War with the Devil, OR, THE Young Man's Conflict WITH THE Powers of Darkness,
In a Dialogue Discovering the Corruption and Vanity of Youth, the horrible
Nature of Sin, and Deplorable Condition of Fallen Man,

Also, A Description of the Power and Rule of Conscience and the nature of True
Conversion. To which is added, An Appendix, containing a Dialogue between an
Old Apostate and a Young Professor, Worthy the Perusal of all, but chiefly
intended for the Instruction of the Younger sort.

By B. K. Author of Sion in Distress, or The Groans of the Protestant Church.

The Twelfth Edition.

Wherewith shall a Young Man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto,
according to thy Word, Psa. 119 v ^

By a Friend, in Commendation of these Poems.
MY Muse is dull, although I have a will
This Book for to commend, I want the skill.
I know not how its worth for to declare,
Few Poems doubtless, with it compare;
Not for rare elegent Scholastik strains,
Which flow alone from those quick witted brains*
Who with their Rhetoric and curious Art
Strive to effect the fancy, not the Heart.
This Treatise read (kind Friend) and thou shall see,
It Is chiefly filled with choice Divinity,
The Author soars on high, his main design
Is to instruct that precious Soul of thine
In The path Caelestial, shows thee very plain,
How thou in Christ an Interest may obtain,
Or i^ in Christ thy Soul has got a place,
He, to thy Joy, shows forth thy happy case;
This Poem's like a messenger sent forth,
To give a visit to the drouzy Earth;
The sluggish Soul it strives for to awake,
Before it drops into the fiery Lake.
There Is very few on Earth do live,
But might from hence some Benefits receive.
^or though it is brought ^^rth in this our Clime,
Yet 'twill agree with every place and time.
^ts Message is of such a large extent,
It may in truth to all the World be sent:
To Male and Female, low and high degree
He speaks a word to b^nd as well as free.
All, in whom Conscience dwells he lets them see
Consciences great power and Authority.
When Heavens hot thunderbolts with fire and hail,
Made Aegypts mighty* Monarch's courage fail;
Conscience st^pt in, made him cry out amain,
The Lord is just; I, and my Wicked Train
^^ve sinned: Yea, Conscience also brings
Saul Son of Kish, the first of Israel's Kings,
Before the Prophet humbly to confess
That he had sinned, and acted wickedness.
Conscience made David to cry out amain,
It Is I have sinned: I have Uriah slain.
Though David ^lew a Lion and a Bear,
And did not the great Giants courage fear;
Yet Conscience made him stop and tremble too:
And more than this you will find Conscience can do.
Here Is Counsel for Professors and Profane,
Choose or refuse, here is loss and also gain.
One Reason, Reader, of this Mode or Style,
(...) that it might with honest craft beguile,
Such curious Fancies who had rather choose
To read ten lines in verse than one in Prose,
And as the nimble Fly, that lightly springs,
Against the flames, until she burns her wings,
(...) taken Captive with that sulfurous flame,
^ith which she only sought to sport and game:
So whilst those curious fancies think to play,
With this small piece, 'twill secretly betray
Them to their Conscience, and if Conscience send
Them to God's Word, the Author has his end,
Provided that unto the same they yield,
And Grace and Conscience do obtain the Field.
Farewell, W. B.

To the Reader; in Vindication of this Book.
ONe or two lines to thee I Will here Commend,
This honest POEM to defend
From Calumny, because at this day,
All Poetry there is many do gainsay,
And very much condemn, as if the same
Did worthily deserve reproach and blame.
If any Book in Verse, they chance to spy,
Away Profane, they presently do cry:
But though this kind of Writing some dispraise,
Since Men so captious are in these our days;
Yet I dare say, how ever the scruple rose,
Verse has expressed as secret things as Prose.
Though some there be that Poetry abuse,
Must we therefore, not the same method use?
Yea, sure, for of my Conscience it is the best,
And does deserve more honor then the rest:
For it is no humane knowledge gained by Art,
But rather it is inspired into the Heart
By Divine means; for true Divinity
Has with this Science great Affinity:
Though some through Ignorance, do it oppose,
Many do it esteem, far more then Prose:
And find also that unto them it brings
Content, and has been the delight of Kings.
David, although a King, yet was a Poet,
And Solomon also, the Scriptures show it.
Then what if for all this some should abuse it?
I Am apt to think that Angels do embrace it,
And though God giv't here but in Part to some,
Saints shall hav't perfect in the World to come.
E. B.

Youth in his Unconverted state.
Youth. THE Naturalists most aptly do Compare
My age unto the Spring, whose beauty's rare,
When Sprightly Sol enters the ^olden Sign,
Which is called Aries, his glorious shine
And splendent Rays do cause the Earth to spring,
And Trees to bud, and quicken every thing,
All plants and Herbs and Flowers then do flourish;
The grass does sprout the tender Lambs to norish.
Those things in Winter that seemed to be dead,
Do now rise up and briskly show their head,
And do obtain a Natural Resurrection,
By his hot beams and powerful Reflection.
How in the Pleasant fruitful Month of May,
Are Meadows clad with flowers rich and gay;
And all Earth's Globe adorned, in garments green
Mixed with rare Yellow, crowned like to a Queen
The Primerose, Cowslip, and the Violet,
Are curiously with other Flowers set.
And chirping birds with their melodious sounds
Delight Man's heart, whose pleasure now abounds
The Winter's past, with stormy Snow and Rain*
And long 'twill be ever such things come again;
Nothing but joy and sweet delights appear,
Whilst does abide the springtime of the Yea^
Thus it is with me who am now in my Prime*
In merriment and joy I spend my time;
And like as birds do in the lovely Spring,
I so rejoice with my Consorts, and Sing,
and spend my days in sweet pastimes and mirth,
And naught shall grieve, or trouble me on Earth:
I am resolved to search the world about,
But I will suck the sweetness of it out.
No stone I Will leave unturned, that I may find
Content and joy unto my craving mind:
No sorrow shall, whilst I do live, come near me;
Nor shall the Preacher with his fancies scare me;
At Cards and Dice and such brave Games I Will play
And like a Courtier, deck my self most gay;
With Periwig and M^ff, and such fine things,
With sword and Belt, Goloshoos and Gold-rings,
Where Bulls and Bears they bait, and Cocks do fight
I do resort with speed, there is my delight.
To drink and sport among the jovel Crew,
I do resolve, what ever does ensue:
And court ^^ir Ladies, that I also love,
and of all things very well approve,
Which tend my sensual parts to satisfy,
from whence comes all my choice felicity.
What ever mine ears do hear and Eyes behold,
Or Heart desire, if so that all my Gold
and Silver can for me those things procure,
^ spare no cost, nor pains, you may be sure,
^hus is my Life made very sweet to me,
^hilst others hurried are in misery;
those minds with strang^ conceits troubled remain,
^inking by losing all, the way to gain.
Such Riddles I cannot learn, I must them leave,
What Is seen and felt I am resolved to have,
Let every man his mind and fancy fill,
My Lust I Will satisfy, and have my will;
Who dares control me in my present way,
Or vex my mind in the least, or me gainsay?
What state of Life can equal this of mine?
Youths gallantry so bravely here does shine.

Conscience^ Control you, Sir! in truth and that dare i^,
For your contempt of my Authority.
You tread on me without the least regard,
As if I worthy were not to be heard;
You strive to stiffle me, and therefore I
Am forced aloud, Murder, with speed to cry,
^ cannot forbear, but must cry out amain,
^uch is the wrong which from you I sustain.

Youth. What are you, Sir, you dare to be so bold?
scorn by any He to be contrould.
^er I have done with you, I Will make you know,
^ou shall your Power and Commission show.

Conscience. Be not so hot, and you shall know my Name,
and also learn from whence my power came.
^n no Usurper, yet I do Command
^^u for to stop, and make a present stand.
^ur Pleasures you must leave and Vicious Life,
^e there will grow a very bitter strife
^^^ween you and I, as will appear anon,
From these Courses you don't quickly turn,
For all the courage which you seem to take,
The News I bring's enough to make you quake.

Youth. Who ever thou art, I Will make you by and by
Confess you have accused me wrongfully.
From Murder I am clear in thought and deed,
Thus to be charged, does cause my heart to bleed;
Pray let me crave your Name, if you are free,
If you provoke me, worse 'twill quickly be;
You seek occasion, and are quarrelsom,
And therefore it is I do suppose, you're come,
But if your Name you don't declare to me,
I am resolved to be revenged on thee.

Conscience. What violence (alas!) can you do more,
Than that which you have done to me before?
Forbear your threats, be still and hold your hand
And quickly you shall know and understand
My Name, my power, and place of Residence,
Which may to you prove of great consequence,
I am a Servant to a Mighty King,
Who Rules and Reigns, and Governs every thin^
Who keeps one Court above, and here below
Another he does keep, as you shall know;
Over this inferior Court placed am I
To act and do as his great Deputy.
I truly judge, according to my light,
Yea, do impartially to each Man right.
Those I condemn who vile and guilty are,
And justify the holy and Sincere.
^ ordered am to watch continually,
Over all your Actions with a wary Eye,
And I have found how you of late time
Committed many a bold and horrid Crime,
Of Murder, Treason, and like Villainy
Against the Crown and gracious Dignity
Of that great Prince from whence you have your breath,
Who Is King and Ruler over all the Earth.
I am his Judge, Attorney General,
And have Commission also, you to call
Unto the Bar, and make you to confess
Your horried Crimes and fearful guiltiness;
A black Indictment I have drawn in truth,
Against thy self, thou miserable Youth
Thy pride I shall abate, thy Pleasure mar,
And bring thee to confess, with tears, at bar,
Thy sport and Games, and youthful Lust to be
Naught else but sin and cursed Vanity.
And for to put you also out of doubt,
My Name is Conscience which you bear about,
No other then the accusing faculty,
Of that dear Soul which in thy breast does lie:
I by that Rule, Men's thought and way compare,
By which their Inward parts enlightened are;
And as they do accord, or disagree,
I do accuse, or clear immediately,
According to your light you do not live,
But violate that Rule which God does give
To you to square your life and actions by;
From hence comes in your woe and misery.

Youth, Conscience art thou? why did not speak ever now*
To mind what thou do say I cannot tell how.
Thou melancholy Fancy, fly from me,
My pleasure I Will not leave in spite of thee.
Other brave Guest, you see, to me are come,
And in my House for thee there is no room*
Do think I will be checked by silly thought,
And into snares my foolish fancy brought?
Is It you which cry out Murder, only you?
A Fig (alas!) for all that you can ^.
For though against me you do prate and preach,
Your very Neck I am resolved to stretch.
I Will swear, corouse and whore, say what you will,
Till I have stiffled you, and make you still,
I Will clip your Wings, and make you see at length,
I do know how to spoil you of your strength,
When you do speak, I will not lend an ear;
I Will make in truth as if I did not hear.
If you speak loud when I am all alone,
I will rise up, and straight way will be gone
To the brave Boys who toss the pot about;
And that is the way to wear your Patience out,
I Will go to Plays and Games, and Dancing too,
And ever a while, I shall be rid of you.

Conscience. Thou stubborn foolish Youth, be not so rash,
Lest ever you be aware you feel my Lash.
I have a sting, a whip, yea, and can bite,
Before you shall overcome, I Will stoutly fight;
^'ll gripe you sore, and make you howl anon,
If you resolve in sin still to go on.
^'ve overcome strong hearts, and made them yield,
and so shall you before I quit the field;
^o where you will, be sure I Will soon come after,
and into sorrow will I turn your laughter.
^Twill prove hard work for you to shake me off,
Though you at me do seem to jeer and scoff;
^s if over you I had no Jurisdiction,
Or was a Dream, a Fancy, or some Fiction.
^or all your wrath, I yet must you disturb,
Though you offended are, I cannot but curb
and snib you daily, as I often have done,
^ill you repent, and from lewd Courses turn.
^or till the cause be taken quite away,
The Effect will follow, what ever you say:
^nless your light wholly extinguished be,
(...) sin remains, disturbance you will see.
Therefore I do beseech you soberly
^or to submit to my Authority,
^bey my voice, I prithee make a trial,
before you give another flat denial.
(...) more sweet comfort I don't yield to you,
Then all which does from sinful actions flow,
^hen me reject; but otherwise, my Friend,
^y Checks receive, and to my motions bend.
^et peace within what ever thou do do,
and let vain pleasures and corruptions go;
^^at will be better for thy soul at last,
^han Gold or Silver, or what else thou have:
and since we are alone, let thee and I
^ore mildly talk above Supremacy.
^'t best for you that pride and Folly reign,
which naught does bring, save sorrow, shame and Pain,
And Conscience to reject, who perfectly
From guilt and bondage strives to set you free
Have not these lusts by which thou now art led*
Brought many a man unto a piece of Bread?
What brave Estates have some consumed thereby*
And now are forced in Barns on Straw to lie?
How has the Wife been ruined with the Child,
Besides poor Conscience grievously turmoyl'd?
Nay, once again, give ear, I prithee hark;
Han't many a brave and curious Spark
Been brought in stinking Prisons there to lie,
For yielding to their Lust and Vanity?
How many swing at Tyburn every year,
For stabbing Conscience without care or fear?
And some also out of their wits do run,
And by that means are utterly undone:
Some men so stiffle me, I cannot speak,
And then they sport and play, and merry ma^e,
Resolving that I shall not gripe them more,
But quickly then afresh I make them roar.
Some of them I do drive into Despair.
When in their face I do begin to stare,
No rest nor peace at all their Souls can find,
I so disturb and still perplex their mind.
What say you now, young man, will you submit?
Weigh well the danger, and the benefit.
The danger on the one hand will be great,
If me you do oppose, and ill entreat.
Sweet profit comes, you see, on the other hand
To such who subject are to my command.
What do thou say; shall I embraced be?
Or, will thou follow still thy Vanity?

Youth. Was ever young man thus perplex't as I,
^ho flourished in sweet prosperity?
^here-e'er I go, Conscience dogs me about,
^o quiet I can have, in doors nor out.
C^nscience, what is the cause you make such strife,
I cannot enjoy the comforts of my Life?
I ^m so gripped, and pinched in my breast,
I know not where to go, nor where to rest.

Conscience^ 'Cause you have wronged and offended me,
^^ving vain Pleasures, and Iniquity.
^he Light you have, you walk not up unto,
^ou know it is evil which you daily do.
^y witness I must bear continually
^r the great God, whose glorious Majesty,
^d in thy Soul give me so high a place,
(...) for to stop you in your sinful race;
(...) must reprove, accuse, and you condemn,
^hilst you by sin, his Sov'raignty contemn;
(...) cannot betray my trust, nor hold my peace,
^ll I am stabbed, feared, or Light does cease;
^ll you your life amend, and sins forsake,
shall pursue you, though your heart does ache.

Youth. How bold and malepert is Conscience grown!
^^ough I upon this Fellow daily frown,
^d his advice reject, yet still does he
^ock at my Door, as if he would weary me.
^science I Will have you know, in truth, that I,
^erson am of some Authority:
Are you so saucy as to curb and chide
Such a brave Spark, who cannot your ways abide
It Is much below my Birth and Parentage,
And it agrees not with my present age;
For to give place to you, or to regard
Those things from you I have so often heard.

Conscience. Alas! Proud flesh, do think thy self too high,
To be subject to such a one as I?
Thy betters I continually gainsay,
If they my Motions don't with care obey.
My Power's great, and my Commission large,
There Is scarce a Man, but I with folly charge.
The King and Peasant are alike to me,
I favor none of high or low degree:
If they offend, I in their faces ^ly,
Without regard or fear of standers by.

Youth. Speak not another word, don't you perceive
There Is scarce a Man or Woman will believe
What you do say, you're grown so out of date?
Be silent then, and longer do not prate.
In The Country your credit i^ but small,
There Is few care for your company at all:
The Husbandman the Landmark cannot remove,
But you straightway him bitterly reprove;
Nor plow a little of his Neighbors Land,
But you command him presently to stand*
There Is not a Man can go in the least a wry,
But out against him fiercely you do fly.
The People therefore now so weary are,
They Have thrust you out almost of every Shire:
And in the City you so hated be,
There Is very few do care a rush for thee:
For if they should believe what you do say,
Their Pride and Bravery would soon decay,
Their swearing, cheating, and their drunkenness,
Would vanish quite away, or grow much less.
Our craft of Profit and our Pleasure too,
^ould soon go down, and ruined be by you.
The whores and bawds, with the Play houses then
Would be contemned by all sorts of Men.
^ou strive to spoil us of our sweet delight,
^ur Pleasures you oppose with all your might.
The Fabric of our Joy you would pull down,
and make our Youth just like a Country clown.
^e half Phanaticks should be made ('it is clear)
(...) unto thee we once inclined were.
^t this amongst the rest does chea^ my heart,
^here's very few in London take thy part.
^re and ^here one, which we Nicknames do give,
^ho hated are, and judged not fit to live.
It Is out of fashion grown, I daily see,
^^nscience for to regard in the least degreee.
(...) that cannot whore and swear without controull,
^e do account to be a timorous Fool.
^erefore though you so desperately do fall
^o^ poor me, yet I do hope I shall
(...) loose from you, and then I Will tear the ground,
(...) in all joy and pleasure will abound.

Conscience. (...) poor deceived Soul! do thou not know,
(...) most of all mankind in the broad way go?
What though they do most wickedly abuse me?
Will thou also in the like manner use me?
What though they will of me no warning take,
Till they drop down into the S^ygian Lake?
Will thou be-friend the cursed Serpent so,
As to go on till comes thy Overthrow?
What though I am in no request by them,
Don't they likewise Gods holy word Condemn,
Don't they the Gospel cast quite out of sight,
Least from their Pleasures it should them afright?
What tho my Friends are tossed about and hurled,
Their Inward Peace is more then all the World
Can give to them, or from them take away,
Whilst they with diligence do me obey.
As I enlightened am by God's Precepts,
Which are a guide and Lanthorn to my steps.
O come proud Heart, and longer don't contend,
But leave thy Lusts and to my Scepter bend:
For I Will not leave thee, but with all my power
I Will follow thee, unto thy dying hour.

Youth, Into some private place then will I fly,
Where I may hide my self, and secretly
There I Will enjoy my self in spite of thee;
And thou shall not in the least know where I be.

Conscience, Nay, foolish Youth, how can that thing be done,
From Conscience it is in vain to run;
No secret place can you find out or spy,
To hide your selves from me, such is my Eye,
I see in the dark as well as in the Light,
No doors nor walls, will keep thee from my sight.
Where ever thou art, or go, am I not near,
Thy Soul with horrid guilt to scare and fear?
Could Cain or Judas, get out of my reach,
When once between us there was the like breach?
Did I not follow them unto the end,
And made them know what 'twas for to offend
My glorious Prince, and me his true Viceroy?
Vengeance does follow them who us annoy.
My Counsel then I prithee take with speed,
For that's the way alone for to be freed
From Vengeance here, and Wrath also to come,
When thou do dye, and at the day of Doom.

Youth. What! cannot I ^ly from thee* nor thee subdue?
Then I entreat thee, Conscience, don't pursue,
Nor follow me so close; forbear a while,
Don't yet my Beauty, nor my pleasure spoil.
This is my Spring and flower of my Age;
Oh! pity me, and cease thy bitter rage:
Don't crop the tender Bud, it is too green:
Oh! let me have those days others have seen,
Forbear thy hand till my wild Oats are sown;
^hey must be ripe also, before they are mown;
Thou have forborne with some for a long time,
That which I ask of thee is but the Prime,
Of those good days which God bestows on me,
Oh, that it might but once obtained be!
^Tis time enough for to adhear to thee,
After I Have spent my time in Gallantry,
^n earth's sweet joy and such transcendent pleasures,
which Young Men do esteem the chiefest Treasures.

Conscience. After all voilence and outrage great
Done to poor Conscience, do you now entreat,
Thinking for to prevail by flattery?
But that in truth I utterly defy;
It Is quit against my Nature, you must know,
Unto vile Lust fond pity for to show;
God has not given such a dispensation,
For me to wink at your abomination;
If God does once but blow your Candle out,
I shall be quiet then, you need not doubt,
(But woe to you, as ever you was born,
If God does once his light to darkness turn.)
But while in you remains that legal Light,
Your sins I cannot endure in my sight.
No liberty, God, (I am sure) will give,
To any one in horrid Sin to live;
Nor will he give allowance for a day:
It Is very dangerous for to delay
The work of thy Repentance for an hour,
What thy hand finds to do, do with thy power.
If me you don't believe, I prithee Youth,
For to resolve thy self, go to God's Truth.

Youth. Well! since that you no comfort do afford,
I will enquire of God's most Holy Word:
So far I will your Counsel take, for I
Am sorely troubled; whither shall I fly?
I will make trial, I resolve to see,
Whether the Truth and Conscience do agree.
The lip of Truth cannot lie, though Conscience may,
When that mis-guided is, it leads astray.
If Truth and Conscience speak the self-same thing,
'Twill some amazment to my spirit bring.
That now I ask for, and earnestly crave,
Is some short time in sin longer to have,
Conscience denis it me: Truth, what say you?
Oh! that you would a little favor show
To a poor Lad, alas! I am but young,
Like to a flower which is lately sprung,
Out of the ground, and Conscience day and night*
Strives for to tread me down with all his might;
Or, as the Frost the tender Bud does ^il,
So has he striven to do a great while;
Must I reform, and all my sins forsake?
Some fitter season then* O let me take.
For all things there is a time under the Sun,
And when I older am I will return.

Truth. Nay, hold, vain Youth, you are mistaken now,
No time to sin God does to thee allow.
If I may speak, attend, and you shall hear,
I with poor Conscience must witness bear;
I am his guide, his Rule, it is by my Light
He acts and does, and speaks the thing that is right,
You are undone, if you don't speedily
Leave all your sins and cursed vanity.
Art thou too Young thy evil ways to leave,
And yet have thou a precious Soul to save?
Art thou too young to leave Iniquity,
When Old enough in Hell for sin to lie?
^ome fitter season (Youth) do think to find?
The Devil does dart that in thy mind.
No time so fit, as when the Lord does call;
Those who rebellious are, they one day shall
Smart bitterly for their most horrid evil,
In yielding to, and siding with the Devil.
But once again, prithee hark to me;
Don't God, whilst thou art young, call unto thee?
Remember thy Creator therefore now,
And unto him with speed see you do bow.
The first ripe Fruit (of old) God did desire,
And so of thee he likewise does require,
That thou to him a Sacrifice should give
Of thy best days, and learn betimes to live
Unto the praise of his most Holy Name;
And not by sin so to profane the same.
This is (Young Man) also thy choosing time,
Whilst thou therefore do flourish in thy prime,
Place thou thy heart upon the Lord above;
And with Christ Jesus also fall in Love.
Did not JEHOVAH give to thee thy Breath,
And also place thee here upon the Earth;
And many precious blessings give to thee,
That thou to him alone should subject be?
God out of Bowels sent his precious Son,
Thy Soul from evil ways with speed to turn;
Who for thy sake was nailed to the Tree
To free thy Soul from Hell and misery.
And whilst in sin (vile wretch) thou do remain,
Thou do, as 'twere, him Crucify again;
Thy sins also ( O Young Man) God does hate,
His Soul does loath, and them abominate;
Naught is more odious in his blessed fight,
Than those base Lusts in which thou take delight.
And will thou not, O Young Man! be deterred
From thy vain ways? what, is thy heart so hard!
Shall nothing move thy Soul for to repent,
Nor work Convictions in thee to relent?
Give ear to Truth, Truth never spoke a lie,
And fly from sin and youthful vanity.
Those that do seek Gods Kingdom first of all,
And do obey Gods sweet and gracious call,
They shall find Christ, and lie too in his Breast,
And reap the Comfort of Eternal rest.
But if thou should this golden time neglect,
And all good motions utterly reject;
And ^light the day of this thy visitation,
That will to God be such a provocation,
That he will not wait upon thee any more,
Nor never knock hereafter at thy door.
While terms of peace God does therefore afford,
Subject to him, lest he does draw his Sword.
If once to anger him you do provoke,
He Will brake your bones, and wound you with his stroke.
Who can before his indignation stand,
Or bear the weight of his revengeful hand?
How dare thou a War with him maintain,
And say, over thee Christ Jesus shall not Reign?
Will thou combine with his vile Enemy,
And yet presume on his sweet clemency?
Will thou, vile Traytor-like, contrive the death
Of that great King, from whom thou have thy breath?
Will thou, cast dirt upon the Holy One,
And keep Christ Jesus from his rightly Throne?
Is It not his right thy Conscience for to sway?
Ought he not there to Reign, and thou Obey?
Dare thou resist his dread and Sovereign power?
Yea, or hold parley with him for an hour,
To gratify the Devil, who thereby
Renews his strength, yea, and does fortify
Himself in thee, and makes his Kingdom strong,
By tempting thee to sin whilst thou are young?
The Blak-a-moor as soon may change his skin,
As thou may leave and turn away from sin,
When once a habit and a custom's taken,
Then sinful ways are hard to be forsak^n.
Dare thou, vile wretch, Christ's Government oppose
And with the Devil and corruption close?
Had rather that the Devil reign over thee,
Than unto God Almighty subject be?
Which will be best, do think, for thee in the end,
The Lord to please, and Satan to offend?
Or Satan for to please, and so thereby,
Declare thy self JEHOVAH's Enemy?
For those who live in sin, it is very clear,
They Enemies to GOD and JESUS are.
And will thou yield unto the Devil still,
And greedily also his will fulfill?
Do think, vain Youth, he will prove to thee a friend,
That thou do so his cursed ways commend?
Has Sin (which is his odious excrement)
So sweet a smell, yea, and a fragant scent?
Shall that which is the superfluity
Of naughtiness, be precious in thine e^e?
And do thou Value Christ and all he has,
Not worth vain pleasures here upon the Earth?
Shall he esteemed be by thee (vile dust!)
Not worth the Pleasures of a cursed Lust?
(...) there more good in sinful Vanity,
^han is in all the Glorious Trinity?
that which men think best, that will they choose,
things of small value it is they do refuse.
that thoughts have thou of Christ then, sinful Soul,
that thou his Messengers do thus control,
^d do to him so turn a deaf ear,
^s Knoks, his calls, and wooings wilt not hear,
Nor him regard, though he stand at the door*
^ith Myrrh and Frankincense, yea, and all store
O^ rare Fruit, and choice Spice, as Cinnamon
^es, Spikenard, Camphire, and Saffron?
(...) precious things, Poor Soul! of Heaven above,
(...) has with him, yet nothing will thee move
(...) open the door: for all his calls and knocks
^ou let'st him stand until his precious locks
(...) wet with dew and drops of the long night.
^us thou do him despise, reject and flight.
(...) rather keep'st thy Lust and Pleasure still,
^an that Christ should thy Soul with Heaven fill,
enough he ten thousand Worlds does yet excel,
(...) makes that heart where he in truth does dwell,
(...) be a Heaven here upon the Earth,
^ng the Soul with precious joy and mirth,
^ich makes gray headed Winter like a spring,
(...) Youth like to Caelestial Angels sing;
(...) Soul he does so greatly elevate,
^t it disdains and does abominate
^ensual pleasures in comparison
jesus Christ his dear and only Son.
^e persuade thee for to taste and try
(...) good Christ is, for then assuredly,
Thou will admire him, yea, and Praise the Lord
That ever he did to thy Soul afford,
Such a dear savior, and such good Advice,
To lead thy Soul into sweet Paradise,
For none do know the natute of that Peace
That inward joy the which shall never cease,
But he himself who does the same possess*
Oh! ^aste and see, for then you will confess,
No pen can it express, no tongue declare,
It Is Nature's such (O Young man!) it is so rare
Christ is the SVMMVM BONVM, it is h^
In whom alone is true felicity;
Such is the nature of Man's panting Breast
There Is naught on Earth can give him perfect res^
It Is not in Honor, that is Vanity:
For such, like beasts, and other mortals dye,
Kingdoms and Crowns they tottering do stand,
The Servant may the Master soon Command.
Belshazzar, who upon the Throne did ^it,
His Knees against each other soon did hit,
How was he scared when the writing came
And wrote upon the Wall, even the same
That afterward befell, his end being come,
Received his fatal stroke, which was his Doom.
Great men oft-times being filled with great fear;
Being perplexed they know not how to stear.
Tall Ceaders fall when little shrubs abide,
Though Winds do blow and strangely turn (...) Ti^
For man in honor lives but a short space.
He dies like to the beasts, so ends his race:
Where Is Nimrod now that mighty Man of old,
And where is the Glory of the head of Gold?
Great Monarchs now are moulder'd quite away,
Who did on earth the Golden scepter sway,
In highest place of Humane Government:
None ever found therein solid content.
Of Alexander it is declared by some,
How he sat down when he had overcome
The Eastern World, and did w^ep very sore
Because there was one World and no more
For him to Conquer. Thus also it is still,
This world's no^ big enough Man's Soul to fill,
Riches and Wealth also cannot satisfy,
That precious Soul which in thy breast does lie.
If store of Gold and Silver thou should gain,
'Twould but increase thy sorrow, grief and pain.
Riches, (O Young Man) they are but empty things,
And fly most swift away with Eagles wings.
When riches thou do heap, thou heapst up sorrow,
They Are thine to day, alas! but gone to morrow,
Fires may come and thy Treasures burn,
Or Thieves steal them, as they have often done.
He that has thousands by the Year, this night
May be as poor as Job before it is light.
And as for pleasure which thy Age does prize,
Why should that seem so lovely in thine eyes?
It Is but a moment they with thee will last,
And sadness comes also when they are past,
The Brute his pleasures has as well as thee,
Man's chiefest good therefore cannot pleasure be,
And whilst thou striv'st thy evil Lust to please,
Thy raging Conscience ( Youth) who shall appease?
With this sweet Meat, I tell thee also, Friend,
Thou shall't have sour sauce before the end.
And as for Beauty, that also is vain,
Unless thou can the inward Beauty gain.
What Is outward Beauty, save an evil snare,
By which vain ones oft-times deceived are?
That beauty which man's carnal heart does prize,
Renders not lovely in JEHOVAH's eyes.
Though decked with Jewels, Rings and brave attire,
The glorious King their beauty don't desire;
His hearts not taken with it, but otherwise
The Beauty of vain ones he does despise.
Thouh very fair, yet if de^^^'d with sin,
They like unto Sepulchers are within,
Loathsome and vile in the sight of God are they,
And soon their seeming Beauty will decay:
It fades and withers, and away does pass,
Just like unto the flower of the grass.
The curled Looks, yea, and the spotted Face,
God ^'re a while will bring into disgrace.
Those Ladies which excel all others too
Must feed the Worms within a day or two,
Death and the grave will spoil their beauty quite,
And none in them shall never more delight.
As for thy Age, in youthful days we see,
Youth minds naught else save cursed vanity,
Soon may thy Spring also meet with a blast,
And all thy glory not an hour last.
The Flower in the Spring which is so gay,
Soon does it fade and wither quite away.
Nothing on earth can thou find out or 'spy,
That will content thee long, or satisfy
That Soul of thine, if still you search about
Till you do find the rarest Science out.
For if on Learning once you place your mind,
Much vanity in that also you will find.
For Humane Knowledge and Philosophy,
Cannot bring thy Soul into sweet Unity
With God above, and Jesus Christ his Son,
In whom, poor Youth, is happiness alone,
Dote not on Honor then, nor yet on Treasure,
Nor Beauty, Learning, Youth, nor Pleasure;
All is but Vanity that is here below,
Truth and Experience both the same do show.
Come, look to Heaven, seek thou for higher joys,
Let Swine take husks, and Fools these empty toys.
Come, taste of Christ, poor Soul, and then you will
Of joys Caelestial receive your fill*
If thou do drink but of the Crystal Springs,
These outward joys thou 'lt see are trifling things.
If Heavens sweetness once thou had but caught,
Thou would account Earth's best enjoyments naught
Honor and riches too Christ has great store
And at's Right hand pleasures for evermore.
Do think that he who makes Man's life so sweet,
Whilst he with grievous troubles here does meet,
And in believing has such sweetness placed,
Though his own Image greatly is defaced,
Cannot give to him much greater Consolation;
When all the sowr's vanished of Temptation?
If with the bitter, Saints such sweetness gain,
What shall they have when they in Glory reign?

Youth. Be silent Truth, leave o^, for I c^n't ^ear
Your wh^ning strains, nor will I l^^g^r (...)
Such melancholy Whimsies, they are such stuff,
Which suits not with my age: I have enough
O^ it already, and also of you,
S^^h you my in 'rest strive to overthrow.
When I appealed to you I was perplexed,
And with sad melancholy sorely vexed:
But since I do perceive the Storm is over,
You I don't think to trouble any more.
Long winded Sermons, Sir, I do not love,
Nor of your Doctrine in the least approve.
No liberty to me I see you will give,
In sweet delights and pleasures for to live.
I don't intend Phanatick yet to turn,
Nor after such distracted People run;
An easier way to Heaven I do know,
And therefore, Sir, Farewell, farewell, to you.
My bride, my sports, and my old company,
I will enjoy, and all my bravery
I will hold fast, yea, wantonly fulfill
My fleshly mind, say Preachers what they will?

Conscience. Ah Youth, ah Youth! is'^ so in very deed,
Will thou no more unto God's truth give heed?
'Twas ^ut my mouth to stop, I now do find,
That unto Truth you seemingly inclined.
But this, O Soul, I must assure to thee,
What thou have heard has much enlightened me,
And my Commission too it does renew,
As will appear by what does next ensue.
Have you from God been called thus upon,
And shall your heart be hardened like a stone?
You cannot plead ignorance, Oh Youth, it is so,
You plainly now have heard what you should do,
Your sin will be with grievous Aggravation,
If quickly you don't make a Recantation.
Your sin will now be of a scarlet dye,
And many stripes prepared I espy,
With which you must he beat; because that you,
Your Masters Will so perfectly do know,
But for to do the same you still refuse,
And your poor Conscience wickedly abuse:
You Will show your self a cursed Rebel now,
If unto Christ with speed you do not bow*
Will thou thy sins retain, when thou do he^r
How much against the Living God they are?
Will thou cast dirt into his Blessed Face?
Oh! tremble Soul, and dread thy present case.

Youth. Now my good days, I see they will be gone,
My inward thoughts will never let me alone;
Ah that I could but sin without control,
And Conscience would no more disturb my Soul;
His bitter gripes much longer I cannot bare,
He Is grown so strong that little hope is there;
But he will prevail, such conflicts do I feel,
My Courage now and Resolutions reel:
But yet I am resolved once more to try,
And struggle will to get the mastery.
I cowardly will not acquit the Field,
Nor at the second Summons will I yield.
I Will make once more another stout essay,
^'re unto Conscience I will yield the day,
Ah! how can I my sweet delights forsake,
Without resistance to the last I make?
Conscience, although I sinful am, I see,
There Is many thousand sinners worse than me,
There Is none can live and from all sin be clear,
That I from Truth did very lately hear.
My heart is good, though it is true, that I
Am overcome through humane frailty.

Conscience. O cutsed wretch! dare thou thy heart commend?
Come tremble Soul, and it to pieces rend,
Don't I most clearly in thy heart behold
Most horrid lust, 'twould shame thee were it told:
All rottenness and filthy do I espy,
In that base heart of thine to lurk and lie:
There Vipers breed and many a Cockatrice;
The spawn of every Sin and evil Vice.
Like a Sepulcher, Soul, thou art within,
N^ught's there but stink and putrefying sin,
Out from thy heart all evil does ascend,
And yet will thou thy filthy heart commend?
And do thou think thy state good for to be,
Cause thou do find many as bad as thee?
You are so naught, if you from sin don't turn,
You must for sin in Hell forever burn,
Except ye do repent. Truth tells you plain,
You perish must, ^n everlasting pain.

Youth. Well, say no more, if this be so, I must
Go unto Truth again, or I shall burst;
My heart will break, I clearly do discern,
I therefore now must yield, and also learn
What Is my state, my Nature, Oh! that I did k^ow,
Come, Truth, I pray, will you this favor show.
As to explain this thing to me more clear,
For Conscience does my Soul with horror scare,
Is he in the right, Oh Truth, or is he wrong?
I find Convictions in me very strong.
What is my state? declare it unto me,
And set my troubled Soul at Liberty.

Truth. What Conscience speaks ( O Young Man) is most right
And vain it is with him longer to fight
Conscience against thee does his witness bear,
And dreadful danger also does declare,
Those he condemns by light received from me,
The Ete^nal God condemns assuredly;
And God is greater than thy heart, Oh Soul!
Who can enough thy grievous state condole
If Conscience does its Testimony give,
That you in sin and cursed ways do live,
And that thou art an unconverted Wretch:
If it is from hence, between you there is a breach,
And this be so, as it you cannot deny,
What would you do, if you this night should die?
If in this state this life you do depart,
Undone for evermore ( Young Man) thou art,
As sure as is the mighty God in Heaven,
Against thy Soul the Sentence will be given.
Conscience his power did from God receive,
And if you don't obey, and him belive,
But do reject his Motions, it is all one,
As if Christ Jesus you did tread upon;
Whilst he does Rule by Laws that are Divine,
It Is Treason him to stop or undermine.
And once again, to show thee thy estate,
Thou being, Young Man, not regnerate,
No God nor Christ have you; it is even so,
And this indeed's the sum of all your W^.
In God no interest ( Youth) have thou at all,
He Is quite departed, ever since the Fall,
And is become thy dreadful Enemy,
His angry Face is set most vehemently
Against thy Soul, and that is a fearful thing,
Enough thy Pride with vengeance down to bring;
Each Attribute against thy Soul is set,
And all of them also together met.
To make thee every way most Miserable;
Which Wrath for to with-stand, what Man is able
He Will suddenly thy Soul to pieces tear,
And his Eternal Vengeance make thee bear;
His Wrath it will upon thy Soul remain,
Till you by Faith are truly born again.

Youth, This Doctrine which to me you do declare
It is enough to d^ive one to despair;
If it be so, I grant, I am undone,
But God is gracious and has sent his Son.
He Is full of Bowels, therefore hope do I,
He Will not on me his Justice magnify.

Truth. It Is true God's gracious, yet he will not clear,
Those guilty Souls who don't his Justice ^ear:
He Is very gracious, yet he is full of ire,
And is to such like a consuming ^ire.
He sent his son, it is true, for Souls to dye
But many miss and fasly do apply
His precious Blood; therefore my Counsel take*
Don't you too soon an application make,
O^ Gods sweet Grace, nor yet of Christ's dear Blood
Until by you the Gospel's understood.
Those who are whole, no Physician have,
The Sick and Wounded Soul Christ came to sae.
What do thou judge thy present state to be,
How does it stand, and is it now with thee?

Youth, I am a Sinner, and my heart does bleed,
My sin-sick Soul does a sweet Savior need,
My Conscience tells me that I am most vile,
And grievously, for sin, does me turmoil.

Truth. No Savior can you have, unless you do
Resolve to leave your Sins, and let them go:
Nor for your Wounds is there a help, be sure,
'Till Causes be removed which do procure,
And bring on you that pain and bitter smart,
Which you cry out of in your part.

Youth. My trembling Soul's amazed and filled with fear;
Another way, Oh Truth! thy course I Will steer;
I must forsake all evil ways, for I
Do see the danger and the Misery,
Which does attend the way that I am in,
Whilst I do keep and hug my cursed sin.
There Is scarce a night which passes over my head,
But dread I do the making of my Bed;
(E're Morning comes) in the sad depths of Hell.
My Conscience therefore now does me compel
To bid adieu to all sweet joy and pleasure,
To Lies and Fraud and all unlawful treasure,
In sports and games I^ll take no more delight,
But contrariwise I Will PRAY both day and night,
Conscience has overcome me with his gripes,
Tr^th follows him so with his threatened stripes,
The wall's broke down, the Old Man runs away,
And Conscience follows close to cut and s^ay:
And threatens too no Quarter he will give,
And seems before him every thing to drive,
Lust forced is in Corners now to to ^ly,
Where it does hide it self most secertly,
And watches also, thinking for to get
An opportunity once more to set,
And fall on Conscience, which it does disdain,
'Cause Conscience says Corruption must be slain,
I side with him, because I would have peace,
But still it is doubtful when these Wars will cease.

Devil. What pity is it thy Sun should set so soon,
Or should be clouded thus before it is noon;
No sooner risen in thy Horrizon,
And sweetly shine, but presently is gone?
Shall Winter come before the spring is past,
And all his fruit be spoiled with one sad blast?
Shall that brave flower which does seem so gay,
So quickly fade and wither quite away?
What pity it is that one so young as thee
Should thus be brought into Captivity.
Hark not to Conscience, for I dare maintain,
It Is better for to hug thy Sins again.
Thy Conscience (Youth) thou have too lately found,
Does but amaze and give thy Soul a wound.
Consider well, advise, and thou shall see,
My ways are best, come hearken unto me,
I Will give thee honor, pleasure, wealth and things
Which prized are by Noble Men and Kings;
Let not this makebate with an angry frown,
Throw all thy Glory and thy pleasure down,
Let not strange thoughts distress thy trubled mind,
What satisfaction can thou have or find,
But that which flows from this World alone?
It Is I must raise thee to the sublime throne,
The Hell thou fear may be but a story,
And Heaven also but a feigned Glory,
If this don't ^^artle thee, then speedily
I will stir up an other enemy^
Old Man, rouse up, I charge you to awake
And swiftly too, your life lies at the stake.
And Mistress Heart, stir up your willful Will.
Is this a season for him to sit still?
If unto Truth and Conscience he gives place,
Our Interest will, you will see, go down a pace;
Judgment is gone already, and does yield,
And Courage too, I fear, will quit the field,
Some sins are slain, and in their Blood do lie,
And others into holes are forced to fly
As for Affection he does hold his own,
Though Conscience does upon him sadly frown.
Remembrance will unto him trai^rous prove,
If I his thoughts from Sermons can remove,
I Will make his mind run after things below,
And raise up trouble which he did not know,
And he will forget what he did lately hear,
And cease will then his former thoughts and fear.
If I can please his sensual appetite,
There is no fear of any sudden flight;
His Breast is tender and apt to entertain
The sparks of Lust which long he cannot restrain,
I Will blow them up and kindle them anew,
And to Conviction soon he will bid adue.
New objects I Will present unto his sight,
In which I Am sure he cannot but take delight,
I have such hold of him, there is no doubt
But I once more shall turn him quite about.
His old Companions also I Will provoke,
At's door again to give another knock:
Their strong enticements hardly he will with-stand,
They can (you see) his spirit soon command.
Youth's old Companions. How do you sir? what is the cause that we,
Cannot (here of late) enjoy your Company?
It seems to us as if you were grown strange,
As if in Youth there was some sudden change.

Youth. I have not had the opportunity,
Besides on me there does some burden lie,
Which does press down my spirits very sore,
And makes me seldom go forth of the door.

Companions. I warrant you, Sirs, it is Sin afflicts his Soul,
And he is just going now to turn ^ool.
Come, come away, to Age such grief belongs,
To Youth, brave mirth and sweet melod'ous songs.
Come drive these thoughts away with Pipe and Pot
Sing and Carouze till they are quite forgot.
The lovely strains of the well tuned Lute,
Where Plays they Act, do with our Nature suit.
Come* go with us upon a brave design,
The which will cheer that drooping heart of thine,
Come, generous Soul, let thy ambitious eye,
Such foolish fancies and vain dreams defy.
Shall thy Heroic spirit thus give place
To silly dotage, to thy great disgrace?

Vicinus. The Young Man yields, being possessed with fears,
They would reproach him else with scoffs and jears
But afterward his head begins to ache,
And Conscience then a fresh begins to wake,
And stings him after such a bitter sort,
It puts a period unto his Jovial sport.
The thoughts of Death, which Sickness does presage;
Does trouble him, he cannot bear the rage,
And inward gripes of his enlightn'd breast,
And therefore now again he thinks it is best
To hark to Conscience, whom he did refuse,
And grieviously did many times abuse.

Conscience, Go mourn, thou wretch, for sad is thy Condition,
Pour forth a-main the water of Contrition.
Will thou appear to men Godly to be,
When all is nothing but Hypocrisy?
Will thou to Truth so often lend ^n ^ar,
And yet to Satan also thus adhere?
You were as good have kept your former station,
As thus to yield afresh unto Tentation;
Go unto Truth, if God give space and room,
Before I do pronounce your final Doom.

Truth. Come, come, Young Man, Don't thy Con^ictions lose,
But cherish them, and timely also choose
The one thing needful, which alone is good*
That God may wash thy Soul in Christ his Blood.
Thy Soul is precious, it is of greater worth
Than all the things that are upon the Earth;
For if that the whole world you now could gain,
And all the plesures of it could obtain,
And in exchange your Soul should lose thereby,
What would your profit be when you must dye?
When once thy Soul is lost, thou losest all:
Oh! that will be a very dismal fall!
Do thou not know what I of Hell declare,
Of the hideous Howlings of the damned the^e?
How can thou with devouring Fire dwell,
Or lie with Devils in the lowest Hell?
Those who do in their natural state remain,
Must live forever in that restless Pain.
All Fornicators, Drunkards and the Liar,
Must have their Portion in that Lake of Fire;
With Thieves, Revilers and Extortioners,
And such who are most vile Idolaters;
The Proud, the Swearer, and the Covetous,
God does pronounce on them the sel^-s^me Curse.
And those who live in vile Hypocrisy,
Or do back-slide into Apost^cy;
Let such unto my present words give heed,
Their Pain and Torment shall all men's exceed.
What will thou do, or whither can thou fly,
Where can thou hide from the great Majesty?
Who tries the reins, and searches every heart,
Conscience declares that thou most guilty art.
Condemned Soul! thou know that this is so,
And this moreover which I plainly show,
Will come to pass, as sure as God's above,
If from all sin with speed you don't remove;
As sure as you do live, where e're you dye,
To Hell you go to all eternity:
Except Repentance in your Soul be wrought,
With vengeance thither you^ll at last be brought,
You are the Man for whom God did prepare
That dreadful Toph^t, where the Damned are,
The which is made exceeding large and deep,
The Damned in that doleful place to keep,
Oh! call to mind what Conscience does this day
Charge you withal, before you're swept away;
Lest you from him do hear no more at all,
Till you into those scorching flames do fall;
What mercy is it that Conscience strives so long,
And his Convictions still in you are strong!
Oh! fear, lest sin do fear your Conscience quite,
And God also put out your Candle light!
And give you up unto a heart of stone,
As he in wroth has served many a one;
Then to repent, it will be much too late,
Such is the danger of a lapsed state.
Young M^n, take heed you don't this work delay,
And put it o^^ unto another day.
Your own Experience may discover this,
M^n's Life a bubble and a vapor is
Alas! thy days on Earth will be but few,
They fly away like to the morning dew,
Like as the cloud and shadow swiftly flies,
Or, dew does pass as soon as the Sun does rise:
So fly thy days, thy golden months and years,
Much like the blossom ^that most gay appears;
And on a sudden fades and does decay;
So Youth often times does wither quite away*
Thy Age thou do unto the Spring compare,
And to the Flowers which appear so rare.
From hence, O Young Man, learn Instruction now,
Don't thy Experience daily teach thee how,
The Flower withers and hangs down its head,
Which curiously of late so flourished;
The Meadow's clad in glorious array,
But's soon cut down, and turned all to Hay.
Like Jonah's Gourd, which sprang up in a night,
And perished as soon as it was light.
Or like a Post which quickly passes by,
Or Weaver's Shuttle, which he makes fly,
Or as a Ship when she is under sail,
Does run most swift when she has a full gale.
So are thy days, they in like manner fly,
How many little Graves may thou espy?
Come measure now thy days, and see their length,
Number them not by years, by health nor strength;
All these uncertain rules you must refuse,
Though that is the way which most of men do use*
(...) to live till they old aged are,
'C^us^ their p^og^^^^o^s long lived were.
That Rule from Truth you see does greatly vary,
And which Experience shows is contrary.
You hear the things which you should reckon by,
Things swift in motion's gone most speedily.
Thy Life's uncertain, ( Youth) it is but a blast,
Thy Sand is little, long it will not last,
Thy house, though new, yet it is very old,
Gone to decay, and turning to the mould,
You're born to dye, and dead also you were,
Before you lived or breathed in the Air.
And dye you must, before that live you do,
Except you dye to live as I do show.
Thy dreadful ruin, ( Soul) is very nigh,
Unless thy Tears prevent it speedily.
What is thy purpose now, what is in thy mind?
Which way do think to take, how art inclined?

Youth. Thy ways, ( O Truth) I am resolved to run,
And never more will I to folly turn.
I tremble, at the thoughts of Death and Hell,
My Soul is wounded and my wounds do swell.
My pains increase, Therefore my purpose now
Is far more strict to be, and for to bow
unto Christ JESUS, that I may obtain,
Some healing Medicine to remove my pain.
No rest can I, save in my Duty, find,
I unto prayer am very much inclined.
God wi^^, I hope, these latter sins forgive,
Since I more Godly do intend to live,
And so resolve to wait and take such care,
That Satan shall no more my Soul ensnare.

Vitinus. He from this day becomes a great Professor,
Though far from being yet a true Possessor.
Christ he has got into his mouth and head,
And not internally raised from the dead,
But in Old Adam still does he remain,
Not knowing what it is to be born again.
When Satan sees it is in vain to strive,
The Soul into its former state to drive,
But that it will forsake gross wickedness,
And will also the Truths of Christ profess,
He yields thereto, resolving secretly,
To blind its eyes in close Hypocrisy,
And so appears under a new disguise,
Most subtly thy Soul for to surprise,
Persuading him, the War which he does find
Daily to be within his troubled mind,
Is saving Grace against iniquity,
Which has prevailed and got the victory;
When it is common Grace (we do so call)
And not the Grace that is supernatural.
He takes the work of Legal Reformation
For the only work of true Regeneration.
Here he does rest and seem to be at ease,
When all is done his Conscience to appease.
But I Will give place to this Religious Youth,
To hear discourse between him and the Truth.

Youth. Oh! happy I, and blessed be the day,
That unto Truth and Conscience I gave way.
I would not be in my old state again,
If I thereby some thousands might obtain.
From Wrath, and Hell, my Soul is now set free;
For I don't doubt, but I converted be.
The Word, with power, so to me was brought,
A glorious change within my Soul is wrought.

Truth. Young Man take heed, lest you mistaken are,
Conversion's hard, it is a work so rare,
That very few that narrow passage enter,
Though far that way there is thousands do adventure,
Yet miss the mark for all their inward strife,
They fall far short of the new Creature-life;
Come, let me hear your Grounds of evidence:
For I don't like your seeming confidence.
I doubt I shall find you under God's curse,
And still your Case as bad, if not much worse,
Then 'twas when you did no Profession make,
But did your swing in all Profaneness take.
The Pharisee was a Religious man,
Yet nearer Heaven was the Publican.
If short of Christ you fix or fasten do,
'Twill be your ruin and your overthrow.

Youth. What do you mean? this Doctrin's too severe;
For all might see that I converted were.
But if my Grounds you are resolved to weigh,
You shall forthwith hear what I have to say;
And the first Ground which I resolve to bring,
For to evince, to clear and prove the thing,
Is from Convictions which I have of sin;
Which once I hugged and delighted in.

Truth. Alas poor Soul! this Reason soon will fly,
For most do see their vile Iniquity.
They are convinced by their inward light,
That sin is odious in JEHOVA'S sight,
But yet vile Sinners are nevertheless,
And don't one d^am of saving Grace possess.
King Pharaoh, Esau, yea, and Judas too,
They were convinced of their sins (you know:)
That they were Saints, there is no Man does believe;
For all those three the Devil did deceive.
As he beguiled them, he may likewise,
With cunning Stratagems your Soul surprise.
Nay, and he has, so far as I can judge,
Unless you do some better Reason urge,
To prove Conversion in your Soul is wrought;
I do declare your state is very naught.
How many Men under Convictions lie,
Yet never born again until they dye?
What have thou else to say and to produce,
Since slight Convictions are of little use?

Youth. I do not only see my sin, but I
Do mourn and grieve for sin continually.
And those which so do mourn they blessed are,
Don't you also the self same thing declare?

Truth. Nay hold a little, thou may weep amain;
And yet in thee may many evils reign.
And thou may mourn for sin, as many do,
Because of shame, of bitter pain, and woe,
Which now it brings and leads unto in the end,
And not because thereby you do offend
The living God, and wound your Savior, who
Did for your sake such torment undergo.
Mourn more for the evil which does come thereby*
Than for the evil which in it does lie.
Th^^ ground is weak, for Esau it appears,
D^d mourn and weep, and let fall bitter tears:
And yet you know that Esau was profane,
And fa^ was he from being born again.

Youth. But I go further yet, I do confess,
My horrid evils and my guiltiness;
If I confess my sins, as I have done,
God he is just, and is the faithful One;
Who will my sins forgive and pardon quite,
And blot them out of his own precious sight,
This being so, what cause then can you see,
But that I Am turned from my Iniquity?

Truth. This will not do, it is not a certain ground;
Some do conf^ss their sins whose heart's unsound.
When Phara^^ saw the Judgment of the Hail,
His heart began then greatly for to fail.
I Have sinned this time, the Lord is just, said he,
I, and my People (also) wicked be.
Though Pha^aoh, Saul, and Judas, each of them,
God did reject, and utterly condemn;
Yet these, when under wrath, are forced to cry,
Lord we have sinned; their Conscience so did fly
Into their Faces, that it made them quake,
And unto God Confession strait to make.
Confession may be made also in part;
And not of every sin that is in the heart.
Men may confess their sin, and their great guilt,
Who the dire nature of it never felt.
Confess their sins in their extremity,
When Conscience pinches them most bitterly.
Confess their sins which they committed have,
Yet don't intend those cursed sins to leave.

Youth. But I confess, and also do forsake,
My state therefore, it is clear, you do mistake*
Those who confess and do their sins foregoe,
God will to them his precious Mercy show.
Therefore don't trouble me, it is very plain,
I for my part am truly born again.

Truth. In this also you may deceived be.
Men may forsake all gross iniquity,
Yet in their Souls may some sweet morsel lie,
Which they may hug and keep close secretly.
They may sin leave, but not as it is sin;
Which has too often manifested been
If the least sin thou did forsake aright,
All sin would then be odious in thy sight.
Judgment and Reason may your sins oppose,
And utterly refuse with them to close;
Yet may thy will and thy affections join,
To favor still and love those sins of thine.
If sin's not out of thy Affection cast,
Thou will appear an Hypocrite at last;
If sin's in the Will and in the Affections found,
It Is a true sign thy heart is unsound.
When they do meet with storms and with bad weather,
Lest all their Goods and Ship do sink together,
When in the Soul great storms and tempests rise
The Devil then may subtly advise,
The Soul to throw some of its sins away,
To make a Calm that so thereby he may,
Persuade the Soul the danger is quite gone,
And that the work in him is fully done.
It Is not enough therefore some sins to leave,
But every sin you must resolve to have
And cast o're-board, yea, and that willingly,
Or else you sink to all Eternity.
Not by constraint as Conscience does compel,
As some are forced to do who like it well,
Who leave the Act, but love to it retain:
Such leave their sins, and yet their sins remain.

Youth, These are hard sayings which you do relate,
And I indeed should question my estate,
Were It not for other grounds and reasons clear,
By which I know that I converted were.
Sir, there is in me a very glorious change,
Most Men admire it, and do think it strange,
That one who lately did both scoff and jear,
Those men and People, which I now do hear,
And followed Vice and every vanity;
Should on a sudden thus reformed be,
And utterly my self also deny,
Of my sweet joys, and former Company.

Truth. From outward filthiness a Man may turn,
And not be changed in heart when he has done:
A legal change I grant he may be under,
Yet may not Soul and Self be cut asunder.
An outward change in Men there may be wrought,
And yet their hearts within be very naught.
The Swine that wallows in the mire now,
May washed be, but still remains a Sow.
Persons may cleanse the out side of the Cup,
And Dogs may spew their nasty Vomit up,
But yet do keep their beastly Nature still,
And e're a while they manifest it will.
Many Professors fall a way and dye,
For want of being changed thoroughly,
The Pharisee was changed, he did appear
As indeed a precious Saint he were;
He differed quite from the poor Publican,
He thought himself a far more happy Man.
But all this was in show, and not in heart;
He therefore had in Christ no share nor part.
Except your Righteousness does his excel,
You in no wise shall in God's Kingdom d'well.
It Is a false change, and cannot be a true,
Unless you are in all things wholly new,
Old Herod will reform in many things.
When once he finds his Conscience bites and sting^,
To hear John Baptist also was ^e led,
Yet after wards deprived him of his Head,
So far this seeming Saint was turned aside,
That he also our Savior did deride;
And when his Men of War set him at naught,
Whilst Accusations they against him brought.
Simon the Sorcerer, also you read,
Was changed so, he gave great care and heed,
To Philips Preachings; yea, and suddenly
He leaves his Witch-crafts and his Sorcery;
But was a coursed Caitiff all the while,
Like a Sepulcher painted inward vile.
Another man in show, it is like thou art,
Yet not made new, and changed in thy heart;
Men in thy Life may no great blemish spy,
Yet in thy breast much rotenness may lie,
Toward all men thy Conscience may be clear,
Conscience so far may for thee witness bear,
That you in Morals it does not offend,
Yet unto God it may not you Commend;
But otherwise, it in your face may fly,
And you condemn for sin continually,
For secret evils which it is privy to,
Which none knows of sa^e only God and you,
Therefore ( O Young Man) if you look about,
Of your Conversion you have cause to doubt
Satan so greatly may your heart deceive,
That not one dram of Grace thy Soul may have,
Which saying is and of the purest kind,
For that, alas! there is very few do find.

Youth. But I am called of God and do obey
The Voice of Truth and Conscience every day*
God's called Ones, I Am sure you cannot deny,
But they are such whom he does Justify:
Therefore it is clear and very evident,
That Grace alone has made me penitent.
My heart is sound, my Grace true also,
My Confidence there is none shall overthrow.

Truth, Thou seem too Confident, it is a bad sign;
For fears attend, where saving grace does shine.
I tell thee (Youth) that many called be,
But few are chosen from eternity.
Judas was called, and did obey in part,
And yet he was a Devil in his heart.
There is an outward and an inward call,
The latter only is effectual.
Therefore you must produce some better ground,
For this don't prove that your Conversion's sound;
But that thou may stick fast still in thy birth
Or prove Abortive, when thou art brought forth.
It Is rare, O Youth! for to be born anew,
And hard to find out when the work is true.

Youth. Though it be so, what cause have I to fear,
When that ^y Evidences are so clear?
I do belive and trust in GOD through Faith,
And he which so does the witness has
Within him self, and shall assuredly
Be saved also when he comes to dye.

Truth. Thou may belive as most of people do,
And yet to Hell at last thy Soul may go.
The Faith of credence it is like you have,
Which cannot quicken, purify or save.
Some Jews believed in Christ, you also find,
Yet to their Lusts there hearts were still inclined;
And out of Satan's Kingdom were not freed,
Nor made Disciples of the Lord indeed.
Simon the Sorcerer, he did believe,
Yet did his Soul no saving grace receive*
But was a child of Satan never the less,
And still was in the the Ga^l of bitterness.
The stoney ground with joy received the seed,
And for a time brought forth as you may read,
And yet their hearts they were but hearts of ston^
Their Faith was temporary, soon 'twas gone.
The Devils do belive as well as you,
Yea, and Confess that Jesus they do know:
They tremble also, when some men cannot say,
They ever did unto this present day.
Such Faith as Devils have must Men obtain,
Which serves for naught, save to augment their pa^
If on a Deathbed Conscience do awake,
'T will cause them then to tremble and to quake*
And roar like Devils when they do espy,
The dreadful wrath of that great Majesty,
Whom they offend, and against purest Light,
And knowledge too most wickedly did slight*
This faith will serve their grief to aggravate,
But not to help them out of that estate,
It Is easy to belive that Christ did dye;
But hard his blood, in Truth, for to apply*
Men may raise up the dead to life again,
As easy as true saving Faith obtain
By their own power, an inherent skill,
Naught does oppose it more than Man's own will;
Until Almighty power makes it bend,
'Twill not to Grace, nor Jesus condescend.
That power which raised up Jesus from the dead,
Works Faith in Saints, where by they are quickened:
The Faith of Credence, and Historycal,
Is easy had. I never deny it shall;
But preicious Faith, the Faith of Gods Elect,
As it is a Grace and gloriously bedeckt
With other Graces, so twill never grow
But in the honest heart, where God does sow
The blessed seed, which, like a gardon pure,
Does yield its fruit to the last, you may be sure.
And when this Faith is wrought in any Soul,
It throws down self, and wholly then does roll
On Jesus Christ, as its beloved one,
On whom it rests, and does depend alone.
If God has wrought this preicious Grace in thee,
Sin thou do hate, yea, all Iniquity;
And Lust does not predominate and reign,
If thou by faith art truly born again.
Christ thou exalt'st as he is priest and King,
And as thy prophet too in every thing;
He does in thee wholly the scepter sway,
And thou art governed by him every day:
Sin cannot prevail, such is thy happy case,
If thou have got this rare Victorious Grace:
It purges and does purify thy heart,
Wholly renewing thee in every part.
Men by its Fruits true Faith do come to know,
And by their works the same do also show;
What Faith is thine? what think thou now of it?
I greatly fear 'twill prove a counterfeit.
Examine thy Estate, and take good heed,
To close with Jesus Christ, and that with speed.
For at the Body without the spirit's dead,
The same of Faith you know is also said;
Without Obedience does thy Faith attend,
Yet for all this you will perish in the end.

Youth. I am obedient, and am free to join
In fellowship with Saints, such Faith is mine
I willing am to do, as to believe;
^he Devil cannot therefore my Soul deceive.
^or I have closed with Christ already so,
That none my Faith shall ever overthrow.
The many prayers I make both day and night,
Do doubtless prove that my conversion is right.

Truth. I tell thee Soul, Men may do more then this,
And yet they may of true Conversion miss.
God's Ordinance many do obey,
And Members of God's holy Church are they,
And of its Privileges seem to share,
As if that they truly Converted were.
They may discourse, and seem to be devout,
And may not be descerned, nor found out:
They with the flock may walk, lie down and feed,
And so remain till many Years succeed:
Nay, not discovered be until they stand
Among the Goats at Jesus Christ's left Hand.
The foolish Virgins joined themselves with these
And fore to meet the Bridegroom did arise,
But e're the Bridegroom came, their case was sad
For they naught else but emty vessels had:
A bare profession, and a mere outside,
And did no Oil, nor saving Grace provide.
Many great Preachers, and disputers too,
Christ will not own, nor any favor show;
Though in his Name they mighty works have done
He Will to them say, ye wicked one be gone,
I know you not therefore be gone from me,
All you vile Workers of Iniquity;
You say oft-times you seek the Lord in prayer;
That you may do and let fall many a tear,
And yet not be in a Converted State;
For many seek with tears when it is too late;
Others, like Seamen, in a storm do cry,
When Conscience does rebuke them bitterly.
And some under afflictions do cry and howl,
And grievously their state do then condole;
Then promises and resolutions make,
That they such courses will no longer take
But when the storm and the afflictions over,
They are as bad, nay, worser then before.
Some pray in form, and others pray by art
And some to mend the badness of their heart;
Their hearts are wounded, and then speedily,
Their prayers to heal it they do straight apply.
The Sin in the day, and pray when it is night:
They sin again, but prayer does heal it quite.
They think it is well, if tears they can let fall,
Their tears and Prayer, they think will cure all,
And so that way poor Conscience they beguile,
They silence him, yet siners all the while.
Their prayers, alas, cannot wash their filth away,
Though they do nothing else both night and day,
It Is on their prayers they rest, and do depend,
Which, like a broken staff, they fall in the end.
A Saint in prayer, no rest nor ease can gain,
Unless Christ's Blood thereby he does obtain;
And Grace also, his sin to mortify;
For Christ, as well as pardon he does cry:
But otherwise it is with most of Men,
They cry for pardon, and do also then
In their vile hearts regard iniquity;
And for this cause God does their suit deny.
Their prayers are to God abomination,
Whilst they do hide and cover their transgression*
Some out of Costom do perform their prayer,
Not out of Conscience or from Godly care;
And others also for vainglory sake,
Like Pharisees they many prayers make.
In sight of men, in public such will pray,
But in the Closet lettle have to say.
And some to God also seem to draw near,
Yet not in love, nor out of filial fear,
They with their mouths and tongues much kindness show,
When as their hearts are fixed on thing below.
It Is for the heart that Christ does chiefly call,
And reason it is that he should have it all;
For he the same did buy, and purchase dear,
Yet Satan has the chief possession there.
God at the door, and in the porch does stand
Whilst Satan may the bravest Room Command.
They lope to him, and keep JEHOVAH out,
And yet in prayer they seem to be devout.
There Is some will pray, and up his duty keep,
When the soul is quite, and the Body near asleep.
Who ever prays, and pra^s not fervently,
In faith, in truth, and in sincerity;
Their prayers are sin, and them God will not hear
Nor mind their cry when they to him draw near.
It Is not enough a Duty for to know,
But how also each Duty you should do.
For men may pray, read, hear, and meditate,
And yet be in an unconverted state.
They out wordly may many truths profess,
But not in heart, the power of them possess.
The Law in the Letter keep, yea, have the shell,
Yet feed on husks, and want the true kernel
The Young Man which to Jesus Christ did run,
He many things as well as you had done;
And yet fell short, as you may plainly see,
Of the chief part of true Chrstianity.
What say yon now O Youth, do you not fear,
That you by Satan much deceived are?
Have you no Dalilah, which secretly
Does in your heart or in your Bosom lie?
Don't you to sin some secret love retain;
If it be so, you are not born again.
Conscience I fear, and God's restraining grace,
Has only stopped you in your former race.
Like to a Dog that is kept up by a chain,
So Conscience does from sin oft-times restrain.
But if the chain should slip, then loose he goes,
And presently his churlish nature shows;
To your own righteousness do you not trust,
I fear you do, come speak, or Conscience must,
Don't you conclude God is obliged to you,
Since you have let so many evils go?
And are so holy here of late become,
Are not your duties set up in the room,
And place of Christ? Oh! see you do not make
A savior of your own for Jesus sake,
Did ever sin, sinful to you apear?
And, as it is sin, to it great hatred bear,
Would you not sin, were there no hell of pain,
Because you know the Lord does it disdain?
Rather, it is not fear of Punishment,
That you of late seem thus for to relent?
Or does there not some carnal base design,
Move thee so far unto God's Truth to join?
Is not thy end to get a name thereby?
Or only done, Conscience to satisfy?
Or done to free thee from reproach and shame,
Which sin does bring upon a person's name
Have not it done, and wisely cast about
This way, for to prevent a Bank^rut?
Or done for to augment thy outward store
To save thy stock, and add unto it more?
For riotous living, which attend thy age,
Consumes apace, and want it does presage.
Come speak, O Youth, and be not thou unfree
To let me understand how it is with thee.
Come call to mind what thou have heard of late
And thereby judge of this thy present state.

Youth. I do not see but my Condition's good,
I have such hopes and Faith in Christ's dear blood,
Though many imperfections I do see,
Yet God is gracious and will pardon me:
For many failings there are in the best,
That is amiss I Will mend and so do rest.

Truth* Thy Hope will fail like to a Spider's webb,
Thy flood of Confidence will have its ebb,
If thou prove guilty of those things which I,
Did unto thee so lately signify.
Thy spots will not be like the spots of those,
Which God for Children to himself has chose:
And since you are so loath for to be tried,
And lest you should also some evils hide;
To Conscience I Will appeal, you have done wrong
To stop his mouth and hinder him so long:
He Is so enlightened now he can declare
As much as we at present need to hear.
He Will speak the truth, and his opinion show.
And nothing will he hide which he does know.
If unto him you will attend with care,
Of other witnesses no need is there.
If he, O Young Man, be but on your side,
And is your Friend, you need none else provide.
But if against you, and, do prove your Foe,
With vengeance then be sure down you will go.
But if you will not hear what he shall say,
He Will make you tremble in the Judgment day.
Conscience, I do in the Name of the great King
Require you forth your evidence to bring
Against this Man, accuse, or set him free,
According as you find his state to be:
Stand up for Christ your dread and Sovereign Lord,
And Judge for him as he does Light afford.
Be not deceived by L^st, a Bribe to take,
But Judge by Law; Christ's honor lies at stake.
For to speak h^m^ and loud have you forgot?
Is he converted now or is he not?
What do you say? your Testimony give:
Is all sin dead, or does there any live?
Is he new born, and changed in every part?
Or is it in show only and not in heart?

Conscience. Sir, say no more, I am at your Command,
And you shall hear how things at present stand,
He has, O Truth, almost deceived me
By's late pretenses unto Sanct^ty:
But having now afresh received more light,
I must declare he was an Hypocrite.
He Is not renewed or truly born again.
Which I to you shall clearly now explain.
For, first of all, his Faculty, called Will,
That is perverse and very wicked still;
Though I stir up to goodness every hour,
Will does oppose it with his greatest power.
He Will never pray in private day nor night:
But I must force him to it with all my might.
The old man is not slain I do espy,
But has much favor shown him secretly,
Though I do force him into holes to run,
Yet he does nourish him when all is done.
His Love and his Affections are for sin,
And so in Truth they ever yet have been.
He Is troubled more at sin because of guilt,
Than at the Odium of its cursed filth.
When he is abroad amongst Religious Men,
Precise and Zealous he is always then:
But when amongst such who ungodly be,
He suits himself to their vile company.
Some sins are left which Men condemn as gross,
Yet one he keeps, and hugs it very close:
Lust does bear rule and much predominate,
And he on it does love to ruminate.
It Is shame an outward fear does him restrain,
Or else the act he would commit again.
If he from outward blots can keep his Name,
That Saints cannot him accuse nor justly blame,
He Is satisfied, and very well contenr,
Though to his Peace I never gave consent.
Peace he oft-times does speak unto his Soul,
And scarce will suffer me him to control.
When I sometimes do catch him in a lie,
And do reprove him for Hypocrisy:
To stop my Mouth he vows he will with speed
Amend what is amiss, and take more heed*
And more than this of him I could relate,
And show how you have hit his present state:
But that he will not suffer me to speak,
He blinds mine eyes, that so I might not rake
Into his heart and life, lest he thereby
Meet with great shame for his iniquity.

Truth. Conscience, forbear, you need not to enlarge;
If you do lay these things unto his charge,
He is undone, alas! his precious Soul
Is under wrath; who can enough condole
His sad estate? the Gospel he will profess,
But still remains in the gall of bitterness.
Is this the Saint which seemed so precise,
And did appear God's Statutes much to prize?
A Saint in show, a Devil in his heart;
And must with Devils also have a part
This day is coming, and is very near,
When Hypocrites shall be surpised with fear;
The everlasting burning fiery Lake.
Is made more hot on purpose for his sake
But since you are not seared, nor I yet gone,
Before we leave him quite do you go on;
Let us pursue him still, for who does know
What God may yet upon his spirit do?
If God grant him one dram of saving Grace,
That will yet do; though it is a doubtful case,
Whether or no God will his Grace afford
To such as he, who thus offend the Lord,
For such whom Satan does this way deceive,
It Is hard to bring them truly to believe.
He never was convinced thoroughly,
Of Sin, and of his natural misery.
His lost estate he truly never saw,
Nor what it is for to transgress God's Law,
How he is undone thereby he never knew,
Nor what for sin original was due.
And as he did for sin never kindly bleed:
So of a Christ he never saw the need.
The absolute want and great necessity
Of JESUS Christ, he never did espy.
But on false bottoms he has built it is clear;
I do conjure you therefore to declare
Him utterly unclean from top to toe,
And let him understand you are his Foe.
The Plague is in his head, and no place free,
But in his heart it rages vehemently.
Lance him unto the quick, and make him feel,
Lay on such blows as may cause him to reel.

Conscience. Come, come, O Young Man, listen unto me,
I will no longer thus deceived be.
I from God' word, commission have anew,
To, tell, thee what is like for to ensue;
For all thy hopes and seeming goodly show,
Thou art a wretched sinner thou do know,
Think thou on Conscience to commit a Rape
And yet God's dreadful Vengeance to Escape?
Dare thou again under a new disguise,
Encounter with those former enemies?
You are the same i am sure, although you have
Changed your coat, poor mortals to deceive.
Ungodly wretch, do thou not dread my name
Who'm come once more against thee to proclaim
A second War, and to declare also,
God's still thy Enemy and bitter Foe.
His Sword is whet, his Bow he will also bend,
To cut down those that do like thee offend.
Naught he hates more than vile Hypocrisy,
And from his Presence, Youth, thou can not fly.

Youth, Conscience, be still, though I a sinner be,
There Is none does know it now save only thee.

Conscience. Deceived Soul! does none know it but I?
Where Is the great God, is he not also nigh?
Do think, vain Youth, the interposing Cloud
From God's all searching Eye can be a shroud?
Or do thou think God's Seat is so on high,
That he cannot thy inward thoughts espy?
None know it but me! know thou not who I am?
Have I not power for to accuse and damn?
Should I be still, it would be a sad day,
Unless thy sins were purged clean away.
And whilst I speak, and thou do stop thine Ear,
Nothing but War and tumult thou will hear.
I Will never side with thee nor take thy part,
Whilst horrid guilt remains in thy heart.
Nor would I mind thy flattery or frown;
Were thou the highest Prince of great'st renown,
That ever did on earth the scepter sway,
Before thy face I would thy evils lay.
At the smallest sin, be sure, I cannot connive;
And therefore with me it is in vain to strive.
For where I am an enemy indeed,
I Will plague that heart until I make it bleed.
A close and secret Foe, Young Man, am I,
Who am also with thee continually.
What e're you think or speak, yea, act or do,
Of it (Poor Soul) I very well do know:
Thy secret Lust, and what is done in the night
Which thou ashamed art should come to light,
I then am nigh and know it very well,
And more then this I am resolved to tell;
I unto thee shall prove an enemy,
When thou art brought into adversity;
When death and sickness comes, then thou shall see,
How thou with horror shall amazed be.
Then my black Bill against thee will be large,
For then against the I will bring a charge,
Which will make thy sad face like Ashes look,
And wound thy Soul as if a knife was struck
Into thy very heart, and make thee mourn,
And curse the day that ever thou wast born.
I Will make thee understand (clearly) in the end,
What it is (vile wretch) poor Conscience to offend
Hark once again, for I have more to say;
When this life's ended, there is another day.
Look now about thee, Youth, for there is to come,
The black, the dark, and dreadful day of Doom.
When thou do dye, I Will bite and sting thy Soul,
Whilst that in flames does burn and does condole
Its damned state for yielding unto sin,
Which has alone the ruin of it bin.
And also when in the Judgment Day you stand*
Amongst the Goats at Jesus Christ's Left hand,
Thy dreadful state and trial for to hear,
Then I against thee straitway must appear;
Yea, and shall speak more plain than now I can,
Because I am clouded by the fall of Man;
And am by Satan oftentimes misled,
And utterly unable rendered
A true and right decision for to make,
He so beguils me that I do mistake,
And a wrong Judgment often times retain,
Till Truth sets me into the right again.
But Satan then shall no more power have,
The heart of any man for to deceive.
I in that day shall you provoke and urge,
For to confess with shame before the Judge,
Thy evil Lust and close Hypocrisy,
Unto thy own eternal misery.
I shall accuse thee so in that great day.
Thou shall not have one word ( Young Man) to say
Thy inward parts so opened then shall be,
That nothing shall be hid in the least from me,
And I before the dreadful Judge shall show,
All secret things that ever you did do;
And in your face so fiercely shall fly,
That you with horror shall be forced to cry,
Guilty, guilty, O LORD! then thou must hear
The dreadful Sentence, which no one can ^ear;
Go, Go, ye Cursed! that is a word of ^ire,
And you must down into eternal fire,
Where Hypocrites and Unbelievers lie,
Broyling in pain to all Eternity.
And as the fire evermore will burn,
And thou from thence shall never more return*
So also I shall then afflict thy Soul,
Whilst thou in scalding Sulp^er flames do roll,
I like a Worm, or Serpent, then will^bite,
And gnaw thy Soul, thou crursed Hypocrite,
Those inward stings which always thou will find,
Of cruel gnawing in thy tortured mind
Will then increase and aggravate thy woe,
In such a sort there is no Tongue can show.
You then will think how you did me abuse,
And my good Counsel bitterly refuse.
And how you labored to put out my Light,
Who in Gods paths would lead your feet aright
Your base delays and put-offs you will repent,
And that your time so foolishly was spent
That you for love which unto Lust you bore,
Should lose your Soul, and that forever more.
To think how near you were unto salvation,
Will prove another grievous aggrevation:
To bid so fair for Heaven, yet to miss,
What greater trouble can there be than this?
To see the ship in the mouth of the Haven lost,
That does, ye know, Preplex the Merchant most.
I Will tell you also how you wilfully
Brought on your self that dreadful misery:
And how I did oft-times to you declare
The bitter torments which you then must bear,
And what your Pride and Lust would bring you to,
If you did not resolve to let them go.
Ah! thou wilt see how thou art quite undone,
And how all hopes for evermore are gone.
Thoughts of those golden Seasons once you had,
And vainly lost, will then be very sad.
Thou might, had thou improved the means of Grace
Beheld, with Saints, Gods reconciled face
And entered Paradise, where Angels sing
Anthems of Joy to the Eternal King;
Thou might have sung to him melodious Psalms
With those whose hands shall bear triumphant Palms
Who with Eternal love shall ravished be,
Reigning with CHRIST to all Eternity.
Heaven is a place whose Glory does excel;
The Thousand part of it no tongue can tell
Man's heart ( Truth says) cannot in the least conceive
What those shall have who truly do believe.
Who would lose Christ and his immortal treasure,
For one base Lust and moments time of pleasure?
But if what is said of Heaven will not invite thee,
Then let hell torments with black vengence fright thee
And make thee yield to Truth without delays,
Before God puts a period to thy days.
As Eye can neither see nor Tongue express,
The glory which Gods Saints in heaven possess:
So there is no man which can conceive the woe,
That Souls shut up in hell do undergo.
If men could number all the stars of Heaven
Or count the dust which by the wind is driven,
Or tell the drops of water in the seas,
Or count the Sands, then might a man with ease
Declare the nature of that dreadful pain,
Which damned Souls forever must sustain.
But Stars, nor Dust, nor Drops, nor Sands can be
Numbered by any man, neither can be
Express the nature of God's dreadful ire,
Which Souls lie under in Eternal fire.
In Hell all is darkness, not one beam of Light:
What Is greater sorrow than eternal Night?
In Hell all is Death, and yet there is no dying,
Naught there is heard but most hideous crying,
Their pains end not, from it there is no exemption,
Their Cries admit no help, there is no redemption,
Nor none to pity them, nor hear their groans
Whist they do make their lamentable moans.
The Lord who died will then rejoice to see,
Vengeance poured forth upon those Souls that be
Vessels of Wrath, who for rejecting Grace
Must have their portion in that doleful place,
No Earthly pain or torment can declare
The woeful Anguish which the Damned bear;
For if those Plagues could be defined by men,
Infinite punishment 'twould not be then.
Infinite Wrath it is to satisfy;
And God be sure, will Justice magnify.
Did thou but hear the groans and hideous cry
Of Souls Condemned to all Eternity,
How would it scare, and cause thy heart to ache,
And every limb of thee to tremble and to quake,
Then, think on this, before the time does come,
That God does pass on thee thy final Doom.

Truth. What say thou now? how can thou sleep in peace,
Until these inward gripes of Conscience cease?
How can thou think in the least thy state is good,
When Conscience swells and makes so great a flood?
Or raises storms and tempests in thy breast?
Because of sin he will not let thee rest.
Come, make a search, Conscience is not misled,
The very Truth before thee he has spread.
What will you do at death and Judgment day,
If Conscience thus you slight and disobey?
Make peace with God, for worser are his cries,
Than if ten thousand witnesses should rise
Against thy Soul; 'twill be a dreadful thing
To have thy Conscience then to bite and sting.

Youth, Some comfort, Truth, alas, my Soul does melt,
Such gripes as these, what Man has ever felt?
I have some doubt my state is very naught,
(...) that Conversion is not truly wrought.
My heart condemns me and does me reprove;
It Is thou alone which can my grief remove.

Truth. Before you have a Plaster for your sore,
Your wound must yet be searched a little more:
If slightly healed only for present ease,
The Remedy's as bad as the Disease.
Do know what time thou did this wound receive
It Is worser far, I fear, than you believe:
It Is deep, it stinks* yea, and it is venomous;
And does expose thee to God's dreadful Curse.
The sting or dart sticks fast too in thy Liver,
Which does thy smart and bitter pains procure.
Thy state is bad, thou have thy mortal wound,
No Limb, or any part of thee is sound;
If thou could live, and never more offend,
Yet by the Law thy Soul is quite condemned:
If from all actual sin you should be clear,
Yet by the Law you still most guilty are
Of former Crimes, Treason and Felony,
And justice does aloud for Vengeance cry,
Nor will she pardon, or reprieve give forth
To any Sinner living on the Earth.
Against thee too the Sentence is forth gone,
And the Day of Execution does draw on:
Naught is between thee and eternal Death;
But some short hours of uncertain breath:
Sin is so vile, and Justice so severe,
That in the least 'twould not Christ Jesus spare;
But Justice he must fully satisfy,
Who came to be man's blessed Security.
And since in Christ thou have no share nor part,
See what a self-condemned Soul thou art.

Youth. O cursed Sin! is this my sad condition.
Truth I believe has made a right decision.
I have my Soul deceived all along,
Though in my heart Convictions often were strong.
Oh! horrid Lust, and base deceitful Devil
Is this the fruit of your sweet pleasing evil?
And thou, false World, what art thou now to me?
For I alas! am ruined by thee.
O whither shall I fly? what path untrod
For to escape the incensed wrath of God?
Will none for me some secret place provide,
Where I from flaming Vengeance close may hide?

Truth. Vain is all this, for none can find a place
To hide from God (such is thy bitter case)
If to the ends of all the Earth you fly,
Vengeance will you pursue with Huy and Cry.
If you should take a sudden hasty flight,
To seek some shelter in the shades of Night;
'Twould also fail thee, though it should be done;
For unto God Darkness and Light is one.
No, if thou could some solid Rock espy,
To hide thee from God's dreadful Majesty,
Can Rocks, do think, prevent, yea, or restrain
The stroke of Justice, and not fly in twain?
There is no Sea, nor Shade, nor Rock, nor Cave
Which can from Vengeance shelter thee or save,
The Sea would part, the hardest Rock will split;
Where Justice aims, her fiery Darts must hit.
Can thou escape? alas! what place is there
To hide from him who is present every where?

Youth. Oh Truth! what shall I do, how can I stand,
Or bear these Tortures of God's heavy hand?
My Spirit may infirmities sustain,
But who can bear this inward cutting pain?
Is there no help, no Salve to heal my Wound;
What, no Physician for me to be found?
Will Tears nor Prayers no help at all afford,
Watchings, Fastings, nor hearing of the Word?
Or if that I could live and sin no more,
O what is sin, and what is my Gangrene sore?
O what is the nature of iniquity,
If naught my soul can cleanse or purify?
Rivers of Oil, much Gold, or Earthly Wealth,
Will not redeem my Soul, nor purchase health.
Ah! I am lost, the cause is truly so,
I am undone, and know not what to do,
Have you no word of Comfort now for me?
Oh, must I dye in this extremity?

Truth. Do find thy self sick at the very heart?
And does my searchings make thy Wounds to smart
Does sin, as sin, upon thy Spiritly?
And does its weight and burden make thee cry?
Do know thy wound is Epidemical?
And that for thee there is no help at all
By Law nor Levite? do thou see thy loss,
And thy own Righteousness to be but dross)

Youth, I know not what to say, I am in doubt
Some sin is hid, which yet I cannot find out.
My heart is deep and very traitorous;
Every day I find it worse and worse;
I grieve for sin, and yet I am in dread
That I in sin am greatly hardened.
Yet this, O Truth, I hope is wrought in me,
Sin I do hate, as it is Iniquity,
I would not Christ offend nor grieve again,
Were there no Hell or place of future pain:
O that e're I against the Lord should sin,
Who has to me so good and gracious bin!
Against the Lord, against the Lord alone,
Have I this horrid evil often done.
Oh! I do see that I in sin am dead,
And my iniquity's gone over my head
As a great burden which I cannot bear,
Oh! that I might but of a Savior hear,
All my own Righteousness I prize no more
Than stinking refuse of a Common-shore.

Truth, Come Youth, cheer up, if this be so indeed,
I tell thee then, Christ for thy Soul did bleed,
Glad tidings now I unto thee do bring,
There Is Mercy for thee in the Heavenly King.
Christ to appease God's Wrath did hither come,
And I am sent by him to call thee home.
Rise up, rise up, his blood for to apply,
And thou shall soon be healed perfectly.

Youth, Ah, could I but believe what thou do say
Unto my Soul, 'twould be a joyful day.
Alas, on me a mighty burden lies,
I cannot stir, nor power have to rise.
Can Lazarus, who in the grave does lie,
Death's cruel Fetters and strong Bands unty?
Can he awake? what power has he to strive,
When dead, and stinks? alas, he cannot revive,
Although dead but four days, then how shall I,
Who have lain dead in my iniquity
Ever since Adam (as it plain appears)
Which is indeed above five thousand years?
Jehovah which at first my heart did make,
Must by his Power it into pieces take;
That so he may create my heart-a-new,
E're good from Christ does to my Soul accrue,
It Is he must give me power to will and do,
And raise me up, e're I can creep or go.

Truth. Though that be true, yet hearken unto me,
And take the Counsel which I Will give to thee?
And thou shall find, as sure as God's above,
He will thy Fears and all thy Doubts remove,
And raise thee up out of the empty Pit,
And on a Rock also still set thy feet.
First thing of all which to you I commend,
Be sure you don't your Conscience more offend,
Do not grieve that, but always take great ear
In every thing to prove your self sincere.
He that in Morals walks not faithfully,
No marvel it is if Christ do pass him by:
In every Nation those accepted are,
Who walk uprightly, and the Lord do fear,
Those who do follow on to know the Lord,
He will to them his saving help afford.
I do exhort you in the second place,
For to attend upon all means of grace.
Do not neglect to hear God's blessed Word,
But prize each season which the precious Lord
Is pleased in Mercy on you to bestow,
For unto you thereby much good will flow.
My third advice make use of speedily,
Lift up your voice unto the Lord on high,
pour forth your Soul to him both night and day,
And you will prevail, though he at first say nay.
Though you at first may with repulses meet,
Your Soul yet prostate JEHOVAH's feet.
He Is full of bowels, long he cannot refrain
E're he comes forth to ease you of your pain.
Thy Prayers and tears and spiritual contrition,
Will move his heart to send thee a physician,
Who will apply a plaster to thy Wound,
Which will hereafter ever make thee sound,
Christ's Blood will heal, 'twill cleanse and purify,
If now the same by faith you do apply.
Such grief is thine, no Medicine will be good,
Nor heal thy Soul, but thy dear Savior's Blood*
The good Samaritan will cast a look,
Though thou of Priest and Levite art forsook?
Into thy Wounds he will pour in Oil and Wine,
The which will heal that bleeding Soul of thine.
O Cry to God, my Sister (Grace) to send,
It Is she at last will prove thy special Friend.
If God is pleased but to send her down,
Thy head with Glory she will straitway crown,
But here I Will advertise thee first of all,
Be sure you do for the right Sister call:
For there are two, and both of one Surname,
The one is lovely fair, the other lame,
The one is common, the other chaste and pure,
And will be true to thee, you may be sure,
The one will dwell where sin predominates,
The other loathes and bitterly it hates,
And makes a through change where she does dwell,
And will all filth out of that heart expel,
Where she does take up her sure resting place;
Rare is the nature of true saving Grace.
Thy stubborn Will she will make for to submit,
And thy affections change as she thinks fit.
Thy heart she can new mould, and make it soft,
And will bring down each high and sinful thought.
The Old Man she will into pieces tear,
She Will cut and kill, and nothing will she spare
That Is opposite unto the Prince of Light,
She Will put the Devil to a speedy flight;
She Will make him leave his strongest hold, and run,
And quite forsake his former Garrison.
She Will take no pity on the Old-Man's Age,
She Will pay him off for all his wrath and Rage,
And cursed Malice, Pride and every sin,
Which of long time he has the Author been,
It Is she can work upon the Covetous,
And change his heart to keep an open house,
To give and to distribute of his store
To the clothing and refreshing of the Poor.
It Is she brings down the proud and lofty mind,
Which nat'rally was to that vice inclined.
It Is she can tame the wild strong-headed Youth,
And make the Liar always tell the truth.
It Is she which makes the froward very meek,
And the revengeful not revenge to seek.
It Is she which quenches Young-mens lustful fire,
And makes them to disdain that base desire.
It Is she will make thy Soul for to defy
Each Dalilah and all Hypocrisy.
She Is like to Oil and Wine, and will give peace
And inward joy, which never more shall cease.
It Is she must put Christ's blessed Robes on thee,
And bring thy Soul out of Captivity.
It Is she must thee adorn and beautify,
And make thee lovely in Christ Jesus Eye
Oh she will inflame thy Soul with precious love
To Christ alone, which none shall e're remove.
It Is she which ties that conjugal blessed knot,
Which cannot be broke, nor ever be forgot.
It Is she that makes Christ and the Saints but one,
And makes them of his very flesh and bone.
It Is she will help thee in this time of need,
Yea, a Disciple will make thee indeed.
And this to thee also I must declare,
Thou of this Grace shall have a part and share.
Since 'twas for thee thy precious Lord did die,
He cannot thy Soul of saving Grace deny;
Give him no rest, 'till more he does give forth,
For to complete in thee the second Birth,
Be earnest with him, strive to hold him fast,
And thou, like Jacob, wilt prevail at last.
Though he at first may seem to stop his Ear,
Yet importunity will make him hear.
Thy time, I Am sure, it is the time of love,
And thy deep wounds will make him from above
To pity thee, and for to cast an eye,
As thou polluted in thy blood do lie;
What e're is needful to thee, he will give,
And raise thee up to life, and make thee live;
Yea, manifest to thee such consolation,
As for to cloth thee with his own salvation.
Come, make a trial, and do not despair,
Look up to Heaven, Soul, thy help is there.

Youth. Thy Counsel I resolve to take with speed,
If 'twas for me Christ on the cross did bleed;
I will send up a sigh, a bitter groan,
And earnestly implore his gracious Throne.
Most Holy God, who dwell in the light,
Ah, What am I before thee in thy sight;
Will thou attend, or listen to my Cry,
Thou know my grief, and where my pain does lie,
Can thou not ease my deeply wounded Soul,
Who in my blood am forced to lie and roll?
Is there no Balm in Gilead, is there none?
Into dark silence then, Lord, I'^e be gone.
Where are thy Bowels, is thy Mercy ^l^d?
Lord, think upon the Blood Christ Jesus shed;
If thou cannot heal my Soul of all its grief,
Then let me perish without al^ relief.
Why were thy sides pie^ced? Lord Jesus, why?
Did suffer ^or thy own i^i^^ity?
There was no sin, IN ^e sure, nor guilt in thee
That caused thy pains; did thou not die for me?
Did thou not Justice fully satisfy,
And pay the Debt? Must I in Prison lie,
When Restitution's made in the highest degree?
Oh, come^ and set my Soul at liberty,
Knock off these bolts and chains, and bring me forth
Out of this pit, deep Mi^^, and bands of Death.
Lord, must I bleed? did I not bleed before
In thy sad Wounds? can Justice challenge more?
O, shall my heart strings break? my Soul does groan
I languish, Lord, whilst thou stand'st looking on.
Lord, do thou hear the Ravens when they cry?
And will thou not my present wants supply?
Will thou the door of Mercy never unlock?
Lord, open unto me, now I do knock.
O Son of David, help; think on thy Word,
And unto me some Mercy, Lord, afford.

JESUS. What voice is this? who is it that makes this cry?
What sinful Wretch is in extremity,
That thus implores for help, and follows me?
That takes no nay, although I silent be?

Youth. Lord, it is a poor dejected piece of Earth,
That is undone, and sighs for a new birth.

Jesus. Was I not sent only to Jacob's race?
How c^^'st thou then to have so ^old a face
To importune me, when ye know full well
You are not of the flock of Israel?
Come you not of the cursed Gentile seed?
Be gone from me, and further don't proceed.

Youth. Ah! help dear Lord, and some Compassion show
For to whom else, or whither can I go?

Jesus. Is It meet that I should give to Dogs that Bread,
With which the Children should be nourished?

Youth. True, Lord, that I grant, and ever shall,
Yet may the Dogs eat up those Crumbs which fall
From their own Masters Table: though a whelp,
Lord, look on me* O precious Savior, help.

Jesus. What ailest thee, poor Soul, what is thy condition,
Which makes thee shed th^se tears of sad contrition?

Youth. My grief, my pain, and great extremity,
Lord, thou do know, and all my wants do see.
Ah! I have sinned, and am so vile and base,
I hate my self, and loath my present case.
I am a lump of filth, wholly unclean,
A viler Creature there has never been.
I languish, Lord, my wounds they are not small:
And I have wounded thee, that is the worst of all^

Jesus. Come, cease thy grief, what is it thou do desire?
My Soul does melt, my heart is set on fire,
My bowels yearn, I longer cannot refrain
From tears, as well as thee I am in pain:
Thy wounds afflict me, and thy bitter cry
Does pierce my heart, I know thy misery*
What is it, Soul? speak forth thy mind to me;
What do thou crave, or shall I do for thee?
Come, open thy heart to me, for I am nigh
Thy suit to grant, thy want: for to supply.

Youth. It Is not for Riches, nor for pleasure here,
Nor Honors, which by men so prized are,
Nor length of days, Lord, do I seek or crave,
It Is something else my Soul does long to have,
The Earth's a blast, and all the World's a bubble:
There Is nothing in it can ease me of my trouble.
Such is my state, naught but thy hand can save,
It Is thou must raise dead Laz'r^s from the grave.
Knock off these bolts, and set thy Prisoner free,
And give thy grace (Lord JESUS) unto me.
My fainting Spirit comfort and refresh,
O spare my Soul, but crucify the flesh;
Complete thy Work (Lord Jesus) on my heart,
And thy own Righteousness to me impart.
There Is naught, I see, will do me any good,
Save the dear Merit of thy Precious Blood.
My bleeding Soul will faint away and dye,
If thou do not thy Blood with speed apply.
How has my panting breast sent many groan,
With bitter tears unto thy gracious Throne,
For one sweet look and aspect of thine Eye?
There Is nothing else which will me satisfy:
Oh! manifest thy Love unto my soul,
For that will cure me and soon make me whole.
My gasping Soul's dissolved into ears,
Whilst pleased with hopes, and yet possessed with fears*
My great Request, alas! is only this,
Come seal thy Love to me with a sweet kiss:
For naught is there on Earth, nor Heaven above,
Which I esteem or value like thy Love.
A promise grant, some Word to lie upon,
Before my life and little hopes be gone.
My Soul's afraid, and trembles, thou do see,
Because I know that I unworthy be:
Ah! I have made thee bleed, I am so vile,
Thy frowns I do deserve, but not one smile.
How did I grieve and put thy Soul to pain!
The thoughts of it does cut my heart in twain,
Thy Messenger, how did my Soul refuse,
and my poor Conscience, wickedly abuse,
Who did receive Commission from above,
Either to clear, or sharply to reprove,
I unto Truth oft-times turned a deaf ear,
And unto Satan rather did adhere.
I slighted thee, and sin I did embrace,
Which shames me greatly to look in thy face.
If thou should pardon such a one as I,
And save my Soul to all eternity,
And me embrace in contract of Love,
And all thy wrath forever quite remove:
It would be Grace and Love beyond degree,
And such which never can expressed be:
O, will thou speak again, dear Savior, do,
A Promise, Lord, or I Will not let thee go.

Jesus. What Faith have thou, poor soul, can thou believe,
And steadfastly my benefits receive?
Do think that I have power and a heart
To save, or help, and free thee from thy smart?

Youth. My faith, alas, is weak, O send relief,
Lord, I believe, O help my unbelief,
That precious voice which I did lately hear,
Will soon remove my doubts and all my fear.
If Love, as well as pity, thou do show,
'Twill give me joy, and take away my woe.
But thou may, Lord, my Soul commiserate,
And yet may I be in a dying state.
Over Jerusalem thou did Lament,
Who had no saving Grace for to repent.
Is there in thee such Bowels of compassion,
As to bestow thy self and thy Salvation,
On such a Worm as I, whose wounded breast
is heavy loaded, and would fain have rest?
O help, dear Lord; my fainting Soul will dye,
Without an answer from thee speedily.

Jesus. Look up to me and see my Love descending,
It Is from Eternity, and has no ending.
Can thou have more, dear Soul? thou have my heart;
What e're is mine, to thee I will impart.
Thy scarlet sins are washed quite away,
Not one of them unto thy charge I Will lay
Pull up thy drooping heart, be of good cheer,
Thy sins, though never so great, forgiven are.
I able am to save to the uttermost
All those who do in me put all their trust.
Those which do come to me, I in no wise
Will cast them out, therefore lift up thine eyes*
Behold my hands and feet, and do not doubt,
For I have wished and cleans'd thy Soul throughout.
Thy debts I Have paid, and quitted thy old score;
Thy former faults I never remember more.
Enter the Royal Fort, thou have obtained:
The holy fountain of pleasure, holy Love unstained
Take up thy Lodging in Eternal Love,
What Is here below, thy treasure is above.
Cheer up, poor heart, I tell thee thou art mine.
My blood was shed to save that Soul of thine:
With endless joys thy Soul I Will satisfy,
And in my Bosom ever shall thou lie.
In my enfolded Arms I now thee take,
And do engage i will never thee forsake.
In the fire and in the Water i will be near,
And help thee through all grief and trouble here,
Yea, I Will be with thee always to the end,
And Death at last I Will cause to be thy friend;
And make its passage also unto thee
Only an entrance to felicity.
Rivers of pleasures thou shall have to the brim,
Wherein the prophets and Apostles swim,
And with great Glory thou shall Crowned be,
And on the throne sit down with me.
World, Death nor Devil ever shall remove
My heart from thee, for those I truly Love,
I Love the end: Ah, Soul it is thou shall lie
In my own Arms to all Eternity.

Youth. Darkness is gone, daylight begins to spring,
Heavens melody I find the sweetest thing.
The Sun is risen now, it is broke forth,
And gloriously enlightens my dark earth.
My Soul is ravished with this joyful sight,
Yea, and dissolved with Love and true delight:
My heart is melted with Celestial fire,
And has obtained at length its own desire,
My frozen Soul must needs run down a main,
Which such hot beams from Jesus does obtain;
The door is opened, Christ has given a knock
Has made it fly, and has dissolved the rock.
My heart which was so hard is made to yield,
Christ has overcome me now and won the field.
The war is ceased between the Lord and I,
A peace is made to all Eternity.
What joy is this! Ah, it is beyond all Measure:
There Is nothing like to inward joy and pleasure.
As was my burden, so I find my rest,
O that was great! and this cannot be expressed.
What heart can taste of these transcendent joys,
And not account Earth's pleasures empty toys!
Such is the nature of a second birth;
Makes Heaven on Earth, turns sorrow into mirth.
Once was I blind, senceless, bewitched, nay, mad,
I thought in Christ no comfort could be had:
Religion was, I thought, a foolish thing,
Which could no pleasure nor profit bring.
I thought Professors greatly were misled,
When I beheld what things they suffered:
But now I am convinced of my mistake,
For I my self could for Christ Jesus sake,
Any derision or Affliction bear;
Such inward peace in him, and joy is there*
What man would not all earthly glory slight,
For one small dram, or taste of such delight?
To have Christ's Love, and in his Bosom lie,
Yields true content, and sweet felicity.
Ah happy ^* I live! my Soul's involved,
In secret raptures, sighs to be dissolved,
And be with Christ, my home and resting place,
For to enjoy and see him face to face.
And in the int'rim, Lord, whilst here I stay,
I faithfully will do what thou do say.
And help, me Lord, thy praise for to declare
Unto all precious Children far and near.
O help me to lift up my voice on high!
Let joyful Hallelujahs pierce the sky.
And echo back again, resound on Earth,
Since thou have wrought in me the second birth:
Let me with the Celestial Angels sing,
And make thy praises round the world to ring,
Thou'st brought my Soul out of the lowest pit,
And in the paths of Sion set my feet,
Thou have from Darkness brought me into Light,
And to my eyes thou have restored sight,
Nay, have my Soul saved from Eternal death
And shall not I thy praises, Lord, sing forth?
O let my tongue, my heart, and life make known
The favor, Lord, which to me thou have shown
Let me aloft, by thy best Grace, aspire
To sound thy praise with the Celestial Quire.
With swift winged Cherubims, Lord, let me join,
To magnify that glorious Name of thine.
Let not remainders of the flesh disturb
My precious peace that is new* O do thou curb,
Yea, kill and crucify each evil thought,
With vengeance let those Rebels down be brought,
And let me on the Earth live all my days
Unto thy Glory and transcendent praise.
And then, great God, when these short days are over,
With S^raphims I Will sing for evermore.

Truth. What Melody and triumph do I hear?
Whose voice is this that sounds in my ear?
What Eagle-ey'd Soul's this that soars on high,
That with swift wings aloft does mount and fly;
And in Eternal Love seems to lie down,
Adorned with Grace, and ravished with the Crown
Of inward peace? that takes up its rest
At Jesus Christ's sweet satisfying breast,
And breaking forth in raptures cannot express,
As he would do, his humble thankfulness?

Youth. It Is I, blessed Truth, the Conquest now is won,
Grace has prevailed, I am the Conquered one.
My Grief is turned to joy, yea and my night,
Is also turned into Eternal light,
Thy power's great when Grace does work with thee,
Ye soon do then obtain the Victory.
Blessed be the day that ever thou were sent,
To change my heart, and move me to repent,
Dear love to thee, O Truth, I shall retain,
So long as I upon the Earth remain.
I Will keep thee close, and hide thee in my heart,
For thou more precious than rich jewels art.
I Will lose my all before i will part with thee,
So much I love and prize thy company.
Though Satan stir up foes never so cruel,
Devil nor men shall rob me of this Jewel.
J am resolved a thousand deaths to dye,
Before J will Gods Blessed Truth deny.
Though of Deceivers there are multitude,
Yet none of them shall my poor Soul delude.
Though they do thee reproach, slight and contemn,
J by Exper'ence can refute all them,
Who say thy words naught but dead letters are,
Which men may burn or into pieces tare;
The outside of the Book they only see,
Who thus do speak reproachfully of thee:
For did they but thy inward power know,
They Would never speak, as often times they do;
But soon they would God's written word extol,
Above that Light which they cry up in all.
The Light which Conscience unto me does give,
J'll always own as long as J do live,
But from God's word does its chief light descend;
Therefore the Scriptures I Will commend:
For had we not God's Word to light our hearts,
The Heathen which do live in Forr^ign parts,
Who never heard of Christ, might understand
As much as any do in this our Land,
Alas! we should have been unto this day,
In all respects as ingnorant as they.
But I Will forbear, because I must with speed
Attend upon Gods Truth with care and heed,
To hear what will he say. O Truth, will thou
Concerning me show forth thy Judgment now!
I do entreat thee Prove me thoroughly,
For still I do retain a jealousy
Over my heart, because that I have seen
How I deceived often times have been.

Truth. Conscience, to thee I must once more descend,
The Controversy thou alone must end:
How is it with him now? what do thou say?
Have any thing unto his charge to lay?
Remember what I formerly have shown,
And let thy present thoughts with speed be known.

Conscience. I always ready am Judgment to give,
According to the Light I do perceive,
And never was more free than now am I
My thoughts to show; your suit I cannot deny.
O Sir! the case is changed; I am his Friend,
His sweet Condition I must needs commend.
Grace has subdued corruption in his heart,
That he is made clean, and washed in every part;
My testimony you may take for truth,
He Is now become a very humble Youth;
He Is truly Godly, Faithful, and sincere,
I do for him, and shall my witness bear:
All kind of Evil does his Soul defy,
He hates above all things Hypocrisy;
Will and Affections now are changed quite,
That in the Lord alone is his delight.
There Is no Command of Chirst, not any one
That he is convinced of, but he has done;
He faithfully also the Lord obeys,
Without excuses, put offs, or delays,
He grieveth most for sins that secret are,
Which unto men do not in the least appear.
He Is more in substance than he is in show,
When highest in joy, his heart is very low.
All his own Righteousness he does disown,
And does rely on Jesus Christ alone,
Christ is become so precious in his sight,
He Is first with him in the morn, and last at night.
He willingly has taken up the Cross,
And does account, what-e're is his but dross,
And parts with it most freely, Christ to gain,
Since he has found Earth's best enioyments vain.
Christ he exalts as King in the highest degree,
And gives each Office its full dignity,
He uses me also most tenderly,
Because he knows that my Authority
Is from above, it is for Jesus sake
He sides with me, and does resolve to take
My part always, what e're he does sustain,
He Will rather suffer than would make me gain.
Christ has in me set up his blessed Throne,
And over me no other King he will own;
Christ must alone in me the Scepter sway,
And he will die before he will give away
Christ's Right and Sovereignty in his dear Soul.
He is resolved to suffer no control,
In things alone which to me appertain,
Fear lest thereby Christ's Glory he should stain.

Truth, Oh! happy young man! blessed from above,
Blessed with Grace, and ravished with the love
Of the Eternal Lord, in whose sweet breast
Thou now do lie, and ever more shall rest.
Thy honor's lasting, now it cannot decay.
Thy treasure's sure, thieves cannot steal't away;
Thy Pleasures are beyond thoughts or conceit,
And thy rare Beauty is without deceit.
Thy strength, thy Wisdom, nor thy Youth shall fade
Nor can thou die, thou art immortal made.
Eternal Life is given unto thee,
And thou shall reign to all Eternity.

Vi^inus. There Is none on Earth is able to express
The inward peace this Young Man does possess:
Whilst to his joy he clearly does espy
This blessed Concord, and rare Harmony:
Conscience and Truth most sweetly do agree,
He Is freed from bondage and Captivity.
Christ's Spirit does with Conscience witness bea^,
He Is born of God, and is become an Heir
(With his dear Savior) of Eternal bless:
What Consolation can there be like this?
But whilst thus filled with joy and true delight,
The Devil falls on him with all his might;
With strong assaults, his Faith for to destroy,
Which much abates and mitigates his joy,
But Satan failing in his Enterprise
In one respect, another way he tries;
And with malicious threats he breaks forth,
Spitting his venomn and his hellish wrath;
Which in some measure may to you appear,
By what immediately does follow here.

Devil. Hark, hark, thou cursed wretch, vengeance is mine,
And I Will repay't upon that Soul of thine;
In dreadful wrath I will contend with thee,
If thou will ^o^ again submit to me,
Will not my shining Glory thee invite,
Nor all my Agents fell thy Soul affright
To leave those cursed ways in which you go?
Then I Will some way contrive your overthrow.
Though out of your Dominions I am bea^,
And forced am at present to retreat;
Yet I Will return like a Lion strong,
And break thy bones in pi^^es ere't be long.

Youth, Father of Lies, do think I dread thy frown?
It Is past thy skill to throw my Glory down;
Thy head is broke, thou art a beaten Fo,
And chained up; alas, thou can not do
According to thy wrath and cursed spite,
Christ's Power is mine who stronger is in Might;
Me he will not leave, though tempted am by thee,
Yet he knows how to help and succor me.
What matter is it although thou art enraged,
When the great Power of Heaven is engaged
To side with me always, and takes my part?
Though thou a Lion and a Serpent art,
Yet may as soon the Lord of Life overcome,
As to produce or work my final Doom,
So Long as I do for his Glory stand,
And am obedient to his best Command.

Devil. But I have so much craft and subtilty,
That I can make the Lord thine Enemy;
Though thou do think he i^ become thy Friend,
I 'le by temptation move t^^^ to offend
Him ere't be long; and soon you will espy
In's anger you he will cast off utterly:
And then I 'le tear and rend you as I list,
And you shall have no power to resist.

Youth, God has bestowed on me his precious Grace,
That I abhor the thoughts of giving place
To thee, O Satan, though thou do entice,
God will preserve my Soul from deadly vice;
But if through weakness him I should offend,
In Bowels he will to me his pardon send.
Christ is my Advocate; God will pass by
All sins of Weakness and Infirmity.
Although he use the Rod, his precious Love
I Am sure from me he never will remove.

Devil. Your hopes will fail, alas, black clouds will hide
Your glorious Sun, your steps will quickly sli^e;
Your morning's bright, but soon 'twill over-cast,
And all your joy will scarce a moment last.
Though Truth does now thy present state commend,
Yet you will find the Proverb's true in the end,
That the young Saint will an old Devil be;
You Will die and perish in Apostasy.

Youth. 'Cause thou have lost thy former happy state,
With malice thou stir'st up thy bitter hate
Against my Soul, thou show thy wicked spite,
But thy vile teeth are broke, thou can not bite.
Thou do on me cast forth an envious frown,
Because thou have forever lost thy Crown.
Because thy Morning's turned into night,
Do think thou shall my Soul amaze and fright,
With such insnaring thoughts? I thee defy;
Nothing can break that blessed band and Tie,
Or Covenant which Christ with me has made,
My standing's (...), my Crown can never fade.
He that has in my Soul this work begun,
Will finish it, I Am sure, e're ^e has done.
There Is never a Lamb or Sheep of his dear fold,
But he will keep, he has of them such hold,
That in the midst of danger they shall stand,
And none shall pluck them out of his strong hand,
They by his Power are kept in every Nation,
Till they are safely brought unto Salvation.
Upon the Rock of Ages I am placed,
And my foundation never can be razed;
Though Mountains should depart and Hills remove,
Yet Christ will never change in his dear Love.
Nor cause his Covenant of l^sting peace
To be removed, nor his sweet Mercy cease.
Thus Truth and Conscience both jointly agree,
That the new birth is truly wrought in me.
The Immortal Seed, I Am sure, must needs bring forth
A Babe Immortal; and my Heavenly birth
Does show to all, and clearly signify,
I cannot perish in Apostasy.
The Head and Members of one Nature are,
Or else Christ's Body a strange Monster were.
As sure as he is in Heaven so shall I,
And reign with him to all Eternity,

Devil. My words, I see, no place at all can find
Within the Center of thy evil mind;
I 'le leave thee therefore with my dreadful Curse,
Which is as bad as Hell, nay, it is worse
Than all the Plagues of the infernal Lake;
And let all those who love me, vengeance take
Upon so vile a Wretch; and though I do
Forsake thee now, within a day or two
I 'le come again, and will thy Soul torment
Till thou of thy Repentance shall repent.

Youth. O Lord, I praise thee for that glorious Power,
Which helped my Soul in such a needful hour
Of strong assaults from the vile wicked one;
Thou help'st me to resist him, and he is gone.
Therefore, dear God, be pleased to inflame
My heart with Grace to magnify thy Name;
And when he comes again, O then be near,
And let thy Truth also for me appear,
Though I am young and weak, I shall thereby
Not fear the assaults of any Enemy.
Come speak, O Truth, wilt be on my side,
It Is in thy strength still I very much confide.
Though I am feeble, thou art mighty strong;
And whilst for me, there is none can do me wrong.

Truth. I will, dear Soul, support thee whilst on Earth,
And save thee from the rage of Hell and Death:
I will assist thee by a mighty Arm,
And keep thee day and night from hurt and harm;
And with my glittering Sword cut down and slay
All cursed Enemies who thee gainsay.

Grace. If Truth should fail, I will thy wants supply,
Thou need'st not doubt of my sufficiency,
Light I will be in Darkness, Joy in Grief,
And when in Trouble great, I Will bring relief.
If always thou do on my Arm rely,
The Devil will be forced with speed to fly.
Never on me did any Soul depend,
But they obtained Deliverance in the end.
I Will help thy Soul through all its Christian strife,
And bring thee safe to Everlasting Life.

Conscience. I Will be third that will lend thee an hand,
We'll all combine to make a triple band.
A threefold Cord cannot easily broken be,
I Will be a Friend in thy Adversity,
There Is not a Foe on Earth thou need'st to fear,
So long as I for thee my witness bear,
That thou in Truth do walk before the Lord,
And that thy ways do with his Word accord.
The evil Fo shall be ashamed quite,
Whilst faithfully thou walk'st up to thy Light;
And Satan never can get any ground,
Whilst I declare thy heart is truly sound.
Clear up, poor Soul, I Will feast thee constantly,
And plead for thee before the Enemy,
My sweetest wine also I Will keep to the end,
At death I will thy Soul with that befriend.
God's Word that is thy ground in every thing,
His Glory is thy aim, from thence does spring
All service thou do do toward the Lord,
His Spirit therefore to thee he will afford;
That does bear witness for thee, so do I,
And will also when thou do come to die.

The Young Man Experiencing Conversion truly wrought in his Soul, and that he is
delivered from the Power of the Tempter, breaks forth into these following
Hymns of Prayer and Praises to GOD. A Mystical Hymn of Thansgiving.
MY Soul mounts up with Eagles Wings,
And unto thee, dear God, she sings;
Since thou art on my side
My enemies are forced to fly,
As soon as they do thee espy;
Thy Name be glorified.
Thou make Rich by making poor;
By Poverty add'st to my Store;
Such Grace do thou provide.
Thou wound'st as well as make whole,
And heal'st by wounding of the Soul;
Thy Name be glorified.
Thou make men blind by giving sight,
And turn'st their darkness into light;
These things cannot be denied.
Thou cloath'st the Soul by making bear,
And give food when none is there;
Thy Name be glorified.
Thou killest by making alive,
By dying do the Soul revive,
Which none can do besides;
Thou do raise up by pulling down,
And by abasing thou do Crown,
Thy Name be glorified.
By making bitter thou make sweet,
And make each crooked thing to meet;
In The Soul which thou have tried;
The fruitless tree thou make to grow,
And the green tree do overthrow;
Thy name be glorified.
The conquered the conquest gains;
By being beat the field obtains,
Which makes me therefore cry,
Lord, while I live upon the Earth,
Since thou have wrought the second birth,
Thy Name I Will magnify.
Thou make Men wise by coming fools;
By emptying thou fill'st their Souls,
Such Grace do thou provide;
By making weary thou giv'st Rest,
That which seemed worst, proves for the best;
Thy Name be gloryfi'd.
Thou art far off and also near,
And not confined, but every where,
And on the clouds do ride.
O thou art Love, and also Light;
There Is none can get out of thy sight;
Thy Name be glorified.
Lord thou art great and also good,
And fit'st upon the mighty flood,
By whom all hearts be tried;
Thou art a Tree, yet art but One,
And comprehended art of (...)
The Exellency of peace of Conscience.
My Conscience is become my Friend,
And cheerfully does speak to me,
And I unto his motions bend,
Althoug that I reproached be;
I matter not who does revile,
Since Conscience in my face does smile.
My Conscience now does give me rest,
My burthen's gone, my Soul is free;
Again I would not be oprest
In the old bands of misery,
For Kingdoms nor for Crowns of Gold,
Nor any thing that can be told.
My Conscience does with precious food,
Feed my poor Soul continually;
Its dainties also are so good,
All sinful sweets do I defy:
This Banquit's lasting, 'twill supply
My wants, and feed me till I die.
My Conscience does me cheerful make,
When I am much possessed with grief;
And when I suffer for its sake,
'Twill yield me joy and sweet relief:
Though troubles rise, and much increase,
I in my Conscience shall have peace.
When others to the Mountains fly,
And sore amazed do trembling stand;
A place of shelter then have I,
And Conscience will lend me its hand
To lock me in the Chamber fast,
Till the Indignation's over-past.
At Death, and in Judgment Day
What would men give for such a Friend?
All those which do him disobey,
They Will it repent in the end;
When such are forced to howl and cry,
My Soul shall sing continually.
An Hymn on the six Principles of Christ's Doctrine. Heb. 6.1, 2.
REpentance is wrought in my Soul,
And Faith for to believe;
Whereby on Jesus I do roll,
And truly him receive.
As my dear Lord and Sovereign,
Him always to obey;
And in all things over me to reign,
And govern night and day.
Christ's Baptism it is very sweet,
With laying on of Hands;
My Soul is brought to Jesus feet
In owning his Commands.
Those Ordinances men oppose,
And count as carnal things;
I have closed with, and tell't to those,
From them rare Comforts spring.
My precious Lord I must obey,
Though men reproach me still;
I Will do what ever christ does say,
And yield unto his will.
On Christ alone I do rely,
Though men Judge otherwise;
Because I cannot Gods Truth deny,
I am reproached with lies.
Let them deride, yet for Christ's sake
Resolved now am I,
in his own strength the Cross to take,
Yea, and for him to dye.
Before J'll ever turn my back
On him whom J do love;
For J do know J shall not lack
His presence from above.
For he has promised to the end,
To me he will be near;
And be to me a faithful friend,
Which makes me now to fear.
Whatever Men or Devils do
In secret place design,
He soon can them quite overthrow,
And help this Soul of mine.
The Resurrection of the Dead
I constantly maintain;
When all those which lie buried,
Shall rise to life again.
And that the Judgment day will come,
When Christ upon the Throne
Shall pass a black Eternal Doom,
Upon each Wicked one.
But all the Saints then joyfully
With Bowels he will embrace,
And Crowns to all eternity
Upon their heads he will place,
And in the Kingdom shall they reign,
Prepared long before,
And also shall with Christ remain,
In bliss for evermore.
A Spiritual Hymn.
THe Sun does now begin to shine,
And breaks forth yet more and more,
Mere darkness was that light of mine,
Which I commended here-to-fore.
I was involved in my sin;
Had day with out, but night within.
My former days I did compare,
Unto the sweet and lovely Spring;
I thought That time it was as rare,
As when the chirping Birds do sing;
But I was blind I now do see
There was no Spark nor Light in me.
My Spring it was the Wintertime,
Yet, like the midst of cold December;
The Sun was gone out of my Clime,
And also I do now remember
My heart was cold like any stone,
My leaves were off, and sap was gone.
God is a Sun, a shield also,
The Glory of the World is he;
True Light alone from him does flow,
And he has now enlightened me;
The Sun does his sweet beams display,
Like to the dawning of the day.
How pre^ious is it to see the Sun,
When in the Morning it does rise,
And shines in our Horizon,
To the clearing of the cloudy Skies!
The misty Fogs by this strong Light
Are vanished quite out of our sight.
Thus does the Lord in my poor heart,
By his strong beams and glorious rays
The light from darkness clearly part,
And makes in me rare shining days.
Though fogs appear and clouds do rise,
He does expel them from mine eyes.
Were there no glorious Lamp above,
What dark confusion would be here!
If God should quite the Sun remove,
How would the Seaman do to steer!
My Soul's the World, and Christ's the Sun,
If he shines not, I am undone.
In Winter things hang down their head,
Until Sol's beams do them revive;
So I in sin lay buried,
Till Jesus Christ made me alive:
Alas, my heart was Ice and Snow,
Till Sun did shine and Winds did blow.
Until warm Gales of Heavenly Wind
Did sweetly blow, and Sun did dart
Its Light on me, I could not find
No heat with in my inward part
Then blow thou wind and shine thou Sun,
To make my Soul a lively one.
In natural Men there is a Light,
Which for their sins does them reprove,
And yet are they but in the Night,
And not renewed from above:
The Moon is given (it is clear)
To guide men who in darkness are.
The Sun for brightness does exceed
The Stars of Heaven or the Moon;
Of them there is but little need
When Sun does shine toward high noon.
Just so the Gospel does excel
The Law God gave to Israel.
All those who do the Gospel slight,
And rather have a Legal guide;
The Sun's not risen in their sight,
And therefore it is that they deride
Those who commend the Gospel-Sun
Above the Light in every one.
Degrees of Light I do perceive
Some of them weak and others strong;
That which is saving none receive
But those who unto Christ belong;
Yet does each Light serve for the end,
For which to man God did it send.
Divine Breathings. A Hymn.
LEt not the Sun Eclipsed be,
Nor any dark Cloud interpose
Between thy self (dear Christ) and me,
Who art that blessed Sharon's Rose:
O let thy face upon me shine,
Since thou by choice have made me thine.
Always let me walk in the Light,
Till Grace does me with Glory crown;
Turn not my Morning into Night,
Nor let my Sun go down;
O let thy face upon me shine,
Since by dear Purchase I am thine.
Let not thick Fogs, O Lord, arise
From the gross Lump of inward Earth,
To the hiding of the glorious Skies,
The thoughts of that is as bad as Death:
O let thy Face upon me shine,
Since by Adoption I am thine.
Lord, let my Morning be more bright,
And my Sun shine to the perfect day;
And let mine Eyes have stronger sight,
That I behold its glory may.
O let thy face upon me shine,
Since God by Gift has made it thine.
Lord shine and make my heart more soft,
And temper it, the seal to take;
Make it according as it ought,
Lord do^t for thy own Names sake.
O let thy face upon me shine,
Since by sweet Contract I am thine.
The Light of thy dear Countenance,
It is the thing I only prize;
Let not therefore mine ignorance
Darken the light of my dim eyes:
O let thy face upon me shine,
Since I by Faith am wholly thine.
O be my Strength, my Light, my Guide,
Always until I come to dye;
And from thy paths never let me slide,
But light me to Eternity:
O let thy face upon me shine,
For I my self to thee resign.
There Is many, Lord, who daily cry,
Oh! who will show us a^y good?
It Is in thy self, Lord, it does ly,
Although by few it is understood:
O let thy face upon me shine,
For I by conquest now am thine.
Lord, in the Light I thee enjoy,
And with thy Saints Communion have,
No Devil can that soul destroy,
Whom thou intendest for to save:
O let thy face upon me shine*
For I can ^ay, Lord, thou art mine.
Let not the Sun only appear,
For to enlighten my dark heart;
But to poor Souls both far and near,
The self-same Glory. Lord, impart:
O let thy face upon them shine
As it does now, dear* God, on mine.
Let Light and Glory so break forth,
And Darkness fly and quite be gone,
That all thy Saints upon the Earth
May in the Truth be joined in one,
O let thy face so brightly shine,
As to discover who are thine.
Let Grace and Knowledge now abound,
And the blessed Gospel shine so clear,
That it Romes Harlot may confound,
And Popish darkness quite cashier:
O let thy face on Sion shine,
But plague those cursed Foes of thine.
Let France, dark Spain, and Italy
Thy Light and Glory, Lord, behold;
To each adjacent Country
Do thou the Gospel plain unfold:
O let thy face upon them shine,
That all these Nations may be thine.
Let Christendom new Christ'ned be,
And unto thee O let them turn,
And be Baptized, O Christ, by thee
With the Spirit of the Holy One,
O let thy face upon it shine,
That Christendom may all be thine.
And carry on thy glorious Work
Victoriously in every Land;
Let Tartars and the mighty Turk
Subject themselves to thy Command,
O let thy face upon them shine,
That those blind People may be thine.
And let thy brightness also go
To Asia and to Africa;
Let Egypt and Assyria too
Submit unto thy blessed Law,
O let thy face upon them shine,
That those dark Regions may be thine.
Nay, precious God, let Light extend
Chinia and East India;
To thee let all the People bend,
Who live in wild America:
O let thy blessed Gospel shine,
That the blind Heathens may be thine.
Send forth thy Light like to the morn
Most swiftly, Lord, O let it fly
From Cancer unto Capricorn;
That all dark Nations may espy
Thy Glorious face on them to shine,
And they in Christ for to be thine.
The Fullness of the Gentiles, Lord,
Bring in with speed, O let them fear
Thy Name in Truth with one accord,
Live they far off or live they near:
O let thy face upon them shine,
And let us know, Lord who are thine.
And let also the glorious news
Of thy Salvat^on, yield relief
Unto the sad distressed Jews,
Who hardened are in Unbelief;
O let thy face upon them shine
For Abram's sake, that Friend of thine.
O don't forget poor Israel,
But let Light and Glorious Rays
Cause their rare Beauty to excel,
Beyond what 'twas in former days,
O cause thy face sweetly to shine
That Jews and Gentiles may be thine.
O let all Kingdoms now with speed,
And all the Nations under Heaven,
From all gross Darkness now be freed,
And power to thy Saints be given;
That they in Glory, Lord, may shine,
According to that Word of thine.
An APPENDIX, Containing a Dialogue between an Old Apostate and Young Professor.
Apostate. HOw many straights and crosses have I met,
Since I my self to seek for Canaan set!
Red Seas and Wildernesses lie between;
Why venture I for what I never have seen?
Why can I not, where I am now, Remain?
Or to my old delights turn back again.
My head has been perplexed with cares and fears,
Since to these Preachers I inclined mine ears.
They were but fancies that disturbed my mind,
I sought for something which I could not find.
Would God in Egypt I had still remained,
For there is no Canaan likely to be gained.
Conscience be silent, don't disturb me more.
Upon such things I will no longer pore,
For back to Egypt I will now retire
Where I shall have things to my hearts desire.

Devil. Pursue thy purpose, thou shall under^^^n^
What-e're I have shall be at thy command*
My Kingdom's great, this world is whol^^ ^ine,
Bow down to me, and all shall then be th^^^*
Afraid I was I should have lost thee quite.
The^'s naught like that which here is now in the sig^^
Behold the Bags of Gold which thou shall have,
Honors on earth, riches and pleasures brave,
When others forced in Prison are to lie,
Thou shall enjoy thy precious liberty.
When Kings and Princes do upon them frown,
Thou shall be held in honor and renown.
Thou have much goods laid up for many years,
And long shall live free from all cares and fears.
Thy seed established too shall be on earth,
And thou shall spend thy days in joy and mirth.
Thoughts of Religion utterly disdain,
Nor think of God, or Jesus Christ again,
Phanatick fables never more regard,
The pains of Hell, of which thou often have heard,
Are naught, save fictions of their crafty head;
With fear of nothing are they frightened,
That madmen like, they do tread under feet
Those lovely joys which wise men find most sweet
Religion's naught but a devised thing,
Which up at first some crafty head did bring
To awe the minds of fools, who wanting wit,
Take that for Gold that is a mere counterfeit.
The truth of Scripture thou have cause to doubt,
For diverse places thou may soon find out
Which inconsistent to each others be,
Of what it speaks there is no certainty.
Conclude in Truth there is no God at all,
Why should thou be so foolish as to call
On him, whom thou did never see or know,
Unless its thus, because that most do so?
Let Melancholy fancies now therefore
Never vex thy mind, nor grieve thee any more.
Enjoy thy self on Earth, and heap up Gold,
No good like that which purse and bags do hold.
Come eat and drink, to morrow thou must dye;
And afterward there is no Eternity,
As some suppose, for thou in the grave shall rot,
And as the Beast be utterly forgot:
But since you know it is reproach to them,
Who all Religion utterly contemn,
Thou may Religious also seem to be,
For there is one that is very fit for thee.
Melodious sounds, sweet mirth, and Music rare,
Do much affect the heart, and charm the ear.
No worship on the Earth does suit so well
With flesh or blood, or does for ease excel,
Or with man's interest does so well agree,
Like what is maintained in f^mous I^aly.
That, that is the worship which for thee I (...)*
I Am not against thy turning Catholic.
If there is a Heaven of this thou need'st not (...)
An easier way for thee I cannot find out.
The way's so broad, whole Nations walk there (...),
And persons of all sorts, no let is sin.
Were thou at Rome, thoud'st hear melodious soun^*
Sweet ioys and mirth on every side ab^unds;
Fine boys and men ravishing Notes do sing,
Whilst Organs play in Consort, and Bells ring;
In that brave w^y thou'st have thy liberty
To do such things as others do deny.
Thou may be mad* carouze and domineer,
Strict Roman Cat^olicks such things can bear;
If thou do swear, drink healths, yea, or should curse
There Is few in the Church would like thee ever the worse,
Or if thou should some curious Lady spy,
Or view some pretty Maid with wanton eye,
To court or play with her thou need'st not fear,
For Venial Sins, alas! all such things are;
And one great help and remedy thou wilt have,
Which from all grief and danger will thee save;
If it fall out by chance at any time.
Thou should commit some great and henious crime
There is straightway the blessed Absolution,
A present help and yet no Superstition.
For a small sum of Money soon is had
A pardon for all sins though never so bad.
His holiness for a few Shillings can
Murder and Perjury forgive to any Man;
Nay, unto thee can grant a Dispensation
To kill and Murder any in a Nation,
Who us and the Holy Church hate and deny;
Come, trouble not thy self, but straight comply
With this famed Church, to whom such power's given
To open and shut with ease the Gates of Heaven.
And make that sin to day which never was sin,
and that lawful, which lawful never has bin.
Come, buy the Beads and Crucifix also,
And as the Church believes believe thou too.
For this I hope to see over a few days
some thousands more cleaving unto those ways,
And thou will not such an advantage gain,
As now thou may with ease, I am sure, obtain
And since in kindness and affection dear,
I Have showed thee how to be preferred here,
And do engage thy faithful Friend to be;
There Is some small things I Would have thee do for me;
Speak evil of the way thou late wast in;
Belie them all, and charge them too with sin,
Their faults lay open, set naught at all be hid,
Revile, reproach, and slander in my stead;
Show how they differ, that they cannot agree,
There Is little Love, and want of Charity.
Of Canaan's Land raise thou an ill Report,
To turn them back who are going for it*
One thing at present I would have thee do,
There is a friend of mine which thou do know,
Who has a Son which is indeed his Heir,
That to his foolish Notions does adhere,
If he should visit thee, with speed do thou
Treat with this pievish youth, I Will teach thee how
To controvert the cause, my place supply,
And do what I could not do formerly.
His forward zeal will do my Kingdom wrong,
Cause others also in that way to throng.
And you shall also some derision bear
Through his hot zeal, if that you ha'nt a care.

Vi^inius^ The thoughts, which Satan darts into his mind,
He closes with, and fully is inclined
His Counsel for to take, what-e'er become
O^ his poor Soul at the great Day of Doom,
An Atheist he is become in heart and li^e,
And has abandoned all his Christian strife,
He Is ready ^^w, and ^it for any (...),
An (...) prepared for the (...).
But since the Gentleman and he are met,
I will give way and hearken how they treat,
About this Youth, that has o^ La^e begun,
Resolvedly to Heaven for to run
You Will hea^ how this Apostate will engage,
To turn him from his blessed Pilgrimage.

Apostate. What! my old Friend E. R. Sir, I am glad
To see you once again, yet I am sad,
And grieved sore to see you look so ill;
What evil, Sir, I pray has you befell?
What is the cause of this your present grief?
If I can give or help you to relief,
Or comfort you in the least, I willing am,
And shall rejoice also I hither came.

^enr. Ah, Sir, my Son, my Heir, does grieve my mind,
He from whom I most comfort hoped to find,
Contrariwise will prove a plague to me,
Unless he can with speed recovered be.
He Will be a Preacher, I do think, er'e long,
He Is such a Bookish-fool, and so headstrong,
That I have little hopes he will e're be good;
Here Is cause of grief, if rightly understood.
He is become such a vile Heretic,
That Rome's good Church, and the true Catholic
Most vilely, I perceive he does disdain,
And does, forsooth, tell me, he is born again.
I do beseech you, Sir, do what you can,
If you cannot change his mind, there is not a Man
I think, in truth, that ever prevail will;
O arm your self therefore, and try your skill;
If you can turn him from those ways, then I
Shall be engaged to you until I dye.
You were deceived your self some time ago*
And therefore now more able are to show
The vanity of these devised ways,
And Bookish Fables of these silly days,
Having the Scripture in our Mother Tongue
Has been the ruin of us all along;
For, since men did our holy Church forsake,
And up new Notions of Religion take,
Naught but confusion in the World we see,
And otherwise, in Truth, 'twill never be,
Until their Books in the fire all do burn,
And they unto the Ancient Church do turn.

Apostate. I am, good Sir, of that opinion too,
And sorry am to hear what now you do
Relate to me, and will also, in truth,
Do what I can to turn that silly Youth;
For I can show and make him understand
The danger that attends on every hand.
The hope of unseen things will him deceive,
And Faith's but a mere fancy, I believe:
That Is the chief good which Man does here enjoy,
And that is the evil which does him annoy,
Or does deprieve him of his joy and bliss,
None but Phanaticks will deny me this;
Who boast of that they never did possess;
They lie, alas, and are (in truth) no less
Than frantic fools, for I could never see
Of what they speak, there is any certainty.
I will therefore endeavor out of love,
Your Son from these delusions to remove:
And since I do perceive he is near at hand,
I Will take my leave

Your Servant to Command.

THE PROLOGUE.
ATtend, kind Friend, read with a serious eye,
And thou shall a sharp Conflict soon espy
Between a Man quite void of Godly fear,
And a dear Youth, most holy and sincere.
The one affirms all Godliness is vain,
The other counts it for the greatest gain.
Mark thou the end of both, and thou shall see
What Is best to choose, Grace or Iniquity.
Apostate. Well met, good Sir, from whence pray do you come?

Professor. I am a stranger, and am trav'lling home.

Apostate. Are you a stranger in this Country?

Professor. Yea, as were our Fathers formerly.
an old Apostate and Young Professor.

Apostate. But from whence came ye? lets confer together.

Professor. From Egypt, Sir, Apost. I am Trav'lling thither,

Apostate. What is your business, Sir, that thus in pain
You strive against the wind with might and main?
E're further you do go, sit down, account,
See whether that you run for, will surmount
The labor great, and loss you will sustain
Before the prize in truth you do obtain.
What place is this to which you think to go,
That t^ ^ise you* may fully know.
For good instructions to you I Will afford,
When I this thing from you have plainly heard,

Professor. I am for Canaan that most holy Land,
I Will travel there, as God does command;
Whose worth and value I do know f^ll well,
For Riches it does, far, all things excel.
And though all things I lose e're I come there,
'Twill all my losses, I am sure, repair.
The worth of that therefore for which I run,
I did account before I first begun.

Apostate. Know you of certain that the place is so ra^e?
You may mistake, for you was never there,

Professor. Ah, Sir, of it I have a glorious sight,
Which does my Soul transcendently delight,
Although in person there I have never been,
Yet I most plain sweet Canaan often have seen,
Besides, I lately spoke with a dear friend,
Who did the other day from thence descend;
And unto me its glory he did show,
Its precious worth from him I came to know:
Some of its fruit also to me he gave,
Which makes me long till I possession have.

Apostate. Is It not the fancy of thy crasy-head?
I have likewise of such a Canaan read;
It may be so, or so it may not be,
It never seemed real truly unto me.
Who would for things which so uncertain are,
Such losses suffer, and such labor bear.
A bird in the hand's worth two i'th'bush, ye know,
This Zeal ( poor Lad) will work thy overthrow.

Professor. You vainly talk, and live by fight and sense,
I walk by faith, which is the evidence
Of things not seen, here with an outward eye.
What thou see not, I clearly do espy,
It Is not the fancy of a crasy-brain,
For Moses, that its glory he migh gain,
All Egypts Treasure quickly did forego,
Was that the way unto his overthrow?
No, no, dear Sir, he saw it was the way
To peace and honor in another day;
The glory real, did his Soul behold,
To be so great, that never can be told.
If thou had drunk but of its glorious springs,
Thou would it prize above all Earthly things,
If thou had tasted but of Canaan's honey
Thou would esteem it more than bags of Money,
Although I make, alas, a poor profession,
Yet I have now something in my possession,
Locked up most safe in my refreshed breast
More rare than Pearls within a golden Chest.
True peace of Conscience, that, through grace I have
Which passes all men's knowledge to conceive.
I would of it not be deprived again,
If that I might ten thousand worlds obtain.

Apostate* Tush s^lly fool, kick Conscience quite away,
Never mind his motions, nor what he does ^^y.
I stifled him, and that a good while since,
And took revenge of his Proud Insolence*
His gasping groans I no ways did regard,
But let my heart against him grow so hard,
That I do judge I have his business done.
He Is dead, in truth, and to dark silence gone,
That now I can without the l^st control,
Have any pleasure which delights my Soul.

Professor Ah, Sir, go on, if that's the choice you make,
I never will such cursed Counsel take.
Who ever does his Conscience so abuse,
Does his dear Maker in like manner use
And though in you, poor Conscience now lies s^ain
In The Judgment day he will revive again,
And then against you his sad witness b^a^,
And in your face most ghast fully will st^re
You Will have the worst at last, I grieve to see
You hardened thus in your iniquity.

Apostate. My sorrow's gone, but thine, alas! will double,
Concerning me thy self do thou not trouble.
The storms and blustering winds are over-past,
And very safe I am arrived at last,
In that same Port where Princes do delight
For to repose and harbor day and night,
Tossed I have been upon the boistrous Seas,
And 'till of late never could find rest nor ease.
But now I am safely landed, and with good
Shall satisfied be, whilst thou art tossed in the flood.
Thou shall, poor Youth, in dreadful storms be hurled
Whilst I shall find a very quiet World.
All thy best days are gone, and plunged thou'^t be
Into sad Gulfs of woeful Misery.
Unless thou do recant and stop thy course,
Thou Wilt see things with thee will grow worse and worse.
Those fools who do their nicer Conscience mind,
E're long they shall but little friendship find.

Professor. Sir, Storms and Tempests, do I know, attend,
Those who resolve poor Conscience to befriend,
Paul's Portion 'twas, who from his very youth
Had kept good Conscience, and obeyed the truth.
He met with blustering winds, was tossed about,
Yet did bear up for Canaan most devout,
Till he at last the glorious voyage made,
Getting the Crown which never away shall fade.
All those who sailed this way, have all along
Met with groat opposition and much wrong
From Pirates, Spoylers, and usurpers, who
Contrived have the Righteous to undo.
^his terrifies me not because that I
^now it is the way to true Felicity.
^he gold and precious things the Merchant gains,
(...) quit his cost, and recompense his pains,
^he Riches which he brings at his return,
Makes him great dangers oftentimes to run.
^o hopes of joys, the which Celestial are,
Makes me no labor, nor no cost to spare.
^ou are for present things, I further see,
^ou are for Earth, but Heaven is for me.
^ou are for pleasures, and for bags of Gold,
(...) am for that which Moses did behold.
^ou are for ease, whatever it does cost,
And honors here, though Soul for it be lost.
Who makes the wisest choice, let him declare,
^et Death and Judgment show who wise men are.
My purpose I Will pursue, what e're I meet,
My portion's great, my peace no counterfeit.
^eaven is my port, there is such a place I Am sure,
^ought shall entice me, nor my Soul allure
^o loose my hold, I Will keep firm in my station,
though in my way I meet with tribulation.
^et I most safe shall there at last arrive,
^o men nor Devils ever shall deprive,
^y Soul of that Eternal dwelling place,
^uch confidence I have obtained, through grace.

Apostate. If I should grant things which so doubtful are,
That there is a Canaan or a Heaven, where
^weet joys abound, beyond what is here below;
(...) hard it is for any man to know,
The ready way unto that seeming place,
Consider this, Oh, it is a weighty case!
For there so many ways and vices be
How thou should find the right I do not see.
Thou art a stranger too, thou told'st, be plain;
Come, come, Young man, turn with me back again

Youth. Nothing ( dear Sir) more certain is than this,
That there is a Heaven or eternal bliss.
The Heathen could by natures light espy
Man's chiefest good or best Felicity,
Must needs excel the highest enjoyment here,
And shall this doubtful unto those appear
Who have Gods works most dreadfully made known
Yea, and his word, which very few or none
Who live in any Land the like have had;
Shall such turn Atheists? this is very sad.
Is not JEHOVAH every where made known
By fearful Judgments, which are daily shown?
And, why, think you, I cannot the true way find,
Seeing Jesus has in writings left his mind
In plain Characters; and whilst I observe,
J from the truth am sure no ways to swerve;
he came from thence himself the other day,
And gave directions how to find the way;
This writing's firm, it is signed with his Blood,
That the Old dragon, with his mighty flood
Of Superstition, and persecuting fire,
Could not it spoil nor gain his cursed desire.
The holy Scripture God to us has given
To guide our Souls in the right way to Heaven.
Though Satan has made oppositions strong,
Yet still we have it in our Mothers-Tongue.
and by this means, most plain J come to know,
The very footsteps where the flock did go.

Apostate. Though you of Scripture seem to make your boast,
Your hopes of that will sudenly be lost.
^or you much longer it an't like to have,
^our Souls and others thus for to deceive,
^or holy Church once more will quite destroy
This English God which they seem to enjoy.
Thou art unlearned, the Scripture do not know,
^ut wrestest them unto thy overthrow.

Youth. They are unlearned whom God has never taught,
^ut have in Popish darkness up been brought,
^hey are unlearned who never had the Spirit,
Who think they can by Works Salvation meri^.
They are unlearned, who foolishly deny
^he Spirits Teachings and Authority
^or to excel all humame Arts and Science,
and on man's teaching wholly have reliance.
^hey are unlearned, or very poorly read,
that teach Christ Jesus is a piece of bread,
which Rats and Mice may eat, and vomit up,
and do deny the Laity the Cup.
^r those for whom Christ did his Body break
(...) of the Cup did bid them all partake.
^hey are unlearned, who think that Purgatory,
On be ought else than a mere feigned Story.
They are unlearned, whose Doctrine does declare,
(...) Church two heads does on its shoulders bear,
That Woman which has any Husbands more
Than only one, is a notorious Whore.
That man's unlearned, who learned never has
The ABC of the true Christian Faith.
That man I grant is wholly yet unlearned,
Who never knew himself, nor yet discerned
The cursed nature of his heinous Sin,
Nor what estate by nature he is in.
That man's unlearned who never went to School,
To learn, for Christ, how to become a Fool.
That man's unlearned, yea, and a very Sot,
Who has his Soul and Jesus Christ forgot,
And does esteem Earth's empty vanity,
Above that good which Saints in God espy.
I am unlearned, and yet have learned how
To crucify the flesh, yea, and to bow
To Jesus Christ, and for his precious sake,
His yoke and burden willingly to take,
And follow him wherever he does go,
And him alone determine for to know.
Who for my sake upon the Cross did dye,
Him I have learned alone to magnify,
And to exalt him as he is Priest and King,
And as my Prophet too in every thing.
And this, through grace, I learned have of late
To be content what ever be my state.
Some things, I must confess, I never could lea^
Nor any ways perceive, see, or discern.
I never read of Peter's tripple Crown,
Nor that he ever wore a Popish Gown.
I never learned that he did Pope become.
Or Rule over Kings like to the beast at Rome.
J never learned that he kept Concubines,
Or ever power had to pardon sins.
I never learned he granted Dispensations,
To poison Kings or Rulers of those Nations,
Who were profane, or turned Heretics,
Or did refuse the Faith of Catholics.
I never read he was the Churches head,
Or did forbid the Clergy for to wed.
I never read that he had ^h^sts of Gold,
Or that great business by (...) ^ere Sold,
I never read he is called His Holiness,
Yet had as much as any Pope, I guess.
I never learned Peter did magnify
Himself above all Gods, or Gods on high,
Or that upon the neck of Kings he trod,
Or ever he in Cloth of Gold was clad.
^ never read that he made Laws to burn
^uch as were heretics or would not turn
^o Jesus Christ, much less to murder those
Who did in truth Idolatry oppose.
(...) never learned nor could unto this day
That the Pope and Peter walked both in one way,
Yea, or that they in any thing accord,
^ave only in denying of the Lord.
(...) that they also greatly differ do,
^f which I think to give a hint or two,
^eter denied him* yet did love him dear,
^he Pope denies him, and does hatred hear
^o him, and to all those that do him love,
^ho bear his Image, and are from above.
^eter denied him, and did weep amain,
^he Pope denies him with the greatest disdain.
Peter denied him yet for him did dye,
The Pope in malice him does crucify.
Peter denied him thrice, and then repented,
The Pope a thousand times, but never relented.
Peter and John no mighty Scholars were,
Yet few for knowledge might with them compare.
Poor Fishermen do find the way to Heaven,
When Scholars go astray, who Arts have seven.
The Learned Schoolmen put our Lord to Death,
And very few of such Christ called has.
But poor despised persons he does call,
And passes by the high-flown Cardinal.
For human learning, and such kind of preaching,
Is nothing to the blessed spirits teaching.
I Learning like* and grant that men may use it,
Yet would I not have them to abuse it.

Apostate. Leave off these canting strains, and don't deride
Our holy Father, for I cannot abide
To hear such prating fools. Are you so wise?
Dare you the holy mother Church despise?
It Is that Religion I like best of all.
The Pope I do adore and Cardinal.
There Is Pomp and Riches, and a worldly glory,
What you talk of, is an unpleasant story,
There Is Pleasure, Profit, safety and much ease,
Which does the flesh as well as spirit please.
Here Is Heaven and Earth, what can thou more desire*
Or of thy God, or any man require?
Thy way the have lost, and Canaan wilt not see,
Therefore with speed turn back again with me,

Professor. Could I no other Reason give or urge
To prove Rome's Church untrue, I cannot but judge
This which you speak, does plainly it declare,
For in Christ's Church no such vain Pomps appear;
No worldly glory does Christ's Church adorn,
For she is afflicted, much despised and torn.
Her beauty cannot with outward eyes be seen,
Her beauty and her glory are within.
When John sets forth the Antichristian state,
Much outward P^mp, it is true, he does relate;
The Whore is decked with Gold, brave stones and Pearl,
Who at poor S^^n does with envy snarle.
No liberty to the flesh the Lord does give;
Saints must alone after the Spirit live;
No serving God and Mammon, Sir, it is plain,
To hell you go, except you're born again.
If you will be Christ's, with speed then turn you must
To crucify the Flesh, with all its lust.
No cause have I to ^^ar to go astray,
Whilst I walk daily in the narrow way.
All those who do Gods holy Word contemn,
No Light nor Truth is there at all in them.
Their feet on the dark Mountains soon will fall,
And utter Ruin will o're-take them all.
But as for me, no cause have I to doubt,
But I shall find this blessed Canaan out.
To turn to Egypt with you, back again,
The thoughts of it my soul does much disdain.
Do think I Will leave my Qu^ils and Manna rare,
For stinking Garlic, and b^^e Onions there?

Apostate, For all your Courage, Sir, I do suppose,
You will repent that ever you have chose
To leave the Comforts of a preci^us World,
And with sound zeal thus blindly to be hurl'^
You are a man that might (...) be
Unto great honor, state and di^nitie.
Your Father's Master of a good Estate,
And you too are his heir, I ^ear of late.
But if you don't this new Religion leave,
One Groat of him you are not like to have.

Professor, This World in a just Balance often I try,
And find it lighter far than Vanity.
Riches, alas! they are but bags of cares,
And honors naught, save fool-bewitching snare^
Your outward joy will turned be to sadness
Your pleasure into pain, your wisdom's madness*
You catch at nothing, it is at best a bubble,
Which long you cannot keep, although you double
Your diligence, and think to hold it fast,
'Twill fly with speed, it is but an empty blast.
What frantic fit is this? Will you destroy
Your higher hopes for such a fancied joy?
This World's just like th'S^rump^t, of whom ^'^e rea^,
Who with sweet Fumes in^ice^h to her Bed.
With amorous G^ances promises a bliss,
And hides destruct on with a feigned Kiss.
She has her Tricks, and her ensnaring Wiles,
But lodges Death under deceitful Smiles.
S^e ^ugs the S^ul she ^^tes, yea, and does prove
A very J^das where she feigns to love.
Take heed therefore, lest you be caught in the snare,
And buy your late Repentance much too dear.
These Comforts here, which you do precious call,
Each wise man sees they are vain and flitting all.
To think I should repent, no cause is there,
If things by you rightly considered were.
What Moses chose of Old, the same do I,
All vain allurements I do quite defy.
(...) knew, when first my Journey I did take,
I must my Fathers house learn to forsake.
^n Abraham's steps I am resolved to go,
Whatever I exposed am unto.
What-e'er I lose, Christ will make it up to me,
When ^ of Canaan shall possessed be.
I seek no honor here from any one,
True honor comes (dear Sir) from God alone.*
To be an Heir unto a great Estate,
Or Son unto some earthly Potentate,
^s naught to what, by Grace, ^ am born to.
My Portion's great, i know not how to show
I Am heir unto the mighty King of heaven.
To me, e'er-long, sweet Canaan will be given.
I do resolve to hold out to the end,
Although I have not one Groat nor earthly Friend
To favor me; I never will return
Until this glorious Canaan I have won.

Apostate, What ground have you ( my friend) for to believe
If you forsake all things, you shall receive
^his land you speak of, for your own possession?
Unto your heart it is good to put this question;
For diverse do unto great things lay claim,
Yet some oft-times, I see, and sure I am,
Unto such Lands can no good title show,
Although they strive for them, as you may do.
If you should sell what-e'er you have for this,
And yet at last should also of it miss,
You Will see your self at length then quite undone
Consider often and back with me return,
For no good title of it can be had,
'Twas this, alas! which once did make me sad
To save my own, I thought, 'twas best for me
Unless of this I could assured.

Professor. Don't think you shall my zeal for Heaven co^
Nor my dear Soul with fancies thus be fool.
Rouse up (my Soul) now in thy own defense,
And show thy clear, thy precious evidence.
Can any thing be plainer here on Earth,
'Twas purchased for me by Christ Jesus's Death.
The Father does his Kingdom own, and he
For his own Child has late adopted me.
And if a Child, I also am an Heir,
And shall with Jesus this like glory share.

Apostate. How do you know you be his Child? in this
You may mistake, and so may Canaan miss.

Professor. My late conversion does most plainly prove,
My inward birth is truly from above.
The Truth and Conscience both agree in one,
I am through Grace no Bastard, but a Son.
^ose whom God does by his own Spirit lead,
^ey are his Sons, you in the Scripture read.
^ies all this, since I did first believe,
(...) earnest of this Land I did receive.
And diverse promises also there be,
^^ich bind it firmly over unto me.
^ot my title unto Heaven good,
^hen signed and sealed to me by Christ his blood?
Y^u see by these I have a certain ground,
And good assurance for Gods Kingdom found.
(...) you, as it appears, do quite despair,
Without all hopes of ever coming there.

Apostate. Nay, stay a little, don't affirm that neither,
^^y may not I as soon as you, come thither?
^ough in that way in which I late did walk,
^as deceived with many other folk;
^d thought that heaven was entailed to those
which did the Pope and Church of Rome oppose.
^inking a man a separate must be
^m that same Church or else could never see,
^d, nor enjoy eternal Peace and Rest;
^d therefore I, like others, did protest
^inst that Ancient Mother Church, whom now
^n resolved to own, yea, and to bow
^wn unto her, with all humble subjection,
^inking it is best for safety and protection,
^solving never more to vex my mind,
(...) I have done; for I shall sooner find
(...) this smooth way, assurance for Salvation,
^an if I had kept in my former station.
Hopes I may have, no certain ground I know
The Church affirms we can attain unto.
But Promises most clear are made to those
Who seek for the Old Way, and with it close:
And that Rome's Church can plead Antiquity,
No Protestant I Am sure can it deny:
Yea, and must grant, whatever's their professi^^
That none, save Rome, can prove their true Success^^
From those brave Churches which first planted (...)
By the Apostles as their Acts declare.
And therefore ( Youth) you must no longer boast
Of ^^ith and Confidence, for you have lost
Your Way to heaven; and must therefore look
Unto that Church which long has been forsook.
From the true Church to rend and schismatize,
Is a sad thing, though many it despise.
For though Corruption in the Church there be,
Yet all should walk in uniformity.

Professor. Sir, I deny your Churches Constitution,
Which makes me loath you, and for your pollution
Corruption, and vile spots, they are so bad,
No Church of Christ the like has ever had;
Which I resolve fully to make a pear
Before I Will leave you, if you are pleased to hear.

Apostate. Rome 's Church was rightly gathered that is most clea^
Saint Paul himself to this does Witness bear.
Faith and Repentance truly did they own,
And were baptized in due form it is known;
N^ Church in Constitution right has been,
If that our C^ur^h in the least does ^ail herein.

Professor. (...) Church* I grant, was true in the Apostles days,
(...) yours from that does differ many ways*
^me's Church was very famous heretofore,
^t is become the scarle^ colored Whore.
^om the true Faith she has departed quite,
^d the true Church was forced to take her flight
^to the dark and howling wilderness,
^here she lay hid in sore and great distress,
^om the vile Beasts, and Dragons furious rage,
And so remained until this latter Age.
(...) Rome's Church now were like unto the old,
^hen with the Romanists we all would hold,
But when she is become Christ's Enemy,
(...) ^d out of Babylon does bid us fly.
^f you can prove Romes Church has not declined
from that Church State by Paul himself defined,
Then you will undertake for to do more,
Than any Papist ever did before.
^he Jewish Church God once did own and love,
^ut for their Sins he did them quite remove
^ut of his sight, they are broken for their sin,
^ith other Churches, which have famous been,
and yet do keep some outward form and show
^f Worship and Church State, as Rome may do.
^ho has, in Truth, naught left save a bare name,
^s has been clearly proved by men of fame.
(...) you would bring your Visibility,
^o prove your Church is true; I do reply,
(...) ^etter Argument I need not bring
^o prove you'^ false, than that same very thing.
For the true Church was hid, did not appear
A thousand two hundred and sixty year.
And then whereas you in the second place
Mention Antiquity, it is a clear case
Your Church is under age, yea much too young
Out of the Apostasy, alas, she sprung.
A Bastard Church, base-born, mere National,
And therefore that is for you no proof at all.
The fleshly seed in the Church must not be brough^
John Baptist and our Savior both so taught.
Christ's Church is gathered by regeneration,
and not as 'twas in former dispensation.
You in a lineal way do go about,
To take in those whom Jesus has shut out.
The Ax is now laid to the root of the l^^e,
And every one true penitent must be,
And must obtain of God true saving Grace,
Who in his holy Church would have a place.
Your Church is not so gathered, therefore I
Deny your Church and its Antiquity;
That Church which is uph^ld by the carnal Sword,
And not by the Power of God's holy Word,
Is very false. And that Romes Church is so,
Not a few worthy Authors plainly show.
And whereas she much boasts of Holiness,
No People, doubtless, in the World have less;
For Rome, like to a stinking common shore,
Receives what every one casts forth of the door.
She Is like a cage of every hateful (...),
As is recorded in Gods sacred Word.
The Coun^^^ which an ancient Author gave,
Let every Soul with special care receive.
He that would holy li^e, from Rome be paking,
There Is all things else, but Godliness i^ l^king.
She also does Doctrines of Devils hold,
According as the Apostle has foretold.
In charging people to abstain from meat,
Which God allows us freely to eat.
And in denying persons for to wed,
Though God allows the undefiled Bed.
By means of these most cursed Prohibitions
Your Clergy stinks alive with gross pollutions.
And many of your filthy Popes of Rome
Have Sodomites and Buggerers become;
Whor^dom and Incest they have minced so small,
As scarce to count them any sin at all.
Most cursed St^ws allowed a^e by them,
Whom none in the Popedom dare in the least condemn.
Vile Ni^^^m^n^ers many of them were,
Haters of God no sin (in truth) is there,
But some of the Popes of it have guilty been,
As may upon Record be early seen.
Is this your holy Head and reverent Father,
Next unto Christ Supreme? is he not rather
A Devil incarnate? the worst of Mankind,
Who can in Hell a viler Sinner find?
I^ Rome Christ's Church, Christ's Spouse, his only Love,
His und^ (...) One, and spotless Dove?
Si^, don't mistake, she is that Scarlet Whore,
Whom Jo^n characterized heretofore.
Which I shall full evince and make appear,
If you with patience will but lend an ear.

Apostate. I find you in Reproaches free enough,
But shall expect you so too in your Proof.
Those Common Epithets of Beast and Whore,
Are daily flung at every bodies door,
But for to warrant your severer doom,
Prove that they properly belong to Rome.

Professor. That truth Gods secret Word does well explain;
That City which over Kings of the Earth did reign,
Was that same Whore, the Spirit clear does show,
And that Rome was the City, all men know,
Who then above all others bore the sway,
'Twas Rome the Nations feared and did obey.
And still you Papists to her Bishops give.
Headship over all who on the Earth do live:
Before him Kings and Emperors must submit,
That so he may the mighty Monarch sit.
Whilst absolute power he claims, and Sovereignty
Above all Princes, by his Tyranny.
From whence all persons may conclude it true,
By their first Mark, the title is his due.
The second Character of Babylon,
Is Pomp and Sat, wherein she proudly shone.
That Rome has been a rich gay costly Whore,
England once found, I wish she may no more.
Infinite Sums almost she squeezed from hence,
For Pardons, Obits, Annates, Peter Pence
And through each Land, where she her t^i^m^hs led,
Wh^l^ swarms of Lucusts, Priests, and Friars were p^^ad,
These (as the ^^^^zar^s to the Tu^^)
Were faithful slaves ^^i^ to promote her work.
Whilst to maintain those drones she swept away,
The fat and we^l^h of Nation^ for their prey.
In the thir^ pla^^, she does men's Souls ^nslave,
This mark in ^^m* most evident we have.
With dangerous Vows, unwarranted Traditions,
Implicit Faith and thousand Superstitions,
Pretended Miracles, Apparent Lies,
Damnable Errors and fond Fopperies,
She clogs the Conscience, and to make all well,
Boasts all her dictates are infallible:
And then (to fill her measure) in the last place,
It Is said she would Gods precious Sion raze.
This can of none but R^me be understood,
That drunken Whore, who reels in Martyrs blood;
As I more largely now shall make appear,
And then with patience your excuses h^ar.
Within the compass of six t^^us^nd years,
Has been presented to the Eyes and Ears
Of future Ages, the most s^d Contents
Of bloody Tragedies, the dire events
Of dreadful Wars, in several Generations,
The overthrow of many fruitful Nations:
But all comes short of Romes most ^lood^ bill,
Which does the Earth with Sanguine vo^umns fill.
Jerusa^em that City of Renown,
Sacked by Vespasian, burnt and bro^^n down;
It was indeed a dreadful Desolati^n,
And so have Conquerors dealt with many a N^tion
All Conqu'rors ever found a time to cease,
When once they would conquered, t^^n they were at peace.
They murdered not, but such as would (...) yield,
To own them for their Lords: and in the field
They slew them too, with weapons in their hand,
For their defense, and always ready stand
To give Quarter to those that it demand,
But this vile Strumpets blood-be-dabbled hands
Finds not a period, never countermands
Her cruel rage, her murders know no end,
She slaughters when she pity does pretend:
Years terminate not her blood-thirsty acts,
She slays without examining their facts.
In times of Peace her treacherous hands have shed,
Blood without measure: she has murdered
By cursed Massacrees, her Neighbors, when
They thought themselves the most secure of men.
One might fill volumns with her bloody story,
In which she still persists: Makes it her glory
TO invent strange Torments to deprive the breath
Of Christians, by a tedious lingering death.
The brutish Nero first of Tyrant Kings,
From whose base root nine other Tyrants springs,
Whose most inhumane Acts, not to their glory,
Did leave the world a lamentable story;
And to their lasting and eternal shame,
Did purchase to themselves that hateful name
Of Bloody Monsters in the shape of men,
Whose cruel acts deserve an I^on Pen,
That might perpetuate to aftertimes,
These Heathens Cruelty; record the Crimes
For which these Christians willingly laid down,
Their earthly houses for a heavenly Crown.
Refl^ct a while ( Sir) and but cast your eye,
First on those Heathen Emp'rors cruelty.
Then view the bloody Papists, and compare
Their Cruelties together, and as far
As Egypts Darkness did exceed our Night,
Or Midnight differs from the Morning-light,
So far the Papist's Cruelty does exceed
The worst of Heathen Tyrants, and indeed
The worst of Tyrants, since the world began,
Or since dissension fell 'twixt man and man.
If Cyp^ians and Eusebius words be true,
These persecuting Emp'rors yearly slew
Millions of Souls, shedding their guiltless Blood,
Which ran like waters from a mighty flood.
So void their hearts were of all humane pity,
They spared no Age, nor Sex, nor Town, nor City.
The things wherein these Christians did offend,
Were only this, they did refuse to bend.
Their Heaven devoted knees, or fall before
Those Idol-Gods th^se Emp'rors did adore.
They did believe One God created all,
They did believe in Christ, and down did fall
Prostrate upon the Earth, and daily bring
S^crifice only to that Heavenly King.
Their Emperors Gods these Christians did deride,
This was the cause so many Millions died.
These Emperors thinking themselves engaged
Their Idols to revenge grew more enraged,
To see the Christians boldly to despise
Their Gods, and honor Christ before their Eyes:
They did conclude the nature of the offense
Deserved no less tha^ Death for recompense.
(...) may we (...)
T^^se Heathen (...) such Cruelty.
'Twas not because they worship not aright,
But worshipped not at all, nay, did despite
Unto these Idols which they Gods did call,
Affirming, that they were no Gods at all.
An act not to be born by flesh and blood,
To have the Edicts of their Gods withstood.
Yet in the midst of all those Tyrants rage,
Serious advice a little would assuage
Their hellish Fury, and for some time cease,
And give the Christians a breathing space.
And when as those ten Em^e^ors ceased to be,
Then terminated all their Cruelty.
3 Hundred years accomplished their fi^rce wrath,
And then the Heathens owned the Christian Faith.
And now their Emp'rors do as much adore
The God of Heaven and Earth, as they before
Had done their Idols; and zealous for the Church,
Give great donations, make their Bishops rich.
And now proud Rome, since Constantine the great
Thou by degree^ have taken up thy Seat;
Puffed up with Riches, swo^n with filthy Pride,
From Gods pure Laws have quickly turned aside
And now such Bishops only do thou choose,
As God does hate, and utterly refuse;
Proud, sensual, and void of the holy Spirit;
Such as the Lord has said shall not inherit
Eternal Glory; such thy Bishops be;
Who should be filled with Truth and Purity.
Shining like lights before the Flock, that they
The better might discern the perfect way.
B^t now inst^ad of such as these, behold
They are presumpt^ous proud, imp^rious, bold;
Changing the Worship that the Lord makes known,
And in its stead will introduce their own.
Yea, so presumptuous are they in their Pride,
As to affirm God's holy Word's no guide
For men to walk by; the only Rule that they
Do counsel men, nay, force them to obey,
Is their Traditions, which the affirm to be
Far more authentic then our Lords Decree,
Within his holy Word he us has given,
For a sure light to guide our steps to Heaven.
And now these Christians whose most tender heart
Dares not believe them, fearing to depart
From Gods directions, which in his blessed word
He has so plainly left upon record:
These are the men this wicked Strumpet has
So often made the objects of her Wrath,
Making the Earth to drink the guiltless Blood,
Of such as for Gods holy Word have stood.
Oh! Let the blood-drunk Earth never cease to cry
Unto the Heaven enthroned Majesty,
'Till God take vengeance, as he did on Cain,
For all the righteous Abels she has slain.
Not for denying, but honoring the Lord,
Yea, for believing that his sacred Word
Is the most perfect, and the truest guide,
The Rule by which all Doctrines should be tried.
Our blessed Lord bids search them, for says he,
They are the words that testify of me.
^^ h^re's the cause, behold the reason why
^e Whor^ h^s acted so much cruelty.
In (...) ^hers does this W^^^e ^^vent,
W^^reby she daily sl^ys the innocent.
The numbers she has murdered do surmount
The strictest of Arithmeticks account
What Country has not tasted of the Cup,
That her most bloody hands have filled up?
How has she stirred up Nations to engage
Against each other, to satisfy her Rage?
Where Millions have been brought unto the dust,
Only to satisfy this Strumpets lust;
That she the better might ingross the power
Of Hell into her hands, and so devour
At her blood-thirsty pleasure, such as she
Could not persuade to love Idolatry.
Perfidious France! whose most inhuma^e wrath
Passing the limits of a Christian Faith
Within the space of eight and twenty days,
Thy bloody hands most treacherously Betrays
Ten thousand Souls, and to that bloody score,
Adds quickly after twenty thousand more.
How many murders more that Popish Nation
Have done, the Romish Hist'ries make relation;
And yet from Cruelty, Rome has not ceased,
But as her years, her Murders have increased;
And swollen to bigger numbers in less space,
As Bellarmine affirms to her face;
Who thus attests, that from the morning light
Until the Sabel Curtains of the night
Were closely drawn, her bloody hands did ^^ay
A hundred thousand Souls; O! let that day
In Characters of blood recorded be,
That may remain unto Eternity.
O let the E^^th that drinks in the rain,
That did receive the blood of all the slain;
Let both the Heavens, and the Earth implore
The God of Heaven to confound the Whore.
O poor Bohemia! thou have had a taste,
When wicked Julian laid thy Country waste.
Burning thy Towns and Villages with fire,
Sparing not Young nor Old, nor Son nor Sire,
What multitudes unnumbred were thy slain,
Which in the field unburied did remain!
Thou found'st the Wolvish Popes in every age
Contrive thy ruin, many times engage
Thy Neighbor Nations to shed forth thy blood,
Only because faithful Bohemia stood
^or Gods pure Worship, Martin the s^xth excites
Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Barons, Earls and Knights,
With one consent to fall upon that Nation,
On no less terms, than on their own Salvation;
Promising also upon that condition,
To give a full and absolute Remission
Unto the vilest sinner that ever stood
Upon the earth, that would but shed the blood,
^^ough but of one B^hemian; O rage!
^ot to be paralleled in any age;
^xcept that Monster, who did sore rebuke
^he over charitable Popish Duke
Of D' Alva; and would you know his Crime?
^ was because that he in six years time,
^^rough too much lenity, caused not the earth
To drink more Christian b^a^d than issued forth
(...) eighteen thousand Souls; (...) the Duke
^as thought by Papists worthy o^ ^^buke.
^^ighteen thousand in six years, so ^^w,
(...) of your (...),
In humanely to murder? yea, indeed,
Because their former Numbers did exceed.
But if the Duke of Alva's bloody bill
Came short in number, yet his hand did fill
It up with Torments, so dreadful to rehearse,
As that the very thoughts thereof would pierce
A Marble heart, make Infidels relent;
Torments that none but Devils could invent,
But if all this was over, little still,
His Predecessors added to the bill.
For from the time that hellish Inquisition
Did from the Devil first receive Commission,
As well approved History does relate,
Till thirty years expired had their date.
By cruel Torments which they still retain,
Was a hundred and fifty thousand slain:
And yet before they took away their bre^th,
They for some time did make each day a death.
Depriving them, as far as in them lay
O^ all the comfort that either night or day
Affords mankind; for them there was not found,
So much Sun-light as to behold the ground
On which they stood: Each day that gives light,
Was unto them like Egyp^ darkest Night
(...) H^l^ish darkness thus they made them spend
Their weary hours, and kindly in the end
Destroyed them: the Company they had
Within those darksome Caverns, was their sad
And melancholy thoughts, their s^ghs and groans,
Their doleful Lodgings was upon the stones,
If noysom Creatures bred and foistr^d there,
Th^se noisome Creatures their Companions were
What food they eat, was only to secure
Their Souls alive, that so they might endure
The several Torments that they did provide,
And so a hundred and fifty thousand died,
Beside what died by persecuting hands,
Within the Popes Confines in several Lands.
Thus may I sooner spend my strength and tears,
And tire (if you regard) your eyes and ears,
Than give a full and absolute relation,
Of all the acts at Romes Abomination.
Oh! may my native Country rather hear
Their bloody Acts, than in the least part bear
^er burden, or behold her murdering hand
Once more spread through the Confines of our land.
But I perceive these truths are dully heard,
And that you little my discourse regard.

Apostate. Yes, yes, I hear and smile, what Tragedies
You make of lawful just severities.
The Martyrs you applaud were Rebels too,
And still against Authority would go
^f then they suffered, who (pray) is to blame?

Professor That I have shown already to their shame.
and I would have my Countrymen to take
Another taste, that may preserve awake
Their drowsy Souls, who take a dying nap,
^uch like deluded Sampson on the lap
^^ lustful Delilah, whose treacherous breath
^nds forth the Messenger of Sampsons death
(...) not the Strumpets sugared words (...)
^hee to give credit t'her, that'^ (...)
To promise fairest when she does intend
To deal falsest, she does betray her friend,
Like wicked Cain, first of that sinful race
That slew his Brother smiling in his face.
From the first time that e're the hellish rage
Of Jesuits appeared on the stage
To act their parts in England, France, and Spain,
And Italy her bloody hands has slain,
Nine hundred thousand souls or there about,
E're many years had run their hours out.
Of the Americans by Popish Spain,
In fifty years was fifteen Millions slain.
The poor religious Waldenses, whose e^e,
Like the quick-sighted Valtur, did espy
Romes filthy whoredoms, and freely disclaim
Her vile Idolatry, and hate the same;
Drunk dreadful draughts of Romes most bloody (...)
Which she with Hell-bred fury poured up.
And for no other cause, her bloody hands
She did stretch forth, with hell enraged band^,
Being sent abroad, forthwith to put to death
Both young and old, each man that draws breat^
And yet, as if she had not been content
To murder Parents with their Innocent
And harmless Babes, as if their hellish-breath
Had now been spent with putting souls to death
Fourscore sweet Babes that never did offend,
Famished to Death, their harmless lives did end
Search, search into the deep Abyss of hell,
And see if all the Devils can parallel
So vile an act, O most imperious Treason
Against the King of Kings (...) of (...)
^re Papists Christians, and are these their Acts
^o punish such as never committed Facts?
^re those right actings, fitting Gospel Times,
^o lay on babes the weight of highest Crimes?
Did Christ do thus, or has he ever given
Them leave to deal so with the heirs of Heaven?
Those Murdered Souls under the Altar lie,
Crying, How long Eternal Majesty,
How long will it be e're thou avenge thy Saint^,
And lend an ear unto their Sad complaints?
These Waldenses being overcome and dead,
A little Remnant, that escaped, fled,
Taught by Dame Natures Moral Laws to save
Their much desired lives within a Cave
Did hide themselves, hoping at last, that they
Taking advantage of an another Day,
When Golden Titan had laid down his head,
upon the pillows of his Westren Bed,
And Pr^serp^na, Lady of the Night,
Had drown her Sable Curtains, then they might
Transport themselves into some other Land,
And so escape out of the Hunters hand.
But as the Hound that hunts the wearied Heart,
Does ply their steps and never will depart
The Fields and Meadows or the silent Wood
Till they Surprise the Beast; even so these blood*
Devouring Monsters having found the Cave,
Most barb'rosly did make that place their grave,
Wherein four hunderd yielding up their breath,
Were in a barbarous mannner choked to death.
No Nation in the World has ever seen,
^ Foe so dreadful as the Whore has been,
It is far better to be overcome
By Turk or Heathen than by Christian Rome.
What part of Europe now can make their boast,
And say they have not tasted to their cost
Of Romish Mercy? Some are yet alive,
Whose Perants felt the Death she did contrive.
O Germans! thy poor distressed Estate
Will speak to future Ages, and relate
Whole volumns of her bloody Murders, and
The Murdered Souls of bleeding Ireland
Cry night and day for Vengeance, and implore
Gods Heaven enthroned Majesty ever more,
To put a period to her Hellish Power,
That we may overtake her in an hour.
Those dreadful Murders, have the eyes and ears
Of some now living, heard and seen the Tears
Of Soul-afflicted Parents, whose sad eyes
Beheld their Murdered Babes, and heard their cries.
Their Daughters Ravished, and when that was done.
Cruelly Murdered; and the hopeful Son,
By unheard Torments, slain before their eyes,
Whilst they beheld their Childrens miseries:
Their Children murdered, and their Wives defiled,
Whose Bodies they ripped up, being great with Child.
And all this, while Parents and Husbands were
Forced to behold, what flesh and blood cannot bear
the bear Relation. What Adamant heart
Melts not, when I these dreadful things Impart?
Riping up Child-great-Women was not all,
For that, although inhumane, was but small,
Compared with other Torments they endured;
Whose Patience bore what could not else be cured;
Tearing out Bowels* Boiling Men alive.
These Dea^hs, and w^rse, those monsters did contrive.
We see how they have dealt with every Nation;
And shall we think at last to find compassion?
The piteous Cries of Parents never could move
Them to extend the smallest dram of love.
The Tears that ran from dying Infants eyes
Like plenteous showers from the darkened Skies,
Whose great abundance might have made a River,
Yet all these floods of bri^ish Tears could never
Enter a Papists heart so hard condensed,
So void of pity, and all humane sense.
To hear the doleful shrieks, and dying groans
Of poor distressed Babes, who make their moans,
To Soul-Afflicted-parents ever they part,
These are the things delight a Papists heart;
To see the dying gasps before the Death
Of tortured Souls, whose life-forsaken breath
Had waited many a tedious hour past,
When their tormented Souls should breath their last.
Whose dolorous sighings penetrate the Skies,
Those objects do delight a Papist's eyes.
And can we now at last expect to find
that Rome's grown merciful, and Papists kind?
No, no, we cannot do it, if we but fix
Our serious thoughts upon late Sixty Six:
When London was consumed, that Famous City,
^ts Ruins do be-speak them void of pity.
By Rome's contrivance was fair London burned,
Englands Metropolis to ashes turned.
T^eir Merchants of their Riches quite bereft,
To day Rich men, to morrow nothing left.
Their Wives and Children harbourless became,
Their substance all consumed in the Flame;
To day this Famous City's decked in Gold,
To morrow an amazement to behold.
The doleful Shreiks, and lamentable Cries,
The floods of Tears that ran from weeping eyes,
As true resemblances, bid represent,
The sorrows that our Neighbors underwent.
And can we think that Hell-begotten Rage,
That did provoke so many to engage
In such an Act, far worse then the Powder Treason,
Can we suppose, if we consult with Reason,
The Fury of their Hellish Rage expired
So soon as e're that famous place was fired?
No, no, ( good Sir) your Pardon, I presume,
Those Hell-engendered Flames that did consume
So fair a City in so short a space,
Hell gave those flames Commission down to raze,
Not only London, but every Soul that has
A heart resolved to maintain the Faith
Of JESUS, Protestants, both great and small,
Rome has determined their eternal fall.
And those more Formal Protestants, whose Zeal
May secretly persuade them to conceal
Their seeming Faith, and feignedly to close
With Romes Erroneous Doctrine, and suppose
Thereby to save their Lives; let none believe
Such vain Persuasions, many did deceive
Themselves; for Rome, that painted Whore,
Will deal with them as she has done before,
With such as hoped in the self-same kind,
To meet with Mercy, but naught less did find.
Christ never gave unto his Church Commission
For to make Laws for grievous Persecution.
No outward Force were they, in the least, to use,
Much less poor Innocents for to abuse,
By Burning, Starving, Roasting on a Spit,
And tauntingly to make Sport of it.
The holy Saints and People of the Lord,
Their only Weapon was Gods sacred Word.
With that blessed Sword always they overcome,
And did Refute all Heretics; but ROME
Makes use ('it is plain) of the Carnal Sword and Fire,
It Is Blood, it is Blood, this Locust does desire,
Death without Mercy, Acts of Cruelty,
The matter must decide continually.
The way they use to turn a Soul from Error
Is the most dreadful Flesh-amazing Terror
Of horrid Rack^, whereon a Man must lie
Tortured to Death, dying, yet cannot dye.
^trange kinds of Instruments devised to tear
The flesh from ^ff the Bones; These sometimes were
Her friendly Admonitions to reclaim
Such whom she does for Heretics defame.
What Massacrees has she contrived by Night,
When Nature does to Rest, each Man invite!
When sleep has closed their Eyes, no thoughts of harms,
Did them possess, but in their folded Arms
Their Wives and Children lay, with hope, that they
Through Grace, might live to see another Day.
Then came these Murdering Butchers, sent from Hell,
Nothing but BLOOD would their vile Rage repel;
^aying dear Babes and Mother in their gore,
^^ll all were dead they scorned to give over:
If these Church-dealings will not work contrition
She can erect a cursed Inquisition:
A dreadful place of Cruelty and blood,
Whose Torments scarcely can be understood.
A loathsome Dungeon and vile stinking Cell,
A place of Darkness, representing Hell;
Where nothing is so plentiful as Tears
And bitter sighs, and yet can find no ears
To hear their cries and lamentable moans,
Nor hearts to pity them for all their groans,
Where many tedious days and nights they spend
Not knowing when their sufferings will have end,
If such like Arguments ( Sir) will confute
A Heretic, the Papists may dispute
With all the world, nay, Heathen Rome could never
Come nigh a Papist with their best endeavor*
They scorn all Turk or Pagan (for contrival
Of Barbarous Cruelties) should be corrival;
For Inhumanities they most defy,
And scorn that Cann^bals should them come nigh.
A bloody Papist strives to counterfeit
The Plague of Hell, as far as Man's conceit
Can reach unto, or Devils could invent;
This is a Papists knocking Argument.
Thus, thus is Rome drunk with the Martyrs blood,
Which has run down like to a mighty flood.
O! it is Rome, that is that Scarlet Whore,
Which thus does hate and persecute the poor,
And all which are unto Truth inclined,
To serve the Lord with a most perfect mind,
Accord^n^ to the tenor of his Word:
All such the strives to put unto the Sword:
And suffers none to buy, nor sell, nor live,
But such as homage unto her would give.
Upon her head also Saint John did see
Was writ the cursed name of Blasphemy:
Setting her self on Gods Imperial Throne:
Saving, I am, besides me there is none.
I have the Keys of Heaven in my hand,
Both earth and Hell is at my sole command.
I shut and open unto whom I please,
I Torment give to some, to others ease.
Lo, thus God's secret Word does point her forth,
This, this is she, there is none in all the Earth
That ever did adventure to lay claim
To that persumptuous and Blasphemous Name,
As King of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, but she,
Therefore Romes Church must the vile Strumpet be.

Apostate. Sir, speak no more, forbear your sland'rous lies,
The holy Church such murderous acts defies:
Do not believe all stories you do hear,
It Is hard for you to make these things appear.

Professor. These things were not (Sir) in a Corner done,
Besides, I never yet have heard of one
That is for you, or stands on your side,
Who by just proof these things ever denied;
For they, alas, notoriously are known,
And many Papists also them do own:
Besides, 'twas late some of these Cruelties
Murder and Blood, and barbarous Tragedies
^ere done, and acted; some alive now be
Who with their eyes these villainies did see.
About the Year (dear Sir) of Fifty five
A dreadful Massacree did Rome contrive
Near unto France, in the Dukedom of Savoy,
Where thirty thousand Souls she did destroy,
Who were Commanded without all delays
Papists to turn, and that within three days;
Who for refusing were then presently
Put unto Death with barbarous Cruelty,
Some with sharp spears thrust through their privy parts,
Whilst others stabbed were unto their h^arts.
Some Babes they cut in pieces, some they Roasted,
And some upon the tops of spears they tossed:
Virgins were Ravished, Widows and Wives,
All barb'rously deprived of their lives:
Some were drove forth on bitter Ice and Snow,
And many knocked of the head as they did go.
Thus were those Souls brought into misery;
See it at large in Morlands History.
Two hunderd thousand Protestants or more
Were Massacreed by this vile bloody Whore
In Ireland; there is many now alive
who saw what kinds of deaths they did contrive,
By which some of their dear Relations then
Were tortured by those most bloody men.
How can you, Sir, these things in the least deny,
Which are so obvious unto every eye?

Apost. Youth, it is the Faith of Roman Catholics,
Thus for to deal with all vile Heretic;
Yet 'twas Rebellion too, say what you will,
For which the Church did many thousands kill*
To Magistrates they d^sobed^ent were,
And therefore they just punishment did ^ear.

Professor Peter and John they Rebels were also,
By that same argument which use you do,
To Magistrates they did refuse to bend,
Wherein they knew they should the Lord offend.
In Civil things they always did submit,
And preached also, 'twas a thing most fit,
In things which unto man do appertain;
But Christ over Conscience ought alone to reign.
Even so those Martyrs bare an upright mind
Unto their Prince, and ever were inclin^d
In al^ just things obedient for to be;
Yet did stand up for Christ his Sovereignty,
And were resolved in matters of their Faith,
To worship God, as holy Scripture says,
According to that light which he does give,
Up unto which each Soul on Earth should live.
And though your Church does put poor men to Death,
'Twas from the Devil such cursed Laws came forth.
The tares with wheat should grow unto the end,
Till God is pleased the Reapers for to send.
That 'twas from Satan, I don't doubt in the least,
For he did give unto this bloody Beast
(...) Power and Seat, and his Authority,
(...) to effect all cursed villainy,

Apostate. T^^y were some evil Persons, without doubt,
(...) ^^ept into the Church, that work^ about
(...) Murderous Deeds, the Church did not allow,
(...) u^terly against them did a^^^

Professor. The filthy Pope, and evil Cardinal,
With Bishops, Monks and Friars you so call,
With fiery Jesuists, for to be brief,
In all these Murderous Acts these were the chief.
Bulls, false Pardons and cursed Dispensations
From bloody Rome has ruined many Nations.
You cannot deceive, nor hood-wink the world more
Time has discovered the Scarlet Whore.
We now know how clearly to bring our Charge,
As I could show, but that I cannot enlarge.

Apostate. I know not how further (Sir) to excuse
The holy Church; you put me in a Muse;
But she is more kind and gentle grown of late,
And does such Cruelties Defy and hate.

Professor. ROME to a Wolf may fitly be compared,
Who whilst against his will is quite debarred
From seeking of his Prey, being tied in Chains,
Seems very peaceable, though he remains
A Wolf in Nature still, if ever he
At any Rate can get his Liberty,
Does straightway run, impatient of delay,
And cannot rest until he is got his Prey.
So Rome seems kind and gentle, until she
Can find again an Opportunity,
Which with unwearied Pains and often Trial
She ever seeks, and hardly takes Denial;
Which if she once obtains, she will not stay
From shedding Blood on Minute of a Day.

Apostate. It Is a vain thing with you for to Contend,
And therefore I had rather make an end;
It Is out of love I speak, to have you leave
Your evil Errors, speedily to cleave
Unto that Church who only can decide
All Controversies, even to divide
The Truth from Error, Light from Darkness, so
That every one the ready way may go.
But you seem so resolved in your mind,
That little hopes, alas, of you I find.
But ( Youth) consider once again, I pray,
The Troubles of a now approaching day.
For sore Amazements will you overtake,
Unless you do your Purposes forsake.
If once our Church the Day obtains, be sure
Then down you Heretics must go forever.
Let former strokes of Justice take such place
As for to move you wisely to embrace
That Counsel which in tender love I give,
That in Safety evermore you may live,
O^ you will Repent that ever you begun
These dangerous ways of Heresy to run.
It Is a dark, doleful, dangerous Path you go,
Recant therefore as many others do.

Professor. You may Mistake, sometimes the waters flow,
Yet on a sudden I observe them low.
A Hamon may maliciously devise
Poor Mordicai and others to surprise,
Yet may h^s Purp^ses meet with a Blast,
And he himself be hanged too at last.
The flesh with all its Lusts to Mortify,
Is hard to those that love Iniquity.
The Way to Papists wholly is Untrod,
And unto all who haters are of God,
The Way seems Dark to you, Untrod, Uneve^
Hard it is to the flesh, yet it is the way to Heaven
It Is dark to you, because that you are blind,
And cannot Gods Purpose in dark footsteps mind.
I Have a sure hand to lead my trampling Paces,
To 'scape the danger of those dangerous Spaces.
I shall pass safe, by means of my best Guide,
Though thousands fall by me on every side.
For to turn back will prove a doleful fault,
I think upon the Monument of Salt.
I am Resolved a thousand Deaths to dye,
Before I Will ever yield to POPERY.

Apostate. Thou art too strict, too righteous and p^ecise,
Thou s^ight'st such things which prudent men do prize
Thou may have Christ, Pleasure and Honors too,
And saved be without half this ado.
There Is very few, alas, are of your Mind,
Who unto Rome are not at all inclined.

Professor. You now condemn me for my holy Life,
Wherein, it is true, I met with straits and strife
But when, dear Sir, you come at length to dye,
You Will blame your self, and me you will justify.
Did ever any one on a Dying Bed
Lament that they were by Gods Spirit led
To crucify their sins, and undertake
All things to leave for the Lord Jesus sake*
If Righteous Ones, alas! scarce saved are,
It greatly does behove me to take care
In holiness to walk, what e're you say,
I from the Paths of Life will never stray.
The Way I know is rough, it is hard and straight,
And leads me also through a Thorny gate.
Whose scratching Pricks are very sharp and fell,
The way to Heaven is by the Gates of Hell.
Your way, it is true, seems very smooth and wide,
Since you from Christ have lately turned aside.
My Paths seem long, yours short and very fair,
Free from all Rubs and Snares, yet (Sir) beware,
The safest Path is not always most even,
The way to Hell's like to a seeming Heaven.
Shall proud Flesh wantons for a moments pleasure,
Expose themselves to shame, and loss of Treasure?
They Will spend their strength, their Gold, and their Estates,
Amongst their sensual Dame hellish-Mates.
Shall cursed Pleasures thus be prized, and must
The joys above be cheaper than a Lust?
The Ambitious Gallant, for to hoyst his Name
Upon the wings of Honor and of Fame,
How will he venture on the point of Spears,
And face the mouths of Canons! naught the fears:
With Courage stout, how will he fight in the Flood,
When Brinish Seas are mixed with human Blood!
Shall wretched Man be at the Devils will,
And dangers run his Lust for to fulfill?
And shall not I, when God commands me forth,
^ngage for him with all my might on Earth?
Or shall the promised Crown of endless Life,
^e judged a Trif^^e, and not worth a strife?
That which vain man accounts to be most rare,
Is not obtained but with much cost and care,
Things of great worth on Earth are got by pains,
And he who ventures nothing, nothing gains.
And shall I then be Startled with a Frown,
When full assured of an Eternal Crown?
The Strife which does an holy Life attend,
Will recompensed be, I Am sure, in the end.
I will go on, since JESUS does invite me,
His strength is mine, and nothing shall afright me*

Apostate I do perceive you are resolved to run
In your strict Ways, until you're quite undone,
Yet hear a little what I have to sp^ak,
And you will find, it is best for you to take
The Counsel which I give; for you^l espy
Great Ruin fall upon you suddenly.
Your Father will ^o^ own you for his Son,
If in this foolish strictness you will go on;
His face expect hereafter not to see,
If this your purpose and you^ pleasure be.

Professor. If Father, Mother, and dear Brethren too
Forsake me quite, yet still, I well do know
My precious Savior will my Soul embrace,
And I shall see sweet Smiles from his dear Face.
My self and my Relations all (though dear)
I do deny, such is the love I bear
To my dear Lord, whose Servant now am I,
And do resolve to be until I dye.
Come Life, Come Death for Canaan I Will endeavor
It is my home and resting place forever.
Better it is that Earthly Friends abuse me,
Then that Christ Jesus should at last refuse me.
I Would rather bear my Fathers Wrath and Ire,
Then to be cast into Eternal Fire.

Apostate. Fie, fie, Young Man, forbear, and take advice,
Let not hot zeal thy fancy thus entice,
For to refuse those pleasant things which you
May here enjoy, as many others do
It Is much too soon for thee to mind these things,
For naught but Grief and Dotage from it springs;
'Twill dull thy wit, and make thee like a drone;
And thou wilt be slighted too by every one.
How might thou live at ease and pleasure have,
If once these ways thou would resolve to leave;
And like a Flower flourish in the spring,
And with young Gallants might rejoice and sing,
And spend thy days in Pleasure sweet and rare?
I prithee, Youth, consider, O take care
To cheer thy heart; behold now in thy sight,
What Earthly joys most sweetly do invite.

Professor, Young it is true, I am, and in my Prime,
Therefore resolve for to Improve the time;
The flower of my days, do think I will
Give to the Devil, Lust for to fulfill?
Shall Satan have the primest of my days,
And put off Christ with base and vile delays,
Until Old Age, and then at last present
The dregs of Time to him? I Will not consent
To such vile thoughts, I will not lend an ear.
I to my savior more affection bear.
Since first of th'living Spring my Soul did drink.
All sinful Pleasures in my Nose do stink
More precious Joy I find in my dear Lord,
Than all this World does, yea, or can afford.
If I am slighted for Christ Jesus sake,
And judged a Fool or Drone, yet I can take
All for him, who for me has under gone
More shame than this before his work was done.
This is my chosing time, I have made choice,
Gods Word I will obey and hear his Voice.
Gods Counsel it is, that first of all in Youth
I should him seek, and cleave unto the Truth
Your Counsel I abhor shall Iustful fire
Be kindled in my breast? shall my desire
Run out again to Aegypt's cursed stuff,
I know it is naught, of it I have enough.

Apostate. Alas! the Journey's long, you will wearied be,
And faint before that Kingdom you do see.

Professor. Nay, Sir, be silent, that is false; for I
By Faith most clearly do the Land espy.
But is the Journey long? blame me no more,
Betimes in the morning I set out therefore.
Why did thou say it was too soon for me
For to set out, if long the Journey be,
I do resove in Youth with speed to strive,
Lest I too late at last should there arrive.
While strength and youth do last, I Will bend my mind
To travel hard, because I clearly find
Old Age and weary Limbs quite out of case
To go a Journey or to run a Race
Alas! when night is ready to come in,
That Is not a time this Journey to begin,
When Sun and Moon and Stars all darkened be,
And clouds return, that we no light can see;
When Rain and tempests do most sore appear,
And the Keepers of the house all trembling are;
When the strong Men themselves are forced to bow,
And Grinders cease also, because that now
They are but few, and ready to fall out,
And those through windows which do look about,
Are become dim, nay, darkened, without Light,
And doors too in the street are shut up quite.
When the low sound of the Grinders scarcely heard,
He rises up too at the voice of the Bird;
And all the Daughters of sweet Music rare,
Are brought too low, don't for such Music care;
And fears increase in thoughts of what is on high,
Fears in the way, and fears for what is nigh.
When flourish shall the Almond-Tree also,
And the Grass-hopper shall be a burden too
When loosed is the precious silver Cord,
And Golden Bole is broken, as we have heard;
When the weak Pitcher at the Fountain's broke,
And the Wheel at the Cistern with a heavy stroke
When desire fails, and there, alas! is none,
What will such do who han't this Race begun?
Besides, it is clear, my Days Uncertain be
Old Age, alas, I may not live to ^ee.
Young Men are quickly gone; for I behold
D^ily, as Young as I, are turned to the Mould,
M^ own Experience does discover this:
My Life a Bubble and a Vapor is*
The Flower which does spread, and is so gay,
Soon may it fade and wither quite away.
If I therefore have still much work to do,
Or, as you say, so long a way to go;
It does concern me then, with all my power
For to improve each day, yea, every hour:
For days to come, I see, may not be mine,
My time I Will spend, not as thou spendest thine;
My weights I Will cast away this Race to run,
Stand still I must not, nor with thee return.
I must provide me Oil, get Grace in store,
For ever a while I shall be seen no more
This side the Grave; I haste therefore to meet
The glorious Judge at the great Judgment seat.
I must make haste, be swift like to the Sun,
Lest that my work's to do when Time is done.

Apostate. To you, Young Man, I have declared much
Of the sad danger, but your Zeal is such,
Naught that I say, with you, takes any place;
You don't believe me, that is the very case.
But what is the Reason, Youth, so many folk
Decline those Paths in which you now do walk?
Were ways of your strict Holiness so sweet,
They in this sort would never back retreat;
I did resolve with others for to try,
And find you all deceived utterly;
Your whole Religion's naught but mere conceit,
Let none therefore thy Soul with fancies cheat.
Since wise men daily do your Ways for sake,
Be thou advised and other Counsel take.

Professor. If thousands fall away it is no more
Th^^ (...) the Scripture shows was heretofore.
Thousan^s of old from Egypt did adventure,
And yet (...) of them did Canaan enter,
They never ^^d of Christ a saving taste,
Who quite away their seeming hopes do cast;
Their hearts, al^^, are R^tten and Unsound,
Who in Christ Jesus never Sweetness found.
But what of this? Shall I my LORD deny,
Because that you some Hypocrites espy?
Those who do murmur in the Wilderness,
The Land of Promise never shall possess.
But if they will the gracious LORD revoke,
Shall I from thence resolve to slip the Yoke?
Because they don't the glorious Lord believe,
Shall Caleb think the Land he cannot receive,
Because so many walk in the way to Hell,
Shall I conclude, that Heaven don't excel
The vain enjoyments of an evil World?
Or shall with fancies thus my Soul be hurled?
To think, because that Swine the grains do choose,
And Pearls do tread upon, and them refuse,
There is more worth in those base stinking grains
Than in those true Pearls which the Merchant gains?
Because these silly men have lost their Way,
Shall I on purpose therefore go astray?
Because that Judas did for thirty Pence
Sell his dear Lord, shall I conclude from thence
Peter a Fool, who prized his favor so,
That for his sake all things he would under go?
If fearful Soldiers basely quit the field,
Shall valiant Chapions therefore strait way yield
Most Cowardly unto their treacherous Fo,
Whom they assured were to overthrow.
If Mariners unskilled in Navigation
Are split on Rocks, shall then in the Nation
That have that curious Art resolve therefore
Never to use the Art of Sailing more?
Because the Sluggard sees the Winds do blow,
The rain descending with cold Hail and Snow,
He does give over, and says, no longer will
Remain in the field his barren Land to till.
Shall faithful Husbandmen from the like ground,
Who have often times by good experience found,
Without they sow, no Harvest they can have;
Resolve the painful labor quite to leave?
He that will not Plow because of the Snow and Rain,
Shall beg at Harvest, and shall naught obtain.
So in like sort, to mind my present case,
'Cause persons void of God's true saving Grace
D'Apostatize, as you your self have done,
Must I to the Devil with you headlong run?
'Cause some Professors secretly do love
Some base Corruptions, does this therefore prove,
There Is none sincere for God in all the Earth,
Whose Souls exper'ence do the second birth?
I for my part, through Grace, have this to say
I never shall, nor can I fall away.
All those whom God has unto Jesus given,
They never can be dispossessed of Heaven;
The promise o^ Eternal life is theirs,
And they like Isaac, even so are Heirs,
Who could not miss nor dispossessed be,
Unless God's Word's made a mere Nu^lity,
God's Covenant also with Christ does stand,
Who can supply our wants on every hand.
Sin shall not reign, such is our happy case,
We are not under the Law, but under Grace.
This Covenant is not like to the Old,
We of a surer Person now have hold
We stand not now as Adam did, it is plain,
God never will trust that Old Man again.
Our Credit's nothing worth, our Surety
Is in our room, our wants he must supply.
Besides all this I Will hint another thing,
Which to my Soul does much refreshment bring:
He that is the Author of my Faith, I spy,
Will finish it himself assuredly.
He that in me has a good Work begun,
Will perfect it also, e're he has done,
Within God's Saints Eternal Life does dwell;
This would remove the doubt, considered well;
Those unto whom Eternal Life is given,
How can it be that such should miss of Heaven?
And now to 'breviate, it is my intent,
Sir, if you please, to frame an argument.
If the new Creature in the Souls of men,
Is of God's Spirit born, I argue then,
The same in nature, it, be sure, must be,
Which cannot death, or like mutation see;
But that it is of God's Spirit born, is clear,
As John the third does make most plain appear.
The Seed also does in their souls remain,
They cannot sin to death, who are born again;
Gods fears moreover is so in their heart,
That they from him shall never more depart.
Thus is my standing very firm and sure,
And to the end I know I shall endure,
And as for those who fall away and dye,
I shall discover clearly, by and by,
What kind of Men and Women they are all,
Which will hold forth the cause too of their fall.

Apostate. Most confident, I do perceive, you are,
Daunted at nothing, yet pray let me hear
Those Persons Names which you did lastly meet,
Who finally resolve for to retreat,
And leave those paths which you seem to commend;
Come, speak to this, and we will make an end.

Professor. Sir, unto me it does most plain appear,
As if they Cowards and faint-hearted were;
Under their Tongues also close secretly,
Some pleasant morsels, I am sure do lie:
And in them all does reign some cursed evil,
Which makes them to conform unto the Devil

Apostate. As you supose, but pray (Youth) have a care,
For they sincere and sober People are.
And I do question whether yea or nay,
Thou do them know; what further have to say?

Professor. I told you, ( Sir) I knew them very well,
And since you urge me, I resolve to tell
What kind of folk they are, and also shall
Their Names discover unto great and small;
Master Fea^ful was one that I did see,
With him was goodly Sensuality.
With Dame Mis-belief, and Goodman Outside,
Who turned from Christ, as soon as they were tried:
One Unbelief, a very wicked man;
Turn him out of his way, there is no man can.
Besides them also, there is one Earthly heart,
Who loves nothing so well as Plow and Cart:
Also, there is Esau Faint-heart, most Profane,
That sells his Birth right, Pottage to obtain;
With Belly god, a Man that I do find
Fleshpots and Onions chiefly he does mind.
There Is Mistress Discontent too, with the rest,
Who would have naught but what she likes best.
Master Hot-love, Soon-Cold also was there,
Lately, for zeal, with him few could compare;
There Is Ishmael Legal-heart, in truth also,
When Troubles rise, he strait away does go
With Master Balaam, who does Jesus leave
The Wages of Unrighteousness to have.
Some People also I have lately met,
Who were with sin most easily beset;
And diverse heavy weights also they bore,
Which wearied them, and made them to give over.
A Gentleman I also did behold,
Whose trade was great, and store he had of Gold,
He Is going back with sorrow, I do know,
Because he cannot have Christ and the World too.
One Master Atheist, that I think's his Name,
As like your self as if he were the same;
He Is fallen back so far, and turned aside,
That at Religion he does much deride;
He thinks Religion's but a foolish thing,
Which does no comfort, nor no profit bring.
This is too true, you also are the man,
To clear your self, deny it if you can;
No marvel it is you play the Devils part,
In laboring thus for to deceive my heart,
And blind mine eyes, if that thou knew how;
Thou Would make me like thy self, and therefore now
I am resolved with thee for to engage,
Who striv'st to stop me in my Pilgrimage.
A Foe more vile than you, what Soul can meet?
I Will therefore bring you down unto my feet.
Some stones I think to fetch out of God's Book,
Though like Goliath you would seem to look,
Yet in his Name, whom you so much defy,
I shall prevail against you, by and by.
I thought, I must confess, some years ago,
I should not in the least been stopped by you;
Or that I should have met with Opposition
With such a Foe to add to my affliction.
But since this is my sad unhappy fate,
I Will add a line or two to vindicate
The Dreadful God, so far as lies in me,
I Will vindicate that Glorious Deity;
Who in my Soul his Image so has set,
That I his Glorious Being cannot forget.
Shall he which formed both Heaven and the Earth,
From whom I have my precious life and birth,
Be trod upon, nay, utterly denied?
What Soul can such a sinful Wretch abide.
Who strives at once, if that you could it do,
The life of Religion to o'erthrow.
Have thou got ought to speak, and will thou enter
On the debate? yea, durst thou to adventure
To o'pe thy mouth in the least for to defend
Those thoughts of thine, which clearly ascend
From hell beneath? thou wilt prove thy self thereby
The Devil's Friend, Jehovah's Enemy.

Apostate. Thou childish Lad, do think I am afraid
For to declare my self, or am dismayed
By silly dreams and Fa^^ies, which afright
Those simple Ones who dare not walk in the night;
Who startle at the shadow which they see,
And think the Devil's near, when it is a tree?
And since I do perceive you understand
What my Opinion is, I do demand
How you can prove, and fully make appear
The^e is a God; for none at all I fear.
No God nor Devil I at all believe,
Nor is there any Heaven to receive
The Souls of Holy Men when they do dye*
Nor is there any Hell of Misery
For Sinners after death, as you conceit;
A^l is no^ght else, save a Rel^gious C^eat.

Professor. Dare you your Maker, thus with impudence,
Deny and tread upon? Such insolence
What Soul can hear! what Age can show the like,
Where so much Light has been! shall Mortals strike
At the great God, and glorious Deity?
Whose dreadful Being and Existency
The Heathens did find out, and gre^tly fear*
His Godhead did to them most plain appear
By the Creation, Man, as in a glass
May there behold who his Creator was.
It Is time to arm my self, and look about,
When by an Atheist I am challenged out:
When the whole of all Religion lies at stake,
It Is time to rouse, and also for to shake
Off sloth and Idleness, and to engage
With such a Foe in this my Pilgrimage^
If once I should unto an Atheist yield,
And treach' rously also acquit the Field;
The strongest hold of Truth betray should I
Into the hands of its worst Enemy:
And should Unman my self of Christian too,
And my dear Soul of reason overthrow.
I should debase my self, should I deny
My Noble Birth from the great Deity.
Man's chiefest glory springs from's Supreme Hea^*
In his descent from him, who made and br^d
And brought him forth, and does his life maintain*
From hence Man does his greatest honor gain,
It Is power Divine that Man does greaten thus
As to make, him King of the Universe.
Who e're disowns his blessed Pedigree,
Does prove himself Unnat'ral for to be.
For Man to say, he came by hap or chance,
As it is a piece of wilful Ignorance,
Himself also he does depose thereby,
From his own honor and rare Dignity;
And vile Contempt upon himself does bring,
As well as dirt upon that Essence fling,
Who formed his Soul, and gave to him his Bre^^^
And made him Ruler here upon the Earth.
But to proceed, and lend my helping hand,
In the defense of Sacred Truth to stand,
And vindicate my great Creator's Cause,
By Natures Light, and also by those Laws
Which Supernat'ral are, and most Divine,
Whose Light excells, yea, and whole Glories shine.
You ask me, How I can make it appear,
There is a God, Attend, and now give ear,
And weigh my Arguments and Reasons found,
And let not Satan more your Soul confound,
And Reason quite destroy as he has done,
Lest to the Devil you do headlong run.

Apostate. Before you do proceed, this you must know,
If you a God do th^^k to pr^ve or show,
Be sure of this (Young Man) it must not be
By Scripture proof, for its Authority
I do deny, and cannot it believe,
You never shall that way my heart deceive;
The Knowledge which you Supernatural call,
Is a mere Cheat, I m^nd it not at all.

Professor Though Supernatural Knowledge you despise,
And count Gods holy Word to be but lies;
I briefly shall stand up in its Defense,
And show your Pride and cursed Insolence.
That all may love Gods Word, prize it, and see
Its worth and weight, and its Authority
To be Divine, and by Jehovah given
To lead poor Souls in the right way to Heaven:
One thing of you in the first place, I demand,
Pray let me know, and ^ully understand
^hen this supposed Cheat did first commence,
and in what part of the world, bring evidence.
^^ypt stands mute, says it commenced not here,
^or did the Jews invent it, that is as clear.
^sk all the Heathens too in every age,
^ their Philosophers brought, on the Stage.
^ you can find it out, pray bring't to light,
Or else confess your darkness worse than night.
^Tis strange that such a universal Cheat
should thus be put upon the World, and yet
No one can show who did the same devise,
Nor how, nor when the same at first did rise.
Since all the world stands silent, and is mute,
This might a^ period put to the Dispute.
But, secondly, I argue once again,
There Is none of them who do so much disdain
The Holy Scriptures, who just Proof can bring
To show, in the least, they were a forged thing;
If none can them disprove, O then, say I,
What ground have you the Scripture to deny?
The Scriptures also, I observe, have been
Strangely preserved by a power unseen;
In every Age, kept, both in word and sense,
From secret Fraud and open Violence,
Against the numerous Armies of all those
That were both secret, yea, and open Foes;
No wicked or malicious men could ever
Subvert the Scripture, though they did endeavor:
The beastly Clergy of the Church of Rome,
Through whose hands to us the Scriptures come;
Though guilty of most vile Abomination,
As ever was committed in a Nation,
Their cursed sins are hateful to relate,
Which they committed, and did tolerate;
And that they might more freely do the same,
And so be kept from sad reproach and shame,
They say, the Pope himself may change the Laws
Of the Holy Gospel, as himself sees cause;
And make the sense of Scripture to agree
With tim and place, as he most fit does see.
How free those Sacriligious Monsters were,
(Had God admitted) to extinguish clear
The Sacred Scripture, and put out their light
And filled the world with an eternal Night?
But we may see, although it made its way
Through those muddy Channels, yet have they
Been still kept pure, and still remain a Law
To keep most men (save Bloody Popes) in awe*
Now if against so many Enemies,
Who used all means that devils could devise
T'obliterate that Soul-informing-Word
It was preserved, and not by humane Sword,
How dare you, Sir, perfume for to deny
Its blessed and Divine authority?
Another ground and Reason I shall urge,
Which proves Gods Word Divine, as I do Judge;
It Is taken from that influence they have
Upon their hearts whom God intends to save;
It turns them from those cursed ways of sin,
Which once they loved and delighted in.
It brings them out of Darkness into Light,
Yea, and discovers JESUS to their sight
Filling their Souls with inward Life and Peace
And precious joys, the which shall never cease.
The Glorious Power which God did afford
Always for those who stood up for his Word
Most clearly shows, Methinks, to every eye,
The Scripture's true, and their Authority
To be Divine, whatever you may say,
I cannot give this Argument away.
How have they been supported in the flames?
Which as it did perpetuate their Names,
So God thereby did stir up ten for one,
To stand up for his Word, when they were gone,
Ah! how did they rejoice, Sir, in the fire,
Which made their very Enemies admire!
Would thou one Instance have, I could give two,
And ten times twenty more, if that would do.
But if I should, I Am sure, I should transgress,
And over-charge the Appendix and the Press.
And therefore I will add one reason more,
To prove Gods Word Divine, and so give over.
How has the Scripture made the Atheist quake,
And all his Limbs with dreadful horror shake!
When on a Deathbed they have come to lie,
Their Conscience waking in their face did sly,
Though in their health they did it much despise,
And did affirm it was made up with Lies.
Yet has it made them howl at last, and cry,
We are undone to all ETERNITY.
'Twas like unto the writing on the Wall,
Which did foretell profane Belshazzer's fall
Which was so terrible, yea, and so strange,
It wrought amonst them a most sudden change,
Their Mirth and jollity does now expire,
And the proud King does earnestly desire
To hear it read, naught then would serve the turn
But an Interpreter; his heart did burn,
His tremling knees smote one against another,
As if his Joints were loosed from each other.
Thus those that will not confess JEHOVAH's Name,
Are forced to own him to their utter Shame.
And those who will not of Gods Word allow,
Are forced by Conscience under it to bow.
These being weighed may make you quite give over,
Yea, and Gods Word thus to oppose no more.
Now if the Scripture cannot be gainsaid,
Methinks each Soul should be exceeding 'fraid,
How they condemn that glorious Deity,
Whom they so clearly show and magnify.
But to leave this a little, and descend
To man's own reason which you so commend,
How many Heathens did alone thereby
Find out ( dear Sir) Gods glorious Majesty?
If you your Reason would but exercise,
From Atheism, doubtless soon might rise,
And hate also this Soul-destroying evil,
Thus siding with, and yielding to the Devil.

Apostate Amongst the Heathen (Youth) were men of same
Who for their skill in nature had the Name
Above all others, which did quite deny
There was a GOD or such a Deity.

Professor Your Epicurus, and old Aristotle,
With Theodorus, Bion, and the Rabble,
And such like Atheists, I must grant to you
Denied there was a God as stories show.
Philosophy is good, but men abuse it.
When they like those old Heathen Authors use it.
God does sometimes men's Reasons darken quite,
For not improving of the means of Light.
To vile affections up God does them give,
Because on Earth, like Brutes, they seem to live.
But though these natural Sots could not espy,
By all their skill the eternal Deity,
Yet many thousand Heathens, I might show,
By natures light alone did come to know
There was a God, they searched so about
Into Gods Works, they found this Godhead out,
For when they gave themseves up seriously
To study natures Book, and came to pry
Into the cause of all things here on Earth,
And their effects did clearly see birth
Or first Original of every thing,
From such an essence to descend or spring.
The very Novices in Natures School,
May soon convince that man to be a fool,
Who by the Creatures glory cannot discern
The being of that dreadful Sovereign,
Who did them form and make, for every where
His glorious Godhead they to all declare,
Had I but time, I would some pages fill,
To show to you how that Man's reason will
Teach him there is a God, for if he mind
The nature of his Soul, this he might find.
Man's Soul is like a spring, or like to fire,
It rests not aloft, it does aspire.
And unto Noah's Dove I Will it compare,
God is the Ark* Souls Rest alone is there.
The flesh dams up the spring, quenches desire,
Keeps out of the Ark, to which it would retire,
Since I perceive Man's Soul does search about
To find some higher Good and Being out;
Which does excel all things which are below,
This does to us Gods glorious being show.
But to conclude this, no man can disown,
God by his Judgments daily is made known.
What sad examples daily do we hear
Of Wrath and Vengeance almost every where?
Some Drunkerds and Blasphemers struck down dead,
And others with strange Judgments tortured?
Some have persumed the holy God to dare,
Whom he would not one little minute spare.
If this will not Convince you of your Error,
I fear you will e're long fall under Terror,
For if you will not now Example take,
God may of you a sad Example make.
Your state, alas! above all men is sad
Because of God you once such knowledge had,
And of his ways, which now you loath and hate;
O Sir! Consider this your woeful state,
And cry to God, if peradventure He
May give you Grace, whereby your Soul may see
Your heinous sin, that so you may repent,
And turn to God before your days are spent.

Apostate. I must confess I know not what to say,
If there is a God, then cursed be the day
(...) I was born; for I do know
He never unto me will Mercy show;
^now resolve to open my condition,
though all is in vain; for there is no contrition
Will do me good, I utterly am lost;
For I have sinned against the Holy Ghost.
I wilfully have sinned, and there remains
Nothing for me but everlasting pains.
O that there was no God! for then should I
Be like the Beast, when ever I come to dye.
For Love of the World and for my present case
I am become like to the troubled Seas.
No Rest nor Comfort ever shall I find,
Cursed be the day that ever I declined
From these good ways in which ( dear Youth) you go,
Or ever I did GOD or JESUS know!
For if I had not known, them it is clear
My Sin would not so henious now appear.
My Conscience does prick me to the heart,
I never shall be eased of that Smart.
O that I were in Hell! for then should I
Soon see the worst of my Extremity.
Thou shall (dear Youth) forever happy be,
For thou art Chosen from Eternity,
To be an Heir of the Eternal Bliss;
But I, alas, am damned! what Woe like this?
The Devil with his glistring Golden Ball
Has me deceived, but now I see my fall
To be so bad, no tongue can it express,
My woeful Pain is quite Remediless
The checks of Conscience I did greatly slight,
And loved Darkness greatly, hated light;
Yea, and of good I never loved to hear,
Though I of him had hints oft-times most clear;
And now will he my Soul to pieces tear,
And make me his Eternal Vengeance bear!
Let all Back-sliders of me warning take,
Before they fall into the Stygian Lake;
Yea, and return and make with God their Peace
Before the days of Grace and Mercy cease;
For mine are past for ever, Oh! condole
My sad estate and miserable Soul.
My days will quickly end, and I must lie
Broy^ing in flames to all Eternity.

FINIS.

