A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL,
and Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England: On
May 29. 1706.

Which was the Day for ELECTION of Her Majesty's COUNCIL for that Province.

By John Rogers A.M. and Pastor of Ipswich.

Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. What Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them as
the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? And what Nation is
there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as all this law
which I set before you this day?

Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were such an Heart in them, that they would Fear me,
and Keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their Children for ever,

Certum est Nos facere quod facimus, sed Deus facit ut faciamus.

Aug. Boston: Printed by B. Green: Sold by Benj. Eliot under the West end of
the Townhouse. 1706.

PUblished at the desire of the House of Representatives,

Tho. Oaks, Speaker.
BOSTON, June 18th. 1706.
A SERMON Preached at the ELECTION. May 29. 1706
I. Kings VIII. 57, 58. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our
Fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us: That he may incline our hearts
unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his Commandments, and his
Statutes, and his Judgments, which he Commanded our Fathers.


THESE Words now read in your Christian Audience, [ Much Honored, Reverend,
and Beloved,] are a part of that Royal Blessing wherewith King Solomon blessed
the Congregation of Israel, after an Elaborate and Affectionate Prayer for
them, at the Solemn Dedication of the Temple, which he had build and finished
for Gods Honor and Worship: Supplicating the Divine Presence and Favor as the
Fountain of all blessings, with the Signal Manifestation thereof in some
special Acts of Grace and Mercy: that the God of their Fathers would own them,
and be with them still; not leave or forsake them: and that He would manifest
this, not only by giving them outward Prosperity, but blessing them with
Spiritual Blessings. Particularly, that as he had given them his Word and
Statutes to teach and direct them in the way that they should walk; so he would
by his Holy Spirit Effectually incline and engage their hearts to Keep and Obey
them.

It is justly to be esteemed the Highest Honor and Happiness of a People, to
have the Lord JEHOVAH for their God, Psalm. 144.15. David pronounces the People
happy that were in such a case, as is before described, when their Sons [which
be the Strength, Safety and Hopes of a Nation] are as Flourishing Plants grown
up in their Youth: Their Daughters [on whom the Hope of Posterity depends] as
Corner-Stones polisht after the similitude of a Palace; Strong and Beautiful,
Adorned with all the Ornaments proper to their Sex: When their Garners are
full, affording all manner of Stones, their Sheep bringing forth Thousands and
ten Thousands, their Oxen strong to Labor, no breaking in of the Enemy, nor
going out against them, nor with them into Captivity, no Complaining in their
Streets, no Outcry or Howling for any sad Tidings, Public grievances or
Calamities. Happy is the People enjoying such Plenty and Peace, says the
Psalmist: Yet immediately thereupon, not in way of Comparison herewith, but
Correction of himself, He cries out, Yea Happy is the People whose God is the
LORD. The former was a very Desirable Estate in it self, but comparatively it
is nothing. The true and chief Happiness of Israel does not consist in these
things, which are common to others with us, but in this Peculiar Privilege,
That the true and Blessed God is our God by Covenant, and special Relation.

Nextly, In having his Laws, Statutes and Judgments for the Rule of our Life
and Walk, with an Heart inclined to Observe and Keep them. This also was
Isreal's peculiar Privilege at first, To have the Revelation of Gods Mind and
Will in his Word, Psalm. 147.19, 20. With which Arguments Moses the Servant of
the Lord, by whom the Law was first given, urges the People to Obedience, Deuteronomy.
4.6, 7, 8. Hereupon the People generally Promise Obedience; All that the Lord
our God shall speak unto us by thee, We will hear and do it. Which Protestation
of theirs God himself takes notice of and accepts as to the Matter of it:
commanding them for it so far, Saying to Moses, I have heard the Voice of the
Words of this People, which they have spoken unto thee, and they have well said
all that they have spoken. But then, (after the manner of men) expresses an
holy jealousy or suspicion of the Truth and Sincerity of their Profession,
Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. Oh that there were such an Heart in them, thus to Fear me
always, and Keep all my Commandments, etc. It was questionable as to Man, though
not as to God, whether there were such a Principle of Obedience in them as was
like to be lasting, or without which they would surely fail as to the
performance.

The Thing it self was greatly to be wished by them, and for them, from the
great Advantages that would accrue unto them and their Posterity therefrom: But
who shall give them such an Heart? (as the Hebrew Words may be rendered) Who but
God himself can confer this Grace and Blessing on any People? If these Words
were spoken by Moses (as some think) they are his Option or Prayer to God for
Israel: that as he had newly delivered to them the great things of his Law, and
they had engaged to Observe and Do all, their Hearts might be rightly framed to
such an Obedience, as was required of them, and now promised by them. Who will
give them such an Heart, or who will give their Heart to be such in them? It Is
certain that God alone can do this; therefore it implies an Address to Him for
it. Now from the same sense (...) Spirit it is, that Solomon makes this
Request, or Pronounces this Blessing in our Text. The Lord our God be with us,
as he was with our Fathers, let him not leave us, nor forsake us: That He may
incline our Hearts unto Him, to keep his Commandments, etc.

The DOCTRINAL Conclusion hence is this.

That the most Desirable Blessing which can be asked or wished for, and
pronounced upon any People under Heaven [as a Fruit and Evidence of the Divine
Presence with, and Favor toward them] is, That the God of Heaven would
incline their Hearts to Himself, to Walk in all his Ways, to Keep his
Commandments, his Statutes and his Judgments.

Or more briefly thus,

That the Choicest Mercy which any People have to desire for Themselves and
Posterity, or that God has to bestow upon them in this Life, is to make them a
Religious, and an Obedient People.

This is the sum of Solomon's comprehensive Blessing here, and it is indeed the
comprehense of all Blessings. Thus blessed was Israel in the pious Reign of his
immediate Predecessor: The Heart of his Royal Father was fully inclined to the
Lord, and to his Testimonies, Act. 13.22. concerning whom the Lord himself thus
restifyed and said; I have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after mine own
heart, who shall fulfill all my will, [that is in Governing his People.] This
was the chief Qualification which God respected in his Choice of him to be King
over Israel, 1 Samuel 16.7. Looking, not as man, to the outward Appearance, but
judging by the Heart; Calling him from a mean Employment, to the highest Seat
in the Government; from following the Ewes great with young, he brought him to
feed Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance: So he fed them according to
the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his Hands.
This is the Testimonial which God has left upon Record for him, Psalm. 78.72.
Wherein are commended two necessary Qualifications of a good Prince or Chief
Ruler in David. Integrity, whereby he sincerely sought the Good and Welfare of
his People, avoiding and abhorring those; Counsels and Courses which were
contrary thereunto. Skilfulness, whereby he managed all Affairs of the Public
with singular Prudence: which is here ascribed to his Hands, not as if seated
in them, but because acted and discovered by them, as appeared in all his
Actions and Administrations. It is sad with a People when their Chief Ruler
wants either of these, Skilfulness or Faithfulness; and it is hard to say which
of these can be worst spared. King David was eminently accomplished with both,
and the People extraordinarily Happy under a Person of such a Spirit and
Accomplishment. The Holy Spirit of God improving his Prudent Counsel, and Pious
Example to be influential, as a means to make them in love with the ways of
Holiness, Obedience, and Instituted Religion.

Now this Devout Prince being about to Demise his Crown and Government, gave
with it this solemn Charge to Solomon his Son, that he should Know and Serve
the God of his Father, with a perfect heart and a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9
Keep close to his Laws and Ordinances, assuring him of Gods Presence and
Blessing, in case he did so: Otherwise, if he forsook God, that he might expect
to be forsaken of him: to all which, Solomon says Amen; imploring the Divine
Help for himself and People, sues for a double Portion of David's Spirit, Wisdom
and Piety, with an Entailment of all Happiness to Posterity in the Causes of
it: The Lord God of our Fathers be with us as he was with them, let him not
leave us, nor forsake us, but incline our Hearts to Himself and Ways, that so
it may go well with us, and with our Children for ever.

But to come to a more distinct Consideration of what is contained in the
Doctrine, I shall lay down these three Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
That Gods Presence and Favor, or His Favorable Presence? is the supreme
Cause, Original, Author, Spring and Fountain of all Blessings (to a Person or
People) Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal.

There is a threefold Presence of God mentioned in the Scripture. As,

I. God is Naturally and Essentially Present with all his Creatures. He is an
Immense Being, and no Creature possibly could Act, Subsist or Be without him.
Thus Paul argued in the Court of Athens, Act. 17.27, 28. God is not far from
every one of us, for in him we live, move and have our being. He is near us
all, he is with us all. Thus the Gentiles owned, and one of their Poets said,
Jovis omnia plena.

2. God is Gloriously Present with the Inhabitants of the Third Heavens. The
Heaven of Heavens has in it most mavelous manifestations of God. There the
Blessed Ones have God so with them, as always to behold his Face: As Hell is
set forth by a separation from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power, 2 These. 1.9 So Heaven, by a Dwelling with him, 1 These. 4 17. For as
there the Saints are ever with the Lord, so the Lord is with them for ever.

3. God is Graciously Present with his People here, by being favorable, kind
and good unto them; Externally, in the ways of his Special Providence:
Internally, by special Influences, Gifts, Motions and Operations of Grace.
Indeed, there is a common Providence of God, which Coextends it self as far as
the Creation; whereby he Upholds the things which he has made, and Governs them
all to their designed end: In respect whereof, God is equally present with all
persons and people, good and bad. But this special Presence of God, he affords
only to his Redeemed, Chosen and Called, who are not only under the Government
of his Providence, but the Dominion of Grace, and influence of the Spirit. This
is that Gracious Presence of God which we ought to be solicitous for, and
concerned to get and keep the abiding sense and tokens thereof.

It consists, (I say) First, In the Engagement of Divine Providence for our
Welfare: Or, God is with us, when he is for us. To particularize, Gods
favorable Presence with any People, is manifest in these Effects.

(I.) In giving them Conduct and Direction in the way that they should walk.
Every man has a Way to walk in, either Private or Public; In both which he
needs a Counselor and Guide, Jer. 10.23. The way of man is not in himself,
neither is it in men that walks, to direct his own steps. Through the darkness
of the Way, and short-sightedness of the Understanding, man is ever in danger
of being bewildered and lost if left to himself. He cannot rightly enter upon,
much less proceed and prosper in his way, that wants a true light. Now this
light flows from the Presence of the Lord: as David acknowledges upon
experience, Psalm. 118.27. It is the Lord that shows me light. Hence Solomon
gave this caution and counsel to man in general, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the
Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding; in all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he will direct thy paths. Those that make their own
bosom their Oracle, God is disengaged from being their Guide; they need him
not: but the snares they run into will soon show them how much they need him.
Yea, not only our own reason, but the counsel and example of others will easily
misguide us; whereas the more men depend on God, the more he will undertake to
teach and lead them. This is especially necessary for a man in public Place;
more especially if he Sit as Chief in the Land, Country or Province, and be to
Choose out the Peoples Way for them, as well as his own. From an high sense
hereof, Moses the Servant of the Lord being called to take the Conduct of his
People Israel, and lead them from Egypt into Canaan, makes his Address to God
for this instance of his Grace and Favor, Exodus 33.13. If I have found grace
in thy sight, show me now thy Way: For wherein shall it be known that I and thy
People have found grace in thy sight, Is it not in this, that thou go with
us? Gods Servants and People are often brought into a Wilderness of
Difficulties and Emergencies; but if God himself be with them, he guides them
to a good issue of them all. And thus his Gracious Presence appears in
directing and inclining them to such a course of actions, and method of
managing Affairs, as makes for his Honor, and their own Safety.

(2.) In affording them Protection against all threatening Evils or Dangers. As
he guides them with his Eye, so he guards them with his Arm. Such as have the
Almighty Jehovah with them, need not fear who is or can be against them, Romans
8.31. Gods Presence is a Defense to his Servants, and an Offense to their
Enemies, Genesis 28.15. Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou go, says the Lord to Jacob; and so to David, 2 Samuel 7.9. I was
with thee, and have cut off all thine Enemies. The Secrecy of his Presence is
the Saints Pavilion, Psalm. 4, last. Herein they may lie down in peace, and rest
securely, because the Keeper of Israel watches over them day and night, that
nothing hurt them. Yea if God be with them, they may pass through the Fire, and
not be burned, through the Water, and not be drowned, Isa. 43.2.

(3.) In granting Assistance and success in their Affairs. To prosper in our
Way requires Strength as well as Light. Not only do our Understandings want
illumination, but our Executive Powers help or assistance from God, to perform
what is incumbent on their part: without this the Wisest of men wont be able to
accomplish what they undertake. But if God be present, he girdeth his Servants
with Strength to perform their Work, so makes their Way perfect. Yea do we not
Read, That out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings God has Ordained Strength
and Praise, Psalm. 8.2. That is, Has settled a firm Foundation for his own Honor
in Accomplishing great things by weak and foolish instruments. As in Spiritual
Matters, or in Working out our Souls Salvation, We have an entire Dependence on
Him, Who works in us both to Will and to Do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.12,
13. So in all Secular Affairs, we depend on the same Power and Goodness. What
through Weakness or Wilfulness, the impotence of Man's Mind, or Disorder of his
Passions, and what through the difficult circumstances that attend his Affairs in
this World of Mutability, Nothing can be done to purpose, unless God be his
Present Help. In a word, There is no part of the Work and Business that
Providence calls us to, either in our General or Particular Callings, but what
is above, or beyond our single Strength: But if God be with us, his Grace shall
be sufficient to carry through the most Arduous and Hazardous Enterprises in the
World, and that with good Success. The Almighty God thinks it enough to say to
any Servant of his whom he calls to the most difficult Adventures, Certainly, I
will be with thee. As when Moses was sent to Deliver Israel from their Egyptian
Servitude, Exodus 3.11, 12. Moses said to God, Who am I, that I should go unto
Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the Children of Israel out of Egypt? And
God said, Certainly, I will be with thee. The like was promised to Joshua, whom
the Lord appointed to Succeed Moses as Captain General to lead the Host into
Canaan, Josh. 1.5. Be strong and of a good Courage, for as I was with Moses, so
I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. All their
Victories and Successes were owing to this Supreme Cause, viz. The Favorable
Presence of God with them, As is acknowledged, Psalm. 44.3. For they got not the
Land into Possession by their own Sword, neither did their own Arm save them;
but thy Right Hand and thine Arm, and the light of thy Countenance, because
thou had a Favor unto them. True and Real Prosperity in every Undertaking,
Business and Affair depends on this Presence and Favor of God. The Best Humane
Policy and Industry will fail without it. Holy David retiring off the Stage of
this World left this Blessing with his Advice to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.11. And
now my Son, The Lord be with thee, and Prosper thou.

These are some of the more ordinary Benefits of Gods Providential Presence
with a Person or People in way of Favor to them.

Secondly, There are yet more special Fruits of his Spiritual Presence in his
Word and Ordinances, Making them Effectual means of Enlightening, Converting,
Sanctifying and Comforting the Souls of men. But not to insist on these here: I
would only say, That all Spiritual Blessings depend more absolutely upon, and
flow more immediately from the Presence of the Lord. Having it helps men to
Live Holily, and Knowing it to Die Comfortably. If God be with us His Goodness
shall lead us to Repentance, His Correction be for our Profit, in bringing us
to partake of His Holiness: and All his Dispensations work Spiritual Good in us
and for us, as a pledge of and Preparatory to that which is Eternal. Yea, His
Rod and His Staff Comfort the Saints both Living and Dying. Whom the Shepherd
of Israel takes the Care of, he not only shows to them the Path of Life, but
will certainly bring them through Death to Life. He leads by Counsil, till he
receives to Glory, Psalm. 73.24. Making them full of Joy from his Countenance,
Act. 2.28. Darting One Beam of light on their Way, Another of Joy on their
Hearts, Both together rendering their walk through the darkest Valley of the
Shadow of Death to be Safe, and Comfortable to them that have this Presence of
God with them, and the sensible Apprehension, or Experimental Feelings thereof,
as David had, Psalm. 23.4. This is the Life of our Life, yea, it is Life in
Death, and Life after Death, even Eternal Life. Moreover, The Presence of God
makes Heaven: To have God with us is a Heaven upon Earth: and our Being with
him is the Heaven of Heaven. To Dwell for ever with that Blessed God in whose
Presence is Fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures evermore,
Psalm. 16.11.

PROPOSITION II.
It is a Signal Manifestation, or Token of the Abiding Presence of God with any
People, [and gracious Answer of Prayer,] when He does incline their Hearts, and
the Hearts of their Children to Himself, and to the Observance of his Laws.
That is, in a Word, To be Religious,

The Sum of all Religion Natural and Instituted, may be looked upon as
Comprehended under these Expressions in our Text; and when the Heart of Man,
(whereby the whole Soul is meant) Understanding, Will and Affections are so
directed and inclined, as to make choice of God himself for their last End and
chief Good, the Object of their Faith and Love, Reverence and Obedience; and
his Word as the Rule of All, then may they be said to be Religious.

There are many Religions so called, as there are God's many, and Lord's many:
but there being but One true God, there is and can be but One true Religion,
which is his Revealed Will concerning our Service to him, and Communion with
him. There is a Religion if there be a God, and but One Religion, if but One
God, whose Will is Uniform. For our Help and Guidance herein, God has not only
left us the Book of the Creature, wherein much of Himself and his Perfections
may be read: But also has given us the Book of Scripture, inspired by his own
Spirit, wherein is the Revelation of his Mind and Will; teaching us more
perfectly what he would have us to Know and Believe of him, and how we should
live in Obedience to him. Here are the Decrees, the Statutes and Ordinances of
the King of Heaven: Rules to guide us in our whole Course to our last End.

God has put a certain Law into the Creatures, which we call the Law of Nature,
in the due observance of which they attain their End, and glorify God. As the
Sun runs his Race like a Giant, yet keeps his Track to an hairs breadth. But to
Man who is a Voluntary Agent, God gives his Commands by his Word, and expects a
Voluntary Obedience thereunto, as the Way to his own Honor, and our Good. Now
our plenary and full Conformity or Subjection unto these in our whole Man, This
is to be Religious, to be Godly, to live unto God: and when it is so, God is
with us of a Truth. This is a special Fruit and Evidence of it. The Truth in
this Proposition may be illustrated by a few Particulars. Briefly,

I. That it was Necessary, for God to prescribe a Law unto us, Or, to give us
his Commandments, his Statutes and his Judgments. Whether we are considered
Apart, or with Respect to Community. Considered Apart, As a Creature, Man is
subject to the Direction of Gods Providence; but as a Reasonable Creature, he
is capable of Moral Government: This Law was at first Written on Man's Nature,
and that was sufficient while he stood in his Integrity to guide him, and
enable him to Serve and Please God in all things propounded to him. The Law
Written on the Heart of Man was both his Principle and his Rule: but that being
obliterated by the Fall, it becomes needful that God should give a New Law to
guide Man to his own Blessedness, and to keep him from Erring. Especially if
Considered in a Community. All Societies of men from the beginning of the World
have found the Establishing of Laws the only Means to preserve themselves from
Ruin; there is no other way to prevent Confusion: and would God leave that
Society which is of his own Institution, and of which He is the Head, without
Laws and Ordinances? No surely, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords Portion is his People,
therefore He will take special Care of them, and give unto them such Statutes
and Judgments, as may preserve his own Authority and Interest among them,
according to which he will reckon with them hereafter: Isa. 33.22. The Lord is
our Law giver and our Judge.

2. In those Statutes and Commandments of the Law which God has given us, we
have not only a Direction set before us, but an Obligation laid upon us. The
Word of God is not only a Rule (for Information) but a Law (for Injunction.)
It Is not only the Result of God's Wisdom, but the Effect of his Legislative
Will; He would not only instruct us in our Duty, but oblige us to perform it,
by the One showing the Equity, by the Other the Necessity of our Obedience. He
has not left us at liberty to comply with his Counsels; but has left the Charge
of his Commandments upon us.

The Moral Obligation of the Law still lies on those that are taken under the
Covenant of Grace. [There is an Eternal Obligation on the Creature to Love and
Serve the Creator, which cannot be dissolved:] We are not Redeemed from the
Service of the Law by Christ, but the Curse of the Law, Luke 1.74, 75. The End
of our Re^^^^tion was not to destroy our Service according to the Law; but to
fit and enable us to perform it according to the Image of God renewed in us,
Ephesians. 4.24. And because our Law is broader, and takes in the Gospel too (which
is the Law of Faith) We are bound to take care of all that God has given us in
Charge, even all that is Adopted into our Rule of Faith and Repentance, as well
as Moral Duties. Again, The Statutes and Commandments of the Law are immutably,
and indispensibly binding to All Men without Distinction. No Man beggeth
Exemption here, because of his Condition, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Prince or
Peasant. God does not exempt any Creature from Duty to Him, but speaks
impartially to All. Hear O Kings, Give ear O Princes, Potentates and Rulers of
the World, as well as Subjects and mean People. Yea, the higher men's Station
the greater their Obligation in many Respects. God's Law is a Royal Law, His
Statutes and His Judgments so Noble and Excellent in themselves, that we need
not be ashamed to speak of them before Kings, Psalm. 119.46. Or to Commend the
Ways of the Lord to the greatest Personages in the World. But yet,

3. The Hearts of All Men are naturally Uninclined to Obedience. Since the
first man proved a Rebel against his Maker, All his Posterity (by ordinary
Generation) are become Children of Disobedience: Are become naked and destitute
of the Image of God, not only indisposed but averse to that which is good, Romans
8.7. The carnal mind is Enmity against God, for it is not Subject to the Law of
God, nor indeed can be: it cannot because it will not. Fallen man has neither
Power nor Will to Obey God. There is both Weakness and Wilfulness in Humane
Nature, that it is not subject to the Divine Will: I mean not Created but
Corrupted Nature, qua talis, as such it cannot be reconciled to God, or
perfectly subject to his Law. It may be as to the outward material part, but
not as to the Spiritual and true intendment of it, till it be renewed. There
must be a change of Nature to bring Sinful Man into a State of Reconciliation
and Friendship with God, and to Walk in Ways of Obedience unto him, and his
Commandments, not only because injoined, but inclined, Amos 3.3.

4. This is God's Work: or it is He alone can change the Hearts of Men, turn them
from their natural Bent and Bias to the World and Sin, and incline them to
Himself and his Ways, Remove the Aversion and Prejudice of the Old Corrupt Mind
and Will, Create new light and likeing in the Soul, new Principles,
Dispositions, and Affections. This is an Effect of Almighty Power and Sovereign
Grace: of Enemies and Rebels to make Willing Obedient Subjects to the Lord. Its
called, A Day of his Glorious and Gracious Power, Psalm. 110.3. When the Heart
of Man does Surrender, and the Everlasting Doors are set open to the King of
Glory, and All the Powers within offer themselves as Volunteers, or
Voluntarinesses in his Service.

This is not brought about by Moral persuasions merely, much less by Coaction
or Violence; but Efficacious Working of the Spirit of Grace, in a manner
suitable to the Nature and Disposition of the Will, which is not destroyed, but
perfected by Grace. Now,

5. This is a Signal Manifestation of the special Presence of God with any
Person or People, when he does thus incline their Hearts unto Himself, and his
Ways. Or, A general Disposition to an Obediential Walking with God in the way
of his Commandments is a good Argument that God is and will be graciously
Present with such a People, and walk in Ways of Mercy and Loving kindness
toward them: or in a word, to Bless and Prosper them. Conversion and
Reformation are Effects and so Real Evidences of the Divine Presence and Grace,
(as the Cause is argued by the Effect:) Indeed Repentance and New-Obedience are
put into the Precept as Conditions of God's Favor and Blessing: and it is
certain, that God will be with us, but as we are with him, and walk in his
Ways. What more evident then this from the Promise and Threatening Conjunct,
declared by a Prophet of the Lord before the chief Ruler and People together, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Hear ye me Asa and all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is with you
while ye be with him, and if ye seek him he will be found of you, -- Yet not as
if our seeking God were first, or our walking in Ways of Obedience must
necessarily precede as a procuring cause of his Blessing. Alas, so Foolish and
Wicked is Fallen Man, that if God should not begin with him, he would never
begin with God. Men are so Dead in Trespasses and Sins they cannot, so
habituated and inclined to Evil, that they will not return to God and his Ways,
till he is aforehand with them. If therefore Religion be Propagated, or
Reformation brought on in the World, or any part thereof lying in Wickedness,
God is found of those that seek him not: our seeking him is a Fruit of his
first seeking us: and when the Hearts of a People are set to Serve and Obey him
by keeping his Commandments etc. its an evidence that He both is and will be
with them. When the Body of a People, especially a considerable Part of the
Rising Generation in any Place, are disposed to be Obedient and Religious, its
a manifest Token of Gods abiding Presence there. If a Peoples walking with God,
Keeping close to his Word and Ordinances, be a means to retain his Favorable
Presence among them, then the inclining of their Childrens Hearts thereunto, is
the most encouraging Token that he intends to take up his Abode in such a
Place; It speaks well concerning them for a long time to come. That the God of
their Fathers will not leave or forsake them. On the other Hand, There is not a
more Awful Token of Gods Departure from a Land, or leaving a People quite, then
when their Children are Corrupt, and a Degenerate Offspring, that regard not
their Fathers God, nor have any Heart to his Covenant and Ways. Pass we now to
the Third Proposition which follows as an Inference from the two former. Viz.

PROPOSITION III.
That the most Desirable Blessing which can be asked or wished for, and
pronounced upon any People under Heaven (as a Fruit and Evidence of the Divine
Presence with, and Favor toward them) is, that the God of Heaven would
incline their Hearts, and the Hearts of their Children to Himself, to Walk in
his Ways, to Keep his Commandments, his Statutes, and his Judgments.

As it is the clearest and surest Evidence of Gods Presence, so it is the
choicest and best instance of his Favor. It Is an eminent Fruit of Election, and
actual Fulfilling of the Covenant of Grace: Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 36.26. They that
find the Law written in their Hearts, may conclude their Names are written in
Heaven, and that they are some of Gods peculiar Favorites. Outward Prosperity
is no sign of special Favor. Indeed, it is no certain sign at all that God is
with a People in Way of Favor, merely because he makes them Prosperous in
Outward things, gives them Power to get Wealth, and heap up Riches or Earthly
Treasure in Abundance, Suffers to live at Ease and Enjoy temporal Felicity;
There may be a Woe belonging to them, and coming upon them for all this. But
when he inclines them to be Religious, directs them in his ways, gives Power
and Will to Obey him in all things. This argues not only a Providential, but
Spiritual Presence of God with such a People. It Is an infallible Evidence of his
special love and good will toward them. For, As the inclination of the Heart
is necessary to Obedience, so is Hearty Obedience unto Happiness, Temporal and
Eternal. Not only the Heart, but an inclined Heart is necessary to true and
acceptable Obedience to God. The Heart must be framed and set Godward, or it
will be impossible to yield a cheerful, uniform and constant Obedience to him:
But that being once well inclined twill influence and draw the whole Man after
it; For the Heart is the Spring of motion that sets all the wheels a working:
If God has that, he will have all. Thus the New Heart proves the greatest
Blessing of the New Covenant, as a Fruit of Grace and Fountain of Obedience.

Moreover, Thus to Obey God from the Heart, is the only way to please him, and
what surer way to prosper in every thing, since that wholly depends on his good
will and pleasure. The observance of Gods Laws, Counsels and Commands as the
Rules of our living, is undoubtedly the way to live well and fare well in this
World and the next. Hence, All the Remaining Proof of the Doctrine, may be had
from Consideration of the manifold great Advantages and Benefits of walking
with God, in a Religious Observance of his holy Laws and Commands, with the
manifold great Mischiefs and Miseries of the contrary course considered as we
go along.

First, If we consider Man singly and in a Private Capacity, The Religious
Observance of Gods Laws and Commandments, conduces much to the Happiness of
every One, even in this Life, and that both as to the Inward and Outward Man:
In the light and enlargment of their Understanding, Peace of their Minds and
Consciences, Bodily Health, Honor, and Estate. The contrary tends as much to
their Hurt in all these. How much it concerns Private Persons to be Religious
and Obedient, The Wise Preacher has told us in a Word; when he says, It Is the
whole of Man, Eccl. 12.13. This is as much a Truth now as it was then, that to
fear God and keep his Commandments is the All, the whole of Man; The whole of
his Duty and the whole of his Felicity.

Secondly, The Laws, Statutes and Judgments of God are wonderfully fitted for
the benefit of Humane Society: And the observance of them every way necessary
and advantageous to the Public Happiness and Prosperity of Nations, as well as
of private Persons.

I. The Matter of these Commandments respects either Law or Gospel. That which
is strictly called the Moral Law or Decalogue is a fit Rule for a wise God to
give, and a Rational Creature to receive: A just Admeasurement of our Duty to
God and man. The World cannot be without it. To God, that we should love Him,
serve Him, depend upon Him, and delight in Him, worshipping of Him at the Time,
in the ways and manner appointed by Himself. To Man, Justice and Charity, or
Mercy, Mic. 6.8. In the Gospel, we have likewise, this excellent Abridgment of
our duty by the Apostle, Tit. 2.12. Which teaches, That denying Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present
World. Now, both the moral and Evangelical Precepts of Gods Word are suited to
promote the Public interest of Nations as well as the Private interest of
single Persons. This would most evidently appear by a Supposition of the
contrary. Suppose a Reverse of all that God has commanded concerning the
embracing of Virtue and Shunning of Vice: if he should free men from those Laws
which himself has most Solemnly Enacted, leave them to their own choice: or
suppose Establish the contrary, Forbid us all Respect to himself, Commanding us
to Worship false Gods, Transform, and misrepresent his Glory by Images, Fall
down before Stocks and Stones, Blaspheme his Name continually, and Despise all
those glorious Attributes which do so clearly shine forth in the Creation; If
he had Commanded us to be impious to our Parents, to fill the World with
Murders, Adulteries, Robberies, to pursue others with Slanders and false
Witnesses, to court and take away what is another man's, Wife, Ox, or Ass, House
or Land, Servant or Child, surely the Heart of Man cannot allow such a Conceit.
Nay the fiercest Beasts would abhor it if capable of such an impression; If
Lusts and Intemperance, Fraud, Rapine, and Violence were enjoined or but
Tolerated, what a World would it soon be? Humane Societies would presently fly
in pieces, and all Mankind necessarily fall into a state of War and Confusion;
But now our Wise and Good God has taken care to prevent these mischievous evils
to Men, by interdicting all manner of Sin and Vice on the severest Penalty,
Establishing the contrary practice of Piety and Virtue by a Law. Yea all things
required herein, are at least, materially fitted for the good of Humane
Societies.

II. The actual Observance of these good Laws, Statutes and Commands, is both
necessary and effectual to the Public Welfare of Mankind. It Is not enough to
have them and know them; but it is the doing of Gods will therein which makes
blessed. Blessed Nations or Societies of People, as well as Happy Souls of
particular Persons. The Decrees and Ordinances of Heaven were made and
Published for this end to be observed; not only to be heard and contemplated
but reduced unto Practice. And it is practical Obedience which makes way for the
Blessing of Heaven to any persons or people upon Earth.

I. This is Necessary. And that both Ex Necessitate Praecepti, and Medji. (I)
Praecepti, God has strictly charged the people whom he has favored with his
word, that they diligently observe and do all things which he has Commanded,
and abstain from whatsoever he has forbidden, Deuteronomy. 5.1. (2) Medij, as a means
to Happiness. National as well as Personal, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness Exalts
a Nation: But sin is the Reproach of any People. Righteousness taken in the
Latitude of it, for the whole of Religion (as sometimes in Scripture it is)
comprehending all Divine Humane and Social Virtues, has a natural tendency to
promote Public Happiness. On the contrary, Sin and Wickedness does in its own
Nature produce many Public mischiefs and miseries. But this will be further
shown under the other branch of the particular.

2. There is a certain Efficacy as well as Necessity of walking in ways of
Obedience to Gods holy Laws and Commands. These are propounded in form of a
Covenant, to which promises and threatenings are annexed: That it shall go well
or ill with a people according as they Observe or Neglect these. It is a
Doctrine not long since commended to us from this Desk on like Occasion. That
such People and Places as profess Christian Religion, may expect to be Happy or
Miserable according as it goes with them as to Holiness and Righteousness. That
is, As to the observance of the Duties belonging to the First or Second Table
of Gods Law, or their Neglect of them. Thus it fared with the Nation and Church
of Israel, whilst they were with God in the ways of Duty, God was wont to be
with them in the ways of Mercy, to bless and prosper them. But when they
forsook God, and walked contrary to him, his way was to forsake and walk
contrary to them: when it was their Way to grieve him with their impieties and
iniquities, it was his Way to vex them with Various adversities. This the
Scripture declares to be the settled course of Gods Providence, that a
Righteous Nation shall be happy, and that a Wicked People shall be punished
even in this Life. The experience of all Ages has made it good. All along the
History of the Old Testament, we find the interchangeable Providence of God
toward the People of Israel always suited to their manners. which things
happened to them for ensamples, and are recorded for our instruction on whom the
Ends of the World are come, 1. Cor. 10.11. And though God in the Administrations
of his justice be not tied up to Precedents, nor can we argue from Scripture
examples that the Providence of God toward other Nations, shall in all
Circumstances be conformable to his dealings with the Jews: yet thus much may
with great Probability be collected from them, that as He always blessed that
People while they were obedient to him, and followed them with Judgments when
they rebelled against him, so he will also deal with other Nations, Because the
reason of those Dispensations as to the main and substance of them seems to be
Perpetual and founded in that which can never change. viz. The invariable
justice of the Divine Providence. Indeed as to particular Persons, the
Providence of God are Promiscuously administered in this World. So that no man
can certainly conclude His love or hatred by any thing that befalls him in this
life. But God does not deal thus with Nations, because (as a late Learned
PRIMATE of our Nation observes) Public Bodies and Communities of men as such
can only be rewarded and punished in this World; for in the Next, all those
Societies and combinations wherein Men are now linkt together under their
several Governments shall be dissolved. God will not reward or Punish Nations
then as Nations, but every Man shall give an Account of himself to God, and
receive his own Reward, or bear his own Burden: But this being the only Season
for National Rewards and Punishments, it seems Reasonable and necessary in
some degree, for a present Vindication of the Honor and Majesty of the Divine
Laws, that a People should be prosperous or afflicted, according as their
general Obedience or Disobedience thereto appears.

III. A Cordial respect; to God and his Ways; that is, Godliness or true
Religion in the Heart not only Obliges but Disposes all sorts of Persons to an
actual Observance of all such things, as tend to the Public Interest and
Happiness of the Communities which they belong unto, or to a Conscientious
discharge of the Duties belonging to them in their several Places and
Relations. Wherever the Fear of God (which is the beginning of Wisdom, the
Principle of all Religion) is truly Planted, that certainly lays the greatest
Obligation on Conscience to all Civil Offices and Moral Duties: and likewise
will have the greatest influence on the whole Behavior of Men one toward
another, as well as toward GOD himself

Particularly,

I. It Is of great use in the Government of Humane Societies, by its influence
both on Governors and Governed; Causing the One to Rule well, and the other to
Obey for Conscience sake. This Distinction of Men is of Divine Ordination, Romans
13.1. The Powers that be are Ordained of God. The Testimonies of the Lord
prescribe the Duty of both. (I.) Of Governors or Rulers, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that
Rules over men must be just, Ruling in the fear God, Where is a Word belonging
to either Table, Fear of God in the first; and Justice in the second. The one
influential to the other. Hence Joseph assured his Brethren, he should be just
to them on this Argument, For I Fear God, Genesis 42.18. Nehemiah did not imbeazle
or convert the Public Treasures to his private use (as some other Governors
had done before,) Neh. 5.15 But so did not I, because of the Fear of God. Yea
this Principle settled in the Heart not only preserves from any Wickedness
against God, and Unrighteousness against Men; but promotes all acts of Love and
Charity toward Men, as well as Piety and Devotion toward God. (2.) For the
Governed. The Word of God interposeth express Rules for their Obedience, and
true respect to God not only Obliges but Disposes to observe them. And also to
Submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors as those that are sent by him: For so is the
Will of God, 1 Pet. 2.15. There are many Arguments why we should Reverence and
Obey Magistrates, but the Supreme reason is, The Will of God. The chief Ruler
was then an Enemy to Religion when this Commandment was given forth, even then
when that part of the World, in which the Church was Seated, was under the
Command of Nero, whose universal Wickedness and particular cruelty against the
Christians might provoke them to disobedience; yet then, God said, Obey and
that not for Wrath, or fear of the Rulers Power only, which is but a loose
Principle of Obedience, and will cease when ever men can Rebel with safety and
to advantage; But out of Conscience, which is a firm, constant and lasting
Principle, that will hold man fast, when all other obligations will break. A
true Christian is not to be tempted from his Obedience and Subjection by any
Worldly considerations, because he believes, That whosoever resists Authority
resists the Ordinance of God, and that they who resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation, Romans 13.2.

Thus Religion or Godliness is the best Friend to Government, and when
Governors and Governed are Faithful in observing and discharging their
respective Duties, it is a considerable Evidence that God is with such a People
in a Way of Favor: That they shall live long in the Land which he has given
them, and be prosperous, Exodus 20.12.

2. It tends to promote the Public Happiness and Welfare, as it obliges and
disposes Men carefully and conscienciously to observe all the Rules of Civil
Conversation, Society and Commerce together. To keep Truth inviolably in all
their Words, Promises, and Contracts; To be just and honest in all their
Dealings one with another; Peaceable and Loving one toward another: Avoiding
all Strife and Contention, Seeking to Advance each others interest as their
own, and preferring the Public to a Private. Were Men once inclined to live as
Religion does require the whole World would soon become a quiet Habitation, yea
a most lovely and desirable place to what now it is. Solomon having a true
Comprehension of the vast benefit of a Religious Disposition, Summed up all his
Wishes for himself and People in this one: The Lord be with us, and incline our
Hearts to Himself and His Ways. He knew full well, This was the surest way for
himself to be Happy in the Government of such a People, whose Loyalty and Good
Obedience to him was Secured by Principles of Conscience, and for them to be
Happy under the Reign of such a Prince, in whose Heart the Fear of God bare the
chiefest Sway.

APPLICATION.
I. LEt us see what cause of Thankfulness for what of this Blessing is enjoyed
by our Nation and our Selves, or the People in this Land. God has blessed the
Nation with a Gracious QUEEN, whose Heart has not only been inclined to Favor
Religion, but engaged to Defend and Promote the interest of it. Her Royal
PROCLAMATION for Preventing and Punishing all Vice, Immorality and Profaneness,
put forth soon after Her Accession to the Throne, was a Public Expression of
it: Wherein all sorts of Persons are Excited to the due Observance of all
Divine (as well as Humane) Laws, Statutes, and Commands, as they tender God's
Honor, the Queen's Favor, and their own Welfare: Besides other gracious Acts
of late. Likewise the Reforming Societies in our Nation, or the Combination of
Christians of every Rank, Quality, and Order, to Advance Piety and Virtue, and
bear Testimony against all that is contrary thereunto in themselves and others;
the continuance of their Pious Resolution, Success of their Endeavors, and
Progress in the Work of Reformation are hopeful signs (at least) that God is
not about to leave the Nation yet, wherein, notwithstanding the Atheism, and
Irreligion of some, the Apostasy and Declension of others, May it not (without
Prejudice to Truth, and then why not without Offense to the World) be said,
That there is yet more of true Religion and Godliness [in that Land of our
Fore-Fathers] than in any such spot of Earth on the Globe besides! And has not
the God of Glory appeared Wonderfully with them and for them, in his Favorable
Providence, though not without some sore Rebukes thereof!

Indeed New England has great Reason of Thanksgiving to God also: though none at
all of Boasting in her self, for what of Religion is to be found here. It was a
strong inclination to God and his Ways in the Heart of our Fathers, and
Predecessors that first drew them into this Wilderness: They were generally Men
Eminent in Piety and Virtue, that Settled this Country, and Served their
Generation here according to the Will of God, with much Faithfulness and Zeal
for the Glory of God and good of Posterity. God was wonderfully with them, in
his Ordinances and in his Providence, Wrought wonderfully for them and by
them, in laying of Foundations here: and with their immediate Successors in
carrying on the Work so happily begun in their Days. We are now for the
greatest Part of the Third and Fourth Generation of them that Loved God, and
followed him into a Land that was not Sown: and though we have too generally left
that First Love, yet God has not left the Land, (Blessed be his Name,) But we
still see His goings among us, in ways of Mercy as well as Judgment: and cannot
without Impiety and Ingratitude omit to mention in way of Thankfulness and
Praise to God, what we now behold and enjoy of his Divine Presence and Favor,
both in Foro and in Templo, yea may I not add also in Campo.

This Land is yet blessed with a Religious Magistracy and Zealous Ministry, and
the body of the People may in the judgment of Charity be reckoned True
Christians, or such in Reality as well as in Profession. The Glory of all which
as it is only owing, so ought to be ascribed to the Riches of Divine Grace and
Goodness; that notwithstanding the great Decay of Piety, and Defect of good
Manners among us, to be Confessed, Bewailed, and Mourned over: God has not left
New England (as in just judgment he might) to a general Violation of his
Covenant, or Apostasy from his Ways. And though he has visited our Transgression
of his Laws with a Rod, and our Iniquity with Stripes, yet we trust he has not
taken away his Loving kindness from us, nor will suffer his Faithfulness to
fail toward us. There is yet much of his Spiritual Presence and influences of
Grace afforded to some in every Order, Rank and Quality, both in Church and
State. And likewise the Favorable Providence of God in many Public instances
thereof has been, and is yet extended to the Country in general; which calls
for Public and general Acknowledgments. As the Health, Plenty and Quiet of
this last year in the Land; Freedom from Epidemical Diseases, Pinching
Necessities, and Outrage of barbarous Eenemies. The continuance of our Civil
and Ecclesiastical Liberties, with abundance of other Mercies and Blessings. It
is true our Civil Liberties and Privileges are not just the same that
sometimes they have been; yet it is better with us on that Account than we
deserve, and than others no worse deserving than our selves Enjoy. Our Church
State is the same as at first. We have never been interrupted, not imposed upon
as to Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline. Indeed our Uneasiness and Discontent
under the best Civil Government is the likeliest means to procure a Change for
the worse. Our Unthankfulness for, and Unfruitfulness under Gospel Privileges
(so highly valued in our Fathers days,) do threaten us more than anything with
the loss thereof, or with a Curse instead of a Blessing: Which calls to see and
consider,

II. What cause of Grief and Mourning on this Account, or for Want of this most
desirable and comfortable Fruit and Evidence of Gods Presence and Favor. Is
it not to be Confessed and Lamented that God is not so with us, as he was with
our Fathers? And are there not too many fearful Symptoms of his further
withdrawing, if not utterly leaving us? Among which this is none of the least,
That He seems to loosen the Reins of Government, and leave men to themselves,
their own Counsels and Ways: when instead of Converting Grace to incline them
to all manner of Obedience, they have not so much as Restraining Grace to
prevent any Sin and Wickedness, they have a mind to. Nay does not the Bent and
Byas of this Generation seem to be much Set, not unto God, his Statutes,
Ordinances and Ways, but some to one Vanity or way of Wickedness, and some to
another, according to their different Constitutions, or Inclinations of
corrupted Nature, Customs, Companions, and Temptations; so that there is scarce
any sort of impiety and iniquity but may be seen to Be and Abound in the midst
of us. Now what greater cause of Sorrow and Lamentation! If mere Unregeneracy,
or want of an Hearty inclination to God and Godliness be so Lamentable a State,
how much worse is it, when the Hearts of the Children of men are fully let in
them to do Wickedly! The more common this is in any Place, the more cause of
Mourning.

III. The Doctrine calls upon us to do all we can in our several Stations and
Capacities, to Retain what of this Blessing is Enjoyed, and to Obtain what is
wanting.

First, It earnestly calls on those that are now the Fathers of the Country,
Political and Spiritual Fathers, to engage their Hearts in this Work. Both the
Temporal and Spiritual Welfare and Prosperity of these their Children and
People must needs lie very near the Hearts of all such: Both Nature and Grace
obliges such to the utmost expression of an affectionate concern for them, and
exercise of their Paternal Care for their good on every account.

I. Our Political Fathers in the Commonwealth are hereby called upon, to do
their utmost to engage the Presence of God with themselves and us, to maintain
the honor of Religion, and promote the Observance of all his Laws, Statutes
and Judgments among us, by their Example and Authority; as knowing how much
their own and the Public Happiness depends thereon. Magistrates as men, are
equally concerned with others to have respect to all Gods Commandments; for
they stand on the same level before him who has no respect of Persons in
Commanding, Judging or Rewarding, Job 34.19. As men, they are as much concerned
to understand the way of Pleasing, Glorifying and Enjoying God, as their
meanest Subjects: Yea, the higher their Station, the greater their obligation,
even as men, 2 San. 12.7, 8, 9. As Magistrates and Rulers, they have great need
to be acquainted with Gods Testimonies, that they may understand their Place
and Duty, that they may be carried through their cares, fears and snares; that
they may have success, and find acceptance. The way for such to Rule wisely and
prosperously, is in all their Government and Administrations, to have respect
to Gods Word, and keep close to that. This counsel and encouragement the Lord
himself gives to Joshua, Josh. 1.8. The Book of the Law shall not depart out of
thy mouth, but thou shall meditate thereon day and night, that thou may
observe to do according to all that is written therein; For then shall thou
make thy way prosperous, and thou shall then have good success. So David to
Solomon, 1 King. 2.3. Thus self interest obliges Rulers as well as others to be
Religious, and Observant of Gods Commands themselves; But Duty obliges further,
viz. to consult the good of the People under them.

(I.) By being thus good Examples to them, both of Piety and Morality, or of
all holy and virtuous carriages; this will have a mighty influence to draw
others to the like practice.

(2.) By exercising their Authority; who are first Gods Subjects, then his
Officers, Romans 13.4. Ministers of God for good to the people. Much good may a
Godly Magistracy do to promote the religious interest of a people, as well as
those of a civil and secular nature and concern. By defending and maintaining
their Spiritual Privileges, speaking comfortably to those that teach the good
Knowledge of the Lord (as good Hezekiah did) and providing suitable
encouragement for those that attend the Service of Gods House. Also by
Restraining, Suppressing and Punishing the Transgressors of his Law. Though the
hearts of men are not in the hands of these Earthly Gods (as the Scripture
styles Magistrates) nor can they change their natural inclinations and wills;
yet may do a great service by correcting their manners and ways. And External
Obedience or Conformity to Gods Law, is much better than none, especially as to
the Public. Though Hypocrisy is a great wickedness; and in some sense it is a
truth, That Simulata sanctites est duplex iniquitas: Dissembled Holiness is a
double wickedness: Be sure, it is very odious to God, yet not of so pernicious
example to the World, as open Profaneness and Disobedience. Hypocrisy (as one
says) shows some Reverence to Religion and the Ways of God, does so far
acknowledge the excellency hereof, as to own it deserves to be counterfeited;
whereas Profaneness and Immorality declare openly against it, and endeavor to
make a Party to drive it out of the Land and World. Indeed, it is a matter of
great difficulty to Reduce a Degenerate People, to bring them generally to
outward Reformation; yet that is the least which is necessary to save them from
Public Ruin, and the least that Pious Rulers will design and endeavor to
accomplish. If such would heartily join to do all they can, by their Laws and
Examples, doubtless they would prevail much; and if they cannot effect all they
would, God will take it well, that it was in their hearts, and likewise Reward
their Endeavors.

May it therefore Please Your Excellency!

The God of New England, [Our Fathers God and Ours] We trust had a Kindness and
Favor for us, as well as Delight in You, SIR, When by His Providence he called
Home, and Exalted a Person of such singular Worth, Wisdom and Goodness to the
Place of Chief Rule and Government over us. Our Observation and Experience of
the Good Hand of the Lord which has been with You hitherto, Protecting,
Directing, Assisting and Succeeding in the managing of our Public Affairs,
confirms that belief; calls for a most grateful Acknowledgment thereof; and
encourages us to Hope as well as Pray, that God will be with you still, that
your Bow shall abide in strength, against all opposition; and the Arms of Your
Hands be made stronger and stronger, by the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob,
who shall bless Your Person and Government, continue You as a Public Blessing
to these Provinces.

And will Your Excellency give us leave to expect, as from a Person so
admirably accomplished for the exercise of Government in general, so familiarly
acquainted with the circumstances of our particular State, Humor and Interest,
Duties, Dangers and Dependancies, so many ways Related to, and interested with
us, a proportionable Zeal for the Honor of God and Religion; a greater
forwardness to lay out such excellent Talents, and improve such singular
Advantages for the Good of the Lords People, Temporal and Spiritual, than in
reason we could expect from any other, not so qualified or obliged.

As for those Honorable Persons that are, or may be Chosen this Day, and
called to Assist His Excellency in Council, or any other parts of Government;
it is the just expectation of those by whom ye are Chosen nextly or more
remotely, that in all things you will sincerely design and endeavor to promote
their Safety and Welfare. And whereas the interest of this People is chiefly a
Religious Interest; and it is likely to fare with us on other accounts as it
goes with Religion among us. Our great dependence under God is upon your
Honors Religious Care to see such things as are provoking to him in the Land
reformed; and that such things as he requires in order to a being pleased with
us; and prospering of us, be observed. And if any thing further can be done to
encourage and promote the liberal Education of the Youth in the Country,
whereby Learning and good Manners may be upheld; it will be a very great
Service to the Interest of Church and State, both in the Present and Succeeding
Generation. We therefore beseech your Honors in your Wisdom to meditate it,
and by your Authority to establish a method for it.

Those Worthy Gentlemen that Represent the People of this Province in a General
Assembly, and who have called me (the unworthiest and unfittest of all the
Lords Servants in the Ministry) to speak on such an Occasion as this, must bear
with me, if now I take the freedom to say, you are indeed betrusted with a very
great Power of Liberty and Privilege from the People you represent, (as well
as from GOD and the QUEEN) to have a Hand in Choosing so many of their principal
Rulers for them: To consent and concur in the making of those Laws by which
they shall be Ruled; and to the laying of all Public Taxes upon them. What you
do in these matters, (which are all of very great concernment) the People are
obliged to stand to. Are not you therefore obliged to use utmost Prudence and
Conscience in all? Your Wisdom and Fidelity, both are consided in, with
reference to these things; That you Elect such only into the Council, as upon
good grounds you may judge to be Men that Fear GOD, and Honor the QUEEN, and
will be true to the best interest of this People, both in Spirituals and in
Temporals. That then you concur with them in any further Acts of Legislation
necessary to promote the Interests of Holiness, Justice and Peace in our Land.
That you lay not unnecessary Burdens of Charge on the People, considering their
deep Poverty; Nor yet be unwilling to expend and lay out what is necessary to
Defend the Country, this Principal Town, the Life, Liberties and Estates of the
People in it: And likewise to support the Government Honorably; I mean with
the double Honor and due Respect, and Maintenance or Reward.

2. Our Spiritual Fathers in the Churches cannot choose but be Desirous above
all other things to see their Children Walking in the Truth, and Ways of God,
from a Hearty inclination thereunto. They greatly long for this Fruit of their
Ministerial Labors, and Prayers: and to leave this Pledge of the Lords Abiding
Presence with their Successors. I presume not to Direct or Counsel our Reverend
Elders in any Case, but rather Entreat them as Fathers, and ask their Prayers
and Blessings for my self and Brethren of the Younger Generation: Particularly,
This Blessing in our Text, That the God of our Fathers, even your God may be
our God, and that he would be with us, as he has been and is with you,
according to the Gospel Charter, or special Promise of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Matt. 28.20. And help us to abide Faithful with Him both as Christians and as
Ministers, Endeavoring to Keep the Truths of God inviolate, which we have
received, and to hand them down along to Posterity. To Keep the Worship of God
and his Ordinances Pure and Incorrupt, and to promote the Sincere Conversion of
Men as well as their outward Reformation. Restraining Grace is not sufficient,
but Regeneration is nenessary to Salvation. This is Gods Work, but we may happily
be instrumental to it: By Teaching the Nature and Necessity of CONVERSION,
Making that the Principal Subject of our Ministry or Doctrine. By Being or
Setting Examples of Holy and Righteous, Peaceable and Charitable Walking: By
incessant Prayers to God for his Victorious Grace, to Change the Hearts of Men,
and cause them to Walk in his Statutes. This is Gods Covenant with his People,
and Ministers as Advocates must put the Promise in suit for them.

Secondly, This Doctrine speaks to the Body of the People. Several things,

I. It calls to the Hearty Exercise of the Forementioned Affections, Joy and
Grief, or to Thanksgiving and Mourning, according to the different occassions
for them.

(I.) New England may yet Rejoice in the Lord, and Joy in the God of her
Salvation: He that is the God of Salvation is our God, and is in the midst of
us. Let us Admire and Adore his Goodness in not leaving of us after so many
Days and Years of Provocation. Be exceeding Thankful for what of his Gracious
Presence and the Fruits of it is seen and enjoyed. Thankfulness for a Little,
is the way to have More, at least, to have that continued and Blessed unto us.
Were the People of the Country generally more sensible of and affected with the
Goodness of God in respect of that Government we are under, and the Gracious
Appearances of God with our Honorable GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, in the good
Conduct and Succesful Management of our Public Affairs, Particularly,
respecting the War; I say, were the Favor of Heaven in this regard more
thankfully acknowledged, it would be a probable Means to have the Tranquillity
of our State Prolonged, and other Blessings added: Prove. 28.2. When as for the
Transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes and Rulers thereof, (either
together contending for Supremacy, or successively by frequent Changes,) But by
a man of Understanding and Knowledge, the State thereof shall be prolonged.
Moreover, If the Churches and People of New England were more Thankful for the
Gospel, and Kingdom of our Glorious LORD, that is yet Visible therein, for the
Liberty of their Religion and free Exercise of it, without Subscribing to New
Articles of Faith, Worship or Discipline, and had Wisdom and Grace rightly to
improve it, they would certainly see more of the blessed Fruits thereof.
Blessed be God for what appearance there is of the Power of Godliness, for such
a Number of those whose Hearts are toward Him, and whose endeavor is to Walk
in his ways, to Keep his Commandments, his Statutes and his Judgments.

(2.) But New England ought also to Mourn for what is wanting of this Blessing.
Does iniquity abound in the Country, and the Love of many (in the Churches) wax
Cold, and Professors of Christianity allow themselves in many great
Immoralities? This argues Gods withdrawing, and may provoke to a leaving of us,
unless it be generally lamented by us. This Duty indeed does chiefly concern
Public Persons, though it lies upon all Christians, Magistrates, Ministers, and
other Officers of Church, and State. Public Persons must have Public
Affections as well as Relations. They are more Responsible to God than others,
and more concerned in the Sins of the Land and Places where they have a Charge
than others. Among Private Persons, a Householder is more Responsible than a
Private Member of the Family for any Disorders, and so proportionably in
greater and more Public Societies. Now this is the Disposition as well as Duty
of such as are truly Godly, to grieve and mourn for the Sins of the Age, and
Place they live in, and for the number of Transgressors: Psalm. 119.136. David
says, I beheld the Transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy
Word. So Jeremiah Weeps in Secret for the Pride and obstinacy of that
Generation. Fit instances for the Christian Magistrate and Minister. But this
is not enough: Except the Body of the People do lay to heart the Sins of the
Times, there is little ground to expect better Times, or that they will
continue as they are, but grow worse and worse, more Sinful, and more Miserable
still.

2. As the Doctrine thus applied to our present mixed Condition, calls for the
Exercise of these different Affections; So to stir up Our Selves to Take hold
on God, that we may retain his Presence, and receive his Blessings. The Prophet
complains of an Universal Neglect hereof in his time, Isa. 64.7. There is none
that stirs up himself to take hold on thee: The People were Pining away in
their Sins and Misery, by reason of the Lords Absence, or Departure from them;
the ground of his leaving them was their not laying hold of him, and want of
stirring up themselves the Cause of that Neglect. Is not this too much our
Case? Indeed the Abounding of Sin is that which first provokes the Lord to take
up thoughts of Departing; but it is for want of our Taking Hold of Him, that He
actually leaves and goes away: Not that He is over-forward to take Occasion for
it. It Is said, He does not willingly afflict or grieve the Children of men, Lam.
3.33. Much less leave and forsake his own Children and People. Nay, instead of
this, There is great Backwardness, and Lothness in God, (speaking after the
manner of Men:) Hos. 11.8. He says, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall
I deliver thee O Israel? Yet the Lord expects to be invited and urged to carry,
or return if going: that the Faithful among his People lay hold of Him, and not
let him go quite. As the Spouse did, Gant. 3.4. I held him, and would not let
him go, till I brought him into my Mothers House. God seemed to shake off Jacob
as willing to be rid of him; but when he would not let him go, He stays to
Bless him, Genesis 32.26. Afterward the Lord was taking his final leave of
Israel, if Moses had not laid strong Hands upon him, Exodus 32.10, 11. But that
Prevented. Does the Lord threaten to leave New England, to give over his Work
here? and cannot She find her Hands at such a time, or has She no Heart to lay
hold on Him? This were a more fearful Symptom of being forsaken than any other.
Oh! Let us stir up our selves and one another to take hold of the Lord our God!
And what other Hold of God have we but his Covenant? what have we to do with
him in any other way? or what Expectation from him? Is this Immanuels Land? Are
we the People of the Lord? Has he any special right and interest in us? This is
the ground of his Care for our Safety and Welfare, and chief Argument for us to
plead with Him. Thus David Personally, Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, Save me. This
the People of Israel insisted on, Isa. 6.9. Behold, see we beseech thee, We are
all thy People. More Expressly still, Jer. 14. O Lord, Though our iniquities
Testify against us, and our Backslidings are many: We have Sinned against thee,
O thou Hope of Israel and Savior thereof in times of Trouble, why should
thou be as a Stranger in our Land. Yet thou art in the midst of us, and we are
called by thy Name, leave us not, Remember and break not thy Covenant with us.
Especially when we ask for this peculiar Blessing thereof, Jer. 31.18. Turn us
and we shall be turned, Convert us, and we shall be Converted; for thou art the
Lord our God. But we must Repent of our Covenant breaking with him, Acknowledge
our Unfaithfulness to the Lord, Renew Covenant again, and Return to our Duty
and Fidelity. In order where-unto we must let go our Idols. God never departs
till there be another taken in with Him, or set up by him to crowd him out: and
God will not continue or ever return, unless these Idols be cast away, Ezekiel.
14.3, 5. One of the chief of them is the World, or our great Heart Idolatry, is
Coveteousness, Isa. 57.17. God. 3.5. But be it Pride, Sensuality, Intemperance,
or whatever else, it must be put away, or it is in vain to Confess we have Sinned
against God in vain to Cry, Lord Leave us not: Jacob took Effectual care to
Purge his Family of their Idols, and buried them under an Oak which was by
Shechem, when going up to Bethel to pay his former Vows to the Lord that
appeared to him, answered him in his Distress, and was with him in the Way
whither he went, Genesis 35. beginning.

3. This Doctrine calls us to Prayer, to be much in Prayer, (in our Courts and
Church Assembles, in our Families and Closets;) and in our Prayers to make this
our chief Request, That God would incline our Hearts to Himself and his Ways.
Is this the most Desirable Blessing in it self? Let us make it the chief Object
of our Desires, for our selves and ours. We should not be content without this
Evidence of Gods Presence, and instance of his Favor, whatever external
Symbols and Tokens of it we may enjoy, through his Merciful good Providence: But
be urgent and instant in Asking for the Spirit of Grace, and influences
thereof, to make us an humble and Obedient People: our Land an Habitation of
Justice, and Mountain of Holiness; that so our God may take Delight to dwell in
the midst of us. And would we have the Benefits of this Abiding Presence of God
Entailed to Posterity, and our Children also to Keep his Commandments, his
Statutes and his Judgments, We must Cry mightily to that God who performs all
things for us and (...), and has Promised this in Answer to Prayer, as in Ezekiel.
36.26, 27, 37. Prayer indeed is the most approved Medium to obtain any Blessing
from the Lord, and especially in the Case before us. For, Except God make bare
his Arm, and Exert the Power of Sovereign Grace, all means will be ineffectual
here. LAWS of Magistrates, Counsel and Advice of Ministers, Parents, Masters,
Tutors, all to no purpose without this. Nor will the Providence of God effect
this change: Neither Mercies nor Judgments will bring an Unconverted People to
Reformation. They will not so much as Frame their Doings to turn unto the Lord,
much less will the Hearts of any be inclined and engaged to his Service,
without the effectual Working of his mighty Spirit, which alone subdueth all
things to Himself.

4. Do we all or generally concur with this Pious Wish or Prayer of Solomon,
That the God of our Fathers would be with us as he was with them, to the same
End and Effect; Then let us concur in an Endeavourous Resolution to Be with
God, and Walk with him as our Fathers were and did. We must inclined our Ears
to his Voice, that he may incline our Hearts unto his ways. Yea this also is
our Duty, though it be Gods work. Hence Joshua Exhorts the People thereto, Josh.
24 23. Incline your Hearts to the Lord God of Israel. And David professes thus
of himself, Psalm. 119.112. I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes
always. This don't imply any Coordinate operation in us with God, in the Work of
Grace; but only our Subservient Endeavors in the pursuing of it. God begins
with his preventing Grace, and the Soul follows the impressions left upon it.
Turn me and I shall be turned, was the Prophet Jeremiahs Prayer; and agreeable
hereto was the Apostle Paul's Exhortation, Work, for it is God that works in
you, both the Will and the Deed, the first inclination, and the Actual
Accomplishment. It Is Certain that we Do what we Do, though God causes us to Do
it, according to that of Austin: Certum est nos facere quod facimus, sed Deus
facit ut faciamus.

Finally, Here is a Call to the Uprising Generation. Whom I refer to those
Excellent Elaborate Treatises on that particular Subject Extant among you.
Beseeching you carefully to Observe the Rules and Motives commonly given in
them: Only thus much in general. Be Exceeding careful to avoid every thing that
may provoke God to Deny you his Presence: and as careful to Do all that has any
tendency to engage it with you. Trusting in the Mercy of God, Which is from
Everlasting to Everlasting upon them that Fear him; and His Righteousness which
is unto Childrens Children, to such as keep his Covenant, and Remember his
Commandments to Do them, Psalm. 103.17, 18.

FINIS.

