MONICA Americana.

A Funeral-SERMON, Occasioned by the DEATH of Mrs. Sarah Leveret, (Once the
Honorable CONSORT of JOHN LEVERET Esquire. GOVERNOR of the Massachuset-Colony,
NEW ENGLAND,) Who changed Earth for Heaven. ^ d. 11 m. 1704.

With an ELEGY upon her Memory.

Mulierculae istae Lacrymis Suis caelum nobis praeripiunt.

Augustine. of his Mother Monica. BOSTON: Printed for Samuel Phillips, at the
Brick Shop. 1705.

Female Piety Exemplified. In a Funeral-SERMON, on the DEATH of Mrs. SARAH
LEVERET. BOSTON. Thursday 4 d. 11 m. 1704, 5.
Luke X. 42. MARY has Chosen that Good Part, that shall not be taken away from
her.


BUT has this Pious MARY any Daughters in our Days to be found among our
selves? Any Admirers and Followers of Her Exemplary Piety? It may not be made a
Question of. The ^ublick Admonitions to do like MARY, in Choosing the Good Part,
will come with a Good Force, if we can show a MARY, (or a SARAH) in our very
Neighborhood, of whom we might say* Behold, An Exemple of doing so! Certainly,
there are such Handmaids of the Lord among the Daughter of our Zion: And as
there were Three Mary's to One John, under the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ I
wish, my Sex were not near as much (...) done in the Number of them that make
Choice of that Precious LORD. Among the Daughters that have thus done
Virtuously, I can say to my Hearers, that such an one was this Day Se'nnight
with us in the Congregation, like a devout MARY, Unweariedly listening, as she
use to be, unto the Word of God. But she is now flown away to that
Congregation, where God is Worshipped, not only without Weariness, but also
without any Infirmity, without any Imperfection. It is fit, that such a Mother
in Israel, should be spoken of; and there is now an opportunity for it, in the
Presence and Audience of a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of our Israel. It was her Excellent
Character for Prudence and Goodness, and particularly for her Imitation of the
Celebrated MARY, in a Constant, Awful, Affectionate Attention to the Word of
God, that has carried me away to a Theme, on which I need say nothing (nor
shall I,) but what was to be Read in her Holy Conversation. I am sure, This
will be a way of Women's Teaching in the Church, which the Apostle never
disapproved of! And we may now confirm an Observation, That the Word of God it
self sometimes comes in as a Recompense and an Instrument of Honor unto them
who have Honored the Word with a more than ordinary Diligence, and Attention.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST was Entertained at the House of Martha, in Bethany, who
had her ^ister Mary living with her. Of these Two Sister^ (...) was loathe to
leave the Room, while the Lord Jesus Christ was there uttering the blessed
Mysteries of our Salvation; but Martha was very busy in providing a civil and
handsome Treat for so high a Guest, and complained, that the other was unkind,
in thus leaving her alone, to provide what was Needful. The Answer of our Lord
unto this Complaint has two things in it. First, Martha is Advised; That she
overdid in her Care, about External matters; and our Lord convinces her of her
over-doing, by advising her, That there is One Thing more Needful, than all
those things about which we are prone to be too careful. Secondly, Mary is
Commended, for the Choice that she had made. And this Choice is commended,
first, from the Object of it. A Good Part. The Lord JESUS CHRIST Himself; the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ; the Mercy proposed in the Gospel; This was the
Good Portion, that she had chosen. And then, from the Effect of it. It should
not be taken away from her, nor should she be taken away from that; Her
possession of what she had Chosen should be perpetual. Will my Hearers, and
very particularly the Sex whose Laudable Zeal, gave an occasion for our Text to
be found in the Bible, now receive a DOCTRINE of the Greatest Importance in the
world? It was received, and it was most practically and admirably illustrated,
by that Excellent Person, whom in my whole Discourse, you may, if you please,
think me all along speaking of.

There is a GOOD PORTION, that is Chosen by every Good Christian; and this GOOD
PORTION is never to be taken away from them that Choose it

The First Proposition.
There is a Good Portion propounded unto the Choice of men, in the Word of God.

The Word of God, is it self a Good Word. When Mary Chose (as Ours also did,
above all the Delights upon Earth,) to attend upon the Word of God, she Chosen
Good Part. But there is this especially Good in the Word of God; It Exhibit a
Good part unto our Choice. Man is a Dependent creature* He depends upon God for
satisfaction. Every man seeks a Portion; that is is to say, an Happiness
wherein he may be satisfied. That Enjoyment, wherein God will give men to find
satisfaction is, a Good Portion for them. In the Word of God, we have such a
satisfying Portion set before us.

But, What is that Good Portion?

In General; The Good Portion is the same that our Lord JESUS CHRIST has
pronounced The One Thing that is Needful. Our Lord having said, One Thing is
Needful, then adds, Mary has Chosen that Good Portion. But now, The One Thing
that is Needful, is, Our SALVATION by our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Of all things the
most Necessary for us, is that Eternal Salvation, whereof our Lord

But more Particularly.

First. The Great and Good GOD is a Good Portion; a very Choice Portion for the
Souls of men. Else it had never been said, Lam. 3.24, 25. The Lord is my
Portion, says my Soul; The Lord is Good unto them that wait for Him. The
Almighty GOD makes a Tender of Himself unto us, to be our Portion. O Riches, O
wonders of Sovereign Grace! Why do not our Conquered Souls, Cry out, Lord, Be
thou my Portion! And surely, GOD must be a Good Portion. As, There is none Good
but God; so we must say, Lord, Thou art Good and thou do Good. The SOUL of
man cannot (...) ^on, what can do so* (...) and the Servant of the Lord. (...)
5, 6. The LORD is the Portion of my Inheritance; I have a Goodly Heritage.

Secondly. An Interest in the Lord JESUS CHRIST is a Good Portion: What
Christian does not count it his best Interest? Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is often
called, The Good One, and, The Good Thing. A Fountain of all Good, must needs
be a Good Portion. The Sun is not more a Fountain of Light, then our Lord JESUS
CHRIST is a Fountain of Good. Men count they have a Good Portion, when they
have Riches enough. ^^e Person that has the Lord JESUS CHRIST (...) a Portion,
has Riches enough, We read, Ephesians. ^.7. about, The unsearchable Riches of Christ.
An Union with the Lord JESUS CHRIST will invest (...) Person with a Portion
that will Supply all Wants, Prevent all Fears: For, Col. 1.19. It has pleased
the Father, that in Him there should all Fullness ^ well. To have all Fullness
for a Portion, is to have ^ Full Portion; and a Full Portion is a Good One.
Truly, an UNION with the Lord Jesus Christ, is the pearl of great price. If ALL
will not make a Good Portion, what will? But, Col. 3.11. CHRIST is ALL. Behold,
A Portion that furnishes our Hungry Souls, with the Bread of Life; Our Naked
Souls' with the Garments of Salvation; Our ^ickly Soul with Healing from His
Wings! Miserable Souls that Reject such a Portion! Oh! our dear People; Do it
not!

Thirdly; The Righteousness of the Lord JESUS CHRIST reckoned Ours, is a Good
Portion; It is most Righteously to be reckoned so. SIN is the Worst Evil. To be
Saved from Sin, is a Good Portion. It was the Exclamation, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Oh!
the Blessednessess of the Man! Oh! the Blessednessess of the Man! There is a
Law of Righteousness, wherein the Holy God has Condemned us unto dreadful
Confusion, upon the least Failure of our Obedience to Him. We have grievously
failed in our Obedience, and the Sentence of the Law has doomed us to suffer
the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. It Is a Good thing sure, to be Released from the
Sentence of Eternal Death, and at the same time to be Possessed of a
Righteousness, wh^ (...) the Law of God has adjudg'd Eternal Life as a Reward.
The Son of God, Assuming our Nature became a Mediator, particularly Exercising
^ Priestly Office, in the yet more particular capacity of a Surety, to answer
the Law of Righteousness in our stead. This our Surety, did both endure the
Penalty of the Law, and fulfill the Precept of it, in our stead, according to
the Covenant between God the Father and the Son, about His doing so. Our Lord
JESUS CHRIST had a most Right^^^^ Heart, and led a most Righteous Life, and at
length underwent the Miseries, that are the Essentials (...) the Punishment,
which was due to us for our Unrighteousness. Thus there is a Glorious
RIGHTEOUSNESS wrought out and brought in, for the chosen People of God. And
now, has not (...) Person a Good Portion, who is own (...) such a
RIGHTEOUSNESS? This Righteousness is called, An Inheritance. [Heb. 11.7.] Oh!
We Inherit a Good Portion; we are very Rich Heirs, if the Righteousness of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST be Ours. May God, by an Act of His Free Grace, Impute this
RIGHTEOUSNESS unto us, and Graciously look on it, as belonging unto us, for Us
to be Judicially dealt withal according to the Merit of it: Verily, If we are
of the Apostles mind, we shall forego all the Things under Heaven, for so Good
a portion. Said he, Phil. 3.8, 9. I suffer the Loss of all things, that I may
win CHRIST, and be found in Him, having that RIGHTEOUSNESS, which is through the
Faith of Christ.

Fourthly. A Principle of GRACE in the Soul, ^ Good Portion; The Least Portion
of such ^rinciple will dispose a man to think it so. As ^as said, Heb. 13.9. It
is a Good thing, that the ^rt be Established with Grace; thus we may say, (...)
Good thing, to have an Heart Principled with ^ce. The Holy Spirit of God is
Good. We read, (...) Thy Spirit is Good. The Spirit of Grace is a (...) Portion
to the Person that has it. A Princi^ (...) GRACE infused into the Soul, gives a
New ^^^me unto the Soul; and that New Frame is a (...) One. In true GRACE, we
have the Image ^^od, we have the Foretaste of Heaven; we have ^ Seed of a
blessed Immortality. It Is a Portion that (...) Meet for the Portion of the
Saints in Light. (...) sometimes Enquire after the PORTION (...) or Such an
one. Why, If they have the (...) of Christ, they have a Good Portion; ^^ey have
that which when it is found in Women, or Men either,) we are told, 1 Pet. 3.4.
It is of ^eat Price. Is not a Portion of what is far better than Silver and
Gold, a Good Portion? Of GRACE we read, Prove. 3.14, 15. The Merchandise it is
better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the in thereof than fine Gold; It is
more precious than ^arts; and all the Things that thou can desire, are (...)
to be compared unto it. One Dram of true GRACE in the Soul, is a Portion of
more worth, ^^an all the Riches of the Indies. Oh! That our beloved Hearers,
might all of them have, as One ^ them lately gone from us remarkably had, the
GRACE to count it so!

Fifthly. The Heavenly Blessedness of the Fut^ State, is a Good Portion; If a
Person have n^ thing of Earth, yet while Heaven belongs un^^ him, he has
Portion enough. If we have a Port^ in the Heavenly Canaan, truly, The Lines are
fa^^ to us in pleasant places. If the Earthly Cana^^ were a Good Land,
certainly much more is t^ Heavenly Canaan so. We shall find in Heaven, He^
10.34. A Better Substance, than any we left (...) Earth. When we come to the
Heavenly Blessedn^^^ in another World, we shall there find a confidence of all
Good. A Portion in Heaven w^ totally rescue us from the Curse. In Heaven, the^
will be no Evil inflicted: All Sin and all Grief ^ for ever banished from those
Regions of Light When we come into the City of God, we shall then want no Good
Thing. God will show Marvelous Kindness to us in that Strong City. Every
Mansion in the Heavenly City, is incomparably furnished. A Good Portion is a
Mansion then* If Peter in the Suburbs, could say, It Is Good to ^ here! What
shall we say, What Good shall we fin^ when come into the City it self? --

-- All Words are Swallowed up! --

Thither, Thither is One lately gone from us who had such a Sense of a Good
Portion* And She did, what is going to be Spoke, in

The Second Proposition.
The Good Christian does CHOOSE the Good Portion; And none have it, but they
tha^ Choose it. A Christian is as much distinguished by much denominated from,
his Choice, as any ^ng whatsoever. The Choice that a Good Christi^^ makes, is
of a Good Portion.

First; A Good Christian does Refuse to be put ^, with a Portion in the Things
of this ^orld. The present World, appears to a Good ^hristian, an Evil World.
There appears nothing ^ horrible to a Christian, as to have This World ^ his
Portion. A Christian does with Horror ^^precate the Condition of those men,
Psalm. 17. ^. The Men of this World, who have their Portion in this Life. The
Things of this World promise to Support us; but a Christian Looks on them as
Broken Reeds. They Promise to Comfort ^; but a Christian Looks on them as
Miserable ^mforters. They Promise to Heal and Help what ^ amiss with us: but a
Christian has no trust in their Promise; he takes it for granted, They are
^^ysicians of no Value. Unregenerate Men are very ^ady to take up with a
Portion in Earthly Things. ^e may say of the Unregenerate, on the worst account
that can be; as in Joh. 3.31. They are ^arthly, and they speak of the Earth;
So, They are ^arthly, and Seek nothing but the Earth, Men have, ^ it were,
Incarnated their Souls; They are so ^uitified and Stupefied, that Earthly
Things are the only Things they have any Relish for. Perishable things are the
only Relishable Things unto the ^ost of Men. The Love of this World, has
Enchanted the most of the men of the World. The ^ost of men in the World, are
the men of this World. It may be said of them; Phil. 3.19. They n^ Earthly
Things. But Regeneration gives to the m^ of a Christian, another Inclination.
(...) Christian is inclined as the Reformer was; w^ when he had great Presents
made unto him, tu^^ed unto the Lord, and made a vehement Protection; Oh! My
God, my God; I earnestly Protest, (...) I will not be put off with such Things
as these!

Secondly. A Good Christian, does not o^ Choose his Portion in Spiritual
Blessings, also make it Evident, that he has made such Choice. To the Good
Christian Spiritual Blessi^^^ and Spiritual Blessings are set before the Choice
o^ Christian, he prefers the Spiritual, as vastly p^^ferrible to the Temporal.
As when the proffer (...) made unto Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 1.7. Ask what I (...)
give thee; he wisely made Choice of Wisdom: T^ upon the profer made unto a
Christian, so mu^^ of a Solomon is he, that he determines upon (...) Choice;
Lord, Give me thy Christ, give me thy Spirit, give me an Assurance of thy
Everlasting Love Bring me to thy Heavenly Kingdom; and preserve ^ Blameless
till thou bring me thither! What is the Desire of a Christian? He desires
rather to Advance the Glory of God, and Enjoy the Favor of God and Obey the
Command of God, than to have ^ daily Bread. What is the Labor of a Christian
He Labors rather for the Food which endures ^ Everlasting Life, than for the
Food which perish^^ and which will not keep us from perishing. T^^ ^anguage of
a Christian about Good, is that; Psalm. ^.28. It is Good for me to Draw near
unto God. The ^in Concern lying upon the Heart of a Christian ^ not, What he
shall Eat or Drink, or, wherewithal ^ll he be Clothed? But, What shall I do to
be Saved? ^he Pleasures that a Christian prefers, what are ^^ey? Not, The
pleasures of sin; but, The pleasant ^ayes of Wisdom. The Riches that a
Christian prefers, what are they? Not, The Riches of Unrighteous ^ammon; but,
To be Rich in Faith. And what are ^e Honors that a Christian prefers? Not,
Worldly ^randeur, not, Humane Applause; but, The Praise ^^at comes from God.
Where are the Affections of ^ Christian? Answer, Col. 3.2. Upon the Things that
^^e Above. Hence, the Christian, to prove, that ^e does Choose the Good Portion,
will rather ^ose any thing else, than Lose that Portion. This ^as the Temper of
a Moses: [Heb. 11.25, 26.] and it was the Temper of our Mary too.

Her Acquiescence in it, must be Portrayed, in

The Third Proposition.
It Is the Excellency of the Good Portion, and of Choosing it, that the Portion is
never to be taken away from them that Choose it. For,

First, A Christian having once been partaker of the Good Portion, he never can
be Deprived of it. It is by the New Covenant, that we come to have our Claim to
our Good Portion. ^^t that Covenant is, Isa. 55.3. An Everlasting Covenant.
Indeed, The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed; but thy Good
Portion, O Saint of God, shall never depart from thee; neither shall the
Covenant, by which thou hold it, be remov^ says the Lord, who has had such
Mercy on thee, to bring thee unto the Choice of such a Portion.

If God once be Our God, we may sing; P^ 48.14. This God is our God for ever
and ever. Wi^^ once God has given Himself unto us, it will be Gift without
Repentance; He never will Repent His Gift. The Engagement of God, unto th^^
that have Him for their Portion, is, I will ne^^ leave thee, nor forsake thee.

If we are once Married unto our Lord JESUS CHRIST, we shall never be Divorced
from Him No, He hates Putting away. Being United unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Knot will be Indis^^luble. That Glorious Head will never suffer a^ of His
Members to be torn from Him. If the Lord Jesus Christ be our Portion, He will
say to us, live for ever more, and because I live, you shall also li^^ As our
Lord says about them that are His Portion, [He is pleased so to call them!]
and ha^^ Him for Theirs, Joh. 10.28. None shall pluck th^^ out of my Hand: So
we may say, None shall pluck Him out of our Hand: And, Nothing shall separate
us from the Love of God in Him.

If once our Sins are Pardoned, they are Forever Pardoned. Our Pardon will be
Irrevocable and Irrepealable. So we read, Heb. 8.12. Their sin and their
Iniquities will I remember no more. When we have the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ for ours, we have Durable Riches with the Righteousness. Though
the Heavens wax old ^^ke a Garment, the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ
is a Garment that will never wax old.

God having Adopted us into His Family, He will never annul the Adoption, and
chase us out ^f Doors. Being become the Children of God, we never shall become
the Children of the Devil. When once the Grace of God is in our Hearts, it will
keep there; it will never be lost. We read, ^ Joh. 3.9. The Seed Remains. If
once we are escaped from the Tyranny of Satan, we shall never fall again into
the Hands of the Hellish Tyrant: Pharaoh shall never fetch us back again! ^he
Grace of God will be a Spring of Living Wa^ in our Souls, that will flow up
into Everlasting ^ife. The Perseverance of the Saints, is a very con^iderable
Article of our Creed. When once the spirit of God has made us Temples to
Himself, He will never destroy, never desert His Temples. No; ^e will say, Here
is my Rest for ever, Here will I ^well, for I have desired it.

And what will be our Portion in the Heavens? ^ will be, 2 Cor. 5.1. Eternal in
the Heavens. ^ur Portion will be Life; But it will be, Life Eternal. Our
Portion will be Glory; But it will be, ^ternal Glory. Our Portion will be a
Crown; But ^ will be, A Crown that fades not away. Our ^easure in Heaven, will
be a Treasure that none ^n sieze upon. If we are made Pillars in the ^emple of
God, we never shall go out from thence; ^^ough Jachin and Boaz were turned out
of Solomon's.

Secondly. A Christian seeking the Good Portion, must and will never be drawn
away from the Seeking of it. No less an Exposit^ than the Great Calvin, I
think, allows the Reading of our Text after this manner; She shall not be taken
away from it. q. d. Man shall not be ^^^en off from her Choice of the Good
Part. When a Christian has chosen the Good Portion, h^ must let nothing Take
him off from his Choice. He that has chosen the Good Portion must be Fixed,
Settled, Resolved in his Choice, and never desist from his Pursuing of it A man
that has chosen the Good Portion may meet with many Temptations to alter his
Choice, or to leave off the way that he is in but he must overcome all such
Temptations. Apostasy from cares to make sure of the Good Portion, is a very
dangerous Impiety. We read, Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, my S^^ shall have
no pleasure in him. Our Worldly Busine^^ often takes us off too much, from that
which we should make our Greatest Business. But a Christian must let nothing
take him off the Business, o^ making sure the Good Portion. What say our Lord
Jesus Christ? Mat. 16.26. What is ^ Man profited, if he gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul?

But as that amiable Person, who trod in the Steps of Mary, made unto her self
a close Application of such Truths as were from time to time dispensed unto
her, from the Word of God Let these Truths now have our

APPLICATION.
It must be, first in a Dehortation, and then in an Exhortation; But both, with
much Brevity, because who can stand before Gods Cold?

I. Be warned, O my Hearers, Be charged, against Proposing to your selves, a
Portion in the Things of this Life. If you love the Lives of your Souls, Oh! Do
it not!

It is indeed the guise of Ungodly men, to take up with a Portion in the Good
Things of this World; which are indeed Good Things, but no Good Portion for the
Souls of Men. I wish, we would all seriously put this Enquiry to our selves;
What Portion have I yet secured? Alas, too many of us, it may be, can have no
better said of us than that, Amos 2.7. They pant after the Dust of the Earth.
What the Apostle said of Demas, the like may the Good Portion say of too many
among us; He has forsaken me, having loved this present World. The Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, -- Quae Tria pro Trino
Numine mundus habet. These are the Sorry Dunghils, wherein the most of men are
Digging for their Portion. Something must be said unto them. Let it be that,
Amos 6.13. Ye Rejoice in a Thing of Naught. And let it be added;

The man who seeks a Portion in the Things of this World, shall never have any
other Portion. The Wild Carobs that were the Portion of the Prodigal in the
Parable, are a fit Emblem for the Portion of the Worldly-minded man. Starved
Soul, How can thou Subsist upon it?

And then, The man who has no other Portion, but in the Things of this World,
is a very Miserable man. As it was said, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this Life only we
have Hope, we are of all men the most miserable; So we may say, If in this Life
only we have our Portion, we are very miserable. The Portion of such an one, it
will be Taken away. Perhaps his Portion will be Taken away from him. Casualties
and Enemies will Take it away. Job found it so; said he, The Lord has taken
away. Naomi found it so; said She, I was full, and now am Empty. This is the
Disgrace of Sublunary Things; A man may have them to Day, and lose them to
Morrow. We read, Prove. 23.5. They take themselves Wings and flee away. However,
he shall be Taken away from his Portion. What a Thunder was that? Luke 12.20.
Thy Soul shall be required of thee; Then, whose shall those things be, that
thou have provided? A mighty Saladine has nothing left him, at his Funeral.
What is then the Hope of the man, that has Gained never so much? Alas, The
Succeeding, yea, the Eternal Portion of the unprovided Soul, will be the
wretchedness of the wrath to come. The Heritage appointed by God for a Wicked
man, what will it be, but the Worm which never dies, the Fire which never shall
be quenched? We read, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the Wicked He shall rain Snares, Fire
and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This shall be the portion of their Cup.
Then, as it was said unto the Rich man, Remember, that thou in thy Life time
receivedst thy good Things, but thou art now Tormented: So, it will be said,
unto the lost man, Remember, that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy portion;
but now an Endless Torment shall be thy Portion.

II. And now, Choose the Good Portion, O All ye People every one of You; And
having chosen it, Rejoice in your Choice. As it was pressed; Isa. 55.2.
Wherefore do you spend your Labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken
diligently unto me, and Eat ye that which is Good, and let your Soul delight it
self in Fatness: Thus, it is now to be pressed; Wherefore do you Labor
inordinately for the Things of this World, These things will never satisfy you.
There is a Good Portion set before you; Oh, Let your Souls feed upon it with
Eternal Delight.

Be it known unto you, That God is in His Gospel Offering a Good Portion unto
your Choice. He that said, Mar. 10.51. What will thou, that I shall do for
thee? Says to every one of us, What will thou have me bestow upon thee for thy
Portion? Oh! Give a Good Answer to this Offer, and Choose a Good Portion, when
it is offered. Say before the Lord;

Lord, Be thou my Portion! Lord, let it be my Portion, to have thy Christ made
unto me, Wisdom and Righteousness, and Holiness and Redemption Lord, Bring me
to the Portion Reserved in the Heavens for thy chosen People!

Are you come to this Choice? Now, Rejoice O Saints, in your Portion; And
again, I say, Rejoice. You may thus Rejoice, even when Losses o^ many Good
Things are befalling of you. [Heb 10.34.] As David when he had Lost all, yet
Encouraged himself in the Lord his God: Thus may we, when we have Lost never so
much, Encourage our selves, I have in my God yet a Good Portion left that never
can be taken away. Christians, You are no other than Travelers and Sojourners
in this World. All your Losses, are but a few Inconveniences befalling
Travelers on the Road. You have an Heavenly Father, that will provide for you
a Competency of those things which are not your Portion. But those things which
are your Portion, Cannot be taken away; and in those things, all your Losses
are abundantly compensated.

And now, methinks, I over hear the Triumphs of an Excellent Mary, triumphantly
boasting in God, and in the Choice that She has made of Him* Psalm. 119.111. Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever, for they are the Rejoicing of
my Heart.

O my Lord JESUS CHRIST; Have thou given me a New Heart? An Heart that has thy
Knowledge Enlightening of it, thy Image rectifying of it? An Heart to Love
thee, and Prize thee, and Serve thee, and prefer my Interest in thee, and thy
Interest in the World, above every thing in the World! Wonderful Testimonies of
thy Benignity toward me! Rejoice, O my Soul, Rejoice in these Testimonies.
They are an Heritage for ever to be Rejoiced in! And, O my Lord JESUS CHRIST;
Has thy Word assured me, that Thou have prepared an Heavenly City for thy
chosen People? A City wherein I shall enjoy Durable Riches, and Pleasures for
evermore! A City, wherein I shall be Saved from all that can be grievous to me,
and I shall be filled with all the Fullness of God! I believe thy Testimonies!
Rejoice, O my Soul, Rejoice in an Everlasting Heritage, reserved in the Heavens
for thee! And now, what ever I am deprived of, as long as I have CHRIST, and
GRACE and HEAVEN left, it is all well enough. I have an Heritage always to be
Rejoiced in. Though I should be Afflicted very much, yet if my Afflictions, may
forward me in my Advances to this Heritage, I may even Rejoice in those
Afflictions, as in the Testimonies of the Divine Favor to me. Let those be
Miserable, that can be Miserable: for my part, I cannot. O my God, my God, Thou
art my Heritage; and ^ will Rejoice in my Heritage; It Is a Good Portion and it
never shall be taken away!

Conclude then; Psalm. 73.26. My Flesh and my Heart fails; but God is the
strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever.

BUT it must be Remembered, That it was MARY, who has given us the Pattern,
which we thus insist upon. Will those of her Sex there have the Ingenuity, to
Look upon themselves as peculiarly concerned in it; and not only to Take, but
also to Give a Pattern of such Devotion! If a Timothy were with all Purity, to
address the Counsils of God unto that Sex, Let them now receive this Address,
That they would make choice of MARY'S Portion.

Certainly, They are well Matched, who are Espoused unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
the Son of God, the King of Heaven and Earth. Let a Friend of that Bridegroom,
then come to you with the Language of the Psalmist; Hearken, O Daughter, He is
thy Lord, and Worship thou Him.

Certainly, The rarest Beauty under Heaven may not be compared with the
Heavenly Beauty of a Soul, which has the Image of God Renewed upon it.
Certainly, There are no Garments comparable to the Righteousness of the Saints,
the Fine Linen which the Wife of the Lamb of God is arrayed withal. Certainly,
There are no Jewels comparable to the Graces, which are Ornaments of great
Price in the sight of God Himself.

All this is in MARY'S Portion; And your Preferring of it, will be your
Securing of it. Use the Wisdom, to Choose it, Above all things that you can
desire; and by Choosing it you will become the Owners of it. Oh! That the
Consideration might Win upon you. Do but heartily and sincerely say, O Lord, Be
thou mine! My Soul says unto thee, O Lord, None but CHRIST, None but CHRIST!
From this moment He becomes Thine, O MARY, and thou art Happy throughout
Eternal Ages.

Methinks, You may see some Encouragement into this Godliness, in the
Reputation which God in His Providence most observably bestows upon them, in
whom it has been observable. MARY stands upon Record, for Choosing the Good
Portion, and will Shine upon Earth as long as there is a Moon in Heaven.

The Commemoration of them, who have Walked with God, until they are Taken by
God, it may stir the Envy in some of the Living, but it is a Kindness, not so
much unto the Dead, as unto the Living. Let it be Proclaimed; A Good Name is a
Better Portion than Great Riches, and it is a Portion of them that have Chosen
the Best Portion of all.

It Is Instanced in that Worthy GENTLEWOMAN, (One upon every account worthy to be
called so,) whose Death is at this Day the Lamentation of them, who reckon the
Graves of the Saints, proper places to drop their Tears upon. In her Character,
all that have any Regard unto Virtue, agree to fulfill that Promise of God;
Prove. 31.30. A Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be Praised. I must in
Justice make this Report, That I never once in all my life, to my Remembrance,
heard one Ill word spoken of her. We may say of her, as they said of Ruth, All
the People knew, that she was a Virtuous Woman. Or as the Martyr Ignatius of
his Venerable Mary, That she was (...), A Samplar for all Gods Women. Fitly
enough might she have been styled as diverse Holy and Famous Women in the
Scripture were, A Daughter of Asher: The SEDGWICK was an Asher, that is to say,
An Happy Man, that was the Father of such a Daughter. Our SARAH had her Abraham
too: There was a Time when her Husband, the GOVERNOR o^ this Renowned Colony,
was Known in the Courts and in the Camp, and Sat among the Elders of the Land.
SHE was then an Honor unto Him and unto all the Land; And her Deportment had
in it, the Discretion, the Gravity, the Tenderness, and the Holiness of those
brave Women, which made the Pagans of old Cry out, with wonders Proh, Quales
Faeminas habent Christiani! Surely The Christian Women are the best in the
world. She was, when she no longer shone with his Rays, afterward, and many
Years, a Widow, which departed not from the Temple, but served God in His
House, with a scarce to be paralleled Frequency and Industry. In her own House,
the Lively Concern that she Expressed, for the serving of her God, and the
saving of her Soul, gave a lovely Representation of Christianity to the Life;
and she is gone to Reap the Harvest of it, in Everlasting Life. Her Namesake
SARAH, is the only Woman, whose Age is Recorded in the Sacred Oracles. It minds
me to say of our SARAH, That unto the Seventy Fifth Year of her Age, did she
continue serving of her LORD, and waiting for ^im.

A whole Country is a Loser; it Loses a Good part, of its Glory, and of its
Defense, when such a ^raying Matron is taken out of it!

Before the Palsy struck her, she had heard that comfortable Advice from
Heaven, Be of Good ^heer, Thy Sins are forgiven thee. And she could say, ^s a
rare Gentlewoman of the same Spirit with her ^^id; My Head is in Heaven, my
Heart is in Heaven, and it will not be long before I my self come to be in Heaven.
The very Day, that her FRIEND, (for ^y Faith in the Death of her Savior she
had made him so,) I mean, her DEATH. came to call her away, he found her
painfully Preparing for him. When some that were very Thoughtful for her, would
have dissuaded her from venturing abroad unto the Sermon, in so bitter a
Season, she made a Reply, which, I wish all the Town would think upon; a Reply
to this purpose; If the Ministers can go abroad to Preach, certainly, it
becomes the People to go abroad; and hear them. The Sermon she then heard, was
Excellently well fitted, for her Funeral Sermon: Describing the Righteous as
more Excellent than their Neighbors, it not only declared the Sentiments of
her own Regenerate Soul, and who they were whom she had from her very Youth
Esteemed as Excellent, but it also relate the very Points, wherein she was her
self among, The Excellent in the Earth. But, EARTH Ah, Thou art no place for
such Excellent Ones to be always Languishing upon. HEAVEN is in Expectation of
them. There, There is the City of the Righteous. There is their Fathers House.
Thither she is now gone. There to Serve the Lord in His Temple. God has there
wiped all Tears from her Eyes. We must have them in Ours, till our Arrival
thither after her.

A Lacrymatory: ^esign'd for the Tears let fall at the Funeral of Mrs. SARAH
LEVERET; Who Died, 2 d. 11 m. 1704, 5.
FLow on, Just Tears; and let such Dues be paid:
Tears were at first, for these Occasions made.
Long did I Vex in Vain at Stupid Man,
That e're Men found out Painting, so long Ages ran.
^ain would I Painted to the Life have seen
The Heroines that in past Times have been.
^ could we Present that bright SARAH View,
Who Mortals charmed, and who pleased Angels too.
Or that brave MIRIAM, She of whom it is said,
The Isreal's Daughters in Devotions Led:
Could glorious DEBORAH appear again,
And to true Glory Quicken Slothful Men:
Could Prayerful HANNAH once again be shown,
Prostrate in Prayer's before the Sapphire Throne:
Could Pious MARY with her inward worth,
And all her Piety again come forth:
We'd Love the Painter, and admire the skill;
But it is our Grief, we want that Painting Still.
And courteous Dorcas, we complain of Thee
We cannot thy Face wrought with thy Needle see.
But now there is an end of all complaints;
ONE Matron gives a sight of all the Saints.
Our LEV'RET is of All a curious Draught:
Oh! what an one! By what fine Pencil wrought
So on one Cherry-Stone, true Fame avers,
Vienna shows an Hundred Pourtraiters.
So Hamborough does of an Agate tell,
Where Europes Princely Faces all do dwell.
The Siamese their Golden Image prize
Whose Price does to Twelve Million Livres rise.
VIRTUE a Nobler Image did Erect
In our Incomparable LEVERET.
Vain Jews, The Palaces no more Divide
Where Holy Women do in Heaven reside:
Four Praesidents assign to them no more;
Or say, a Fifth's now added to the Four.
She shall be (...) on Earth at least* and we
By this our HU^DAH will directed be.
You, Ladies, that were Tutoresses to
The Ancient Saget, did, what she shall do.
'O VIRGINS worthy of the Zodiac, Love
'Those Objects first and most, that are Above.
'Be first Espoused unto the mighty LORD,
'On Terms propo^^d in his most Sacred Word.
'Walk not with them whose Folly leads to Hell;
'By awful M^^esty rude Fools repel.
'Let not Vile Books your blooming years deprave,
'But Books of ^ru^^ let your perusal have.
'Rather to Churches than to Balls repair;
'Perfume you Closets too with Daily Prayer.
'Foul Cards let your Fair Hands throw by with Scorn
'But Write and Work as for high purpose born.
Let pearly Tears (at which lewd wretches scoff)
Of Penitence wash your Black Patches off.
^^ess well ^ Fla^t not too high; nor Change too fast:
^ear what shall speak you Sober, Wise and Chaste.
and in (...) clad with comely Dress,
Sou^ (...) with rich Robes of Righteousness.
Thus di^ our admirable SARAH: Thus
Of Virgin-Grace a mould she left for us.
^ Matchless Merits now prepared her
^ be a Match for a great GOVERNOR.
^n Sarah called Her Lord: Himself to please
^ sought: And saw none but her Tygranes.
^e Colony in her sweet carriage saw
^^at made in every House a Persian Law.
^ Wife so lovely, so discreet and kind;
How Blessed of God, the Man that shall her find!
^e up, Her Daughters, and with Grace Repeat,
^^w she did You with constant Wisdom treat.
^ what she did for You; And still Retain
^^at she gave You of Tinctu^^ in the Grain.
Happy Chickens! [Those we Happy sing;]
Whom such a Dam warms with her Tender Wing.
^ must a Widow too Example give
^^w in a Patient Widow-Hood to live.
(...) her Patricius Twenty years and five,
^thless did in his moaning Dove Survive.
^der Maker now she did her Husband make:
^uch Souls in Him can full contentment take.
^h Famous Women let our SARAH claim
^ best endowments an Immortal Name.
^atia taught of old the Liberal Arts:
^ Ours the Art of managing our Hearts.
(...) ^^^sses on the Bible wrote;
(...) a Gloss in her pure practice brought.
(...) wrote the Lives of worthy Men;
(...) one Worthy to be wrote by them.
(...) Zealous Visits to the House of God,
(...) there she chose for her Abode.
Her Fervent Zeal would overcome the Cold:
No Storms from coming there could her withold
Ye, Men of God, Your Funeral Sermons owe
For Her who Sermons those Regards did show.
You have in Her an Auditory gone,
A Full one it was, if she were there Alone.
Good I (...), Tell us now that Secret Rare;
Ra^^ like the Stone of the Philosopher:
A ^ife of Ten Times Seven Years to run,
And all that while to be Reproached by None.
None You Reproached; But every Person knew
What Good You could, You Would every Person ^
There, Madam, lay Your Skill: By Goodness it is
We charm fell Serpents, that they cannot hiss.
Till grown for Earth too Good, on Earth she grew
Heaven claimed her then; and then to Heaven she fle^
Luxurious Death; such Pearls to Swallow thus!
Famed Cleopatra's Daughter was less profuse.
You rash Astronomers, the Stars miscall,
A Dog you style the brightest of them all.
Correct an Error which You find so Great;
Your Sirius now shall be a LEVERET.
Else the most Fulgid Lamp, which Heaven did she
And then took in an Hundred Years ago,
Now She Is got there, will once again appear,
And radiant Sit in Cassiopea's Chair.
^acrymatories which Reserved of old
^ears for the Dead, were Viols (as we are told:)
Our LEVERET is Lost; we will Weep for her
(...) that shall fill the Tun of Heidelbergh.
FINIS.

