A Serious Call TO THE QUAKERS, Inviting them to Return to Christianity.

By a Friend.

The Third Edition.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, and C. Brom
at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard. BOSTON: Reprinted and
Sold by T. Green, in Middle-Street. 1709.

A Serious Call TO QUAKERS
T HIS Sheet of Paper does set before you some of the many vile and monstrous
Doctrines, Principles, and uncharitable Sayings of the Chiefest and most Noted
of your Teachers: Faithfully Collected out of their own Books, the Titles and
Pages whereof are set down in the Margin: You are earnestly requested, as you
regard your Eternal Salvation to consider them, and with Prayer to Almighty GOD
to enable you by His Good Spirit to compare them with the Holy Scriptures, by
which you may clearly see that your Teachers have led you quite off from the
Principles of Christianity, without the Faith of which ye have no ground to
expect Salvation. It is hoped that if you will duly and well consider these
things, you will not only renounce your Teachers Errors; but gladly embrace the
Doctrine and Religion of Christianity, to which you are hereby sincerely
Exhorted.

Concerning their pretended Infallibility and discerning of Spirit, and
Equality with God. C. Fox and R. Hubberthorn Truth's Defense, p 2.


OUR giving forth Papers, or Printed Books is from the immediate eternal Spirit
of God to the showing forth the filthy Practices of the Worlds Teachers, etc.

G. F. Great Mystery. p. 98.
And thou and you, all that speak and write, and not from God immediately and
infallibly as the Apostles did, and Prophets, and Christ, but only have gotten
the words, you are all under the Curse in another Spirit ravened from the
Spirit that was in the Apostles:

G. W. Truth Defended. p. 24.
Do not you George Whitehead Blasphemously take to your self an Attribute of
God, while you pretend ordinarily to know the Hearts of Men. And tell Mr.
Townsend (Minister of Norwich, in the second Page of your Ishmael,) that the
Light of God is departed from his Conscience.

George Whitehead Answers, I take no Attribute of God to my self, but what God
has given me, by whose Gift I witness that promise fulfilled in me; Ye shall
discern between the Righteous and the Wicked; between him that serves God, and
him that serves Him not, Mal. 3. 28. Obsery. This in Mal. 3. 28. or any other
place of Scripture, proves not that any man shall have one of Gods Attributes
given them to know men's Hearts. G. F. Great Mystery. p. 89.


The Quakers can discern who are Saints and who are Devils, and who are
Apostates, without speaking ever a word. G. F. Readiness Errand p. 8


They that have the Spirit of God, ( which all the Quakers say they have,) are
equal with God. Francis Howgils Works, p. 232.
He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; there is Unity, and the Unity
stands in Equality it self.

Concerning the Scriptures. Great Mystery, p. 302.


G Eorge Fox says, The Scriptures are not Infallible nor Divine, but Humane. W.
Penn in his Quak. a new Nickname for old Christianity. p. 71.


No Command in Scripture is any farther obliging upon any man, than as he finds
a Conviction upon his Conscience, otherwise men should be engaged without, if
not against Conviction, a thing unreasonable in a man: (Note, According to
this, there can be no Sins of Ignorance.) J. Parnel, shield of Truth, p. 11.


He that says the Letter is the Rule and Guide of the People of God is
without, feeding upon the Husk, and is ignorant of the true Light. G. W. and W.
P. Serious Apology, p. 49.


The Question being put, Whether the Quakers did esteem their Speaking to be of
as great Authority as any Chapter in the Bible? G. Bishop, Mean Tekel, p. 22.


George Whitehead Answer, That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any,
is of as great Authority as the Scripture and Chapters are, and greater. G. F.
Answ. to the Westmerland Petition. p. 30.


How can, or dare any say, without the highest Blasphemy, that the Scriptures
is the Word of God? E.B's works p. 105.


If ever you own the Prophets, Christ's, or the Apostles, you will own our
Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power. G. F. News out of
the North, p. 14.


You are in the Witchcraft, who observe Commands from without from the Letter.
And in several Papers, given forth by the Quakers, p. 45. and 40.


So Dust is the Serpents Meat, their Original is but Dust, which is but the
Letter, which is Death; so these Serpents feed upon Dust, which feed upon all
these carnal things, and their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
which is the Letter: The Cursed Serpent is in the Letter, R. Huberthorn' s
words, Truths Defense, p. 102.

Concerning the Trinity.

G. Whitehead, etc in Ishmael and his Mother cast out. In Answer to Mr.
Townsend, p. 10.
THE Three Persons which thou Dreams of, which thou would divide out of one,
like a Conjurer, are all denied, and thou shut up with them in perpetual
Darkness for the Lake and Pit, for thou have no Scripture that mentions any
such things.

W. Penn, his Sandy Foundation, p. 12, 13, 15.
Since the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Spirit is God (which their
Opinion necessitates them to confess) then unless the Father, Son, and Spirit
are three distinct Nothings, they must be three distinct Substances, and
consequently three distinct Gods.

That frequent, but impertinent distinction, that God is one Substance, but
Three in Persons, or Subsistences, -- A most absurd Blasphemy. -- They the
Trinitarians must necessarily conclude their Kind of Trinity a Fiction.

Its requisite I should inform the Reader concerning its Original: Thou may
assure thy self it is not from the Scripture, nor Reason, since so expressly
repugnant. -- It was conceived in Ignorance, brought forth and maintained by
Cruelty.

G. F. Great Mystery, p. 246.
The Scriptures do not tell People of a Trinity, nor Three Persons, but the
Common Prayer Mass Book speaks of Three Persons; brought in by the Father the
Pope.

Concerning christ and his Blood. etc.

W.Penn, Serious Apol. P. 146.
THat the outward Person that suffered was properly the Son and God we utterly
deny.

C.A. Sword of the Lord Drawn, P. 5.
Your imagined God beyond the Stars, and your carnal Christ, is utterly denied:
-- To say Christ is God and Man in One Person, is a Lie.

G.Fox Great Mystery, P. 250.
The Devil was in thee, thou say, thou art Saved by Christ without thee, and
so have recorded thy self a Reprobate.

G. F. Great Mystery, P. 47.
The Light which every Man has that comes into the World is sufficient to
Salvation, without the help of any other Means or Discovery.

G. W. Antidote, P. 28.
The Light within ( all men) is sufficient for Salvation without any thing else.

Stephen Crisp Collection, P. 160.
And this Light in thee, wherewith thou art Enlightened is the Life of Jesus,
John 1.4 which He has given a Ransom for Man, that was not Natural, as some
foolishly imagine, For if it were Natural, it could not be a Ransom for Man our
of Sin.

Will-Bayleys Works. P. 600.
The Apostle Preached Christ the Word nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, and
the ingrafted Word which is able to save the Soul. So he did not Preach a
visible Christ with Flesh and Bones, as you do. -- And Paul Preached God that
made the World that was not far from ever one of us, the invisible God; but you
Preach a visible Man with Flesh and Bones, at a great distance from all People,
above where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are.

Voice of Wisdom. P. 36.
G. W. says, The Righteousness which God effects in us is not Finite, but
Infinite.

W.P. Quak. New Nick. P. 6.
Faith in the History of Christ's outward Manifestation, a deadly Poison these
latter Ages has been infected with, to the Destruction of Godly Living.

G.W. Truth defending the Quakers, P. 22. 65.
Christ's coming in the Flesh was but a Figure. -- Faith in Christ without Men is
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine.

W. P. Serious Apol. P. 148.
This we deny, viz. Justification by the Righteousness which Christ has
fulfilled in His own Person for us (wholly without us) and boldly affirm in the
Name of the Lord to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of
Corruption, which do now Deluge the whole World. Observe. The words [ wholly
without us,] relate to the Meritorious Cause of Men's Justification before God;
for which God does Justify them which is the Righteousness of Christ's Person,
by His most Holy and Perfect Obedience unto Death, and shedding of His most
Precious Blood, and that was wholly without us; and that was the true State of
the Question between W. Penn and his Opponent, and is here denied by W. Penn.

W. P. Id. 148.
Death came by actual Sin, not imputative; therefore Justification unto Life
came by actual Righteousness, not imputative.

Light and Life, P. 44.
Christ [ in us] offers up Himself a living Sacrifice to God for us, by which
the Wrath of God is appeased to us. Vindicated by G. W.

S. Eccle's Letter to R. Porter.
The Blood of Christ was no more than the Blood of another Saint.

G.W. Light and Life, P. 56.
It is confessed, that God by His own Blood purchased to Himself a Church, Act.
20. 28. Now the Blood of God, or the Blood that relates to God, must needs be
Spiritual, He being a Spirit, and the Covenant of God is Inward and Spiritual,
and is the Blood of it.

E. B's. Works, P. 273.
The Suffering of the People of God ( that is Quakers) in this Age, is greater
Suffering, and more just, than in the Days of Christ, or of the Apostles, or in
any time since. What was done to Christ, or to the Apostles, was chiefly done
by a Law; and in great part by the due Execution of a Law, etc.

Concerning Baptism and the Supper.

W.P. Reason against Railing, P. 108, 109
I Affirm, by that one Scripture [ Heb. 9. 10] Circumcision is as much in force,
as Water Baptism; and the PaschalLamb, as Bread and Wine, they were both
Shadows, and both Elementary and Perishable. And we can testify from the same
Spirit, by which Paul renounced Circumcision, that they are to be Rejected, as
not now Required.

E. B. works, P. 190, 191.
To say that sprinkling Infants with water is Baptism into the Faith of Christ,
is the Doctrine of Devils.

G. F. News out of the North, P. 14.
Your Baptism and Sacraments as you call it, and all your Ordinances, and
Churches, and Teaching, it is Cain's Sacrifice.

Their Sacrament as they call it, is Carnal, Their Communion Bread and Wine the
Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils. The Book out of which this passage is
taken, is entitled, News out of the North, written from the Mouth of the Lord,
from one who is Naked, and stands Naked before the Lord clothed with
Righteousness, whose Name is not known in the world, risen up out of the North,
which was Prophesied of, but now is Fulfilled. Called, George Fox.

Concerning the Resurrection:

W. Penn in in his Invalidity of J. Faldo' s Vindication, P. 369, 370.
I Do utterly deny that this Text, 1 Cor. 15. 44. It is sown a Natural Body, it
is raised a Spiritual Body, etc. is concerned in the Resurrection of Man's
carnal Body at all. But the two States of Men under the First and Second Adam,
Men are sown into the world Natural, so are they Sons of the First Adam; but
they are raised Spiritual through Him who is the Resurrection and the Life, and
so are they Sons of the Second Adam, who came to raise up the Sons of the first
Adam from their Dead to His Living; their Natural to His Spiritual Estate. But
perhaps, it will be objected that the 47 th. verse, The first man is of the
Earth Earthly; and part of the 49 th. verse, We shall all bear the Image of the
Heavenly, seem to imply a Bodily Resurrection; but let the whole Verse be
considered, and we shall find no such thing, etc. T. Ellwood in his Answ. to G.
K's 1st Narrative, P. 149.


The Apostle (1 Cor. 15. 14.) does not say, The Natural is made a Spiritual
Body, or the Natural Body and the Spiritual Body is one and the same Body; but
he sets them in opposition, as two distinct Bodies. The Body that is put in the
Grave is a Natural Body; but the Body that is raised is a Spiritual Body. And
that none might think this Spiritual Body was the same, he adds, There is a
Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body.

W.Pen, Reason against Railing, P. 134.
If a thing can be the same, and notwithstanding changed, for shame let us never
make so much stir against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, for the Absurdity
of it is rather outdone than equalled by this carnal Resurrection.

Rich. Hubberthorn's Collection, P. 119.
His Envy has reached to Heaven, to prove. That the Saints in Heaven are not
Perfect, but wait for the Redemption of their Bodies; which now, if People mind
the Scriptures, there is no such Doctrine in it, as the Saints in Heaven have
not received the Redemption of their Bodies.

W.P. Reason against Railing, P. 138.
If the Complete Happiness of the Soul rests in a Reunion to a carnal Body, for
such it is Sown, then never Cry out upon the Turks Alcoran; for such a Heaven
and the Joys of it, suit admirably well with such a Resurrection.

Concerning Christ's Coming to Judgment.

G.W. Light and Life, P. 41.
WHat is that Glory of the Father in which Christ's coming is? Is it visible to
the Carnal Eye? And where is that coming to be? Is it now to be looked for
outwardly?.

We acknowledge the several comings of Christ according to the Scriptures, both
that in the Flesh, and that in Spirit. But three comings of Christ, not only
that in the Flesh at Jerusalem, and that in the Spirit, but also another coming
in the Flesh yet to be expected, we do not read of.

Id. Nature of Christianity, P. 29.
Do thou look for Christ as He was the Son of Mary to appear outwardly, in a
bodily Existence, to save thee? If thou do, thou may look till thy Eyes
drop out, before thou will see such an appearance of Him.

Id. Brief discovery of the Dangerous Principles of J. Horn, P 9.
And as for that, 1 These. 4. 15. concerning the coming of our Lord from Heaven
which men blindly put afar off; the Saints who then were alive remained unto
it. -- So their Conversation was in Heaven, ( viz. a Heaven within them:) they
did not say their Conversation was at a distance, above the Clouds, from whence
you look for a Christ.

Concerning Heaven and Hell.

George Fox, Great Mystery, P. 214.
THere is none have a Glory and a Heaven but within them.

W. P. (...), P. 170
To deny the Locality of Heaven and Hell not very offensive, and it looks too
Carnal and Mohammedan ( viz. to assert it.)

Concerning doing Serbile Work on the Lords Day, and of the Moral Law.

Truth Desending Quakers, P. 20.
DID that Quaker sin therein or not, who lately brought on the Lords day, an old
Doublet into Dr. Gells Church in London, and sat upon the Communion Table
mending it while the Dr. was Preaching? G. W. Answ. What will thou still
continue a Papist, that thou countest it such a crime to work upon the
Communion Table, as if it were a more Holy place than another? Where do thou
read in Scripture that men must do no work on the first Day of the Week? Obser.
But to save them on all sides the Quakers infallible spirit can go both ways
for and against the observation of the Lords Day: and both as directed by the
same spirit. Thus G. Fox determines in an Epistle to all Christian Magistrates
and Powers in Christendom, p. 12. So all Friends of the Lord God that be moved
to set open your Shops, or do any work on the First Day, which the false
Christians call their Sabbath. -- Do not ye Judge all that do not [ open Shop]
as ye do that be not moved to the service as ye are to do that Day. And all
that does not do that service [ viz. open Shop] on that day as you do as are
not moved by the Power of the Lord God, do not Judge them that does such a
Service on that Day. Obser. Here he makes them the False Christians, who call
the First Day of the Week their Day of Sabbath or Rest.

Truth Defending Quakers, P 18.
Is the Moral Law, or Ten Commandments a Rule to a Christian's Life, or is it
not? G. W. Answ. Thou might as well ask, If the Moral Law as thou call it be
a Rule to Christ? For the Christian's Life and Rule is Christ, who is the end
of the Law for Righteousness, who came not to Destroy but to Fulfill it.

Postscript.
From the forecited Quotations, it is plainly Evident that the QUAKERS Belief
in these Nine Articles is as follows.

1. C Oncerning their Infallibility: They affirm that they are Infallible, that
God has given to them His Attribute to Know Men's Hearts, and that they are
Equal with God.

2. Concerning the Holy Scriptures: They say that the Scriptures are Humane,
and that no Command in them is in it self obliging, that what they speak is of
greater Authority than the Holy Scriptures, that the Gospels of St. Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, are Dust, and the Serpents Meat, that is the Devils Meat.

3. Concerning the Holy Trinity: They Damn the Holy Trinity to the Pit of Hell,
and call it Conjuration, affirming the Three Persons of God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost are Three Nothings.

4. Concerning Christ and His Blood: They utterly deny that JESUS CHRIST who
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was properly the Son of God, or that we are to
be saved by His Merits, but affirm that the Light which every Man brings with
him into the world, is sufficient for every man's Salvation without any thing
else; and that the Blood of Christ is no more than the Blood of any Saint.

5. Concerning Baptism and the Lords Supper: They affirm that Baptism and the
Lords Supper are no more Duties to Christians than Circumcision is, which they
renounce ( as they say) by the same Spirit, by which St. Paul renounced
Circumcision. They call Infant Baptism the Doctrine of Devils, and the Lords
Supper the Table of Devils.

6. Concerning the Resurrection: They deny the Resurrection of the Body after
Death, calling that Article of our Faith absurd as the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is.

7. Concerning Christ's coming to Judgment: They deny the Article of Christ's
coming to Judgment at the end of the World, saying, That there will be no other
coming of Christ, than what has been already, or that be within Men.

8. Concerning Heaven and Hell: They deny any other Heaven or Hell than what is
within men, calling all other Mahometism.

9. Concerning the Lords Day, and the Moral Law: They allow doing servile Work,
as opening Shop on the Lords Day, to sell Goods, and Taylers to mend Clothes on
that Day; and deny that the Ten Commandments are a Rule to Christians, and
especially the Eighth Commandment: for a Quaker said; He had a Command
immediately from Heaven to take away the Priests Hourglass; which being
complained of, G. Fox makes this answer, ( Great Mystery, p. 77.) And for any
being moved of the Lord, to take away your Hourglass from you; by the Eternal
Power it is Owned. Note by the same pretense, they may take away the Church
Plate, or any thing else: For as E. Borough their Prophet says, Our HEIRSHIP
it to Possess the uttermost part of the Earth, in a Declaration of the Quakers
signed by E. Borough and Fifteen more, P. 9. which is the same Principle with
John of Leiden, and other German Enthusiasts, That all Right to any Worldly
Substance is founded on Grace, and that none had a right to any thing but the
Saints.

The Quakers are not wronged in any one Citation, and it is left to the
Judgment of all serious Christians, whether these are not the Doctrines which
are contained in them. All Good Christians are desired to have this Sheet in
their Houses, and as they have opportunity, to show the Poor Deluded Quakers
their Errors, which it is hoped many of them do not know, and will Renounce as
soon as they do.

FINIS.

