His Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Baron of Hurley, Capt General and Governor
in chief of the Provinces of Nova (...) or New Jersey, New York and Territories
depending thereon in America, and New-(...), of the same. HIS SPEECH To the
General Assembly of New Jersey, convened at Amboy the 4th day of March, 1708.
Gentlemen;
I Am very sensible of the great Difficulties that do attend this honorable
Employment in which her Majesty has been pleased to place me, the Government
of this Province; but I hope you will never fail to assist me to serve the
Queen and her People here.

Her Majesty has shown in the whole course of her Reign, a Reign glorious
beyond Example, how much she aims at the good and prosperity of her People. She
has, with indefatigable pains, united her two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, and she continues the same application to unite the Minds of all her
Subjects. This is her great Care, and ought to be that of those whom she
deputes to govern those distant Provinces, which are not so happy by their
S^ituation to be under her more immediate Government.

I cannot set before me a better Pattern; I shall endeavors therefore to
recommend my self to you by following (as far as I (...) able) her Example.

I persuade my self, I shall not give you any (...) cause to be uneasy under
my Administration; and I hope you will not be uneasy with one another. (...)
past Differences and Annimosities be buried in Oblivion, and let us all seek
the Peace and Welfare of our Country.

Her Majesty would not be burthensom to her People, but there being an absolute
necessity that the Government be supported, I am directed to recommend that
matter to your Consideration* You know best what the Province can conveniently
raise for its support, and the easiest Methods of raising it.

There is another thing also will require your Consideration, the (...) Law for
the putting the Militia upon some better (...) tha^ it is at (...) with as much
case to the People as possible.

I shall only add, That I shall be always ready to give my assent to whatever
Laws you shall find necessary for promoting Religion and V^rtue, for the
encouragement of Trade and Industry, for the discouragement of Vice and
Profaneness, and for (...) other matter or thing relating to the good of the
(...)

To his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Capt. General and Governor in Chief of
the Province of New Jersey, etc. The humble Address of the General Assembly of
New Jersey.
May it please your Excellency;
WE esteem it our great happiness that her Majesty has placed a person of so
much ^emper and Moderation over us, and make no question your Excellency will
surmount every Difficulty with Honor and Safety.

Her Majestys Reign will make a bright Leaf in History; and as it is the
advantage of the present, so 't will be the admiration of future Ages, not more
for her Success abroad than her Prudence at home; and though our distance has,
and may sometimes be disadvantagious to us, yet we experience the Effect of her
Princely ^are, in putting an end to the worst Administration New Jersey ever
knew, by sending your Excellency, whose Administration must always be easy to
her Majesty's Subjects here, and Satisfactory to your self, whilst you follow
so great and so good an Example.

We have no Annimosities with one another, but firmly agree to do our Selves
and Country Justice; and persuade our selves, none that deserve public
Censure, will have share in your Excellency's esteem, but that we shall meet
with a hearty Concurrence from you in all those measures that conduce to our
Peace and Satisfaction.

We shall contribute to the Support of her Majestys Government to the utmost of
our Abilities, and most willingly so at a time when are freed from Bondage and
Arbitrary Encroachments; and are very much satisfied that Vice and Immorality
will meet with a different Treatment from what it did, and not receive the
public Countenance and Approbation.

We do assure your Excellency, all your reasonable Desires shall be Commands to
us, and that we will study to make your Excellency's Administration as easy
and happy as we can to your Excellency and our selves.

March 8. 1709. Several Members of this House being of the People called
Quakers, do approve of the matter and substance above-written, but make some
exceptions as to the style.



House of Representatives, March 9. 1709.
May it please your Excellency;
THis House being credibly informed, that an Address was sent to her Majesty by
the Lieut. Governor and Council in the year 1707* a Copy of which this House
has hitherto, in vain, endeavored to obtain. This House therefore humbly
prays, That your Excellency would be pleased to take such measures as your
Excellency shall think fit, that a Copy of said Address may be laid before this
House.

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Lieut.
Governor and Council of Nova Caesarea (...) New Jersey in America.
May it please Your Majesty,
WE, the Lieut. Governor and Council of your Majestys Province of Nova
Caesarea or New Jersey, having seriously and deliberately taken into our
Consideration the Proceedings of the present Assembly or Representative Body of
this Province, thought our selves bound, both in Duty and Conscience, to
testify to your Majesty our Dislike and Abhorrence of the same, being very
sensible, that the unaccountable Humors and pernicious Designs of some
particular men have put them upon so many Irregularities, with intention only
to occasion Diversions and Distractions, to the disturbance of the great and
weighty Affairs which both your Majesty's Honor and Dignity, as well as the
Peace and Welfare of the Country required. Their high Encroachments upon your
Majestys Prerogative Royal, Notorious Violations of the Rights and Liberties of
the Subjects, manifest Interruptions of Justice, and most unmannerly Treatment
of his Excellency the Lord Cornbury, would have induced us sooner to have
discharged our Duty to your Majesty, in giving a full Representation of the
unhappy Circumstances of this your Majestys Province and Government* had we not
been in hopes that his Excellency the Lord Cornbury's full and ample Answer to
a most scandalous Libil, called, The Remonstrance of the Assembly of Nova
Caesarea or New Jersey, which was delivered to the Governor by the Assembly at
Burlington in May last, would have opened the Eyes of the Assembly, and brought
them back to their Reason and Duty; but finding that those few^ Turbulent and
uneasy Spirits in that Assembly have still been able to influence and amuse the
Judgment of many well meaning Men in that Body, as appears by another late
scandalous and infamous Libil, called, The Reply of the House of
Representatives of the Province of NewJersey, to an Answer made by his
Excellency Edward Viscount Cornbury, Governor of the said Province, to the
humble Remonstrance of the aforesaid House. We are now obliged humbly to
represent to your Majesty the true Cause, and what we conceive may be the
Remedy of these Confusions.

The first is wholly owing to the Turbulent, Factious, Uneasy and Dis-loyal
Principles of two Men in that Assembly, Mr. Lewis Morris, and Samuel Jenings a
Quaker; Men notoriously known to be uneasy under all Government: Men never
known to be con^^^^ent with themselves; Men to whom all the (...) and
Confusions in the Governments of New Jersey and Pennsilvania for many years are
wholly owing: Men that have had the Confidence to declare in (...) Council,
That your Majesty's Instructions to your Governors in these Provinces shall
not oblige or bind them, nor will they be concluded by them, further than they
are warranted by Law; of which also they will be the Judges; and this is done
by them, (as we have all the reason in the world to believe) (...) encourage
not only this Government, but also the rest of your Governments in America to
throw off your Majesty's Royal Prerogative, and consequently to involve all
your Dominions in this part of the World, and the (...) good and well meaning
People in them, in Confusion, hoping thereby to the (...) wicked Purposes.

The Remedy for all these Evils, we most humbly propose, is, That your Majesty
will most graciously please to Discountenance those wicked designing Men, and
show some Dislike of this Assembly's Proceedings, who are ^^solved neither to
Support this your Majestys Government by a Revenue, nor take care to Defend it
by settling a Militia.

This last Libil, called, The Reply, etc. came out so suddenly, that as yet we
have not had time to answer it in all its Particulars, but do assure your
Majesty, That it is for the most part false in Fact; and that part of it which
carries any face of Truth, they have been malicious and unjust in not
mentioning the whole Truth, which would have fully justified my Lord Cornbury's
(...) Conduct.

THUS having discharged this part of our Duty, which we thought at present
incumbent upon us, we beg leave to assure your Majesty, That whenever we shall
see the People of this Province labor under any thing like a Grievance* we
shall, according to our Duty, immediately apply to the Governor with our best
Advice, for the Redress of it; and we have no reason yet to doubt of a ready
Compliance in him. We shall not be particular in, but crave leave to refer to
his Excellency's Representation of them to the Right honorable the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations.

The strenuous asserting of your Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and Vindicating
the Honor of your Governor, the Lord Cornbury, will, in our humble Opinion, be
so absolutely necessary at this juncture, that without your so doing, your
Majesty will find your self deceived either in expectation of a Revenue for
Support of the Government, or Militia for its Defense.

In hopes your Majesty will take these important things into your
Consideration, and his Excellency the Lord Cornbury, with all the Members of
your Majestys Council, into your Royal Favor and Protection, We shall conclude
with our most fervent Prayers to the most High to lengthen Your Days and
increase your Glories; and that our Selves in particular, and all others in
general who reap the benefit of your Majesty's most gentle and happy
Government* may be, and ever continue the most Loyal and Dutiful of Subjects to
the most Glorious and best of Queens.

Robt. Quarry, William Sanford. Thomas Revell, Daniel Leeds, Daniel Cox,
Richard Townley, Rich. Ingoldesby, William Pinborne, R. Mompesson.


House of Representatives, March 14. 1708.
May it please Your Excellency;
THis House renders their humble and hearty Thanks to your Lordship for
favoring us with a Copy of that Paper, called, The Address of the Lieut^
Governor and Council of New Jersey, to her Majesty, which we conceive rather
to be an Impeachment, and lays the House under a necessity humbly to address
your Excellency, That you will be pleased to desire the Lieut. Governor, and
all those Gentlemen that signed the said Address, to attend your Excellency at
such time as you Think fit to appoint, to prove their Allegations contained in
said Address, and that this House may have leave to be present, that Her
Majesty's dutiful Subjects of this province may have an opportunity of making
their just Defense to clear themselves from such Imputations.

To his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Capt. General and Governor in Chief of
the Province of New Jersey, etc. The humble Address of the General Assembly of
New Jersey.
May it please your Excellency;
W E have now a considerable time waited in expectation that the Gentlemen of
the Council would have laid before your Excellency something in Justification
of the Address they sent to the Queen; it is what (if they have any value for
their Reputations) they are obliged to do; but their Neglect of it, after the
time set them, looks as if they Studied to avoid coming to the Test.

We cannot suppose them unprovided, having (as they say) seriously and
deliberately taken into Consideration what they thought themselves bound in
Conscience and duty, to testify their dislike of, to her Majesty* and having
now had so long time to collect what Proofs they are able, which if they
decline to do, we hope your Excellency will take it for granted, that what they
have writ is not true* but that the Consciousness of their own Guilt, makes
them shun that trial, which is so necessary to enable your Excellency to set
the Differences between us, in a true light, before her Majesty.

We have drawn out the several Articles in that Address, which amount to about
sixteen; and whatever pretenses they may make to Temper and good Manners, we
presume they will not offer this Address as an Instance of either; if they do, we
must confess our selves so unfortunate as to entertain different sentiments of
it; but of that enough; the Articles are,

I. That they had Seriously and Deliberately taken into Consideration the
Proceedings of the present Assembly, or Representative Body of this Province,
and that they were in Duty and Conscience bound to testify their dislike and
abhorrance of the same to the Queen.

II. That the unaccountable Humors and perni^ious Designs of some particular
men have put them upon so many Irregularities, with Intention only to occasi^n
Divertions and Distractions, to the Disturbance of the great and weighty
Affairs which her Majesty's Honor and Dignity, and the Peace and Welfare of
the Country required.

III. That we had highly incroach't upon her Majesty's Prerogative Royal.

IV. That we had notoriously violated the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects.

V. That we had manifestly interrupted Justice.

VI. That the Remonstrance was a most Scandalous Libel.

VII. That the Lord Cornbury made a full and ample answer to it.

VIII. That the Reply of the House of Representatives of the Province (...)
New Jersey was a scandalous and Infamous Libel.

IX. That these disturbances are owing wholly to Lewis Morris and Samuel
Jennings, Men of turbulent, factious, uneasy and disloyal Principles; (...)
notoriously known to uneasy under all Government, and Men never known to be
consistent with themselves.

X. That to those Men are owing all the Factions and Confusions in the
Governments of New Jersey and Pennsilvania.

XI. That this is done with design to throw off the Queens Prerogati^^ Royal
and consequently to involve all her Majesty's Dominions in the p^^^ of the
world, and the honest, good and well meaning men in them, in Confusion, hoping
hereby to obtain their wicked purposes.

XII. That the Assembly are Resolved neither to Support the Queens Government
with a Revenue, nor Defend it by settling a Militia.

XII. That the 'Reply, (which they again call a Libel) came out so suddenly,
that they had not time to answer it in all its particulars.

XIV. They assure her Majesty, it is for the most part false in fact.

XV. That where it has any face of Truth, we have been Malicious (...) Unjust
in not mentioning the whole Truth.

XVI. That Whenever the People labored under any Grievance, (...) would,
according to their Duty, apply to the Governor with their (...) Advice.

YOUR Excellency must needs think, here are but too many Temptation to
Resentment, and would justify our Treatment of the Authors with a ^^^able
Warmth, to find this House accused so unjustly, and with so peculiar^
Virulence, cannot be very grateful to us. But when we consider that (...) whole
design of this Address was an endeavor to render Assemblies altogether
Useless, to lodge the whole Legislature in Edward Viscount Cornbury, (...) a
few (...) ((...) so we must (...)) (...) were (...) being (...) Ministers of
his Arbitrary Pleasure. And to obtain this end, no less an (...) was used, than
that we designed to throw off her Majestys Preroga^^^ Royal. Its not
unreasonable to suppose, that those who used the thing (...) its largest
acceptance, did not use the word in its most restrained fence; (...) say, its
no wonder that at such an Accusation as this we appear in some (...) concerned,
and tell your Excellency* It is what we abhor and detest from (...) bottom of
our hearts; That we think our selves happy under her Majestys Government; and
hope, We have given you Demonstration that what (...) is true. No Resentment
that we might justly have to Lieut. Governor hindered us from paying an Honor
to the Queens Commission, by giving (...) Two Hundred Pounds for this year;
though we take leave to inform your Excellency, it is not his own Merits, nor any
hopes we have of his future Conduct (...) to it, but purely in honor to the
Commission (as we said before) (...), more, it is an Office to us altogether
useless, and a Charge we cannot bear. (...) we beg leave further to inform your
Excellency, That though we have given (...) hundred Pounds, for a year, to a
chief Justice, yet we never did intend, that (...) Roger M^mpesson, Esquire or any
of the Signers of that Address, should (...) any benefit by that Sallary
appointed for the Office of Chief Justice, but (...), That your Excellency
would be pleased to remove the said Roger Mompesson, Esquire from the said Office
of Chief Justice, we having too great reason to (...), that her Majesty's
Subjects cannot be safe in their Properties, so long as a (...) that has so
falsely represented her Majesty's good Subjects to our gracious Sovereign,
executes that Office. We also humbly submit it to your Excellency's
Consideration, how fit it will be for her Majesty's Service and the Peace and
welfare of this Province, to continue any of the Signers of the
abovementioned (...)-representation to her Majesty, in her Council, or any
other Office of Trust Profit in this Government.

We conclude, by acquainting your Excellency, That we have addressed her Majesty,
and beg leave to recommend it to your Excellency's care, and hope, (...) you
may always, as you do now, give us reason to pray for your Health and long
continuance among us.

By Order of the House, Thomas Gordon, Speaker.
March 31. 1709. Several Members of this House being of the People called
Quakers, do approve of the matter and substance above-written, but make some
exceptions as to the style.



To his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Baron of Hurley, etc. The humble Address
of the Lieut. Governor, etc.
May it please Your Excellency;
YOur Excellency having been pleased to communicate to the Gentlemen of the
Council an Address from the present House of Representatives, in relation to a
Paper, called, The Copy of an Address signed by the Lieut. Governor and
Council of New Jersey, (...) Majesty. We desired time till the (...) of the
Gentlemen, who are charged with signing this Address* can have (...) to appear
to give answer to your Excellency; whereupon the Clerk of the Council was
ordered to write to the several Gentlemen of the Council, to (...) in their
respective Stations in eight Days* which time being expired, (...) whose Names
are here asserted in the Copy, as having signed thereto, although (...) believe
there are some Mistakes in transcribing, and though some of the Gentlemen, said
to have signed the same, are not here, yet in behalf of our selves, (...) all
Humility and Submission, presume to offer this as our Answer;

That in the Station her Majesty has been pleased to place us. We have (...)
to discharge a Conscience in the faithful Execution of our trust, and (...)
that we have each of us taken, have sworn, That we shall not know nor hear any
thing that may be prejudicial to the Commonwealth, Peace or (...) her Majestys
Realm, or this Province, but that we shall, with all diligence (...) and
Declare the same to her Majesty, etc. Whereupon, being sensible how prejudicial
the Proceedings of some certain Persons were to her Majestys Interest and the
Peace and Quiet of this her Majestys Province, we thought it our (...) the same
to her Majesty. And your Excellency having been pleased to communicate to us
her Majestys Commands, signified in a Letter from (...) Lord Sun^erland, That
upon your Excellency's arrival here you enquire (...) the manner of Fact, and
send him an account thereof, as it shall appear to your Excellency, that he may
lay the same before the Queen. In order to (...) your Excellency to return an
Answer thereto, we shall produce such Proofs (...) Instances, as, we presume,
will justify us in her Majesty's Opinion, for the (...) we then thought it our
Duty to offer; but the same being a matter that (...) necessarily take up some
time in getting Copies of the Records of (...) Counties, and taking the
Evidences of several Witnesses, dispersed at (...) distances in the Province,
must crave a convenient time to be allowed by your Excellency for our so doing.

Rich. Townley, Rob. Quarry, Daniel Cox. Rich. Ingoldest^^^ William Pinbor^^
William (...)


At the same time, Mr. Mompessor delivered his Answer in (...) words following,
viz.
May it please your Excellency;
THe Address being tendered unto me as an Act of the Lieut. Governor and
Council, and signed by all the Gentlemen, before brought (...) me; upon
consideration of the Lord Audleys case, mentioned in (...) Reports, where the
Ld. Chief Justice's Opinion was different from the (...) Judges, yet his was
invol'd in theirs, and reported to the Lords on that (...) as the Opinion of
all the Judges: On the Citation of that Case, and the (...) the House of
Commons were of Opinion, That when seven Commissioners were appointed to
inspect into the forfeited Estates in Ireland, when four (...) signed the
Report, the other three ought to have signed it, and were (...) for not
signing, though contrary to their Opinions. It Is likewise taken (...) in the Ld.
Strafford's Trial, fo. 231 and 232. That the usual Method in the (...) Council
of Ireland (...) That if an Order were made on a Council day, (...) it was
drawn out fair, it was afterward signed by the other of the (...) though absent
at the time of making the Order or although they gave their (...) to it, when
present at the making^ The Method likewise at New York (...) been, that when a
reference has been made unto three of her Majestys (...) there, to make their
Report thereon, if in such case who have been of (...) opinion, and the third
of another, yet all have signed the Report, and it has (...) there looked on as
regular, and requisite to be done. On these and other Considerations of the
like nature. I signed the Address beforementioned without amining into the
particulars thereof.

Roger Mompessor

To his Excellency John Lord Lovelace, Capt. General and Governor in Chief of
the Province of New Jersey, etc. The humble Address of the Representatives of
her Majestys Province of N. Jersey.
May it please your Excellency;
WE the Representatives of this her Majestys Province of New Jersey having
examined into the truth of several Complaints made against Peter Sonmans, Esquire
one of her Majestys Council for this Province, do find, that the said Sonmans
has illegally used the Power he is clothed with, to the great hurt of several
of her Majestys Subjects, and, if tolerated, will be of evil example, and
render their Liberties and Properties precarious, and at the disposal of every
Magistrate, who will make his will, and not the Law, the Rule of his Actions.

We are heartily sorry that that Gentleman, who has the honor be of her
Majesty's Council, and does not want sufficient Abilities for her Service,
should by his imprudent Conduct lay us under a necessity of so public a
Complaint against him; but we cannot be so much wanting to the Country we
represent, as to be silent in a case that so justly requires our Consideration,
and persuade our selves, your Excellency will not protect him in the breach of
the Laws, and abuse of her Majesty's Subjects; but on the contrary, think it
for the honor of the Queen to punish a Person who uses her Authority so
contrary to the end for which it was conferred on him. Though we have but too much
reason to believe those Arbitrary measures with which the late Administration
under the Ld. Cornbury, so much abounded, were very much owing to his Councils,
he being one of the Persons on whose advice his Lordship very much relied, yet
we shall not insist on any thing that may look like Conjecture, but take care
to inform your Excellency,

That in the first place, he advised and procured the arresting of Mr. John
Barclary on Whitsunday last, coming out of the Church from the Sacrament, which
is a manifest breach of the Peace, and contrary to the Laws in that case made
and provided, and must tend to the discouragement of Religion, and the public
Worship of God, if Persons cannot be secure at the Altar in the most Solemn Acts
of Worship.

2 dly, He took from one John Brown his Horse, without assigning him any Reason
for it, and detains him to this Day. And some time after the poor Man had
commenced an Action against him, to recover, if possible, his Beast unjustly
detained from him, one Reeves complained against one Mellin, a Tailor (who had
some time before used some expressions against some of Mr. Sonmans Friends) for
detaining a Coat of the said Reeves's, which Mr. Sonmans was pleased to call
Felony, and was going to commit the said Mellin for Felony, though Mellin
proved, and Reeves afterward con^est, that Mellin only detained the Coat he had
made, till Reeves should pay him for making of it. Mellin finding there was no
contending against absolute Power, found a way to escape from Sonmans, and was
set over to (...)-Island by the aforesaid Brown, who was altogether ignorant of
what had happened; upon which Sonmans (to gratify his Resentment) contrary to
Law^ committed the said Brown to Goal; and when the Sheriff had admitted him to
Bail, Sonmans used many threats to him for his so doing, ordering him to take
him back again, telling him, he would throw up his Commission, and go to York,
and desire my Lord to send Soldiers to Rule them; which Threat, and the fear of
being governed by Martial Law, induced the Sheriff to take him into Custody
again, and keep him in Prison till my Lord Cornbury was pleased to allow he
might be admitted to Bail. This Procedure, as it was most unlawful and unjust,
so it tended not only to render her Majesty's Subjects entirely depending on my
Lord Cornbury, or those he thought fit to honor with Magistracy, but to create
in the Minds of the People an avresion to her Majesty's just and mild
Government, when by a humor a Gentleman of the Council could Dragoon them at
pleasure.

3 dly, In a Case depending between the Queen and Mr. Harrison, upon
Information exhibited by the Attorney General, he the said Sonmans endeavored
to persuade the Sheriff to pack a Jury* and accordingly gave him a Lift of
eleven Men, all Dutchmen, and promised to bring them in his way, that he might
be at little trouble; had this been after the Threat of Dragooning, and with a
Man of less Virtue than the present Sheriff, in all probability it had taken
effect, and the Gentleman had been Ruined.

4 thly, In a Suit depending before him in the Court of Pleas, between Mr.
Michael van Veighty and Mr. Alexander Walker, a Friend of Mr. Sonmans, the said
Veighty had ordered Mr. Tho. Gordon to take out a Writ and sign it with his the
said Veighty's Name, which Veighty acknowledged in open Court, and offered to
sign it himself; notwithstanding, he the said Sonmans did not only not admit
the Action to be Tried, but taxed a Bill of Cost against the said Veighty for
three Pounds seven Shillings and ten Pence, in abatement, in which Case no Cost
ought to be paid. And that the Partiality and Injustice of Mr. Sonmans may
appear more plainly to your Lordship, in the same Court another Writ signed in
the same manner as that was, met with no objection from him, but was allowed of.

5 thly, The aforementioned Alexander Walker, after beating and cutting his
Wife in a miserable manner, threatened to wash his hands in the Blood of his
Son-in-Law, and on Sunday in the Morning attempted it with an Ax, and had, in
probability, murdered him, had not the sudden coming of help prevented him;
upon which application being made to Mr. Sonmans, to bind the said Walker to
the Peace, he absolutely refused it, pretending he was immediately going out of
Town on your Lordships Business, though he staid in Town part of the next Day.

6 thly, In Contempt of the Laws in that Case made and provided, he openly
Cohabits with a scandalous Woman, has had one Bastard by her; This is to the
evil Example of her Majesty's Subjects, in so public a Violation of the Laws,
by a Person who ought to give a good Example, and punish that Crime in others.

7 thly. He stands indicted of Perjury and Adultery, and we fear, the
Consciousness of other Guilts, prevailed upon him, after an unpresident^^^
manner, to hinder the Grand Inquest from doing their Duty at the last Court; by
which means, several Breaches of the Peace, Riots and Misdemeanors have
escap'^ that Notice which should be taken of such Crimes.

8 thly and lastly, Whereas her Majesty has been graciously pleased to admit
the People called Quakers to bear and share in the several Offices in this
Government, Mr. Sonmans has turned them out of Juries, and not admitted them to
serve in those Stations in Courts of which he has been Judge; This is
endeavoring to Defeat her Majesty's good Intentions to her Subjects of that
Persuasion, and render her Government uneasy, which is what, we are satisfied,
She in no means designs.

Were there no more to be said against him than his being indicted for Perjury
and Adultery, we humbly conceive, would justify what we are to desire of your
Lordship; A Person of that Character being a Scandal to her Majesty's Council;
and we believe your Excellency will think it a Reflection on the Public
Administration to continue him in that Station. We therefore pray, That your
Excellency would remove him from your Presence, Her Majesty's Council, and all
Places of Trust and Profit in this Province.

By Order of the House, Thomas Gordon, Speaker.
March 18. 1708.
Mr. Sonmans Address to his Excellency is as follows.
May it please Your Excellency;
EVer since your Excellency did me the Favor of letting me see the Address of
the Representatives relating to me, I have diligently applied my self to answer
the same; but having been obliged to attend your Excellency daily in Council,
and the Committees of the said Council, to draw and Copy every thing relating
to the said Answer my self have not yet had sufficient time to perfect, but
hope, by continual Application, to finish and deliver the same to your
Excellency in three or four Days.

Peter Sonmans.
April 1. 1709.
House of Representatives, March 22. 1708.
May it please your Excellency;
THe Representatives of this her Majestys Province of New Jersey, have
endeavored, in vain, hitherto, to bring Peter (...), Esquire Receiver General of
the last Revenue, to account; and he being now in (...) Province of New York,
under your Lordships Administration, obliges (...) humbly to pray your
Excellency to command the said (...) to attend this House with his Accounts and
Vouchers of the said Revenue; which if he neglect or refuse to do speedily, we
humbly desire your Lordship will be pleased to order his Securities Bonds to be
put in Suit.

House of Representatives, April ^. 1709.
May it please your Excellency;
THough (...) House has an entire Confidence in your Excellency (...) and
Prudence, that your Excellency would dispose of (...) Money raised for the
Support of the Government, to the Purpose designed, yet we dare not say, that
we have that Confidence (...) these Gentlemen that are now of her Majesty's
Council, which is the reason we have altered the former Method, and which we
pray your Excellency will please favorably to represent to her Majesty in our
behalf.

By Order of the House, Thomas Gordon, Speaker

Amboy, House of Representatives, April 4. 1709.
BY Virtue of an Order of the House of Representatives, do appoint William
Bradford to Print his Excellency Spee^^ The Address of the Lieut. Governor and
Council to her Majesty (...) also the foregoing ten Addresses to his
Excellency.

Thomas Gordon, Speaker

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Queens most (...) Majesty
for the Province of New Jersey, 1709.


