(...) matter,) has an Ounce of it, in all the Calamities, that ever since that
black Day have overtaken them.

When Moses returned from the Mount, unto this Idolatrous People, this was One
of the awful Demands, which he brought from Heaven unto them; Therefore now Put
off thy Ornament from thee. The Chaldee reads it; Put off thy Armor. And, if
it be so read, it seems the Language of a Provoked General, Ordering the
Rebellious Legions* to be Disarmed, that so he may proceed unto what Punishment
he please upon them. Or, if we rather say, Put off thy Ornaments, it looks like
a Master Ordering a Slave to be Stripped, that he may then Resolve, Whether to
Punish him or no, according to his Demerits. It administers occasion, by the
way, to let fall an Admonition concerning a Fault which is too common among us;
On our Days of HUMILIATION many of our People appear with too gay Ornaments
upon them. If Sack cloth of old, (the same with Sagum,) a Black rough Garment
made of coarse Wool, (called, The Garment of Sorrow) was thought the only
Suitable Habit for such Days, I would bespeak your Plainest, Meannest,
Humblest Habit for them. When such Days arrive; Christians, Don't Affront
Heaven with any Bravery, but, Put off your Ornaments. What I have now to
Observe is this. To Put off their Ornaments, is here Enjoined upon the People,
as an Expression of Repentance. There is a Confession implied in this
Expression. The Confession is of this importance; Lord, We have Stripped our
selves of all real Ornaments; No real Ornaments do now belong unto us. They
were to Put off their Ornaments, in token of what they now Saw and Owned
themselves to be Really before the Lord; A Ragged, Squalid, Horrid Spectacle!
They were to own it, and they did so, with a Wonderful contrition before the
Lord.

I lay hold on this Intention. There is a Doctrine, which I may very Properly
inculcate on my Children; Oh! That I may do it as Pungently; and very
Profitably!

Sinful Men, do by their Sins, Miserably
Strip themselves of Ornaments.
They that are in ill Terms with Heaven, by being yet in their Sins, have cause
to apprehend themselves really and utterly destitute of all Real Ornaments. A
Sinner, however he may be adorned* Spoils, and Wounds, and Loses all his
Ornaments. Ah, Sinner, Put off thy Ornaments. Do not pretend to be an Owner of
any Ornaments! I have these things to say upon it.

I. Ungodly People may have those things, which may be Esteemed Ornaments. Many
choice Endowments and Ornaments may be bestowed upon Ungodly People. There are
Persons, whose Names God has not Written in the Book of Life: Persons, whom God
has rejected from His Eternal Purposes of Mercy; Persons, that continue in a
State of Enmity to God; And yet, the Great GOD, Adorns these Persons, with many
and lovely Ornaments. They that are Loathsome to God; the People of whom the
word of God assures us, The Lord Abhors them. Yet God may bestow those
Ornaments on these People, which may mightily Set them off in the Eyes of the
World. The Image of God, wholly does consist of Ornaments. There may be seen
Remainders of the Image of GOD, in ungodly People. Those in whom the Image of
GOD is not Restored by a Saving Work of Heaven upon them, Yet have something of
it Remaining in them. There was one shut out from the Kingdom of God; One who
Lacked that One thing, which is the Chief Ornament of all: Yet such were his
Ornaments, that we read; Mark 10.21. Jesus beholding him, Loved him.

There may be Internal Ornaments, upon those, who yet upon other accounts are
within full of all Hypocrisy and Iniquity. Internal Ornaments are the Gifts of
the Holy Spirit of God. There are Common Gifts of the Holy Spirit, granted unto
Reprobates: They are not the Better things which accompany Salvation. We read
concerning a Wicked man, 1 Samuel 10.9, 10. God gave him another Heart; the
Spirit of God came upon him. Rare Talents may be Conferred on Persons who are
Haters of God, and whom God Hates, as the Workers of Iniquity.

And there may be many External Ornaments Enjoyed by them, who have nothing but
what is merely External to boast of. The Providence of God may Enrich those,
who are Internally very Poor Creatures. It may Advance those, who are
Internally the Basest of Men. It may give a Fair Skin, a Speckled Coat, unto
those who are Internally full of Deadly Poison. We read concerning the most
Unhappy Fools; Psalm. 49 14 They have a Beauty, that shall Consume in the Grave.

In the world before the Flood, we read of Two Generations. There were the
Children of Cain, and there were the Children of Seth. Among the Cainites, we
read of Notable Artists; We read of them that Built and Owned whole Cities; we
read of Women that were very Beautiful. Among the Sethites, we read not of such
things; but we read of Men Walking with God, and then Taken by Him. The Ancient
Writers of Primitive Christianity make an Illustrious Type of this matter. The
Cainites are a Type of the Men of this World, or* of the Kingdom of Satan in
this World. The Sethites are a Type of the Godly, who are called out of this
World, into the Kingdom of God. Even among the Cainites, there may be Great
Hero's, there may be Great Scholars, there may be Wealthy Landlords; and there
may be those who may have all the Charms of Nature upon them.

There is the Unaccountable Sovereignty of GOD, in Ordering of it. All the
Children of men must Confess unto the Lord, Isa. 64.8. O Lord, We are the Clay,
and thou art our Potter. The Sovereign Maker of men, may set off His Clay
Vessels with whatever Ornaments He pleases. The Vessels, which He will at last
make Vessels of Wrath, He may now set them off with very Fine Figures, and fill
them with what may give a grateful Entertainment. It is even so; Lord of Heaven
and Earth, Because it pleases thee!

The Compassion of Heaven also does Consult the Welfare of Humane Society in
thus Ordering of it. The Compassionate Lord, has a mighty Tenderness for Humane
Society. The Ornaments of Ungodly Men, are made unspeakably Serviceable,
incredibly Beneficial, to Humane Society. The World, yea, and the Church of God
in the world, fares the better, for the Ornaments of Ungodly People. God makes
a Good Use of Ill People. He furnishes Ill People with abundance of Good,
because He will Employ them to Do abundance of Good. He Lodges Good Qualities,
and Brave, and Neat Ornaments in Bad People, because He will make use of them
for the Good of others. Oh! The Goodness of God! How Great is His Goodness and
His Beauty!

II. There is a Wondrous, an Hideous, Vgliness in all Ungodly People,
notwithstanding all their Esteemed Ornaments. Hear this O Proud and Vain and
Self-applauding Sinner: There is not one Ungodly Sinner, but what is a Prodigy
of Deformity. Abominable Men, who Drink in Iniquity like Water! The Person who
for many Ages was the Greatest Person in Europe, is called, Dan. 11.21. A Vile
Person. Why? He is the Man of Sin. Sin, Sin, always makes a Vile Person*
[Compare, Psalm. 15.4] We read, -- and Oh! What Pumice stones are our Eyes, that
we can read it with Dry Eyes! Psalm. 14.1, 3. They are Corrupt, they have done
abominable Works, they are all together become Filthy. It Is the Description of
all Ungodly People. Hear this, O all ye People, every one of You.

We read of an Adorned Sepulcher. What is an Adorned Sinner but an Adorned
Sepulcher? Let never such Ornaments appear upon him* he is a Collection of
Loathsome Filthiness and Rottenness Come with me, Miserable Wretch: Come along
with me; and I will show thee what thou art. The Word of God is Compared unto a
Glass. Thou shall be showen unto thy self in that Glass. Oh! Be not that
Forgetful Hearer, that will go away, and Straightway forget what manner of
thing thou art. Look into the Third Chapter to the Romans, and Read, from the
Twelfth Verse to the Eighteenth. Read, and be Confounded, and never open thy
Mouth any more, because of thy Shame. [Turn to the Place, and Read it with
Deliberation.]

Original Sin, Our Original Sin has brought us under an Universal Depravation*
it has depraved us with an Universal Deformity. By losing the Image of GOD, we
have Lost our Ornaments. By having the Satanick Image upon us, which are made
most horrible Objects. -- But I anticipate my self; My Discourse is yet but
coming to that Extremity.

I must first say; To be born a Sinner, is to be born a Monster. It Is as Odious,
as Frightful, as to be born with the Scales of the Leviathan; to be born with
the Belly where the Head should be; with Eyes in the Back-part of the Head;
with the Hands growing to the Mouth; with the Feet made for ever to go awry
every Step. I Speak Significantly; Sinner, such, even such a Monster would be
thy very Emblem. There is no Sinner, but from his very Birth, every thing is
Out of Order with him.

Is not an Hater of God, an horrible Object? No Good Man can without Horror
think of such an Object. But such an one is every Unrenewed Sinner, every
Unrepenting Sinner. We read, Romans 1.30. They are Haters of God. Vile Things are
to be spoken of thee, O Thou Hater of God, thou Monster of the World!

We generally decry a man, who Loves none but himself. A Sinner not changed by
Grace, comes under this Character. He sets up himself at his GOD. He does
nothing but for himself. Self, Self lies at the bottom of all his Designs, all
his Actions, all his Friendship.

We generally decry a man who is Ungrateful to his Benefactor. This is the
Black Character of a Sinner, whom Grace has not made a change upon. His
Ingratitude unto GOD, who Keeps him, who Feeds him, who, daily Loads him with
his Benefits, it is the most abominable Thing that ever was heard of. He is
always Reproaching the Lord, whom every Moment he lives upon.

How Deformed were a Man turned into a Dog, a Swine, a Serpent! So is the
Unrenewed Sinner Painted in the Book of God! A Creature full of Ornaments
indeed! Born a Wild Asses Colt! A curious Creature truly*

But I must at last bring the matter to the Extremity. Certainly* a Devil is an
ugly Thing* The Image of the Devil is all over Ugly. Sinner, It Is thy Image. The
word of God has called such as thou art; 1 John 3.10. The Children of the
Devil. Oh! horrible Deformity!

In fine; How do all ungodly People appear to all the Angels in Heaven? Verily,
Those Holy Angels look upon the Unrenewed Sinner, with Astonishment, with
Detestation; they look upon him as you do upon a Toad. An Ungodly World is that
rueful and hateful Sight, at which the Angels of Heaven are thus called upon;
Jer. 2.12. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye
very desolate, says the Lord.

III. The Ornaments on Ungodly People, the very Ornaments themselves, through
their Ungodliness, do even cease to be Ornaments* As we read; Romans 2.25. If
thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision. Even so,
If thou art an ungodly Person, thy Ornaments are made no Ornaments. Ah,
Unregenerate and Unreconciled Sinner* whatever may be thy pretended Ornaments;
Even make no pretensions to any Ornaments; thy Sins, thy Sins, have ruined all
thy Ornaments. It was a sore Balance to the Ornaments of Naaman; 2 King* 5.1.
He was an honorable man; he was also a mighty man in Valor; but he was a
Leper. But all the Ornaments of any Person, are much more heavily
over-ballanced, if there be this Dead Weight on the other side; But he is a
Sinner; But he has no Fear of God: But he is a Stranger to Serious Piety; But
he is destitute of that Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

We will Enumerate the Principal Ornaments, that are found on any Ungodly
People, and see how they are Eclipsed, Absorbed, even Destroyed by their
Ungodliness.

First. Some are Adorned with Wit, with Knowledge, with Learning; Their Natural
Abilities are very Pregnant; Their Acquired Abilities are very shining. They
have Sharp Understandings, Quick Inventions, Strong Memories. These are
admirable Ornaments. These Ornaments may be found in some that yet are not Wise
unto Salvation. But, Ah, Witty Sinner; What will become of thy Wit, when in thy
Later End thou shall be found a Fool, and thou will call thy self a Fool World
without End? Count not thy self a Wise Man. Thou art One of those, of whom the
Oracles of Wisdom declare, There is no Wisdom in them. An Unconverted Sinner is
a Fool. He does nothing, but what calls for that Acknowledgment; 2 Samuel 24.^0.
I have done very foolishly. The whole course of a Sinner is, To go astray in
the greatness of his Folly. What Wisdom is there in a Sinner? There is not yet
in him so much as the Beginning of Wisdom. Until a man has the Fear of God, he
has not the Beginning of Wisdom. What Signify the brightest Accomplishments and
Embellishments of Mind, in that Man, who is all the while a Madman? He that is
not a Good Man is a Madman. We read, Eccl. 9.3. Madness is in their hearts.
Ah, Foolish Sinner! He has the Wit to do and Speak ingenious things without
Number: But he has not the Wit, to Encounter the Devices of Satan against him.
He may be a Knowing Person; But he Knows not the Things of his Everlasting
Peace. He may be a Learned Person; But he has not Learned the skill of Living
unto God. He may be reckoned a Wise Man; but he never did One Wise Act in all
his Life. A Wise Man! Alas, he is a Madman! He Sells a Soul for a Song. He
parts with Eternal Pleasures, for some Shadow of a Delight, which Expires in a
Moment. He contends with an Almighty GOD, who can crush him in a Moment! Fool,
Put off thy Ornaments. A Fools Coat belongs unto thee.

Secondly: Some are Adorned with a Sweetness of Temper They are so
Good-natured, so Good-humoured, so Obliging, that they may be styled, as One
was, Delicium humani generis; The Delight of all that Converse with them. A
Courteous* Officious, Condescending Temper, is an Ornament, which every body
commends. It commands Commendation, Every bodies Commendation. But, Oh, Sweet
tempered Child; If thou art yet in thy Sins, the greatest Baseness of Temper in
the World, is to be charged upon thee. A Glorious CHRIST has dyed for thee; has
Entreated thee, Requested thee, Importuned thee, long waited on thee, to become
His. Thou take no notice of Him. Nothing will win upon thee. A Dying Savior
will not win upon thee. Base-tempered Wretch; All Heaven cries out upon thee.
Thou art an Enemy to GOD; That is to be an Enemy to Infinite Goodness. Is this
the Goodness of thy Temper? To Abuse Goodness it self! Thou art a most
Unthankful Creature. The Complaint which the Blessed GOD makes over thee, is
that; Isa. 1.2 I have nourished, and brought up Children and they have Rebelled
against me. The Blessed GOD even courts thee, with His Blessings. Thy Heart
beats not so many Pulses, as a Good GOD heaps Blessings of Goodness upon thee.
All these Kindnesses will not persuade thee to Love Him. After all these
Kindnesses, thou do continue in Arms against Him. Verily, Every Person in a
State of Nature, is a very ill-natured Person. Hard-hearted Sinner; Put off thy
Ornaments. Do thou thus Requite the Lord?

Thirdly. Some are Adorned with a Noble Courage and Valor; a Courageous,
Valiant, Undaunted Magnanimity. They are, as it was said about certain Men of
Moab; Lion-like Men. They are men of Resolution. They Enjoy a Presence of Mind
among Showers of Bullets; amidst the Thunder of the Armies and their Shouting,
as well as in their Closets. This is a very Sparkling Ornament. But if this
Resolute Man be one that is not Resolved for the Service of GOD, he is a
Coward. We read, who Leads the Van, in the Host, of them that are the Children
of Perdition; Rev. 21.8. The Fearful. Foolhardy Sinner; He is found a Fighter
against GOD. Faint-hearted Sinner; He is Afraid of Engaging in the Strict ways
of Religion; He is Afraid of coming under Obligations to cross his Fleshly
Inclinations. He is Afraid of Suffering a little Persecution, a little
Disadvantage, perhaps a little Derision, for the Cause of GOD. Coward, Put off
thy Ornaments, Thou art Afraid of a Shadow*

Fourthly. Some are Adorned with Good Breeding; They have been Well-bred; have
had a Polite Education. They have a Civil, a Decent, in one Word, which
comprehends all the Rules of Behavior, A MODEST Behavior; They Behave
themselves Handsomely, that is to say, Modestly, on all occasions. A very
taking Ornament! An Handsome Carriage. But what becomes of the Good Manners,
where the People do nothing but Miscarry every day? They whose Manner it is, to
do nothing but Sin, are guilty of Ill-Manners. The Manners of all Impious
People, are the worst of Manners. They Corrupt Good Manners; they Cast off Good
Manners, and the thing that is Good. It may be said unto them; Jer. 22 21. This
has been thy manner from thy Youth, that thou Obeyed not my Voice. Ah, Ill
bred Sinner! A Sinner that Misbehaves himself in every Business; in every
Company. A Sinner that goes about every Good Thing, with a very Misbecoming
Awkwardness. Oh! Thou Accustomed to do Evil; Put off thy Ornaments. Thou do
nothing Right!

Fifthly. There are Some Adorned with Riches in Abundance; Riches, which the
Sons of Laban count their Glory. They have Silver and Gold enough to make them
Glitter. They have Wealth enough to dazzle the Eyes of the Beholders. Riches
are commonly Esteemed Ornaments. Men Esteem themselves for them; Expect Esteem
from others; Reckon themselves Endowed with them. To little Purpose, if they
are not Rich toward God. A Wealthy man, if he be a Wicked man, he is worth
nothing. A Rich man, that has made no Provision for Eternity, may undergo a
Laodicean Rebuke; Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I am Rich; and know not, that thou
art Wretched and Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and Naked. We may, unto such a
Sinner, Invert the Words to the Angel of Smyrna; I know thy Riches, but thou
art Poor. A Lazarus is Richer than the Richest Sinner in the World: A Rich Man,
but a Rich Fool! A Rich Man, but one that has a Poor, Needy, Starving Soul
within him; A Rich Man, but One that may Die this Night, and leave all, and he
has laid up nothing for Eternity! Such a Craesus is but a Wretched Beggar. The
Emperor Basilius with his two hundred thousand Talents of Gold, (according to
Zonaras, which Lipsius computes, at a thousand and two hundred Millions of
Money) besides Numberless Heaps of Silver, and numerous chests of Jewels; while
he was a Wicked Man, a Wise One has told us, He was Little Worth. Thou Fool,
Put off thy Ornaments. Thy Poor, Poor, Poor Soul, is a Prisoner in a Dungeon!

Sixthly. There are Some Adorned with Honorable Relations; They are well
Related; They have Relatives of some Account. They are of Credible Families.
Their Ancestors were Persons of Renown. They are Allied unto Persons of
Considerable Interest. Such Escutcheons are Ornaments. But* my Friend; There is
a desperate Blot in them, if thou art not a Child of God. It was a sad Word,
Spoken to Some, that boasted what Family they were of; Joh. 8 44 Ye are of your
Father the Devil. What Signifies a Man's being of a Good House; if he belong to
the House of the Wicked! What Signifies the Generation a man is of, if he be
One of the Generation of the Wrath of GOD? If thy Progenitors have been Eminent
Persons, their Eminency will be but an Aggravation of thy Degeneracy. -- At non
ille Satum, quo te mentiris. -- A Sinful Offspring of some gracious
Progenitors, make themselves viler than a Spurious Offspring. Silly Trifler;
Put off thy Ornaments. If Satan be thy Father, and all the Slaves of Satan be
thy Brethren, it is no matter who else may be thy Relatives.

Seventhly. There are Some Adorned with Beauty: They are very Beautiful; Their
Complexion, their Proportion, their Aspect, is very grateful. All that are not
Blind, Look upon this as an Ornament. But I remember a most humbling Word;
Prove. 11.22. As a Jewel of Gold in a Swines Snout, so is a fair Woman without
Discretion. An Adorned Swine! What an Uncouth Sight is That? They that are not
yet Renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, alas, they have Sinned away all their
Beauty. Every thing is Irregular in them. Their Eyes are closed with Filthy
Humors. They are so Lame, that they take none but Wrong Steps; they are ever
Stumbling. They have a nasty Leprosy on them; from the Crown of the Head to the
Sole of the Foot, nothing but Wounds, and Bruises, and Putrefying Sores*
Crookedness is Looked on as an Vnshapeliness. Many a Crooked Person, is highly
to be valued, for being among the Upright in Heart. But a Well shaped Body will
not cover thy Disgrace, Child, if thou art One of the Crooked, and Perverse
Nation. Stammering, it is a very abasing Imperfection; a very uneasy Infirmity.
Our Savior Sighed, when he saw a man Troubled with it. A Learned Man has
Written a Discourse to prove, That it was the Great Apostles, Thorn in the
Flesh But the Sinner, who does not Keep his Tongue from Evil, is much worse
than any Stammerer. Uncomely Sinner; Put off thy Ornaments; Thy Sin puts all
out of Shape.

Lastly; I leave to the Last of all, that which is truly to all Judicious
People the Least of all; There are Some Adorned with Splendid Apparel. Their
Garments are their Ornaments. The Meanest of all Ornaments are perhaps their
Only Ornaments. Perhaps they count some things to be Ornaments, which the Sober
and the Virtuous in all Ages have decried, as not being the Spots of the
Children of God. Particularly, The Spots which disfigure the Faces of so many
Gentlewomen in our Days, have in all former Ages been decried by all Pious
Persons, as Blemishes, and Vanities, altogether misbecoming the Children of
God: altogether improper for Baptized Faces! Children, Wash them off, with the
Tears of true Devotion. Those Tears would certainly do it. Perhaps the Costly
Rigging of some at one time upon them, is more than they have laid out for the
Special Service of God, in many years together. Alas, what is the Lady Bernice,
in her Great Pomp, with all her Jewels upon her? A mere Shining piece of
Rottenness. But the Word of God has told you of Better Ornaments; 1 Pet. 3 4,
The Ornaments of the Interior, -- the Spirit; which are of great price in the
Sight of God. Children, If you are without those Ornaments, You are as bad as
without all Ornaments. While you are in your Sins, You are clothed with Filthy
Rags. Till you have Put on the Lord JESUS CHRIST, you are without the only
Garments that can Commend you to Heaven, or Defend you from the Wrath of
Heaven. Art thou not yet Clothed with the Righteousness of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST? Sinner, Put off thy Ornaments. Thy Soul is Naked, is Forlorn, has
nothing upon it, but what proclames thee Miserable.

APPLICATION.
AND now, Hear the Conclusion of the Matter. My Children, Be prevailed withal
to Seek the Best Ornaments; The Ornaments without which, you Forfeit, and
Confound, and Blemish, and for ever Nullify all your other Ornaments.

My Hearers, Will you mind what I say?

I say, First; That you must not value your selves on any Pretended Ornaments,
while you are Yet in your Sins. No; See your selves; Loathe your selves; Be not
Angry if Others cast much Contempt upon you. Make those Lamentations; Lam. 5
16. The Crown is fallen from our Head, woe unto us that we have Sinned. Retire,
Ponder, Fall into Heartbreaking Soliloquies; Lord, what am I? Nothing but a
Lump of Deformity; Nothing but an heap of Abomination!

I say, Secondly: That if you make but a little Show of Other Ornaments, yet
Serious Piety will make you Incomparable Creatures. Holiness, it will make you
the Excellent of the Earth. So we are taught; Prove. 12.26. The Righteous is
more Excellent than his Neighbor. Suppose a Person to be of the Common Rank,
of no Secular Advantages; but One that betimes turns to God; an Example of
Early Religion; One Devout, Watchful, Prayerful; Ready to every Good Work; One
Humble, Honest, Industrious; full of all Goodness, and Kindness to all about
him. Truly, the Ornaments of such an One, will bespeak an uncommon Respect for
him among the People of God. Verily, Such Persons are themselves the Ornaments
of the Societies whereto they belong; They are, (as a Good Man was once called,
Monile Ecclesiae) the Jewels of the Church; they are the Stars of the World.

I say, Lastly. Then, Children, make your Choice. We read, Psalm. 45.13. Of, A
Kings Daughter all glorious within. The Ornaments which will render you all
glorious Within; Oh! make Choice of these; your Choice of them will render you
the Adorned Children of God. Let the Ornaments that you will Choose and Seek,
be, The Knowledge of a Glorious CHRIST: A Resemblance to that Glorious Lord; An
Obedience to that Glorious Lord; A Patience under all His Mortifying
Dispensations; An Abhorrence of all Sin against Him; A Disposition to Do Good,
and Know no Pleasure equal to That. You are called upon; Phil 4.8. Whatsoever
Things are Lovely! Think on these things. Children, These things are Lovely,
and will make you Lovely. Go to the Glorious LORD for such Ornaments. Ask them
of Him, who gives them Liberally, to them that ask them. Ask His Holy Spirit,
which He Gives to them that ask Him, and then you have them Liberally. Be
importunate in your Supplications; Oh! my God, Let thy Holy Spirit, Possess me,
Renew me, Incline me, and Adorn me wonderfully. My Child; The next Smile of
Heaven upon thee, will be that; Isa. 60.1. Arise, and Shine; for thy Light is
Come; and the Glory of the Lord is Risen upon thee: Thy Ornaments are Wonderful!

A Young PERSON Putting on the Best Ornaments.
AND now, to Life Rai^'d by the Heavenly Call,
Henceforth, Vain Idols, I Renounce you all.
Vile Flesh, Thy raging Lust, and sordid Ease,
My winged Soul now shall not serve and please.
False World, Thy Laws* shall be no longer mine,
Nor to thy Ways my Newborn Soul incline.
Satan, Thou will, I know, my Tempter be;
But thy Temptation shall not Govern me.
Foolish I Have been; O Lord, I blush, I grieve*
And gladly would my Woeful Folly leave.
Fain would I Turn to God; but cannot alone:
Help, Sovereign Grace, or it will never be done*
To the Great GOD of Heaven I repair,
And Helped by Heaven, thus to Him declare.
Great GOD, Since to be Mine Thou willing art,
Oh! Be thou mine! Replies my Conquered Heart.
To Glorify Thee, Glorious Lord, I take,
For That alone, which can me Happy make.
O FATHER, of all Things Creator Great,
Will thou all Happiness for me Create?
Eternal SON of God, will thou me Save,
That I the Hopes may of Gods Children have?
Eternal SPIRIT of God, Poor me will thou
With Spiritual Blessings of all sorts Endow?
Lord, Ravished at thy wondrous Grace, I do
These Gracious Offers now Conform unto.
O All-sufficient ONE, Will thou supply
My Wants from Stores of rich Immensity?
Shall Boundless Wisdom for my Good Contrive?
And Boundless Power, the Fruits of Goodness Give?
Shall Spotless Holiness on me Imprint,
An Holy Temper, with thine Image in it?
Lord, Thy Perfections all I do adore,
And to a Perfect Love my mind would soar.
A State of Bliss according to thy Word
Thou will unto thy Chosen Ones afford.
A State of Blissful Rest and Joy, wherein
Raised from the Dead, they shall be freed from Sin.
There Bathed in Rivers of Eternal Joy,
No Sorrows more shall them at all annoy.
GOD shall be All in All; Brought nigh to God,
In Him they shall for ever make Abode.
They shall See God; The Beatifie Sight!
And their own God shall take in them Delight.
My Soul, Make now thy Choice. O say; Is This
What thou do Choose for thy Chief Blessedness?
Things of this Present Time I now Refuse;
My Blessed GOD, Thee, Thee, and This I Choose.
May the sweet JESUS me to Glory bring,
And be my Glorious Prophet, Priest and King.
Does the Almighty SON of God, to those
That Will, an Union with Himself propose?
My Lord, I will! The Will thou did bestow:
To Thee, Oh, Let me be United so.
The full Obedience which my Surety paid
To God, may That my Righteousness be made.
A Wretched Sinner would appear in That,
Righteous before the dreadful Judgment Seat.
Show me thy Way, O Lord, Lest that I should
Fall by those Mockers that will me delude.
To thy Pure Scriptures way, I will adhere,
And find the Rule of my whole Conduct there.
All the Rebellion of my Heart Subdue;
And for thy Work, O Lord, my Strength Renew.
From thy vast Fullness let my Faith derive
Strength to do all things, and to Thee to (...)
May thy Good SPIRIT me Possess, and Fill
With Light and Zeal, to Learn and Do thy Will.
With His Kind Flames may He upon me Sieze,
And keep me always on my Bended Knee.
May all I am and have, be used for Him
Whose is my All, for He did me Redeem.
To Thee, Good SPIRIT, I lift up my Cries,
That thou will fall upon the Sacrifice.
May thy Bright ANGELS, be my Guardians then;
For Thee, they will Guard and Guide the Sons of Men.
By Thee Assisted, LORD, Thus I Consent
Unto thy Everlasting COVENANT.
FINIS.

