An Essay to do GOOD. By a disswasive from Tavern-haunting, and Excessive
Drinking.
By Benjamin Wadsworth, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston; together with a
Lecture SERMON, by the same Author.
IT IS said of our glorious Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ, that he went about
doing good. Act 10.38. All his Disciples, should walk as he also walked, 1 John
2.6. They should imitate him in doing good, as much as possibly they can; to be
sure Ministers of the Gospel should do so. And it must needs be reckoned a good
work, not only to mortify our own lusts and corruptions (which we should
chiefly and constantly endeavor to do) but also to prevent and suppress Sin in
others, as much as possibly we can. It Is Brotherly, Neighbourly kindness, to
reprove others for and caution them against Sin, Lev. 19 17. We should
especially witness against, and endeavor to put a stop to, growing threatening
Evils; and among Sundry such evils in our Land; I reckon Excessive Drinking to
be one. I therefore thought it proper and seasonable, to bear some Testimony
against this growing wickedness; by offering some few considerations, to those
who needlessly frequent Taverns; and also to Tavern-keepers, or to those who
Retail Drink, whether they are Innholders or not Yet lest I should be
mis-interpreted, or be thought to run into extremes; I Will readily grant,

1. That the keeping of Taverns, or Houses of Entertainment, is not only
lawful, but also very useful and convenient. The proper end and use of Taverns,
Inns Alehouses, Victualing-houses, or Houses of Entertainment, in general, is,
the accommodating of Strangers and Travelers. If Persons had no occasion to be
far from home, there would be no occasion ordinarily for Taverns. But the
necessary business of many (yea of most at one time or other) calls them to be
abroad, Journeying or Trading far from home. Now when Persons are thus distant
from home, Houses of Entertainment are needful, to accommodate them with
Victuals, Drink, Lodgings, etc. I grant,

2. That Town-dwellers who are nigh home, may sometimes, have proper occasions
to go into Taverns, and stay a while there. No doubt but such Town-dwellers
(especially those who have most business with Strangers and Travelers) may
sometimes have real business at Taverns, and so have proper occasion to go
thither for the doing of it. And no doubt but when their business calls them
there, they may allowably buy and use, what drink is proper and needful for
their Refreshment.

I grant,

3 That the use of Strong Drink, yea of Strong Spirits, is not only Lawful, but
in some cases convenient. I verily believe, that various sorts of Strong Drink
are greatly abused in this Land, and Rum especially. But though many abuse these
things, it does not thence follow that it is unlawful to use them. I grant that
even Distilled Spirits may do good, when taken only in a moderate quantity, and
only at such times or seasons, when there is proper occasion for them. But though
I readily grant these three things but now mentioned, yet I verily believe,
that multitudes of Persons in this Land, are very criminal and blameworthy;
for their needless haunting of Drinking-houses, and spending their Time and
Money there. Now out of hearty regard to the glory of God, the good of the
Public, and the benefit of such faulty Persons; I would Entreat, Exhort and
Urge, those who are thus blameworthy, to reform such their ill practices.
Don't frequent Taverns (or any Drinking houses, be they called by what name
they will) don't spend your time, nor Money there, unless there be some real
occasion, some real business that calls you so to do. The Exhortation is, Don't
needlessly Spend your Time nor Money, at Drinking-houses.

To move you to a compliance with this Exhortation* consider, by thus doing,

1. You Sinfully Spend your TIME, which you must give an account to God for.
It Is in God you live, move and have your being; he holds your Souls in Life,
and preserves your Spirits; every breath you draw, is a renewed Instance of
Divine Mercy. God who thus lengthens out your Time, requires that the whole of
it should be so Employed, as to bring glory to his Name. God said of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 4.10. I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to FEAR ME ALL
THE DAYS THAT THEY SHALL LIVE UPON THE EARTH. You should Fear, Serve and
Glorify God, all the time of your Life upon Earth And God will call you to an
account, How you spend your Time, and for what you do upon Earth. 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. Well, and what account can you give to God, of the Time
needlessly (and therefore Sinfully) spent in Taverns? Oh how doleful will your
account be, if speedy hearty Repentance does not prevent? If that Time you
needlessly spent in Taverns, had been spent in Reading Gods Word, in holy
Meditation, in earnest Prayer to God for Spiritual Blessings; how much would it
have been, for the good of your precious Immortal Souls, and for your Joyful
account in the day of Judgment? Such needless spending of Time and Money,

2. Wrongs your Outward Estates. All Christians, should be diligent in some
lawful business. Idleness it self is a great Sin, and leads to many Sins. You
should be, Not slothful in business, Romans 12.11. The Slothful, is called the
Wicked, Servant; in our Lords Parable, Mat 25 26. The Inspired Apostle says, 1
These 4 11, 12 -- Study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work
with your hands as we commanded you -- that ye may have lack of nothing. Ephesians. 4
^8. -- Let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs. These plain commands of God you break, by
needless frequenting of Taverns. You not only neglect diligent proper means,
honestly to Increase your Outward Estate (which might render you more
Serviceable and Useful) but you also diminish and lessen what you have. And if
you Estates can bear such expenses at present; yet the course you follow, tends
to Poverty: Prove. 23.21. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty;
and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags. It Is easy to give many Instances,
of Persons who had competent Estates, good Business, good Reputation, and in
likely way to thrive honestly in the World; who by frequenting of Taverns, have
been brought to Poverty. And if your ill course in frequenting Taverns, brings
you into low, strait, impoverished circumstances; then these (among other)
mischiefs are like to follow.

1. You will be unable to pay your just Debts to those you deal with. Gods
command is, Romans 13 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. The
Prophet said to the Widow, 2 King 4 7. Pay thy Debt, Psalm. 37.21. The wicked
borrows and pays not again. Men are wicked, if they don't do their utmost to
Pay their just Debts; but your ill course renders you unable to pay such Debts,
therefore your wicked course puts you on further wickedness. You employ that to
Serve the Devil, and gratify your lusts; which should go to satisfy your
Creditors. This is mischievous wickedness.

2. You cannot do what you should, to Support the State and Government. Romans
13.7 Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
to whom custom, etc. Those who Serve the Public, should be paid by the
Public; Rates and Taxes are necessary to be paid, for the Public Service, and
to Support the State. But your Poverty procured by your wickedness, renders you
unable to do your part in this Duty.

3 You cannot do what you should, to Maintain Gods Public Worship. The divine
command is, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him
that teaches in all good things. Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy
Substance. It Is the undeniable Duty of Christians, to pay out of their Estates
what is needful, for the honorable Support of Gods Worship and Ministry. But
your Sinful spending what you have, renders you unable to do this Duty. By
wickedly spending what you have, you Serve the Devil instead of Honoring the
Lord, with your Substance. The Poverty which your Sin procures, not only makes
you defraud Men but also rob God; you are guilty of Sacrilege, Mal. 3.8 -- 10.
Possibly I may be Scoffed and Mocked at for this, by the Intemperate and
Profane; but if I am, I Will endeavor to bear it.

4. You cannot Support and Maintain your own Families. Many Families are greatly
impoverished, brought into necessitous pinching circumstances; because the
heads of them haunt Taverns, live Idly, spend their Time and Money in Drinking,
Gaming and other vicious practices. What shall I say to you that are thus
guilty? I say! Nay hear what God says, 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for
his own, and specially for those of his own house; he has denied the faith,
and is worse than an Infidel. It may be you would be vexed with me, if I should
call you Heathens and Infidels; but God says, you are worse than such For many
Heathen carefully provide for their Families, but you wickedly neglect yours.
IF Gods Word may be regarded (and surely it should) you don't deserve to be
called Christians, but to be called worse than Infidels. Nay, the Sea monsters
draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones, Lam 4.3. Birds and
Beasts will feed their Young Ones; therefore you act much worse than they, if
you suffer your Wives and Families, your poor Children, to want what is needful,
while you wickedly spend your Time and Money at Drinking-Houses.

5. You become burdensome to your honest Neighbors. When by your wicked
Impoverishing courses, you come to be very low, have nothing before hand, and
it may be much in debt too; if God should now send Sickness on you and your
Families, why you must perish if your charitable Neighbors did not help you.
Those that were Sweating while you were Drinking; diligently Working while you
were Idling, and Playing; those who were Frugal, Diligent and Prudent, while
you acted like Prodigals; must now Support you and yours, else you would
perish. And what a shame is it, that you should be thus burdensome? These few
hints show, that the course you take, tends to destroy your Outward Estates,
and so it brings many mischiefs.

Again, the course you take,

3. Hurts your Reputation. It Is probable that your own Idle companions that are
as bad as your selves, will not dislike you for your ill courses; but all Persons
of true worth and virtue, will disesteem you and think meanly of you, for them.
It Is part of a good man's character, Psalm. 15.4. In whose eyes a vile Person is
contemned; but he honors them that fear the Lord. Now I Am sure it is Vile and
Sinful, for Persons needlessly to spend their Time and Money at Taverns. And if
such a course brings them (as it has done many) to be gross common Drunkards;
then they must needs be Contemptable, even in the eyes of Sober Heathens, as
well as of good Christians. To see a Person through excess of Drink, (...),
Staggering, Yawning, Slavering, Wallowing in his Vomit; or so Stupify'd that he
cannot move any more than a log; what a contemptable loathsome object is it?
They that have any virtue, will surely contemn those that are thus vicious. A
Drunken Sot, deserves to be contemned. Solomon tells us, Prove. 3.35. Shame
shall be the promotion of Fools. The ill course you follow,

4. Is hurtful to your BODIES. God says, Exodus 21.13. Thou shall not Kill. When
the Jailer would have killed himself. Paul cried out, Act. 16.28. Do thy self
no harm. You should give heed to these things. Self-Murder, is an heinous and
crying Iniquity; I believe many Tavern-haunters are guilty of it. No doubt but
many kill themselves as Surely, though not so Suddenly, by Intemperance, as if
they should run themselves through with a Sword. Prove. 23.32. At the last it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Excess, Poisons them; it
brings many Distempers, and at last kills them. I think it is easy to observe,
that many who haunt Taverns, and habituate themselves to intemperate Drinking;
do gradually lose their Stomachs, their Appetite is gone, they can eat little
or nothing; they are Bloated, Weak, they become in a great measure benumbed,
doz'd, listless, and so not fit for any business of Body or Mind, and so
languish till they drop into the Grave. According to the different Age,
Constitution and Employment of Tiplers, some thus destroy and murder themselves
in a shorter, and some in a longer time. I suppose twould be easy to give
instances of Persons (and to Name them if it would not look Invidious) that by
excessive drinking of Rum, have been brought into Languishing Circumstances;
yet they have so craved Rum, that they could not be without it. It may be every
quarter of an hour (or very frequently) they must have it, they are fainting
and gasping without it, and yet the taking it kills them. I have heard sundry
Skilful Physicians say, that the Customary or frequent use of Rum, Brandy, or
indeed any distilled Spirits, hinders the digestion of Food, spoils the
Appetite, begets a vicious craving, after Spirits; and yet to gratify this
craving, is very hurtful to the body, destroy natural Heat, and tends directly
to destroy Life Oh, how many have thus Murdered themselves! Those who destroy
their Estates, or Reputation, or Lives, by Intemperance, are so far the Devils
Martyrs. They suffer these things in his Service, and for his cause. Satan's
service is costly to them in this World, besides what is coming in the Other.
But besides this gradual way of killing by Intemperance, Drunkards woefully
expose themselves to many fearful Accidents. That saying, That Drunkards get no
harm, is the Devils Proverb, it is false, it is a lie. Inspired Solomon in his
Proverbs says, Prove. 23.29, 30, 34. Who has We? who has Sorrow? who has
Contentions? who has Babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness
of Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine --
Yea thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he that
lies on the top of a Mast. How many Instances might be given, of those who
when Drunken have met with Falls, Wounds, Bruises, broken Bones? Have not some
slept abroad in their Drunken fits, got Cold, Sicken'd and died upon it? How
many have been found Dead abroad, when a dark Night, cold Season, or sore Storm
has met with them in their Drunken fits? Many have died in Drink, and where do
you think their Souls are? But again, by the course you take,

5. You are in danger of being led into OTHER SINS. One Sin often leads to
others, and smaller offenses make way for greater. It may be though you needlessly
frequent Drinking-houses, yet at present you are reckoned Sober Persons; you
are no Swearers, you are no Drunkards so as to Reel, Stagger, Spew as the
common Sots do; well if it be so, yet you are in an ill course, and there is
apparent danger of your growing much worse. If you are not Profane Swearers,
yet possibly at Taverns, you may meet with some Sons of Belial, some children
of the Devil Cursing, Swearing, Damning, as if they were dating God to destroy
them. And by your needlessly coming into such Company, and hearing such hellish
abominable words; who knows how far you may be left to Imitate them? And if you
are not Staggering Drunken Sots already, it is to be feared the course you take,
will bring you to it. It may be when you have been Sitting and Drinking a
while, and are about to go home; then there comes in some other Neighbor, and
so you will stay somewhat longer, to have a Pot, or Pint, or Jill with him, and
thus you gradually proceed from bad to worse. And possibly in a little time,
you will come to be really buz'd, really overcome with Drink, really Drunk. And
what a figure will you make then? what are you good for, or fit for, in your
drunken fit? why, for no good to be sure. You are not fit for any Service for
God or Man; you're only fit to Serve the Devil. If Children are Gluttons and
Drunkards, no wonder if they are Stubborn and Rebellious, Deuteronomy. 21.20.
Drunkenness has various effects on men; some in their Drunkenness, act like
Fawning, Flattering, Slavering Fools, they seem mighty Loving and Good
humored. Others in their Drunken fits, are much for Discoursing and disputing
about Religious things, and it may be will Weep and seem much affected with
them. I believe the Devil prompts them very much to this, that if possible, he
may render Religion Ridiculous and Odious, and Prejudice others against it.
Some in their Drunken fits, are like raving mad Dogs, are ready to quarrel and
fight with any they meet with. To such an one we might well apply, Prove. 17.12.
Let a Bear robbed of her Whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly.
When men are drunk, how often do they Quarrel, Fight, Wound, Bruise, Maim one
another; and hurt Sober Persons that come in their way? Nay, sometimes they will
cruelly beat their own Wives, Children, or best Friends. Yea very many Murders
have been committed, by Persons in their Drunken fits. A few Months ago, Two
men were Executed at Bristol, for being guilty of Murder in their Drunkenness.
One in the County of Middle-sex, was last Summer tried for his Life, for
Killing a Man, (even a Kinsman too) when both they and others had been
Intemperately Drinking together. 'Twould be easy to give many instances, of
Murders committed by men in Drink. Alas, when men are deprived of Reason by
Excess of Drink, what wickedness are they afraid or ashamed of? They Will
sometimes Curse, Swear, be Unclean, Fight, etc. There Is scarce any wickedness
that they will scruple, or boggle at. Nabal in his Drunken fit, did Rail at David
and his Messengers, 1 Samuel 25.10, 11, 14, 37. David says, Psalm. 69 12. I was
the song of the Drunkard. Drunken Sots, wont scruple to rail at and revile, the
best Persons, and the best Things. Lot was a good Man, yet his Daughters
wickedly and purposely made him Drunk; and when he was Drunk, he did commit
Incest with both of them, Genesis 19.32 -- 38 Oh dreadful, Oh horrible wickedness
committed through Drunkenness! Be astonished O Heavens, at such things as these.
I was lately told some Expressions, which a Churchmember, Spoke in a Drunken
sot; the expressions were (to say the least) very Profane; yea I think they
might be truly called Blasphemous; when he became Sober (I was told) he was
Reproved and Confessed his fault. I mention this, for the cautioning and
warning of Church Members, as well as others. It Is very criminal and wicked, to
revile Church Members in general (as too many are apt to do) for the gross
faults committed by some. Yet as to particular Persons, if they indulge
themselves in Drunkenness and so fall into other Scandals; therein they act
more like Heathen or Brutes, than as becomes the Members of our Holy Lord
Jesus. Surely any one that thinks, and will take the pains to consider, will
readily grant, that Drunkenness leads to other Sins. I shall therefore add no
more on this head, but only Subjoyn part of the Confession made by a man, who
was executed above twenty years ago in this place, for a Murder he committed
when he was in drink: The Confession was Printed, with a Sermon Preached by the
Reverend Mr. Increase Mather on that occasion. The Confession runs thus,

I James Morgan, being condemned to dye, must needs own to the glory of God,
that he is righteous, and that I have by my Sins provoked him to destroy me
before my time. I have been a great Sinner, guilty of Sabbath-breaking, of
Lying, and of Uncleaness; but there are especially two Sins, whereby I have
offended the Great God; one is, the Sin of Drunkenness, which has caused me to
commit many other Sins. For when in drink, I have been often guilty of Cursing
and Swearing, and quarrelling, and striking others. But the Sin that lies most
heavy upon my Conscience is, That I have despised the Word of God, and many a
time refused to bear it Preached. For these things, I believe God has left me
to that, which has brought me to a shameful and miserable Death. I do therefore
beseech and warn all Persons, Young men especially to take heed of these Sins,
lest they provoke the Lord to do to them as He has justly done by me.

To proceed, the course you take,

6. Will very much hurt your Families. I don't here refer to your Impoverishing
of them, (I spoke to that before) but to the want of good Order, Instruction,
Discipline, Religious Worship among them. Some who haunt Taverns, do stay out
very late at Night; this disorders the Family. It may be when you come from the
Tavern very late, the most part of your Family are gone to bed; or if not, yet
they are so Sleepy and Drouzy, they can scarce keep Awake to attend Family
Prayer. But in truth, I doubt, that those who needlessly haunt Taverns, have
little (if any) regard, to Instruct their Families in Religion, to Read Gods
Word to them, and to Pray in their Families Morning and Evening. But very great
is your wickedness, if you neglect these plain necessary duties. Yet how unfit
are you for these duties, when you have been with Idle Companions, chatting
where you had no call nor business, and Drinking (to say the least) more than
you had need of? Nay it may be, if you stay out late, when you come home,
Instead of Praying with your Families, there is Vexing, Fretting, Scolding, if
not Fighting too; occasioned by your base irregular practices. I pity those
poor Wives, Children, Servants; who dwell in such woeful Families. What Is like
to become of those poor Young Ones, who have such Vile Examples set before
them, and are brought up in such disorderly Families? Such vile disorders, tend
to breed up a Generation fit for no good. If the head of the Family is abroad
very unseasonably, very late, if he is Intemperate, if he will call ill Names,
speak vile Words, Curse and Swear Profanely; is he likely (do you think)
rightly to Reprove or Reform what is amiss, in his Children or Servants? Nay if
persons don't frequent Taverns, but do in Private Houses stay out unseasonably;
spending all or most part of the Night, in Gaming, Tippling and other wicked
practices, it is much the same thing, as to the Hurting and Disordering their
Families.

Again Consider,

7. The course you take, may prove, very Injurious to your Neighbors round
about you. Ill examples, are very Influential and pernicious. A little Leaven,
leaveneth the whole Lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. Lest any root of bitterness springing up,
trouble you, and thereby MANY BE DEFILED, Heb. 12.15. One ill example, may
defile and hurt many. Solomon says, Eccles. 9 18. One Sinner destroys much
good. Drunkenness is a great Sin, it pulls down Divine Judgments; God threatens
Woes to those that are guilty of it. Isai. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up
early in the Morning, that they may follow Strong Drink, that continue until
Night, till wine Inflame them. Isai 28.1. Woe to the crown of Pride, to the
Drunkards of Ephraim. Well, when you needlessly haunt Taverns and become
Intemperate, by this your Vile Example you Practically say, That others may do
so too. And if they should follow your wicked Example, what would become of us?
Why we should soon be a Land of Tiplers, Sots, Drunkards, Extremely wicked and
utterly miserable. The Lord be Merciful to us, shall this be the Doom of Poor
New England? God forbid. Well then, Don't Set ill Examples before others. If
you are not gross Drunkards already, yet your needless haunting of Taverns, may
be unspeakably pernicious to others. I have heard of sundry Younger Persons,
who being blamed for being needlessly and unseasonably at Taverns; did allege
for their Vindication, the Example of such and such Persons of some note and
figure, either for their Age, Office, Church Membership, Sobriety, etc. How
sorrowful is it, that the Example of any such should hurt others* I therefore
earnestly Entreat and Beseech those (high or low, rich or poor) who make any
considerable Figure, or are of any Tolerable Note on Character, for Age,
Office, Church Membership, Sobriety, etc. that they would as much as with any
Convenience they may, avoid Tavern-haunting; lest Younger, Looser,
Inconsiderate Persons, should by their Example be led into the Snares of the
Destroyer. To those who needlessly frequent Taverns, I would say Once more,

8. The course you take, tends to the Eternal Ruin of your Precious Immortal
Souls. If you are not gross Drunkards already, yet the course you take leads to
it. Therefore hearken, to our Holy Compassionate Redeemer's Words, Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest AT ANY TIME your hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness. Verily you should take heed. 1 These. 5.6. -- Watch
and be Sober. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not Drunk with Wine, wherein is excess* but be
filled with the Spirit. Excess of Wine or other Strong Drink, provokes the Holy
Spirit of God. And if that Holy Spirit, should no more Strive with and help
you, you are undone for ever. Consider, Drunkards are numbered among those, who
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. If you will not take warning
and turn from Sin while you may; you will pay dear for it afterward. As for one
that hears Gods curse, yet blesses himself, Saying he shall have Peace, and
walks in the Imagination of his heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst; what is
like to become of him? Why, Moses tells us, The Lord will not spare him, but
then the anger of the Lord, and his Jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord
shall (...) out his Name from under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Oh tremble, at
these dreadful threatenings of the great God; break off your ill courses before
it is to late. If Drink (or any other Sin.) brings you to Hell you cannot there
have One drop of Water to feel your Scartched Tongues. Oh Repent and Reform
speedily. Drunkards, are not absolutely beyond the reach of Divine Mercy. Some
have Repented and been Saved. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. But alas, how few Instances have
we, of Drunkards (...) It Is no easy thing for them to do good, who are (...) to
do Evil, Jer. 13.23. The (...) and Entreated, no longer to (...) in any ill
(...) whatsoever. (...) coming, JUDGMENT is coming; Oh think, ETERNITY,
ETERNITY, ETERNITY will be upon you very Quickly. Oh prepare for Eternity, by
forsaking all Sin, by heartily accepting of Jesus Christ, and Sincerely Walking
in his Ways. If you would be Saved, you must live as the Gospel directs; and
that is Soberly, Righteously, Godlily, Tit. 2.12.

I would now proceed.

II. To offer some Advice, to all that Keep Houses of Entertainment, and that
Retail Drink. And my Advice and Exhortation is, That you do by no means
Encourage or Indulge Intemperance, in any person whatsoever. It may be you are
desirous to Sell Drink, for your own Gain; but you should not do this to your
Neighbors hurt. You should Love your Neighbors as your selves, do as you
could (reasonably) desire to be done by; you should desire your Neighbors
Profit and Welfare as well as your own, Phil. 2.4. These are plain commanded
Duties, therefore you should make Conscience of doing them. And for this
reason, you should never Encourage any of your Neighbors or Customers,
needlessly to spend their time and money with you. Nay you should not Indulge
them in so doing. If you Encourage or Indulge their sin, thereby you become
partakers in their guilt. According to God's Law, he that can prevent mischief
and does not, is to be Punished as if he himself did it, Exodus 21.19. God
threatens those particularly, who further Drunkenness in others, Hab. 2.15. Woe
unto him that gives his Neighbor drink; that put thy Bottle to him and
make him Drunken also. Remember this the great God denounces Woe against
those who make their Neighbors Drunk. And will you for the gaining of a little
Money, expose your selves to this Woe? What, do you provoke the Lord to
Jealousy? Are you stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. When you encourage or
indulge your Neighbors, in the mispence of time and money with you; as you
provoke God and incur his displeasure, so you greatly wrong your Neighbors
too. If you should Steal a Great or Sixpence from him, this would be a plain
breach of the Eighth Commandment; yet this Theft would not so much hurt your
Neighbor, as your Selling him so many Peny-worth of Drink if you be (as
doubtless you often are) morally sure, that he will be Drunk with it. For when
your Neighbor thus gets Drunk, he not only has spent his Money, but he hurts
his Body and Soul too, with what his money paid for. By reading what I have
already said to Tavern haunters, you may see how sinful and dangerous their
course is; therefore if you encourage or connive at such practices in them; you
are in a great degree, chargeable with the sin and mischief attending them.
When you encourage their mispence of time and money, you then further them, in
hurting their Estates, their Credit, their Families, and their Bodies and Souls
too; yea in hurting the Public and that various ways. If when you owe your
Neighbors a small matter, you urge them to take it out in your way; that is,
to drink it out though they have no need of it; this is very wicked in you. They
had better lose their Debt, than get it in such a manner. If when Constables
come to clear your Houses, as the Law directs; you hide your wicked Customers,
deny that they are there, and so encourage their staying to Tipple, Game, etc.
then you do very wickedly; your sin is greatly Aggravated. You do wickedly, to
indulge any sorts of persons, whether Heads of Families, Sons or Servants,
needlessly to spend their time and money in your Houses. But it seems something
of an Aggravation of your sin, when you suffer your Poor Neighbors, Tradesmen,
Labourours, to do so; when you know their Poor Families want Necessaries. It
may be they have scarce Victuals to feed them; scarce Fire or Clothes to warm
them. Those men who spend their money at Taverns, while their Wives, Children
or Servants thus suffer; are worse than brutish; and you act Inhumanely,
Barbarously, Cruelly (not to say Murderously) in indulging them in such Cursed
practices. Indeed you are bound in Duty and Conscience, to oppose and hinder as
far as you can, any persons mispending his time or money in your Houses. If any
would be so disorderly in your Houses, you should kindly and friendly advise
them to desist, and be gone; tell them how hurtful their practice is. If such
gentle means will not prevail, yet you may refuse to let them have drink; you may
take methods, to hinder their wickedness if you will. Possibly you will Object,
this is the way to lose your Custom, you cannot Live after this rate. To this,
the answer is short and plain, You had better lose your Custom, thou mischief
your own Souls, and the Souls and Bodies of your Neighbors; which you do, if
you indulge their wickedness. The Gain you get by indulging Sin, is Unrighteous
Gain; and that exposes to the Wrath and Vengeance of God, whatever you may
think of it at present. Remember therefore the account you must give to God, in
the Judgment Day; and let that restrain you, from encouraging or indulging
Intemperance (or any other sin) in any person whatsoever.

From the Premises, I think the following Inferences are plain, viz.

1. That none but Persons of approved Sobriety and good Conversation, should
have Licenses to Retail Drink, especially to be Inn holders. If Vicious Immoral
persons, who have little or no Conscience, come to be Inn-holders; they will
allow of vile Disorders, Swearing, Gaming, Drunkenness* they will not care how
much they Impoverish and Debauch their Neighbors, if they can but Gain by it
themselves. Yea, the Children and Servants in such Houses, are in great danger
of being utterly Ruined I reckon such Inn-holders are very Extensive Plagues
and Mischiefs to the Public They are more dangerous to the Public, than so
many Indians on the Frontiers, or a Privateer on the Coast; for these open
Enemies can do no more (at worst) but Kill the Body; but such Inn-holders will not
scruple, to destroy the Estates, Credit, Bodies and Immortal Souls of their
Neighbors. Sometimes one base Fellow in a Town (though in a private Capacity)
does a world of Mischief, by tempting corrupting and debauching his Neighbors,
Young Ones especially; but if such an one Keeps Tavern, he will probably do more
abundant mischief. Therefore those who have power to Grant Licenses, as they
have any regard to God's Glory and the good of this Land; should
Conscienciously take heed, not to grant them to Unsuitable Persons.

2. The needless multiplying of Licenses to Sell Drink, especially to be
Innholders, directly tends to debauch and ruin this People. If a grieved
Conscience (concerned for the Public good) might have liberty to Speak; I
humbly conceive, that Licenses are so multiplied (especially in some Places)
that those who have them can get no tolerable gain by them, unless their
Neighbors prove Wicked Customers, in spending more Money with them than they
should. When men have Licenses, they are under a Temptation to Sell what Drink
they can; though they know their Neighbors do Wickedly, in buying so much as
they do. And the Poorer those are that have Licenses, the greater are their
Temptations to allow ill practices in others, for their own gain. It may be a
Man has met with Losses, or his Trade Fails, he is become low and indigent; the
next thing is, he seeks a License to Sell Drink; and when he has it, possibly
many of his Neighbors ruin themselves, by being his Wicked Customers. I fear
many are made poor, by being Wicked Customers to others, that were poor before
them. If those really poor and low, would Keep good Consciences; I think they
had better follow the hardest labor their Bodies can bear, and be content to
live very meanly; than to get a License to Sell Drink: for their Temptations
would be very great. How many have reason to rue the day, that they got such
Licenses? I doubt Licenses are so Multiplied, that few who have them can get a
gain answerable to their Charge and Trouble, and Keep good Consciences too.

3. All that desire the Glory of God and the good of this People, should do
their utmost in their several Capacities to Suppress Intemperance. Those in
Civil Authority, should Employ their power against this threatening Vice, as
well as against others; else they are not a Terror to Evil doers, Romans 13.3. I
reckon there is great need also, that all Ministers through the Land, should very
Plainly, Publicly and Particularly, bear their Witness against this growing
and threatening Evil. Heads of Familes should watch over their Young Ones, not
suffer them to haunt Taverns, nor drink to Excess. They should not teach their
Children, their Boys and Girls to drink Rum, (as I have heard some very
Foolishly and Sinfully do.) In short, all that are Sober and well-minded,
should in love and faithfulness Watch over their Neighbors, Exhorting,
Reproving, Admonishing as their is occasion; for the Preventing and Suppressing
of this growing wickedness.

4. All that desire the good of this Land, should earnestly Pray for the
Out-pourings of the Spirit of Christ. God is various ways contending with us.
He has punished us by a long War, which has cost us much Treasure and Blood.
The last Summer we met with a disappointment, which was very chargeable and
expensive to us; at the same time also, God sorely chasten'd us with a very
Severe Drought. God is come out against us in the Way of his Judgments; Surely
we should be in Good earnest, to reform what is amiss among us. We should not
only Talk of a Reformation, but diligently and heartily Endeavor it. Therefore
we should Earnestly Pray, that God would Pour down his Spirit on us; (though we
should use the best means we can, yet) nothing short of that, can work a Real
through Reformation. If every serious Person in the Land, would heartily and
constantly Pray for this great blessing, 'twould be a Token for good, Psalm.
85.4 8. Turn us, O God of our Salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to
cease -- I will hear what God the Lord will Speak: for he will Speak Peace unto
his People, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly.

Read this Essay, and Lend it to thy Neighbor.

Boston, N. E. January, 25th. 1709, 10.
THE All-seeing Eye of GOD OUR JUDGE Should Restrain us from SIN, and Quicken
us to DUTY; urged in a Lecture-SERMON, Preached at Boston, N. E. December 22.
1709.
JER. XVII. 10. I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins, even to give
every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.


EVERY Creature, is always under the Eye and in the Hand, of God it is Creator;
and every Man, must give an account of his carriage to God, who will reward or
punish him according to what his behavior has been. That every Man shall be
thus dealt with, seems evident from the Text now read. In the 5. and 6. verses,
we have a curse denounced against those, who Trust in Man, but their Hearts
depart from God. In the 7. and 8. verses, we have a blessing pronounced on
those, who Trust and Hope in God. It Is then added, v. 9. The heart is decietful
above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? Some suppose these
last words, to refer to the 5. v. where a Curse is denounced against those that
Trust in Man; as if the Prophet had said, Man is not fit to be Trusted in, for
his Heart is very decietful; he may pretend much kindness, when he intends
mischief. Others look on the words of v. 9. as some reply to Self flattering
Hypocrites, who pretended, that their hearts were right with God and did not
depart from him; as if the Prophet had said to such, Take heed that you be not
mistaken, for the Heart is decietful, etc. If this latter be the true meaning,
it is something like the Apostles caution to every man, Not to think more highly
of himself than he ought, Romans 12.3. And that, if he thinks himself something
when he is nothing, he deceives himself, Gal 6.3. But whether the 9 v. refer to
the one or other of the forementioned particulars, yet in the end of it it is
said of Man's heart, who can know it? Now the words of our Text, give a complete
full answer to the Question, God knows the Hearts of all. Though no man knows the
hearts of others, nor fully knows his own; though he knows not the depth of that
decietfulness which is in him; knows not how far he may fall, if he should meet
with opportunities and pressing temptations; yet God most fully and completely
knows, all that is in the hearts of men. He not only hears all their words, and
sees all their outward actions, but is also as fully acquainted with their
hearts. The Heart and the Reins, seem here to signify one and the same thing;
even the Rational Soul; with as it is Motions and Actions. When men desire to be
fully satisfied about a matter, they commonly Inquire, Try, make Search, that
so they may come to the bottom of the business. Job speaking of himself as
Judge, says: Job 29 16. The cause which I know not, I searched out. In allusion
to such Inquiries among men, God is here said to Search the heart, and Try the
reins. So he is said, to Weigh the Spirits, Prove. 16.2. To Weigh Actions, 1 Samuel ^ 3. To Search Jerusalem with Candles, Zeph. 1.12. Men sometimes light a
Candle, look into dark holes and corners, to make discovery of what they knew
not before. Now these things are spoken of God, after the manner of men; they
don't signify as though God Took pains, and did really Strive and Labor to know
what is in men; but they note, the most full complete knowledge which God has
of all men, and of their hearts. God takes the most exact notice that can be,
of what is in the heart of every Man, Woman and Child in the World. And what
does God do this for? Why it is not as an Idle unconcerned Spectator, that he
critically observes all that is in the hearts of Men, but he does it as a
Witness and Judge; That he may give to every one according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doing. To give to every Man, it seems then, that
every Man must have to do with God as his Judge. Very often in this World, God
deals with Persons in some measure according to their ways. He sometimes brings
on the Wicked very sore Judgments, which on some special accounts, are
remarkably the fruit of their doings; and sometimes the Godly meet with
blessings, which seem to have a remarkable Relation to their good deeds. I say
it is sometimes thus, yet the Godly and the wicked cannot fully, much less
constantly be distinguished from one another, by external dispensations of
Providence to them, here in this World. All things come alike to all, Eccles 9
2. But in the World to come, in the Day of Judgment, then each particular
Person shall recieve from God, according to what his heart and ways have been.
From our Text therefore we may raise this,

DOCTRINE. GOD exactly Knows the Heart of every Person, and will give him
according to his Ways.
Here are two Propositions. (1) God exactly knows the heart of every Person.
(2) He will give to him according to his Ways.

PROP. I. GOD exactly Knows the Heart of every Person.
This is evident,

1. Because Gods Power upholds and concurs with, every Creature in all its
natural Operations. The same God who Made all Creatures does Preserve them,
Neh. 9 6. The same Almighty power, which was necessary to give them being, is
necessary to preserve them in being. We live, move, and have our being in God;
he holds our Souls in Life and preserves our Spirits; he upholds all things by
the word of his power. The Divine Power, causes the Wind to blow, the Sea to
flow and ebb, the celestial Bodies to keep their Stated regular motions. It Is
the Divine Power, that upholds or preserves the Natural Powers, which are in
all living Creatures; and so in men as well as in others. It Is the Divine Power
that upholds in men, the animal faculties of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, etc.
and that does concur with these faculties in such Sensations. So the Divine
Power preserves the Rational Soul, all its natural powers and abilities, and
concurs with the faculties in all their natural operations. If God should
withdraw his sustaining power, the Creature would presently sink into its
original nothing. Or if God should preserve the Creature in being, yet it could
not act, exert or exercise its usual natural powers, if the Divine Agency or
Concourse were withheld. All the actions of the Soul may be called Natural, as
performed by the Rational natural faculties (whether Supernaturally or
Graciously assisted or not) though at the same time they may be called Moral too,
as they refer to the Rule or Law of Actions. Now considered as Natural Actions,
a Divine Concourse is absolutely necessary* in order to the performance of
them. Divine power actually upholds and assists the faculties of the Soul, in
all their operations. And since there is such a Divine Concourse, in all humane
actions outward or inward, it necessarily follows, that God knows all the
motions and actions even of the Souls of men. For the Soul can do no action
without (...) Divine Concourse, inasmuch therefore as God, power is concerned
in such an action, he must needs know all about it. That God knows the hearts
of men, is evident,

2. Because he has given Laws, to regulate and govern even the hearts of men.
The Divine law requires us, to Love the Lord our God with all our Heart, Soul,
Mind and Strength; and our Neighbor as our selves, Mat. 22 37 -- 39. It
forbids us to Hate our Neighbor, Lev. 19 17. It bids us Trust in God, Rejoice
in him, it bids us be Patient; and indeed multitudes of Divine Precepts, have
an Immediate direct reference, to the Inward Motions of the Soul which other
Men cannot see. Nay indeed all the Commands of God reach to the Soul, to the
heart; for we should obey and serve God with all our heart. Now since God gives
laws, to regulate even the inward secret actions of the heart, the Soul, it
plainly follows, that he knows those inward secret actions; for if he knew them
not, his laws would signify nothing, he could not tell when they were kept or
broken, and so could not punish or reward Men according to their ways. That God
knows the hearts of Men, appears,

3. From plain direct Assertions in Scripture. God is a boundless Infinite
Being, He Is every where Present, and necessarily knows all things. The eyes of
the Lord are in every place, beholding the Evil and the good, Prove 15 3 There
is no Creature that is not manifest in his sight, all things are open and
naked, to the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb 4.13. Man is a short
sighted Creature, many things are hid from his eye; but nothing is hid from
Gods eye He knows all the outward bodily actions of men, though done never so
secretly. For the Darkness hides not from him, but the (...) shines as the
day: the darkness and the light are both alike to him, Psalm. 139.12. Indeed his
eyes are open, on all the ways of the Sons of Men, Jer. 32.19 Men commonly know
those things, that are done before their Face, under their eye, they looking
on; Well, Gods eyes are always open, and that on all the ways of the Sons of
men. So God knows all the Words men speak, though never so secretly Whispered:
Psalm. 139 4 There is not a Word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord thou know it
altogether. No, not One word but what God exactly knows. Though it is uttered with
the lowest Whisper, it is as audible to God as Thunder. And indeed in the
Judgment day, Men shall give an account of every late Word they speak, Mat.
12.36. Men sometimes plot, contrive, cabal to carry on some vile design;
possibly they use utmost care to keep the matter Secret; but alas, God hears
every word about it. But besides all this, God as fully knows the Hearts of
men, as he does their Words or outward Actions. Solomon said to God, 1 King
8.39. Thou even thou only, know the hearts of all the Children of Men. There
is not so much as any one of the Children of Men, but God knows his heart. He
knows all the Thoughts of men, for no thought can be withheld from him. He
knows the thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139.2. What can be more plain and express
than what God says? Ezekiel. 11.5. I know the things that come into your Mind,
every one of them. No one single thought can pass through our Minds, but God
observes it. God knows what belief we entertain in our Minds, about himself,
about his glorious perfections, about his holy Truths and Ways; what opinions
we have about our selves, about our own state as to the future World, about our
own ways and actions; what opinions we have, about other Persons, other things,
and the actions of others. He knows all our designs, purposes, contrivances of
what nature soever they are; whether men know any thing of them or not. He
knows all the arguings and reasonings we at any time have, about any affair
whatsoever. God knows all our doubts, fears objections; all our hopes, desires,
wishes whether good or bad. He knows what we Love and what we Hate, what we
Grieve for or Rejoice at. In a word, God is most perfectly acquainted with all
the secret actions and motions of the Soul. He has a more exact knowledge of
every man's heart, than the man himself has. It Is undeniably true, that God
exactly knows the heart of every Person. This was the first Proposition: we
therefore proceed to the Second.

PROP. II. He will give to him according to his Ways.
GOD has made all Creatures for his own Glory. Prove. 16.4. And he will have
glory from every one of them, in one way or other. As for Rational Creatures,
they are Subjects capable of Moral Government; therefore God their Sovereign
has given them Laws and Rules to act and walk by. They should glorify God, by
yielding unfeigned Obedience to his Laws; if they don't, He Will glorify himself
in Punishing them for their Disobedience. Indeed all men have sinned, they all
fell in Adam; and so became legally obnoxious, to the Everlasting Wrath and
Vengeance of God. But God (in the wonders of his Grace) has so loved the world
as to give his only begotten Son, this whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh. 3 1^ Though men's sins have been never so
many or great, yet if they heartily spent of and turn from them, accepting of
Christ on Gospel terms: they shall then be Pardoned and Saved for Ever. But if
they don't heartily comply with this way of Salvation, they must perish
unavoidably to all Eternity. Well, God will call all men to an account, and he
will deal with them, according to what their hearts and ways have been. He
sometimes (as we hinted before) deals with them in some measure, according to
their ways even here in this world: but 'twill be more fully and completely
done, hereafter in the Great Day of Judgment. Here therefore we may observe,

1. That every Person shall be brought to Judgment. We read, Mat. 23.31, 32.
That all Nations must be gathered before Christ's Throne. They must be there
assembled to be Tried Romans 14.10. We must all stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. All! What must none be excused? No, not so much as one. Small and Great
must appear, and the Books (wherein their thoughts words and deeds were
recorded) must be opened, Rev. 20.12. Rulers and Ruled, Rich and Poor, High and
Low, Young and Old must appear. The Master as well as the Servant, must then
appear; those that were Judges on Earth, as well as those that were Judged by
them. The mighty Ones of the Earth, Kings and Emperors must appear; and also
the Meanest and Lowest in the world. But what, may not some appear by Proxy?
May Not they get some Attorney to represent them, and manage their cause for
them? No Indeed, every one must Personally appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. There Is no possibility to avoid or escape it. Sometimes in this world,
those that should be brought on their Trial, for some Crime they are accused of;
do yet escape such a trial. It may be they hide, and so cannot be bro't forth;
or flee, they run away and cannot be seized; or they Fee or Bribe one or other;
and so are not Tried as they should be. Such things as these are too common
among men, but no such thing can be in the Day of Judgment. The Angels shall be
the Sheriffs (if we may so term them) to bring all to the Bar of Christ; they
shall be the Reapers, who shall gather both Wheat and Tares to recieve their
respective Doom, Mat 13 37 -- 43. There Is not one Man, Woman or Child in this
Congregation, or in this World, but what must personally appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ.

2. There will be but two sorts of Persons, in the Day of Judgment. There will
be the Godly and the Ungodly. The Godly are set forth, under the name of Sheep
standing at Christ's Right hand; and the Ungodly, under the name of Goats
standing at his Left hand, Mat. 25.33. All that shall be raised from the Dead,
and all that shall be Judged (for both Quick and Dead must be Judged at
Christ's appearing, 2 Timothy 4.1.) are distributed into the Just and Unjust, Act,
24.15. Into those that have done Good, and those that have done Evil, Joh. 5.28
29.

3. All the Good Deeds of the Godly shall be mentioned in the Day of Judgment,
and be Eternally Rewarded. We read, that their Faith shall be found to Praise,
Honor and Glory, in the Day of Christ's appearing, 1 Pet 1.6, 7 Then, their
Secret Prayers shall be rewarded Openly, Mat. 6 6. Their Alens-deeds shall then
be rewarded, Mat 25.34.35. Yea we are told in general, Ephesians. 6.8. That whasoever
good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be
bond or free. All the Pious Words and Counsels of the Godly; all their Just
Righteous and Commendable Deeds; yea all their Holy Serious Thoughts, Designs,
Purposes, Desires, shall then be Openly Published, Eternally and Gloriously
Rewarded; a reward of Grace shall then be bestowed, for all their exercise of
Grace here in this world. Then the Godly shall find by most blessed experience,
that they served a good Master; that none of their doings or sufferings for
Christ, were lost or in vain. They Will never repent of any thing they did, or
suffered for Christ. That day of Recompense, will be a day of inconceiveable
Joy to them. No Tongue can express, how surprising, how ravishing their Joy and
Delight will be, and that for ever.

4. All the Sins of the Wicked shall be openly mentioned it the Judgment Day,
and be Punished for ever. As that day will bring surprising Joy and Glory to
the Godly; so 'twill bring surprising Shame, Woe and Misery to the Wicked. Then
their sinful Deeds, shall be laid open before the world. Now they often strive
to Conceal their sins from men, and if they can do that, they content
themselves. The Apostle says, Ephesians 5.12. It Is a shame even to speak of those
things, which are done of them in secret. They do them in Secret, because
they are ashamed to have them known. Job 24, 14, 15. The Murderer rising with
the Light slays the Poor and Needy; and in the Night is as a Thief. The eye
also of the Adulterer waits for the twilight; saying no Eye shall see me: and
disguiseth his face. Thus the wicked seek to hide their Sins from men, but God
will make them known hereafter. Doubtless there are many secret Murders, secret
Thefts, secret Fornications and Adulteries, secret Extortions and methods of
Unrighteous Gain; which the wicked would not have known to their Neighbors by
any means. It may be they would not have them known to such a number of People
as are now in this House, for all the World; and yet they must quickly be known
to all the World For God will bring ever work into Judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be Good or whether it be Evil. Eccl 12 14 Woe to them that
seek deep to hide their Counsil from the Lord* and their Works are in the dark,
and they say, who sees (...) and who knows us? Isa. 29 15. But all their
endeavors can never hide their Counsels nor Works from God; He sees them and
will discover them. Mary of the wicked would Flash, and be ashamed to show
their heads, if but some of their Secret Villainies, were now known to a few of
their next Neighbors; but they will all of them be made Public to Angels and
Men, in the great Day. Absolom's going in unto his Fathers Concubines on the
housetop, was said to be done, before all Israel and before the Sun, 2 Samuel
12.12 But the most Secret sins of the wicked, shall be made more Public than
that, in the Day of Judgment. Their sinful Words shall be then made public and
known, as well as their sinful outward Actions. God will then convince ungodly
sinners, of all their hard speeches which they have spoken against him, Jude v.
15. Yea of every (...) word they speak, they must give an account in the Day of
Judgment, Mat. 12 36 Some are now so hardened in sin, that they will Openly speak
filthy, obscene, profane, blasphemous words. Others not so daringly wicked,
will yet speak vile abominable words in Secret; they will Secretly revile,
backbite, raise and spread ill and false reports of others; they will secretly
carry on vile designs of various sorts, their Tongues are set on fire of hell;
but alas, these their Tongue-transgressions shall be laid open before the
world, in the great Day. Yea their Secret heart-sins, which never broke forth
into Words or outward Actions, shall then be laid open also. Our Savior speaks
of committing Adultery in the heart, Mat. 5.28 So there are such things as
Heart-Thieft, Heart-Murder and the like; when the hearts of the wicked secretly
desire to do such things, and please themselves with the thoughts of doing
them. Well, even Heart-abominations shall be called over, and condemned in the
Judgment Day. For then, God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and the counsels of the heart shall be made manifest, 1 Cor. 4, 5. Indeed all
the sins of the Wicked, in their Thoughts, Words and Deeds, shall be made Known
and Punished in the Great Day: That Day is called, Romans 2 5 The Day of the
Rebelation of Gods Righteous Judgment. Twill Indeed be a Day of Revelations, a
Day of great Discoveries; the sins of the Wicked shall then be openly
discovered, and God's Wrath against them shall be discovered too. Then shall
the Wicked receive from their Judge, according to all the Bad (the Evil) that
they have done here in the Body, 2 Cor. 5.10. They shall be covered with Shame
and Everlasting Contempt, Dan. 12.2. They shall receive Wrath and Vengeance, in
full weight and measure for all their offenses. Then they will find to their most
sorrowful cost, that their neglecting and provoking God, was the highest Folly
as well as Rebellion. Their pleasures in Sin were but for a Season, their
plagues for Sin will be Everlasting. Their lusts burnt in them on Earth. Gods
wrath will burn on them in hell for ever. Their Sins shall be set in order
before their Faces, the view of which, will fill them with unutterable horror
and confusion for ever. Their Consciences, which in this World are often
Sleepy* yea sometimes seared as with an hot Iron; shall then be awakened, and
shall roar upon them, and fill them with inconceivable anguish to all Eternity.

We may now proceed to the USE of these things, in a few Inferences.
I. We should never allow our selves in any Sin, under the Notion of it is being
SECRET. Indeed, Sins are frequently and properly distinguished into Open and
Secret; but this distinction refers only to Men, and not at all to God: for all
things are equally known to him. Therefore Oh Man, never indulge thy self in
any Sin, though thou can keep it secret a while from Men; such Secrecy, cannot
exempt thee from Punishment at last. If thou dare not do such or such an ill
thing, before Men, for fear of blame, shame and punishment from them; and yet
dare to do the same ill thing in Secret, then thou show more regard to Men
than to God. It Is said of some Idolaters, Romans 1.25. They worshipped and served
the Creature, more than the Creator. So thou show more regard to Creatures,
than to the Creator; if thou can dare to Sin because it is in Secret. Thou
show more regard to Man's presence, than to Gods presence; to Man's eye than
to Gods eye. Can thou dare to Steal, because men don't see thee? But consider
Oh man, the Great GOD, the Holy JEHOVAH stands by and looks on. Can thou
commit Fornication or Adultery, because there are no humane Witnesses by? But
consider, the great GOD sees thy filthiness, as plainly as he saw Absoloms on
the House top, before all Israel and before the Sun. Can thou dare to extort,
cheat, defraud, because thou reckonest thou can hide it from men? But alas,
notwithstanding all thy Whiffling shuffling tricks, notwithstanding all the
baffling plea's thou do use with thy Sleepy Conscience; yet God observes very
critically, all thy methods of Unrighteous gain; and he stamps a curse on thee
for them. 1 These. 4.6. That no man go beyond or defraud his brother in any
matter (not in any matter whatsoever) because the Lord is the avenger of all
such. Can thou dare among some of thine Intimates, to belie, revile, reproach
others, to blast their reputation, to raise or spread ill reports of them;
can thou dare to do this, thinking 'twont be known that it comes from thee,
or that it cannot be proved upon thee? Alas, the great GOD hears, and critically
observes all this thy wickedness. So far as thou do Indulge any Sin, under
the Notion of it is being Secret; so far thou do practically deny God to be
Omnipresent, and Omniscient. For thou seem to suppose, that there is no God,
or that he is not an Allseeing and Holy Judge. Oh let not such cursed Atheism
prevail in thy Soul. Thou should avoid Sin chiefly for this reason, to wit,
that it displeases and provokes God; therefore thou should avoid Secret as
well as Open Sins, for the former as well as the latter are known to him, and
provoke him. The Allseeing eye of thy glorious Judge is always upon thee, by
Day and by Night, whether alone or in company; let the thought; of this, keep
thee from allowing thy self in any known Sin whatsoever. When Joseph was
tempted to Sin in Secret, he replied, Genesis 39 9. How shall I do this great
wickedness, and Sin against God! He dare not do it, though in Secret as to Men,
for he considered that God would see and be provoked with it.

II. We should Repent even of our Secret Sins. It Is not enough, that we repent
of our Sinful Words and Actions, which are commonly known to those about us:
but we should heartily Repent of our Secret Sins too, for our glorious Judge
knows them all. Oh Man, Woman, it may be thou have been guilty of secret
Murder, secret Fornication or Adultery, secret Lies or Perjuries, secret
Reproaches and Defamations, secret Thiefts, Cheats, Frauds and Cursed methods
of unrighteous gain; Well, God thy glorious Judge knows all these things What
if men don't know them, yet thy Judge does, and he needs no Witnesses. What if
thou should go on Secretly in thy Wickedness, and go Impenitent and
Undiscovered to the Grave? What then? why all thy secret Villainies, shall
hereafter be published before the World, and be Published for ever. Therefore
speedily Repent of Secret (as well as open) wickedness. Awaken thy sleepy
Conscience, let it do it is office, let it speak plainly and faithfully; hearken
to it is reproofs, don't stiffle them; for it will roar dreadfully hereafter,
and that to thine eternal confusion too, if speedy hearty Repentance prevent
not. Oh be serious and in good earnest, examine thine heart, thy past actions
Secret as well as others; unfeignedly Repent of, Mourn for, and Turn from even
all thy Secret as well as open Sins. And if thou have Secretly wronged others,
in their Name or Estates, do thine utmost to make Reparation. Don't keep what
thou have gotten in any unjust way, though never so secretly; thou will keep the
Curse and Wrath of God on thy Soul, if thou do. Oh take warning before it is
too late, speedily and heartily Repent* fly to the blood of JESUS for Pardon,
and forsake thy evil ways. GOD is now calling on thee and warning of thee to
Repent; if thou do not now take warning, it may be few or no more warnings
may be given thee: or if they be, possibly God may Judicially give thee up to a
seared Conscience; and may say, Let him that is filthy be filthy still, let him
that is unjust be unjust still* What if God should say, if such an one, or such
an one does not take warning, repent and reform now; then he shall go on in his
secret ways of wickedness, and shall be blinded and hardened in Sin, till he
drops into the unquenchible flames of the pit below; if God should say thus,
how dreadful would it be! For the Lords Sake, and for our Souls Sake* let us
consider these things and impress them on our Consciences.

III. Here Is matter of Support and Comfort to the Godly, under false Charges
and Accusations laid against them. The world is commonly filled with groundless
Rumors and false Reports; and the Godly often suffer much by them. The Apostle
said, Romans 3.8 We be slandorously Reported. David said, Psalm. 35.11. False
Witnesses did rise up, they laid to my Charge things that I knew not. Well, the
consideration of the All-seeing Eye of our Glorious Judge, should quiet and
support us if at any time vile false Reports are raised of us. If any Charge us
with saying such or such ill things, which we never said; or with doing such or
such ill things which we never did; or with having some ill design which we
never had; if it be so, this may Support us, That GOD who knows all things and
will Judge us at last, knows that we are Innocent in these matters. If our
Consciences Testify for us in such Cases, they are better (as to our own inward
Peace and Satisfaction) than a Thousand Witnesses. Indeed, if men raise false
Reports of us, and our Name suffer thereby; we should seriously Consider God's
Hand in such Affliction, ( David Eyed the Hand of God in Shimei's Cursing)
inquire into the Voice and Meaning of such a Providence, and Endeavor to
comply therewith by growing more Humble and Holy. Yet so far as we are
Innocent, the thoughts of our Innocence being known to God, should greatly
Quiet and Comfort us.

IV. We should be Encouraged to Secret Duties. As the Consideration, of the
All-seeing Eye of our Glorious Judge, should keep us from Secret as well as
Open Sins; so it should quicken us to Secret as well as Open Duties. We should
be Religious in our Cases, as well as in the place of God's Public (...).
Remember what Motive our Lord (...), to Quicken unto Secret Prayer, Mat. 6 6.
Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have short thy Door, Pray to thy Father
which sees in Secret; and thy Father which SEES IN SECRET shall REWARD THEE
OPENLY. God Sees and will Reward, Secret as well as Open Duties; therefore we
should be Encouraged to them We should be Quickened to do what is Good and
Laudable, though men don't see us, though there is little or no notice taken of it
by others; for God sees every Sincere Duty, is Pleased with it and will Reward
it. If men give Alms out of Obedience to God, though so Secretly that their right
hand scarce knows what their left hand does; yet he that sees in Secret will
reward it Openly. Such Alms shall come up for a Memorial before God. He that is
Secretly and Sincerely (as well as Externally) Pious, shall be Openly and
Eternally Glorious.

V. We should use utmost Diligence to be Sincere and Hearty, in all our
External Religious (or other Commendable) Performances God not only hears all
our Words and sees our Outward Actions, but He also observes the Inward
Principles from whence they flow; even all the secret Designs of the heart in
them. Many things have a fair Outside to men's Eye, but a black Inside to
God's Eye. The Pharisees did Outwardly appear Righteous to Men but Inwardly
were full of Iniquity and Hypocrisy: All the good things they did, they did
them to be seen of Men, Mat. 23.5, 38. Men often serve the Devil and their own
Lusts, under a Mask of Religion, under a plausible show and pretense of
Holiness. Absalom asks leave to go to Hebron, under a pretense of paying his
Vows to God; when Treason was in his Heart; his design was to raise a Rebellion
against his Royal Father. Jezebel orders a Fast, pretends to have Justice done,
and a Reformation wrought; when the design was, to Murder Naboth and get his
Vineyard. Herod Inquires after the holy Child Jesus, pretending to Worship him,
but intending to Murder him, Mat. 2. ch Alas, the Devil transforms himself into
an Angel of Light, and his Children often Imitate him in such hellish
dissimulation. They often pretend much zeal for God, when indeed their hearts
are Set on their wickedness. Well, let us never allow our selves in such
hypocritical practices, for GOD our Judge Sees our Hearts; though it is possible
to deceive Men it is impossible to deceive God. Let our main care therefore be,
to approve our hearts to God in all we do. We all call our selves Christians,
we profess and pretend to be the Disciples of Christ; but if we are not hearty
and sincere in it, God will damn us for our Unbelief and Hypocrisy. If we have
not the Power as well as the Form, of Godliness; if we have not Oil in our
Vessels ( i. e. Grace in our Souls) as well as in our Lamps ( i. e our outward
Profession) then we shall perish for ever. Therefore On Man, be a Christian
indeed and in truth, unfeignedly receive Christ on Gospel-termes, and live to
him as Prince and Savior. Outward shows without inward Sincerity, will avail
thee nothing in a dying-hour What though thou do profess the self (...)
Christian, what if thou art a Church Member, and do lead a blameless Life in
the view of Men, and all thy Neighbors count thee an eminent Saint; yet if thy
heart be unsound and hypocritical, God will cast thee into Hell for ever. Ih
never content nor satisfy thy self, merely in approving thy self to Men, and
getting their good Opinion of thee; but approve thy heart to God in all things.
Don't content thy self in doing those things that are Materially good, but see
that thine heart be right with God, in the doing of them. When thou hear a
Sermon, let thy heart be Engaged with God in that Duty. When thou make a
Prayer, let thine Heart as well as thy Mouth draw nigh to God. Oh Christian,
take heed that thou do not deceive thy self, even in doing that which is
Materially good and commendable. Be vigorous to promote every thing that is Holy
Just and Good; yet don't be Hypocritical in it, don't do it to be seen of men:
but do it out of hearty Obedience to God, aiming at his Glory therein, for he
sees thy heart whatever thy pretenses are. Be zealous against Sin in others,
duly to witness against and suppress it; this is thy Duty, don't neglect it.
Yet don't allow the same Sins, nor any others in thy self. And again take heed,
that thou art not carried forth by a Spirit of prejudice or revenge; for if
it is personal prejudice or revenge, that makes thee condemn the faults of
others, then thou do serve the Devil and thine own lusts in doing it: thou
do make the lusts of others, fuel for thine own lusts to feed on. Take heed
therefore that thy heart be right with God, even in doing those things which
are Materially good and laudable; for God sees the heart, and hares Hypocrisy.
He hates Robbery for burnt offerings, Isa 61 8 He hates that Men under a
pretense of honoring him, should serve the Devil and their own corruptions.
Therefore do the things that God commands, but do them with an Upright Heart,
and with Sincere Designs.

VI. We should not allow our selves in any thing, but what we can give a good
account of in the Day of Judgment. Surely this should be our greatest Study and
Care, since our Text tells us, That God will Give to every one according to his
ways. It may be when we are to manage such or such an affair, we think and
consider what to do in it; and we inquire in our own Minds, what will such and
such Persons, it may be great Men, or it may be some intimate Friends or near
Relations; what will they think or say of it, how will they like it? I say, it
may be we are apt to reason thus with our selves, about what we are going to do
(and indeed it may not be improper, in many cases and circumstances thus to
query) but our great inquiry should be. How will God like of it? What will our
glorious Judge think of it? Will it please him? Then let us do it though it
displease all men. Will it displease God? Then let us shun it though Men are
never so much provoked thereby. Let us act or not act, as shall be most for our
Peaceable and Comfortable account, in the great Day of Judgment. According as
we behave our selves now, so shall we be dealt with here-after. For we are told
Joh. 5.28, 29. (with which I shall conclude) All that are in they Graves shall
hear his (that is, Christ's) Voice, and shall come forth; they that have done
good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil to the
Resurrection of Damnation.

BOSTON, N E. Printed by B. Green, for a Public Good. 1710.


