THE HAZARD AND THE Unprofitableness, Of Losing a SOUL For the sake of Gaining
the WORLD Evidenced In a SERMON, on Mat. XVI. 26.

By JOHN BARNARD, A.M.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, in Middle-Street, 1712.

Imprimatur,

J. DUDLEY.
The Hazard, AND UNPROFITABLENESS Of Losing a SOUL TO Gain the WORLD.
Mat. XVI. 26. For what is a Man Profited, if he shall Gain the whole World,
and Lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?


IT IS one of the Aphorisms of Solomon, Eccl. II. 14. A wise man's eyes are in
his head; but the fool walks in darkness. No where does Wisdom appear in a
greater Luster, than in weighing things in a just Balance, and proportioning
our Care and Labor, according to the nature and intrinsic worth and value of
them; and fixing our chief Concern upon that which is of the greatest Weight
and Moment to us: For this manifestly discovers, that we have a clear and
distinct View of things; know where our greatest interest lies; how to move in
a strait line, and take the nearest course to secure it. Whereas, they that
content themselves with a transient view of things, are often led into wild
Mistakes about their true interest; are apt to conclude that to be so, which
upon Examination would be found to be of little or no Consequence to 'em; and
hence they spend themselves in vain and to no purpose: by which means they
evidently declare their Folly, and that they walk in Darkness.

This then is the distinguishing Character between the Wife Man, and the Fool,
and what we may form a Judgment of 'em by; viz. their Closest Application: What
is it fixes their Diligence, and commands their Attention? Are they the lower
and more trifling Matters that most of all engage 'em? Or, do they keep more
noble Ends in their view? steadily pursue what does more nearly concern them,
and regard these lesser Matters only by the By?

This now holds good with respect to the Wisdom of this World. But when we
consider this, and the future World, our Souls and our Bodies apart, (to the
one or other of which our greatest Care and Labor must be restrained,) the
Wise man will plainly discover himself by his Choice; he will prudently adjust
his Labors after this World, so as that they may not be an impediment, or give
any interruption to the greater Business he has upon his hands; viz. that of
securing the welfare of his Soul; which he firstly regards, and reaches after
with the utmost pains and sedulity. In order hereto, 'twill be necessary for
him, to have a full Conviction of the worth of his Soul; of what importance the
Salvation of it is to him, and how much below its Dignity all the things of
this World are; and therefore how much less he ought to be concerned about
them, than about the grand affairs of Futurity; that he must by no means suffer
the little Interests of the Flesh to turn the Scale against the weighty
Concerns of the Spirit.

To this end my Text serves; For what is a Man Profited, if he shall gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in Exchange for
his Soul?

In the Paragraph to which these words belong, our Savior gives us the
Essential Qualification of His true Disciples: If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. He is one that for
the sake of Christ, is ready to part with every thing in this World, though never
so dear to him; to deny himself not only of his Sensual Gratifications, but of
those Enjoyments which are justly valuable to him, nay, even of Life it self;
when they stand in Competition with the cause of Christ. And the reason why he
must thus deny himself, is given in the next words; For whosoever will save his
Life shall lose it. He that for the sake of any earthly Enjoyment; though it be
to preserve his Life, shall forsake Christ and His Cause; shall find he has
missed his aim, and lost the happiness he sought, in losing a Life infinitely
more valuable than this: But whosoever shall lose his Life for my sake, shall
find it; he shall find in the Conclusion, that by his Fidelity to Me and My
Interest, he has been the greatest Gainer, tho he has parted with all this
World for Me; for he has secured the Life of his immortal Soul.

As a further Argument to follow Christ whither-soever He shall lead us, though
it be with our Cross upon our Shoulders, the words of my Text are bro't in;
which shows us, how little will be the Gains, and how great the Loss, if for
the sake of preserving this Life and the Enjoyments of it, we should part with
the Life that is to come: For what is a man Profited? etc. If a man have Gained
never so much of this World, though it should be the Whole of it, if it be at the
Expense and Loss of his Soul, he will see at the foot of the Account, that he
has made an Unprofitable Bargain; his Loss is so great, that his Gains are no
ways Equivalent; and so Irreparable, that the whole World, were it in his
power, would not be sufficient to give in Exchange for his Soul.

In the Words, it is First, taken for Granted, that the World, and the Soul
stand Competitors, and are Rivals in address; and there is great Hazard, left
the World be hearkened to.

That the Soul, the Heaven-born, Intellectual and Immortal part of the man,
which raises him above the Brute, and distinguishes him with the bright
characters of his Divine Original, from the rest of the visible Creation; that
this Courts his Love in the Most pathetical address, and challenges his thought
and pains proportionable to its worth and dignity.

That the World, the things that we Converse with here, which lie level to
Sense, and we necessarily have some respect to while we Tabernacle in Flesh,
that must be fed and clothed; that this also Sues for the greatest Interest in
our Affections; and under all appearances, with the most splendid and courtly
show, and specious pretenses, endeavors the possession of our highest Love;
and there is great Hazard, lest the Charms of the World prevail upon us, and
we make a Surrender of our selves to it.

And then, Secondly, we have it Asserted, in favor of the Soul, that he makes
an Unprofitable Bargain of it, who for the sake of Gaining the World, Loses his
Soul: Who receives the Address of the World, hearkens to its insinuations, and
places his affections upon it; at the same time disregarding the more important
Entreaties of the Soul. For the misery of it is, that if the Address of the
World be admitted, the Soul is unavoidably Lost. The Soul may be made our chief
Concern, and yet a sufficiency of the World be secured to us; but we cannot make
the World our greatest Business, but it will certainly be at the Expense of the
Soul. The World May, but the Soul Cannot come in as a Servitor, and be treated
by the By only. 'Twill then be no ways to his Profit, but his unspeakable
Damage and Loss, to prefer the World to his Soul: As plainly appears from
hence; What shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? If he were never so
willing to purchase the recovery of his lost Soul, at the Price of all that he
has, or all that he can wish for of this World, it would not be sufficient to
Redeem it. The mighty advantage he thought to have made to himself, by throwing
off the care of his Soul, and hugging the World as his Darling, will all
disappear; and he will see, that he has Played the Fool Egregiously, in his
rash and inconsiderate Choice; when he comes to find, that the whole World is
not a valuable Consideration, for the Redemption of the Soul he has parted with
to Gain it.

According to this View of the Words, there are these Two General Heads of
Discourse for me to insist upon. [I.] That there is extreme Hazard and Danger,
lest the Soul be Lost for the sake of Gaining the World. [I.I.] That whatever
any may Gain of this World, if it be at the Expense and Loss of the Soul,
'twill be the most Unprofitable Bargain.

Accordingly;

1. There is Extreme Hazard and Danger, lest the Soul should be Lost for the
sake of Gaining This World.

MAN is justly looked upon as the Top of the visible Creation, and a kind of
Medium between Body and Spirit; for he is neither one nor the other considered
alone, but both in a near and happy Union; by which means he stands allied to
Two Worlds with respect to This Body, to This in which we now dwell; and with
regard to his Soul or Spirit, to (...) World, which here he (...) a Candidate
and Probationer for. Hence arises the Contest between Flesh and Spirit, the
things of Time and Eternity. This World, on the one hand, makes interest with
our Fleshly part, and courts our Choice; and the Glory and Happiness of the
Future World, on the other hand, presents it self to our Spiritual man, as more
worthy of our regards. Now it is impossible that we should be equally alike
concerned for Both of these at the same time; but while we Cleave to the one,
we shall necessarily Forsake the other; if we Love the one, we shall discover
our Hatred of the other by our Slighting of it, Mat. VI. 24.

This now shows us, wherein lies the Loss of the Soul; not in its Annihilation,
or being reduced to Nothing; (this indeed may be sadly wished for, but shall
never be experienced by those miserable Wretches that lose them;) but, in its
Forfeiture and Loss of all the Happiness, Joy and Pleasure of the future World;
and Consequently, in inheriting all that Misery which is contrary thereunto for
the Soul cannot remain in a state of Indifferency; but her Exquisite Sensation
will necessarily involve her in all the Unhappiness and Misery, contrary to the
Good She is deprived of.

And it is granted, as an Unquestionable Truth, that he that Gains the World,
thus Loses his Soul. Not that barely our acquiring this or that, is to be
esteemed the Gaining of the World, in the sense our Savior speaks; for while
we dwell here, the Body must be provided for; and we are obliged as Men, and
Christians, to such a just Industry in our proper Business, as we may
rationally expect some Worldly Gains from: But it means, our Loving the World
above every thing else, and for the Gaining of it, to make it our chief Care
and Business, and accounting what we get of this World to be the only Gains; He
who thus Gains the World, undoubtedly Loses his Soul.

Here then lies the Danger, lest while we Converse with this World, it gain the
ascendant over us, six our Hearts and Affections, and extort from us the
chiefest of our Though It and Care; left it put us upon neglecting the weighty
Concerns of Immortality, turning our backs upon the Blessedness and Glory of
the future World, and so our Souls become Lost for ever. And this, I say, there
is extreme Hazard and Danger of.

For,

1. Do but consider the Advantage this World has on its side, in its striking
so directly, and immediately upon the Senses. It Is the world we dwell in; and
must necessarily hold some Communion with, while we carry about with us a load
of Flesh. It Is wonderfully suited to our Outward Fleshly part, but has no
kindred and affinity with our Immortal Spirits, which the Future World more
peculiarly belongs to Every thing here exactly agrees with our Senses. We see,
we feel, we taste the Enjoyments of this World, and all our Senses are
gratified from it. What advantage has it over us by this Means? For the
Communication from the Senses to the Intellectual Powers, renders the Soul
necessarily affected with what affects the Body, enclines her to will and
embrace what is agreeable to the Body, and to refuse the contrary.

And besides, we need no dint of Argument and severe Reasonings, to convince us
of the Truth and Reality of these things; so apparent and self-evident are they
to our Senses: Whereas, we need to summon our Rational Powers, and closely
apply our Thoughts; and when we have been most Intense and deep in our
Enquiries, and made the fairest Discoveries we can, we must exert our Faith, to
confirm to us the Being of a future World, and the Truth and Reality of its
Happiness and Misery. Yea, though the existence of the Soul is Self-evident; yet
so much clearer and plainer is the evidence of the Body, and the things
relating to it, that we are ready to lose the view of our Souls, in the
brighter appearance of this World to us. There needs no Arguments, to convince
a Hungry man, that he is so; or one Athirst, that he wants Drink; but we need
the strongest Arguments, to convince us of the Wants of the Soul.

Thus, by the force this World has upon the Body, we are put upon pleading
necessity for it; it is what we cannot do without, as well as what will greatly
delight and entertain us.

Now then, what extreme Hazard is there, left for the sake of Gaining this
World, we neglect the Care of the Soul? What great Danger are we in, of having
our Hearts engage with our Senses, listen to the pleas of the World, and we
give it all our Love? What Danger, left we submit our selves entirely to the
Empire and Dominion of our Senses, which are so near akin to this world, and
have such influence upon us? Left we think no more of those Spirits, which
appear to us in so dim a Light; or, of a coming World, which is at such an
unknown Distance from us, and Sense has so little Evidence of the Truth of?
Left we give the loose to our Appetites, and not only neglect the important
Interest of the Soul, but take those methods to gain this sensible World, which
strike directly at the Foundation of its Happiness? And so the Soul be utterly
Lost.

Again,

2. The extreme Danger we are in, of setting our Hearts upon this World, will
further appear, if we consider the force of our Natural Depravity; and the
Advantage which Satan makes of it. We have all Sinned, and come short of the
Glory of God Romans iii. 23.
: We are shapen in Iniquity and conceived in Sin Psalm. li. 5.
; and have gone astray from the Womb, telling of Lies Psalm. lviii. 3.
.

Now, this is the Injury and Mischief done us by our Apostasy from God, that
the Soul is sunk vastly below its Original Dignity; and with its Primitive
Rectitude, has lost much of its Royal Prerogative, Empire, and Dominion over
the Senses: that instead of being the Guide, and Director of our Senses, and
Governor of our Sensual Appetites, it is now subjected to their Influence and
Sway. The Revolution which Sin has made, has given the lower Appetites the
ascendant; that now the Soul is forced to see through their Glasses, has a strong
Bias put upon her, her Volition and Choice is Governed by the greedy desires of
Sense, and her mean and low Joys rise chiefly from Sensual Gratifications. Now,
from this superior Influence the Senses, and lower Passions and Affections
have, you may easily see, what extreme Danger we are in, of being so careful
and troubled about the Many things of this Life, as to neglect the One thing
Needful.

Besides, how eagerly does Satan bring home to us the force of Temptations from
the World? What an edge does he give 'em? while he presents the World to us in
the most Gaudy and Beautiful appearance. How does he fire our Ambition with a
View of the Glory of this World? Charm us with the momentany Delights and
Pleasures of Sin? And Encourage us with the Prospect of the vast Advantage we
may make to our selves by these things? So does he enkindle our Desires after
them, and quicken our Endeavors to grasp a Portion in this Life, though we
should be destitute for ever hereafter.

Hence it is, that the Natural man is wholly under the Power of this World;
Walking according to the Course of this World; according to the Prince of the
power of the Air; the Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians.
II. 2. And even the Child of God, who is released from the Tyranny of Sense,
yet finds a Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his Mind, Romans VII.
23. That if we consider him with no greater Guard and Security than what he has
from himself, there would be great Danger, lest through the workings of the
Remainder of Corruption that is in him, and the Subtilty of Satan, his grand
Adversary, he should determine his Choice for this World, and lose his Soul for
ever.

3. The extreme Hazard there is of Losing a Soul for the sake of Gaining this
World, is Evident, from the Natural Tendency of all our Worldly Possessions.
It Is but the natural produce of what we Enjoy in this world, to have our Eyes
more blinded, our Desires enflamed, and our Lusts increased by it.

It tends to Blind the eyes of the Soul; it casts a mist before her, that She
shall not be able to take a fair View of things, nor see 'em in their proper Shape
and Colors. We read, Deuteronomy. XVI. 19. A gift blinds the eyes of the wise. Thus
the things we enjoy, (which we are apt to look upon as Gifts from the world,
they) hinder our fight of any thing but in favor of it. They miserably Cloud
and Darken our Apprehensions in Spiritual and Heavenly things, that we cannot
see their Justness, and Beauty, and the lasting Importance they are to us. This
we enjoy appears Fair and Comely, and tempts us to say with the rich Fool, Eat,
Drink, and be Merry therewith Luke xi^. 19.
: And while we have this View, how little shall we think of our Souls?

Again; Thus what we Enjoy tends to Inflame our Desires after a larger and
fairer Interest in the world. For tasting the sweet of this little, we conclude
it must be much more pleasant to feed upon a larger Income, and hence are
excited to Cry, Give, Give. Hence it is, that every Stone shall be turned, and
the most Unjust Method taken, rather than such Joy shall be withheld from our
longing Desires, and our greedy Thirst after Riches go Unquenched.

Thus also, our worldly Possessions tend to Increase our Lusts; our Pride,
Ambition, Luxury, and the like; and so more subject the Soul under the
Government of the world; all of which bars the Happiness of the Future World,
and evidently destroys the wellbeing of the Soul. Hence we are told, I Tim.
VI. 9. They that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and many
foolish and hurtful Lusts; which drown men in Destruction and Perdition. And
yet this is the Natural Tendency of all our worldly Enjoyments; which nothing
but the Grace of God can prevent. How great then is the Danger, let our
Affections be entirely Possessed by the World, and for the sake of Gaining it,
we Lose our Souls? Bar to add no more;

4. Our Blessed Savior has Warn'dus, of the extreme Danger of losing the Soul
to gain the World. He does so in my Text; What is a man Profited, if he Gain
the whole World, and Lose his own Soul? Which as well supposes the Hazard,
lest a man do so, as asserts the Unprofitableness of his Bargain. And so in the
words foregoing my Text, He that will save his Life shall lose it; which
imply's the very great danger there is, left for the sake of this Life and the
Enjoyments peculiarly relating to it, we should refuse to take up our Cross,
and follow our Lord; and so lose the life of our Souls. And hence it is, our Lord
has told us, Luke XVI. 8. That the Children of this world, are wiser in their
Generation than the Children of Light: They are not only more Prudent in
Consulting the best means, and more Industrious in the Application of those
means to attain their ends, to grow Rich and Honorable in this world, than the
Children of Light are to secure to themselves the Treasures of the Heavenly
World; but than the Children of Light are to Gain this world. You rarely see a
Christian of great Seize in Grace and Holiness, who lives in a fair View
of the Eternal World as his Portion, that is Wise for the things of this world,
like them who have their Portion in this Life; but as his Spiritual Wisdom
increases, his worldly Wisdom abates and the Reason is plain, because a man can
scarcely be every way Wise about the Concerns of this Life, without setting his
Heart upon 'em, and making 'em his chief Business. Hence also, our Lord has
given us this awful Admonition, Mat XIX. 23, 24, Verily, a rich man shall
hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. -- It is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to enter into Kingdom of God.
For, it is next to impossible, that a Rich man should not set his Heart upon
these things; and contented with his present Portion, take no thought of
securing a Portion in the Kingdom of God.

If therefore, I see a man increased in Wealth and Honor, who in the midst of
all his worldly Enjoyments, and the hurry and business he is necessarily
Engaged in, maintains a just Concern for his own Soul, and wisely makes sure of
a more enduring Substance; I look upon him, as one of the Brightest instances
of the Infinite Grace of GOD; and shall Honor him, as one that is possessed
with more eminent measures of that Grace and Spirit, which only can support him
in his Slippery places, and preserve him safe in the midst of those far greater
Dangers, than others, not Circumstanc'd like him, are encompassed withal.

And now upon a View of this Head; Can we consider, how nearly this world
stands allied to us, how sensibly it affects us, how easily it makes way to our
affections, and with what advantage of Grandeur, and Magnisicence, Delight and
Gallantry, it Courts our Love? Can we think, how much our Sinful Souls are
disordered and subjected to the Government of our Passions, and the Tyranny of
Flesh and Sense; that, the Enemy that is lodged within us, waits the first
opportunity to open the Gates, and let the World into our hearts; and an
envious Devil is ever soothing us to the Chains, and calming us into
Subjection? Can we view the force of what we already Enjoy, to stir up our gust
and relish, to urge our endeavors after more, and cloud our sight of Eternal
things? Can we read the awful Admonitions and Warnings our Savior has given
us, of the Snares of a deluding World? I say, Can we seriously consider these
things? and not not the extreme Hazard and Danger, lest the world prove too
hard for us, we are (...) in its Snares, surrender our selves to its
Enticements, and mind only Earthly things.

But I proceed to the Second General Head, Viz.

II. That whatever any may Gain of this World, if it be at the Expense and Loss
of the Soul, 'twill be the most Unprofitable Bargain.

You have seen the Danger, left a Soul be Lost, to Gain a World; and now I am
to cast up the Accounts, and see what would be got by the Bargain. In order to
this,

I. I shall distinctly Sum up the Gain, and the Loss by themselves.

II. And then Balance the Account, and see whether the Gains be Equivalent to
the Loss

Agreeably,

I. I shall Distinctly Sum up the Gains, and the Loss by themselves.

1. Let us see what is Gained: which is here supposed to be the whole World.
But by the way; It Is impossible any one Man should Gain the Whole World into his
own Possession; the greatest Monarch, that ever boasted of Universal Empire,
has had but a small part of the World compared with the whole: However, to make
all possible Allowance for the Gains, I shall suppose it to be the whole World;
and if we consider, that he that has placed his Affections, in the sense I have
been speaking of, upon the whole, it will vindicate the allowance.

But then, The world is not properly Gained; for nothing is so, but what a Man
can call his own from a true Propriety he has in it. Now after all pretenses to
Possession, if his Title be Challenged, we shall find the Man has no Right to
it; he may have a just Claim to this or that, with respect to his
Fellow Creatures; But, the earth is the Lord's, with the fullness thereof; the
world, and they that dwell therein, Psalm XXIV. I. God only is the Great
Lord-Propietor of all; and every man is but His Steward, and holds all that he
has at Good Pleasure only. However, Suppose he has truly Gained the world, and
has a Right and Propriety in it. And now after all this allowance, let us see
what it is that he has Gained:

(1.) It Is an Empty, Unsatisfactory World. It Is empty of all that Good which the
Man hoped to enjoy, and which only is suitable to him. For, this world is
neither Man's chief Good, nor of it self leading to that which is so: the Man
has therefore grossly mistaken his interest, and the means to attain it. And
hence when he has Gained what he reached after, he finds himself deceived; it is
not the thing he thought it, not what he fought for. Thus under all his
acquisitions, he remains unsatisfied: nor is it in the power of the whole
world, to yield Satisfaction to a Man that has a Soul in him; which however
depraved, yet has a fort of Boundlessness and Infinity in its Cravings; and
will not rest Contented, unless the Supreme Good, the Infinite All, he has some
faint breathings after, in his imperfect State, come and fill him with
everlasting Satisfaction: For this whole world is not that infinite All, but
GOD only; and therefore, though he should Gain it all, there would be still
something which the World could not afford, and without which the Man could not
be truly Satisfied; but he would still wish New Worlds to Gain, as Alexander
did to Conquer. Hence it is, that King Solomon, who had tasted as much of the
sweet of the world as any Man, assures us, Eccl. 1. 8. The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, not the ear with hearing: And Chap. V. 10. He that loves silver,
shall not be satisfied therewith; nor he that loves abundance with increase.
The rivers run into the sea, and yet the sea is not full; as that wise Man
tells us: And as easily can a Soul of boundless Capacities, lodge the whole
world in a narrow Corner, and be as far from having its appetites filled and
satisfied as ever, Hence it is we daily see, that those who enjoy the largest
Portion of this world are as uneasy in their desires as others: nay, they may
well be the more so, for the fuller experience they have of the Emptiness, and
Unsatisfactoriness of it all.

(2.) It Is a World, which not only is unable to Prevent Trouble, or Support them
under it, but does it self Create them abundance. This whole World would not be
able to secure them, from the Sorrows and Afflictions, which necessarily attend
upon their Make and Frame; and how little a way will it all go, to keep their
hearts from fainting in a day of Adversity? It Is not the fairest appearance this
world can make to him, that will sooth and calm a Soul under the horror and
anguish of an awakened Conscience, and the sense of Guilt; especially, such as
may arise from a view of the manner of his acquiring it, and what he has lost
for it. When he has most need of this world, he will find it most useless to
him: his bags of Gold will not be able to Bribe the Angel of Death; nor the
solidest Props of his Throne Support him and prevent his stumbling upon the
dark Mountain: but though he may be called a God, yet he shall Die like a Man,
Psalm. I, XXXII. 6, 7. Nor will all his Enjoyments afford him a Plea, to wipe
away his Guilt in the day of Trial; for they will not profit him in the day of
wrath, Prove. XI. 4. Nor will they be able to fill his mouth with Songs, and his
heart with Rejoicing, while everlasting Burning surrounds him: but, though in his
life time, he had his good things; yet now he is in Torment, the whole World
cannot supply him with a drop of water to cool his Tongue, Luke XVI. 23,24.

But then, the whole will conspire to Give him abundance of Uneasiness; and he
will find it to be Vexation of Spirit, as well as Vanity Eccl. 1. 14.
. The way to Gain it is paved with Genesis iii. 18. Hos. ii. 6.
Thorns, and he must take many a painful step e're he reaches it. But I suppose
him to have Gained it, and therefore shall not insist upon the trouble he meets
with in the way to it: and only say, he will not want for Vexation in the
Improvement of it. For his Possessions would be unweildy; as we see those that
have the fairest Estates, are ordinarily less able to manage them with Ease and
Comfort. He would find his Interests often jarr and clash together;
Disappointments would break in upon him; his best Schemes fail; and his
frustrated Endeavors would throw him into as much Confusion within, as his
Affairs are without. It Is impossible it should be otherwise, while a Finite,
Clouded, Debauched Mind had the concerting of Measures, and the managing of all
the Affairs of the world, for its sensual Gratifications.

(3.) It Is but a Fading, Perishing World that he has Gained. Decay is written in
indelible Characters upon all the Glory of this world: and we see a little time
puts a Period to the greatest Luster and Beauty of it.

We our Selves daily Change; we alter our Taste and Relish; and what was
pleasant and delightful to our Palate a little while ago, is now the least
grateful and acceptable to us. As we advance in Years, we lose our Gust for
those Entertainments which delighted us in Youth. We see to, that a Man of
Wisdom and Strength, may become a Child in Weakness and Folly; a Man of Beauty
and Honor, lose the gay Airs of his Countenance, and be robbed of his Glory.

And the whole World is a continued Scene of Changes: the very Heavens wax old
as a Garment Psalm. cii. 26.
: The Earth fades away Isa. xxiv. 4.
: And one Generation passes away, and another comes. Eccl. i. 4.
What is become of the Flourishing States and Kingdoms, the Magnificent
Structures, the Applauded Heroes, that a few Ages ago Struck the world with
admiration? they have all sunk in the Ruins of Time; and he that Enjoyed the
most of the world then, has not his Skin left upon his Bones now. And yet this
will be the Condition of all the Living e're longs their Riches, and all the
Glory of this world, will make to it self wings, and flee away, Prove. XXIII. 5.
And he that Boasts most in his Wealth, shall, in a little time, be laid in the
Grave, and Death shall feed upon him. So is all that he has Gained Fading and
Perishing. But

(4.) Besides; While he does Enjoy this mighty Gain, it is suited only to his
Body, the Meaner part of the man. Such is the very Nature of all he Enjoys,
that it answers only to his Body; which is but the Brutal part of the man; and
it has no real affinity to a Spiritual and Immortal Soul, which is of too
Angelical a Nature to have its Wants and Circumstances answered by Sensible
Objects. It Is therefore, a Gain of the lowest Nature, because of the lowest
Order of things, and suited only to the Meanest part of the man.

And now, If you suppose a man at the Head of the World, on a more exalted
Throne than Ahasuerus, who Ruled over an Hundred and Twenty Seven Provinces;
Wealthier than Crasus; and surfeiting on all the Delights of the greatest
Voluptuary; yet, if all that he has gained be, a World that cannot Satisfy him;
a World that cannot Secure him from Troubles, but Procure them; that is
Perishing in the Using of it; and at best suited only to his Brutal part; than
I am sure, it is but Poor Gains after all! And yet thus it would fare with him
who should Gain the whole of it, at the Loss of his Soul.

2. Let us now cast up the other Account and see what is the Loss he has
sustained, for the sake of this Gain. It Is here said to be a Soul. To take a
distinct View of the Loss, we must consider the Worth of a Soul, and the Nature
of its Loss: What it is that is Lost, and How it is Lost.

(I.) First then, to Consider the Worth of the Soul; and certainly that is far
more than the whole World. Which sufficiently appears;

1. From its Nature and Endowments. If we View it in its Nature, it is a
Spiritual Being: For there is a Spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the
Almighty gives him Understanding, Job XXXII. 8. It Is all over the Book of God
styled a Spirit: it is so in regard of the subtlety and purity of its Substance;
it is of an Angelical Contexture; and not formed of gross Matter, as the Body,
and this World are: And though it be invisible to our Bodily Eyes, and
unperceptible by our Senses, yet it is most Active and Vigorous. How quick are
its Motions? How powerful its Operations?

Again; It Is the Principle of Life in us; God Breathed into man the breath of
Life and he became a living Soul, Genesis II. 7. It Is the Union of this to the Body
that upholds us in Life: And if the Spirit return to God that gave it, the Body
returns to its original Dust.

Again; It Is an Immortal Spirit. It Is not composed of any preaeexistent Matter,
subject to decay, as our Bodies are; it is possessed with aspirations after
immortality; and the Sacred Scripture every where treats it as immortal; it
assures us, Mat.X.28.
it cannot be Killed; it sets before it Eternal Happiness and Misery, as its
Reward of Punishment; Mat.XXV.46.
and God Challenges it as His Name, to be the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob; and He is the God of the Living, not of the Dead. Mat.xxi.32.


Thus its Endowments be speak its Worth and Dignity. The Soul is capable of
Understanding, the Nature of other things, the Dependence and Connection of
Causes and Effects; it is capable of Retiring within it self, taking a view of
its own Essence, and reflecting upon its own Actions. The Spirit of a man which
is in him, knows the things of a man, 1 Cor. II. 11. It Is capable of knowing
God, and Jesus Christ, whom He has sent; whom to know is Life Eternal.

Besides, it acts by Counsel, and is able to Determine its Choice, and always
Acts as a Free and Spontaneous Agent: that even in the work of Conversion, the
Will is not forced, but guided and directed; and as such God works in the Soul
both, to Will, and to Do, of His own good Pleasure.

Now this excellent Nature of the Soul shows, that it is to be preferred to the
Body, to all the enjoyments of this World, and to Life it self.

2. The worth of the Soul may be judged of, by the Regards those that best know
it have to it. God, who is infinitely well acquainted with all things, esteems
it Precious and Valauble: Hence, He insists upon it as His honor, Zech. XII.
1. I, the Lord, that formed the Spirit of man within him. And He has manifested
His esteem of it, in the whole Contrivance of our Salvation, which has more
peculiar reference to the Soul.

Christ Jesus also esteems it Precious; as is evident if we Consider, what He
has Done, and Suffered for it. He has not though it it too much, to leave the
Delights of His Father's Kingdom, to assume our Nature, to pass through all
imaginable Indignities and Sufferings, to lay down His Life, and all to
Purchase this Valuable things to Himself, and make it His own Inheritance.

And they will appear Valuable, if we Consider the Pains the Apostate Spirits
are at, to Secure our Souls to themselves; how deep they lay their Designs, how
unwearied they are in the Execution of their Purposes, to compass this great
End, the gaining of our Souls for their own Possession; and, that though they
have Secured Millions of Miserable Wretches, yet they are as vigorous and eager
as ever to Gain more.

All of this evidently shows the worth of the Soul, to be very great. It Is such
a Precious and Valuable thing that is Lost, for the sake of Gaining the World.

(2.) Consider the Nature of the Loss; wherein the Loss of the Soul consists.
You may remember I said before, it does not ly in the Annihilation of the Soul;
yet if This were the Loss of it, it is certainly a great deal too much, to
destroy the Essence and Being of so Noble a thing as a Soul, for the sake of
Gaining this World: But this cannot be what is meant, for I have showed it is
immortal, and can never Dye. It must therefore be the loss of its happiness and
well-being, which consists in the Image and Favor of God.

Wherefore,

1. The Loss of the Soul lies, in its being deprived of the Image of God. The
Image of God is Holiness and Rightcousness, Ephesians. IV. 24. After this image and
likeness the Soul was at first Created; But since the man has chosen this World
rather than Heaven, and been guilty of that Covetousness which is Idolatry, he
has lost that Glorious Image, and now his Soul is become Polluted and Unholy.
Its Rectitude was its Glory; but now all its Powers are disordered; the
Understanding and Will often interfere, the Passions clash together, and the
Love of the world has involved it in thick Confusion. Since it has submitted to
the World, it is become the Servant of Sin and Lust, is sold under Sin, and
stoops to the meanest Drudgery of it. It has now contracted an Enmity against
God, is not subject to His Law, nor indeed can be; for since the Love of the
World has gained the ascendant, the Love of the Father dwells not in him, I
Joh. II. 15. So that now it has no lines of the Divine Likeness upon it, but
what will aggravate its Misery; its Spirituality, which renders its
Apprehensions Exquisite; and its Immortality, its Pains Lasting.

2. The Loss of the Soul lies, in its being Destitute of the Favor of God. For
having turned its Back upon God, for the sake of this World, incensed Justice
will for ever Exclude such a Soul, from any Tokens of the Divine Favor in the
World to come. It has lost the bright Presence of the ever Glorious God, the
Fellowship of the holy Angels, the Society of perfected Spirits, and sweet
Communion with a Triumphant Redeemer. Vastly great is this Loss indeed! To lose
that God who is the only adequate Portion of an immortal Soul! To lose that
Mercy and Favor, and all the Dear Expressions of immense Love, which a
Crucified Savior has Purchased! -- And yet this is the Loss they sustain, who
prefer the Care of their Bodies, to their Souls: And He that Made them will not
have Mercy on them, and He that Formed them will shew'em no Favor.
Isa.xxvii.11.
There is not a Smile in the Divine Countenance for them, nothing but angry
Frowns; which will fill them with Terror and Amazement. When they pass into the
Future World, God will say to them, Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity, I
know you not. Mat. vii.23.
And this dreadful Sentence will immediately take place upon them, and they
will be Eternally Banished His Favor; even beyond the reach of Mercy to
relieve them. They had Chosen this World for their God, and now they may get
all the Favor from it they can; for there is none to be found any where else
for them. So in losing their Souls, they have lost Heaven, and Happiness, and
God Himself. As a Surplussage, and what necessarily follows upon this, I may
add,

3. There will be this in the Loss of the Soul, its Eternal Existing in Misery,
Pain, and Anguish. If the Loving Kindness of God is better than Life: Psalm.
Ixiii..3
then on the contrary, to be Excluded His Favor is worse than Death. The
Happiness of the Glorified lies, in their near Conformity to the Image of God,
and their beholding of His Face in Glory; and it is the Misery of the Damned, to
be most unlike Him, and excluded His Presence. Now the Soul will be sensible of
the happiness it has lost, and this apprehension will wrack and torture it
beyond all imagination. How will its Reflections lash and sting it? And make
every where, separated from God, an hell to it? Yea, set up a hell within it
self! Which it can no more get rid of, than it can cease to be.

But besides, there is an Hell, or a Place of Torment, which God of old has
foreordained, for them that slight the Blessedness of Heaven; where Rivers of
Brimstone, and inextinguishable Flames prey upon the forsaken Soul. The
Sentence is not only, Depart ye Cursed, which rouses the Never-dying Worm to
fasten his corroding Teeth upon them; but, Depart into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. XXV.41. Which fixes the Soul in the
midst of inexpressible Pain and Torment; while the Body too, which has
occasioned the loss of the Soul for the pampering of it, Roars out its endless
Ejulations. This is the Loss of the Soul! Oh! Who would be so mad, to run the
risque of this Loss, for the sake of Gaining the whole World!

II. And now, let us Balance the Account, and see whether or no the Gain is
equivalent to the Loss. Can we subduct the Loss from the Gain? Alas! Alas! The
Loss is infinitely the most; and the whole World is not a valuable
Consideration to give again in Exchange for the lost Soul. What shall a man
give in Exchange? Fain would he give something; any thing; every thing to
Redeem his lost Soul: But, alas! So Precious is the Redemption of his Soul,
that it ceases for ever, Psalm. XLIX. 8. What is an empty, troublesome,
perishing World, compared with an heavenborn, spiritual, immortal Soul? It Is
lighter than the small dust of the Balance: And how is it possible then, that
such a light aerie Nothing should be a Gain equivalent to the Loss of a weighty
Soul? There is no proportion at all between them.

In short; Will Divine Justice be Pleased with this, and for the sake of it
release the Captive in Chains, from Eternal Darkness and Misery?

Will the Son of God be Contented, that he that slighted the infinitely
valuable Price of His Blood, which was offered to Ransom him from going down
into the Pit; I say, that he should be rescued from that Torment, which is his
due, by the mean inconsiderable Bauble of a World? No certainly; It Is not such
Corruptible things as Silver and Gold, 1 Pet. i. 18.
that can Redeem a Soul; Burnt-offerings, and Calves of a year old, thousands
of Rams, and ten thousands of rivers of Oil, Mic. vi. 6,7.
would not appease the Divine displeasure, and prevail with God to release him.

Besides; If the World were sufficient to give in Exchange, he has it not now
to give: Upon the moment of his entering into the Valley of the Shadow of Death,
he Lost the World, which he though it he had Gained, as well as his Soul; and now
has not the least pittance of it left to Comfort him in his Misery.

Nay further; if it were possible for God to say to him, Be as thou will; he is
now become so much of a Devil, that he would be his own Tormentor: for God he
could not Choose; and he would never be able to get from under the lively
apprehensions of what he has lost.

Oh, then! What an Unprofitable Bargain do they make of it, who lose their
Souls, for a World; who, for the sake of Gratifying their Sensual Appetites,
carry Fire in their Bosoms, and Court Everlasting Burning?

APPLICATION.
USE I.
Hence we may see something of the Exceeding Sinfulness of Sin; which has
Debased, and Wronged so Noble a thing as the Soul of Man is. The Soul is of a
Divine Extraction and Original; Glorious in its Make and Endowments; and it
argues the Vileness of Sin, that it has sunk the Soul below its Original
Dignity, Weakened its Powers, Slurr'd its Luster, and Clothed it with the most
ignominious tokens of Slavery. For, the greater is the Mischief done, the viler
is the Cause of it. It Is Sin that has bro't all the Mischief upon the Soul: It Is
this has clipped its Wings, and clogged it from soaring to its Native Heaven;
hinders its delightful Converse with Angels, and its Eternal Father; keeps it
groveling in the Dust, like a Beast; and has brought it under the Government of
the Senses. It Is this has filled it with Principles of Rebellion, made it a
Traitor to its Rightful Sovereign, engaged it in a Conspiracy against its own
Life, and entailed upon it Wounds, Bruises, and putrefying Sores.

It Is this has procured it a Sentence of Eternal Banishment from God, the
immense Fountain of Blessedness; and has Damned it to the lowest Misery, where
the smoke of her Torment ascends for ever and ever. So does he that Sins,
wrong his own Soul, Prove. VIII. 36. Which argues the heinous and vile Nature of
Sin; and should provoke us to loath and abhor it.

USE II.
Is the Gain of the World so small a thing as we have seen, then, how mightily
are they Deceived, who expect Great things from it? Here lies our great
Mistake: while we are in pursuit of the World, we view it through a Magnifying
Glass; and pleasing our selves with its mighty appearance, forget to make
allowances for the increase of its Dimensions; hence our hopes are raised, and
we expect great things from it. We form our Schemes according to our present
Sight of it, and so enlarge our desires, and quicken our endeavors to Gain it.
But when we come to bring it near, and take a closer View of it, without those
deceitful Glasses, (like some Paintings that appear beautiful in a proper
distance, so) its glory vanishes, and we behold it in all its imperfection.
Where is the man, that by indulging his Sensual Appetites, and following after
his Pleasures, ever found that in them which he expected? As his hopes and
expectations were great, so is the trick and cheat that is put upon him, when
he finds, that notwithstanding its fair Show and Promises, it is all like Eve's
Apple, false and deadly within. He will as certainly find himself deceived, as
the Sensualist in the Gospel, Luke xii. 19.
who said to his Soul, Soul, take thine case, Eat, Drink, and be Merry; thou
have Goods laid up for many years. For they are neither proportionable Goods,
nor can he retain them: but that very Night God may require his Soul of him:
and then whose shall all these things be?

USE III.
Is the Loss of the Soul such as I have showed? then, it is certainly the
Greatest Loss that can be; and Consequently so is its Salvation. Its Loss is
the greatest for what has a man to lose equal in Worth and Value with his Soul?
which raises him above the level of the viable Creation, and fixes him upon a
Seat with Angels. And what is and the affliction and sorrow the Body is liable
to, compared with the endless Torments of a lost Soul? It Is the loss of the
Soul, that involves the Body in its greatest Plagues. This then, is the
greatest Loss that it is possible to sustain; more than to part with the dearest
Enjoyments of this World, and even Life it self.

And hence it will follow, that the Salvation of the Soul is the Greatest, for
the same reason that its Loss is: And therefore it is called Great Salvation,
Heb. II. 3. And it is what our Glorious Mediator peculiarly aims at, in His
undertaking the work of Redemption; that the Soul might not be lost under the
Wrath of God abiding on it; but inherit everlasting Life: Joh. iii. 36.
And this is the end of our 'Faith, the Salvation of our Souls. 1 Pet. i. 9.
.

USE IV.
Do they make the most Unprofitable Bargain, who Lose a Soul to Gain a World?
hence we may see their extreme Folly and Madness who do so. He that is wise, is
wise for himself. Prove.ix. 12.
Wisdom ever appears in a man's being chiefly concerned, for what most nearly
touches him, and his foregoing all lesser interests to secure the Main. And it is
a plain Demonstration of unaccountable Folly and Madness, to let go things of
greater importance for the sake of the less. What Fools then are they that lose
their Souls, to gain a World! That part with a Kingdom, to catch Flies! That
snatch at the Shadow, and lose the Substance! That contemn Beauty, and court
Deformity! That prefer the vilest Slavery, to the noblest Liberty! That can
part with Heaven, and all the Glory of it, for this empty Bubble of a World!
Nay, that for the sake of a blast of Honor; a little Jollitry and Sensual
Pleasure; and deceitful Riches, and all but for a Moment; will make themselves
over Vassals to Satan, and Drudges to Eternal Misery!

And yet, alas! How many are there that are Guilty of this Prodigious Folly and
Madness? How many are there, who greedily swallow down the delightful Morsel?
Yet know 'twill issue in Everlasting Bitterness! Who resolve if possible to
raise themselves to the Loftiest Pinnacle; though they fall, like Lucifer, to the
Depth of the Bottomless Pit! Who will swim down the Golden sanded Stream; though
it carry them into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone! Hence it is we
see Men lavish away all their Thought, Time, and Pains upon this world; like
Martha, (though in a worse sense,) careful and troubled about many things, while
the One thing Needful lies neglected Luke x. 42.
. Hence we see them leap the Boundary of the Divine Law, break through all the
Obligations of nature, trample upon Humanity, and fly in the face of Common
Justice and Equity; and all to compass a little Portion of this worlds Good:
but never retire within, to see how it fares with their Souls; will not entertain
one serious Thought about them, nor be at the least pains to secure their
Happiness. How do they drudge and toil all the Day long, exhaust their Spirit,
consume their Strength, and weary themselves for very Vanity Heb. ii. 13.
? Yea, all to Destroy an Immortal Soul! which if they were but as truly
painful and laborious to Preserve, they might Save for ever.

USE. V.
Is there such great Danger, left we lose our Souls to gain this World? it
concerns us then, to take all proper Methods to Guard against it. This is a
Danger that Encompasses every one of us: for we all carry Flesh and Sense about
us, for the world to operate upon; and a Corrupt Principle in us, inclining us
to receive the impressions of the world: and so strong are the Temptations from
without, and such a treacherous Adversary is secretly lodged within, that great
is the Hazard, left we comply with the offer made us from this and Stop our
Ears against the Charms of the Heavenly World. Need have we therefore, to use
our Utmost Endeavors, to harden our selves against the Allurements, and save
our selves from splitting upon this fatal Rock.

And give me Leave to say to you, my Brethren, who are entering upon the Affairs
of this world, and engaging in the Hurry and Bustle of it; that there is great
hazard, left the Cares of this Life, which you, and your Families support and
comfort, Necessarily call you to attend, should so far prevail upon you, as to
become the Chief things you are concerned about; and so the Lives of your
Immortal Souls be neglected and lost. No doubt but you have felt something of
the Force and Power of the Temptations of the world; and from your own
Experience have seen something of the Danger you are in: But Unquestionably, if
you live any considerable while longer, you will be assaulted with much
stronger allurements, than ever yet you have met with. Suffer me therefore, to
set before you a few necessary Rules for Your Behavior in the world; by which
you may Guard against the enticing snares that endanger the loss of your Souls.

Briefly;

1. Be Moderate with respect to the things of this World. Bring your Appetites
and Desires under a good Regulation; that you may not be hurried away by the
vehemence of your own cravings. Seek not great things for your selves: For the
more moderate your Desires are, the freer will you be from the Influence and
power of the world, and the less Danger will there be of your losing your Souls
to gain it. Let your labors after the things of the world be moderate too: for
he that pursues the world with all eagerness, is continually liable to fall.
This is the Holy Apostle's advice, Phil. IV. 9. Let your Moderation be known
unto all Men. It becomes those that call themselves Christians, to let all Men
see that they are not the Men of this world who have their Portion in this life
only, by being Moderate in their desires and labors after it. It Is the
inordinate Cares of this Life, that Eat out the heart of Religion, and choke
the good Seed; but it your Appetites and Pains are kept within due limits, the
world is not like to fasten upon you, Ben't therefore anxiously careful what
you shall Eat, or what you shall Drink, or what you shall put on; for your
Heavenly Father knows what you need of these things: But acknowledge the
Divine Government by a suitable Quietness of mind, and Acquiescence in your
Portion.

2. By no means Allow of any Known Sin, for the sake of the World. Whatever
form and address the world may appear to you in be not allured, or forced by
it, to commit a known Trespass upon the Law of God: But say with good Joseph,
Genesis XXXIX. 9. How shall I do this great Wickedness, and Sin against God? You
must therefore take special Care, that you use no Unrighteous Methods to Gain
the World; that you don't injuriously take from your Neighbor, what you have
no Right to; that you don't Cheat and Deceive, in your Business and Dealings
with him; that you don't impose upon his Ignorance; nor oppress him under his
Necessities; nor use such Knavish Shuffling Tricks, to advance your Secular
interest, as are the Shame of a Christian, and the Bane of humane Society. You
must also take Care, that you don't forfeit your Word, or, break your Trust;
though you might have never so great an Advantage by it, to enlarge your
Possessions. For such things as these will argue, that your hearts are set upon
this world, and will bar your entering into the Kingdom of Heaven: For no
Unrighteous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. VI. 9.

3. Let not the Cares of this World Hinder your Attendance upon any known Duty.
You will find very much of the Policy of the world lies here, so to possess
your Minds with the Cares of this Life, how you shall be Provided for, how you
shall go through this Difficulty, or be able to accomplish this Undertaking; I
say, its design is, by filling your Minds with such Cares, to jostle all sober
thoughts of God, and your own Souls, out of your hearts, and so to prevent your
Attendance upon those Religious Duties, which are the only proper Methods of
Gain to your Souls. You must therefore be careful, that you omit no Duty for
the sake of the World. Don't suffer the hurry of your Business, to hinder you
from such Public Worship of God, as you might conveniently enough attend upon:
And to be sure, let it not defraud you of the Duties of your Families, and the
Secret and Retired Devotion you owe to God and your own Souls. When Religious
Duties, and Worldly Business seem to interfere, impartially Examine, which is
the present Necessary Duty? and that that must be attended now, or not at all,
let the other give place to: And though the affairs of this world, may sometimes
necessitate your Religious Duties to give place for a few Minutes; yet they
cannot make it necessary, that you wholly neglect them. And if you do; you will
Starve your Souls, to Feed your Bodies. This was their Bane, whom our Savior
invited to the Wedding Dinner, one had his Farm, another his Merchandise to
mind, (...) they made light of it, and went their way, Mat. XXII. 5.

4. Watch and Pray against Temptations from this World. When Our Savior bid
His Disciples take heed, that their hearts be not overcharged with Surfeiting
and Drunkenness, and the Cares of this Life; He immediately adds, Watch ye
therefore, and Pray always, Luke. XXI. 36. You will find the world to be full
of Temptations. There are the lusts of the Flesh, the lusts of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life, which make head with their numerous hosts under their Command,
and fiercely assault the Soul: And you had need therefore be upon your Watch
and Guard, that they may not take you at Unawares, and surprise you in their
Snares.

And thus you must Pray against them as well as Watch: and that not only in the
common course of your Devotion; but as you find Temptations to arise: at least
by short and pathetical Ejaculations, to crave the Divine Assistance against
them. For this is the holy Breath of the Soul which blasts the designs of the
world. This carries the Soul into the Heavenly World, takes a view of the
Entertainments of it, and so keeps her out of the reach of this World. This
will gain the assistance of the Great Captain of your Salvation, who will not
suffer you to be Tempted, above what you are able.

5. Lastly, Improve what you Enjoy of this World to the Best Ends and Purposes.
We are advised, 1 Cor. X. 31. Whether ye Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God. You must take care, that you don't Dishonor the Name
of God, by gratifying only your Sensual appeties, and Consuming upon your
Lusts, the Enjoyments of this World, which He favors you with: but you must
endeavor, to make all that you have subservient to this great End, The Glory
of God: For this is the End for which you were made, and have the lower streams
of His goodness flowing down to you. Let therefore a suitable Portion of your
worldly Interest, be more peculiarly devoted to His Service, that all the rest
may be Sanctified to your use and improvement. Works of Piety and Charity; the
promoting and maintaining the Honor of God, in His House and Worship; and the
relieving the wants of the Indigent, and Distressed; demand a Portion of your
worldly Estate; and you must not withhold your hands therefrom, To Do Good, and
to Communicate, forget not, Heb. XIII. 16. By this means, instead of Losing
your Souls, to Gain the World, you will further their Welfare, by a wise
Improvement of these things; and make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when they fail you, you may be received into Everlasting
Habitations.

These short Rules well observed, you will wisely guard against the Hazzards
and Danger, you are exposed to from the World.

USE VI.
Let us all then be Exhorted to a Just Concern for our Immortal Souls; and make
their Safety and Welfare the First and Chief of our Cares. We are ready enough
to take care of our Bodies, to Feed, to Cloathe, to Beautify, and Preserve them
Healthy; to repair the Injuries that may be done them, by Distempers, or
Accidents; and see that they want nothing Necessary, or that may be Convenient.
But we have immortal Souls within us, of infinitely greater Worth and Value,
which earnestly demand our Care; whose Safety is of the last importance to us.
Well then, Let us not be Deaf to their Cries, but let them have the First of
our Care; left the prepossessions of the World clap a strong Bias upon us, and
having been used to indulge our selves in its Vanities, and Gaities, its Sinful
Delights and Pleasures, we find it hard to shake off a contracted Habit; and
turn the current of our Affections into a new Channel: left we Slip the
Opportunity of Recovering them, and too late would give any thing in Exchange
for them; but find 'em irrecoverably gone. Seek first the Kingdom of God and
His Righteousness, was our Blessed Savior's Advice; with an Assurance, that
all these things, (a Sufficiency of them,) shall be added, Mat. VI. 33.

And let them have the Chief of our Care also. They certainly deserve it: and
the greatness of the Work, and difficulty of Securing their Welfare, renders it
necessary to bend our whole Force, and use our closest Applications; and that
all other Affairs be engaged in, as though we engaged not, in comparison of them.
For it is no easy matter to Work out our Salvation: it must be done with Fear
and Trembling; and it requires all Diligence to make our Calling and Election
sure.

For Direction.
First; Put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus we are called upon, Romans XIII. 14.
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill
the Lusts thereof. Receive the Reports of the Gospel, and Christ Jesus, who is
therein offered to us, as the alone Savior of a lost Soul. Look upon His
Obedience and Passion as our only Propitiatory Sacrifice; and humbly Plead it
with the Eternal Father, for the Remission of our Sins, and our Acceptance with
God: and commit our Spirits into His Hands, as the Lord God of Truth, who has
Redeemed them, by an entire Dependence upon Him, for all that Salvation which
He has Purchased for us. So let us lift up the everlasting Doors, that That
King of Glory may come, and dwell in our Hearts by Faith Ephesians. iii. 17.
So will the Image of God be pourtrayed a new upon us, in bright and lively
Characters, the Enmity between us will be Slain, and we shall be made nigh by
the Blood of Christ Ephesians. ii. 13.
: And this will be the most effectual Method, to secure our Souls from the
Tyranny of an Usurping World. For, who is he that overcomes the World, but he
that Believes, that Jesus is the Son of God? 1 JohnV.5.

Again; Grow in Grace. Thus are we advised, 2 Pet. III. 18. Grow in Grace, and
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Let us not rest
contented with feeding upon the husks of this world, but reach after the Food
of Angels, the Flagons and Apples of the Sanctuary, the Graces of the Holy
Spirit of God. See to it, that all Old things are done away, and that all
things are become New in your Souls; and to one Grace and Virtue add another,
and never come to a stand, as though you had already attained, but still press
forward, from one degree of Grace to another, till you come to appear in
strength before God in Zion. For this is the Food and Nourishment of the Soul,
which only can support the proper Life of it: And by this means, we shall come
to have our Conversation in Heaven, while we are upon Earth, and so live above
this World; and be enabled to Contemn its Glory, as not worth our Regarding.

Finally; Let us Lay up our Treasure in the Heavenly World. This is our
Savior's Direction, LukeXII.33. Provide for your selves Bags that wax not old,
a Treasure in the Heavens, that fails not. There is a Treasure worth our
seeking after: There are durable Riches and Righteousness Prove. viii. 18.
; there are Rivers of Pleasures and Fullness of Joys at God's Right Hand
Psalm.xvi. II. and xxxvi. 8.
; and a a Crown of Glory that fades not away I Pet. v. 4.
. This is a Treasure every way suitable to a spiritual and immortal Soul,
agreeable to its Nature, and answerable to its Wants and Desires; large as our
wishes, and exceeding our most raised expectations; which no Enemy can spoil us
of, nor the longest Duration run it dry. For God is an inexhaustible Fountain,
and when He becomes all in all to the Soul, though the Springs of Nature may
fail, yet He will remain the Strength of our heart and our Portion for ever.
Here then let us lay up our Treasure; and having our Treasure in Heaven, let
our Hearts be there also: and then when our Souls shall be Uncloathed, our
earthly House of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we shall not be Naked and
Destitute; but provided with a Building of God, an House not made with Hands,
Eternal in the Heavens. See 2 Cor. V. 1,2.

Let it be as Motive to us, to Excite us to this Prudent Care of our Souls; To
Consider the Possibility of Saving them. If it were a thing impossible, who
would take any Pains about it? But this is possible, through Divine Goodness.
God has begun this work for us, has laid the Foundation of it in infinite Grace
and Love; He has sent His Only Begotten Son to Redeem and Save us; has
Published to us these Glad Tidings of Great Joy, that to Us there is Born a
Savior, Christ the Lord; and He is waiting upon us, with the repeated Offers
of His Grace, and the Strivings of His Holy Spirit with us, to carry on this
Work in our Souls. Well then; Since it is a day of Grace and a time of Love,
let none of us forsake our own Mercies, and follow after lying Vanities; let us
be stirred up to improve the Opportunity, and Advantage we have in our hands;
and know the things of our Peace, in this the Day thereof, e're they are hidden
from our Eyes.

To Conclude;
Consider the Vast Consequence of determining your Choice Wisely Now; for you
do it for Eternity. When once Death has laid us in the Grave, there will be no
Knowledge, Work, nor Device for us there. What we do for the Salvation of our
Souls must be done immediately: for we know not how soon the Midnight Cry may
be heard; Come away. Let this Excite us, to hearken to the Gracious Offers made
us from the Third Heavens, and Comply with the engaging Address of that World
we now stand Probationers for; and then the Salvation of our Souls will be
established, as the everlasting Mountains, and the perpetual Hills; and 'twill
be their Glory to Shine Brighter than the Sun in the Firmament of God; the
radiant Luster whereof shall Shine around our Bodies, while we Join with the
Holy Choir of Perfected Spirits, who surround the Throne of the Lamb, Singing,
Alleluia! Salvation, Glory, Honor, and Power be unto the Lord our God.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, and may shortly be Sold, by Timothy Green at the
North End of Boston, the Lower End of Middle Street; a Book Entitled,
Memorials of Godliness and Christianity. In Three Parts.

The First Part containing Meditations, (1.) Of making Religion ones Business.
(2.) An Appendix applied to the Calling of a Minister. The Second Part
containing, (1.) The Character of a Christian in Paradoxes and seeming
Contradictions. (2.) A Proof or Character a Visible Godliness. (3.) Some
General Considerations to Excite to Watchfulness, and to shake off Spiritual
Drowsiness. (4.) Remedies against Carefulness. (5.) The Soul of Fasting. The
Third Part containing, (1.) A Daily Direction, or brief Rules for Daily
Conversation. (2.) Particular Directions for the Lord's Day. Eighth Edit.

By HERBERT PALMER, B.D. Late Master of Queens College Cambridge in Great
Britain.


