GODS Sovereign Government Among the NATIONS Asserted in a SERMON Preached
before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL, and
Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on May
28. 1712. being the day for Election of Her Majesty's Council for that Province.

By SAMUEL CHEEVER, Pastor of the Church in Marblehead.

Psalm. xcv.3, 6 For the Lord is a great God and a great King above all gods: O
come let us Worship, and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.
Psalm. ii.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that put their trust in
him. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green: Sold at the Booksellers Shops. 1712.

PRinted by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL.

Isaac Addington, Secr.

GODS Sovereign Government Among the NATIONS.
PSALM XXII. 27, 28. All the ends of the World shall remember, and turn unto
the LORD: -- For the Kingdom is the LORDS: and he is the Governor among the
Nations.
THE Eternal GOD, for whom, and by whom all things in the World were made, and
are preserved and governed, having in his everlasting Counsel (notwithstanding
the Primitive Apostasy and Revolt from Him, fore-known to Him with all His
Works from the beginning of the World) purposed from the Ruins of fallen man,
to take out of them a People for his Name, and to reduce them to Subjection and
Obedience to Him, from whom they had revolted; that they might show forth, and
might be to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace: was pleased accordingly to
pitch upon his blessed SON, to be the great undertaker in this Matter, and
called therefore the Captain of their Salvation, Heb. 2.10. Appointed to bring
the Children unto Glory. Christ Jesus being therefore deputed to this difficult
task, the desert of Sin was such, and the Justice of God so immutable, that
there was no way to bring the matter to an issue, but by the Death and
Sufferings of the Lord Jesus; Sin being such a crime and offense against the
Crown of Heaven, that without suitable Satisfaction made to Divine Justice, the
honor of Gods Law and Government could not otherwise be upheld and maintained
in the World: Christ Jesus having therefore consented hereunto, and willing to
assume that Nature which had Sinned, and to offer up Himself a Sacrifice to
satisfy Divine Justice, it was very congruous to Divine Wisdom, that for so
deep a Humiliation He should have as illustrious an Advancement, and a peculiar
Honor conferred upon him, so as to be made King and Lord of all, and have a
Name given Him above every Name, and suffer first, and so enter into Glory;
according to the Prediction of the Prophets, and by Christ applied to Himself,
Luk 24.25. It being that which he Prays for, Joh. 17.5. That the Glory which
he had, as to his Divine Nature, with God from Eternity, might be communicated
so to his Humane Nature, as that his whole Person might be glorious, and by
that way have a joint Rule with God over all the Works of his hands, which as
in other Places of Scripture, so particularly is plainly hinted in the Book of
Psalms, and especially in this Psalm where the Text lies: the two great Truths
respecting the Humiliation and Sufferings of Christ, and his Exaltation
afterward being exactly Predicted by the Spirit of God, for the directing and
strengthening the Faith and Hope of the Church of God in all Ages of the World.
This Psalm is a Prophetical Psalm, and should the question be asked as was by
the Eunuch, Act 8.34. Of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or some
other man? It must be understood of Christ Jesus, in whom many of the Passages
were literally accomplished; as appears by comparing it with Mat. 27.35, 46.
and Joh. 19.24. The former part of the Psalm holding forth his Humiliation, and
the latter part hinting out his Exaltation, and gracious Promises made to Him
in this Estate; and is a Prophesy of the Enlargement of his Kingdom by the
accession of the Nations from one end of the World to the other, who should
remember, and turn to him. The words may be considered as a Prophesy, and a
Promise made to Christ, for his encouragement in dispatching that arduous
affair he was entrusted withal. And also it implies a strong Obligation on the
ends of the World, to Remember and turn to the Lord; and the more effectually
to persuade them so to do, we have laid down in the latter part of the verses
read, a most undeniable argument, For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the
Governor among the Nations. Now this Kingdom of Christ admits of a twofold
consideration; The first is that Universal Kingdom by which Christ, together
with the Father and Holy Ghost, reigns over all things; this being common to
every Person in the Godhead. And Christ on this account has power over all
flesh, and He is King of Nations as well as Saints. And secondly, there is a
special peculiar Kingdom which Christ executes over his Church, his Mediatory
Kingdom, by special dispensation committed by the Father to him over the Hearts
and Consciences of men to bring the Soul to a free, and voluntary Subjection to
him, hinted in Psalm 110.3.

But its the first of these two, which shall especially be taken notice of, not
wholly excluding the other; the universal Kingdom and Government, common to the
whole Godhead. There being but One GOD, though Three Persons, and all equal in
Power and Glory: This Truth therefore as it has relation to the calling of the
Gentiles, and a particular reward promised to Christ. I shall wholly wave any
further consideration of, and the Reason given in the Twenty-eight Verse, is
that I shall principally confine my Discourse to. In which Verse, we have
asserted the Universal Kingdom of the Lord, and his Government of all the
Nations in the World: The design of this Discourse being to persuade, and if
possible to prevail with us in these ends of the World to a humble subjection
and submission to the Sovereign Government of GOD, whose we are, and whom we
ought to Serve, and in all things readily obey.

DOCTRINE. GOD the Lord (or Christ Jesus) is certainly the King and Supreme
Governor among the Nanations of the World, and ought to be Remembered, and
acknowledged as such by all; and especially by His Professing People, at what
end of the World so ever by His Providence they are cast, and placed to dwell
in.

This Truth is that, which we find so often asserted, and by irrefragable
arguments demonstrated, so universally implanted in the light also, and law of
Nature, that without offering violence to Reason, and blowing out this candle
of the Lord the Spirit in man; all must yield to the belief of it: If we own
there is a GOD in the World, we must certainly own Him as the King and
Governor of it; it is what we are taught in the Lords Prayer, Thine is the
Kingdom the Power and the Glory, Mat. 6.13. And which every one, every day
ought to say, Amen unto. That which David, that great King over Israel, did
most readily in his Life, and at his Death humbly acknowledge, 1 Chronicles. 29.11,
12. And that he held his Crown from him; all his Victories over the Nations
were such as God gave him, who was exalted as head over all. How often in the
Psalms do we find David owning and proclaiming this Truth? Psalm. 47.2, 7. and
66.7. and 103.19. It Is one of the Royal Titles given to God, That He is the
Most High, Psalm. 83. ult. God is the Supreme: Other Persons may be high in
their Stations and Posts of Honor, which Providentially they are advanced to;
but the Title really of the Most High belongs peculiarly to God alone; so he is
called by Abram, Genesis 14.18. Power and Highness is originally and fundamentally
in God. He is a Great King, Mal. 1.4. The Only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. But not
to spend time in averring a Truth so plainly demonstrated, and which I hope
none need to be taught, by the terrible works of God, as Nebuchadnezzar was, by
turning him a grazing among the beasts, till seven times passed over him, that
he might know that the Most High rules in the Kingdom of men, Dan. 4.32. I
shall therefore dispatch in a few Propositions this Truth, and illustrate the
same by a few Conclusions resulting from them, for the clearing up of the same,
in order to the Application of the whole, and to conclude all with all
convenient brevity.

PROP. I. God the Lord is certainly concerned in, and about the affairs of all
Nations, all the World over. And here we may consider,

1. The Being and Constitution of Nations is really from God. The wise God,
though he had the residue of the Spirit, and could at once, if he had so
pleased, made the whole Stock and Race of Mankind, and replenished the Earth
with a sufficient Number of Inhabitants, as God did do at the Creation of some
parts of the World; yet notwithstanding He chose rather to display his manifold
Wisdom and Power in this great affair, to frame, and make immediately but One
Man, and One Woman, designing from that One Stock, all Mankind should be
Propagated, Acts 17.26. Of one Blood, from one Family, all should have one
Father, be all Adams Children, who was to be the representative of all his
Seed: Whereas among the Angels the Inhabitants of the Highest Heaven, God made
the whole number at first; and in the Starry Heaven, God at once garnished them
with those Lights which continue to this day according to his Ordinance: but in
this lower World it is otherwise. All came from dust, in a little time God had
a multitude of Nations in the first Age of the World before the Flood; and
afterward when they were brought to Eight Persons in the Ark, yet God in a few
years replenished the Earth, and from those three Sons issued a multitude of
Nations; it was the blessing Promised to Abraham, Genesis 12.2. Though he was but
one individual, Of thee, Genesis 15.5. He was the father of many Nations, they
were as the Stars of Heaven; in Egypt, in the space of Two hundred and fifteen
years became a great Nation, six hundred thousand Males, from twenty years old
and upwards.

2. As God is the Maker of the Nations, so all the Motions of the Nations, are
all ordered by God, from one part of the World to another. We find at Babel,
how God by the confusion of Languages, scattered them up and down, when they
were building to prevent their being so scattered, Genesis 10.5. And indeed its
the Lord who bounds every ones Habitation; In Him we Move, as well as Live,
Act. 17.26. It is not in man to direct his steps, as Jer. 10.23. Gods ways and
thoughts are not as men's; God made for man a large house to dwell in, a great
body of Earth, though part of it be a Wilderness, and a barren Land, for the
wild Ass to dwell in, as we read, in Job 39.6. Yet a very great part of it is
very fertile, as Egypt watered by the River Nilus, and Canaan counted the
glory of all Lands, and by God allotted to be the Place of his Peoples abode,
Deuteronomy. 33.8. Though at first possessed by the Posterity of Canaan, and improved
for many Ages, yet God for the Sins of that People rooted them out, and brings
Israel in their room: As God gave them the grant of that Land, so in that grant
he sets down their bounds and limits: in Exodus 23.31. and Josh. 1.4. Though
Israel possessed not the whole till David's time. God is indeed the Lord of the
Soil, and removes Nations as he sees meet. As Joseph did by the Egyptians from
one end of the Land to another, never intending that all the Nations should be
penned up in one Corner of the World, nor drove together in heaps, when he has
room enough for all, without encroaching upon one another Proprieties: He
brought up the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir, Amos 9.7.
Gave Mount Seir to Edom, would not let Israel disturb him in his possession.
And by the Wise Orderer of all, it was that this little handful of People came
to dwell in this Wilderness, God moving on the hearts of our Predecessors to
leave a fruitful Land, and come to this Jeshimon.

3. All the Changes that happen among the Nations are all Overruled by this
God, and Lord of all. It is the Great GOD who does most certainly order all
events, and issues of affairs which to men, and second causes may be unknown
and unexpected, yet so brought about, that no man can always foresee or
prevent: Gods Peculiar is that He Himself is JEHOVAH, and changes not, Mal.
3.6. There is not the shadow of turning, or any variableness: but the World is
full of changes. It is with Political Bodies as with Bodies Natural, at such
times when Persons have the Fever and Ague, one day sick, another day tolerably
well: and as Job speaking of himself, in his 10. Chap and 17. v. Changes and
War are against me; is very applicable to Nations. God sometimes blesses a
Nation with a great deal of Prosperity, some considerable time: at another
time, vexes them with all manner of adversity. In Solomon^^ime, Israel had very
happy days: as we read 1 King. 4.25. Israel dwelt safely, every man under his
vine; and it was durable all the days of Solomon; so that there was no
adversary, or evil occurrent, as Solomon acknowledges to Hiram, 1 King 5.4 But
as soon as Solomon's head was laid in the dust, what an amazing change and turn
of affairs, Ten tribes rebel against the house of David, and Solomon with all
his Wisdom could not prevent it, 1 King. 12.15. God gave up Rehoboam to so
foolish and fatal a mistake, as to alienate the very hearts of his Subjects
from him; and what abundance of changes in both the Kingdoms fell out, the
History of their Reigns in Sacred Writ do abundantly evince: And indeed Nations
are very prone to transgress against the Lord, and change their glory for that
which does not profit, Jer. 2.11. And no wonder if God change his dispensations
toward them: Sin brings trouble in a Nation, and God has very often a
controversy with Nations, with all the Inhabitants of the Land, Hos. 4.1, 2. We
read, of a Sinful Nation, Isa. 1.4. and Jer. 7.28. This is a nation that obeys
not the voice of the Lord: and this will cause God to take other measures, and
vex such with all manner of adversity, as we find, in 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. God
has his time to diminish, and bring a People low, Psalm. 107.39. So also to
take away the Peace of a People, as you have it, in Jer. 16.5. He can draw out
his Sword out of the Sheath of his Patience, give it a large commission to pass
through a Land; and its God alone who can give quietness. How much of Gods
Sovereignty is seen in this matter in the times of the Judges? the Land
sometimes rested many years, but they had also long times of Servitude. And
indeed in our times, what Multitudes of changes have passed over us? and what a
long calamitous War have we labored under? As from the Heathen behind us,
those pricks and thorns left to prove and afflict us by; and also a Foreign
Enemy: and it must be God only that makes Wars to cease, Psalm. 46.9. That can
give us quietness. And had we been more careful to have pleased the Lord, He
could before this day have made our Enemies to be more at Peace with us.

4. The Government of the Nations is most certainly Ordered by this God and
Lord of all. As God has made the Nations of one blood, so he has and does
take care in his Providence, that all may be under rule and government; and as
he has given Laws, and general Rules to all, so He is pleased to Set up
Persons, who shall be entrusted in a great measure, with the Execution of them;
and to govern men by men, putting that honor on some to Rule, so on others to
obey, and be Ruled by them; Civil Government being certainly Gods Ordinance, to
be observed in his Realm every where. God endoweth some with particular gifts
of Wisdom and Knowledge above others, that they may be the more Serviceable in
their Generation to others. God ordered a special Education for Moses, who was
to be King in Jeshurun, to be trained up in the Court of Pharaoh, and well
learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22. And mighty in Words as
well as Deeds, one that could do, as well as say what became him. And Saul the
first King of Israel, God gave him another spirit, of Government to fit him for
the Place he was called to, 1 Samuel 10.6. Civil Government being the great
Instrument in Gods hand, appointed for the preservation of humane Society, that
men might not live as Beasts, but live civilly and orderly as becomes Rational
Intellectual Beings. And Gods care is such, as that he lays down rules for
Governors as well as for the Governed; we may read their Character, what they
ought to be, given by David by the order of the God of Israel, and directed by
the Spirit of God, in 2 Samuel 23.3. To make and leave a Record of the same; for
the direction of all in after Ages, and God orders also the King to write out a
Copy of the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. And Johojada gave to Joash the Testimony with
the Crown, 2 Chronicles. 23.11. When he anointed him King: And so all Inferior
Officers also are by the Orders of Gods Realm, to be Men Fearing God; and such
as must Judge not for man, but for the Lord, who will be with them in the
Judgment; to observe their carriages, so also to defend them against all those
Persons whom the impartial exercise of Justice might provoke and exasperate
their Spirits: God has therefore kindled this light in the minds of all men,
that they cannot but see the necessity of upholding and maintaining it in the
World: and although Oppositions have been in the World, and Rebellions against
Governors, yet it has been only to put it into others hands; and if one has
been thrown out of the Sadle, another has been put in; Licentious Nature does
not love to be controlled, and would have no Lord over it: but sound reason
will tell every man that there is no living where every man may do what he will
without control. The most barbarous Nations who never saw a Bible, have their
Governors, to whose Edicts and Wills, they do most unaccountably submit. The
old Persians had a custom, when their old Prince dyed, to indulge the People
with five days misrule, in which they might do what ever they would without
control; that so by the Rapine, and Outrages committed, they might be brought
in love more with the Person and Government of the Succeeding Prince: A sad
way, but a sure one, as the Author calls it. But our holy Christian Religion
has taught us a better way; let us be the more thankful to God for his holy
Oracles, and study to do our part, and duty of submission to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, who is our King, and Lives for ever, though such as are
sent by him, may and will die like men.

PROP. II. What ever Rulers are by Divine Providence set over men, yet God the
Lord is certainly the most Absolute Supreme Governor, and King over all. The
great God, though he entrust Mortals with a Power to Rule, yet he keeps the
Government in His Own Hands. Christ tells Pilate, Joh. 19.11. When he was
telling of his Power, That he could have no Power at all against him, except it
were given him from above: his Power must come from God, though Caesar had put
him in the Place; there was One above Caesar, and without the permission of
this God, he could neither condemn him, nor see execution done upon him. The
Lord is that King, who will never part with his Sovereignty to any of his
Substitutes whatever; as Pharaoh tells Joseph, In the Throne I will be greater
than thou, Genesis 41.40. In the account given of Isreal's conduct in the
Wilderness: Psalm. 77.20. Thou leddest thy People, like a flock by the hand of
Moses and Aaron. We find that God is the greatest Principal Leader; Moses and
Aaron were but Instrumental under God; as in the Natural Body, the head guides
the hand, so also in all Political Bodies: God could indeed, but he puts in
Men, not that God needs their help, for He can do all of it alone. Though Men
cannot do all alone, the Number and Care is too great, Moses complains, Numb.
11.11, 14. But God does it as an Act of favor, to put honor on the Creature,
as in his Preserving Providence He often uses Instruments, not out of
necessity, as when he imploys the poor Widow of Zarephath, to take in his
Prophet to her Table, but puts a singular honor on her, and sends Himself
Provision enough for both of them; so it is also in his Governing Providence,
God uses Instruments, but it must always be remembered by such as Rule for Him,
and such as are to be Ruled by them, That God is the Supreme, and his Laws and
Rules must be by both, carefully observed and kept, and its God who concurs
with the Instruments; and without Him the builder builds in vain and the
watch-mans care would be insignificant; God never therefore gives Commission to
any, but he gives and limits their Commission with such particular Instructions
as He sees meet. And for the illustration of this, we may consider a few
Conclusions which result from this Proposition laid down. As,

Conclu. 1. God the absolute Supreme Lawgiver, as He is the Governor of the
Nations, so He gives Laws to all of them, to Regulate all Persons in all their
Actions. In all Government, there is a Legislative Power; and in Judahs
blessing, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter, and Lawgiver are joined together; and the
Church very readily owns this Lord of all, to be her Lawgiver, as he was her
King, Isa. 33.22. And its an argument used by the Apostle James, to dissuade
Persons from rigid censuring and rash condemning of men for those things which
the Law does not condemn in them, because there is One Supreme universal
Lawgiver, who can directly bind men's Consciences, and make Laws for their
Souls, and is able to Save, and to destroy men's Souls, which no other Lawgiver
can do, Jam. 4.12. This God has his Throne prepared in the Heavens, and is so
represented as Sitting on it, Rev. 4 21. And as there he receives honor from
all, so from thence he gives forth his Laws and Commands to all men whatever.
The Eternal God, having the whole Model of the World in his Own Mind, as he
proposed to make Man the chief of all his visible Works, so he resolved how all
his Subjects should be governed; and pitched upon a Rule according to which all
should walk, Gal. 6.16. Never designing to make any Creature who should be
absolute Lord of his own Actions, to live, speak, act or do as he pleased; but
that all their ways should fall under Law and Rules congruous and suitable to
the Nature of that Being, He was pleased to give them.

Conclu. 2. God having therefore in his own hand drawn up a body of Laws, has
been pleased to proclaim and declare to man, what is his great duty, God
expects from him; and what God has revealed, ought carefully to be studied and
practiced. Promulgation of Laws, being what is ordinarily practiced in all
Governments. Deuteronomy. 29. ult. Secret things belong to the Lord, but those things
which are revealed, belong to us and our Children for ever. There are indeed
Arcana imperii, Mysteries of State, and many Secret events of Providence, which
God in his own time will bring to pass; but the things revealed by God are the
proper objects of man's inquiry, study and practice. Micah 6.8. He has showed
thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee, etc. At man's
first Creation, God making of him in His Image, He gave him the full knowledge
of his Mind and Duty, and by Oral Tradition in the first Ages of the World, His
Law was safely handed down, and communicated by one to another, till God after
man's Life was so exceedingly shortened, was pleased to commit his Laws of the
Government to writing, and at Mount Sinai gave the Ten Commandments, the Moral
Law, to his People, and wrote them on Two Tables of Stone with his Own Finger;
as we are certifyed by Moses, his Secretary of State, Exodus 31.18. It being a
new Edition of what was first given to Adam, and an universal Rule to oblige
all Persons in all Ages to observe and do; and in after Ages this God inspired
holy Men to write down, and leave upon Record such Rules, as might be
sufficient to make men wise to Salvation, and compile that complete Canon, by
which men might be thoroughly furnished unto every good Work: the Scriptures
being those Sacred digests, where God discovers his Imperial Power, as well as
his Wisdom and Justice; and though indeed the Wise God has been pleased to
give some more opportunity to know his Will, than others; yet all have the
Light and Law of Nature, a Law written in their hearts, as its called, Romans
2.15. The non-improvement of which will clear up the Justice of God in
Punishing such, and leave all without excuse in the Great Day of Account; when
God will render to every one according to his Deeds.

Conclu. 3. As God has Published the Laws of his Government, so he does
positively Enjoin and Command Obedience to all his Laws. God does not leave the
Creature at liberty, to comply, or not; but lays a strict charge on all,
Speaks with authority; and although the Word is sometimes called Gods Counsel,
and God (though the Sovereign Governor) condescends to reason, and debate with
poor Mortals, makes them Judges as it were in their own case, Micah 6.3. and
Jer. 26. Isa 5.3. Yet it is to convict them of the equity and reasonableness of
all his demands and expectations, and the unreasonableness of their
disobedience in any thing there-unto. At Mount Sinai, with what authority did
God speak, such words, that they entreated might not be spoken to them any
more; but Prayed that Moses might speak with them, and they would hear, but let
not God speak with us, lest we dye, Exodus 20.19. And Christ Jesus in the day of
his Humiliation, under the form of a Servant, yet had this testimony given of
him by the Officers sent to apprehend him: Joh. 7.46. That never man spoke like
this Man. And the Evangelist Matthew in the History of Christ's Life, declares,
That Christ taught them as One having Authority, and not as the Scribes; as you
may Read in Matthew. 7.29. In the Levitical Law, God enjoins them to do this and
that, I am the Lord, Lev. 19.3, 12, 14, 30, 37. Never any Laws delivered with
that Majesty, and in that Style, as the Laws of this God are, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16.
Without any exception in both Covenants, in the first Do and Live; and in the
second Covenant, Believe and Live: Act. 17.30. He Commands all men to Repent. 1 John 3.23. And this is his Commandment that we belive on the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ; and what we cannot do without Supernatural aid, He binds us to
seek the help of his Grace to enable us to do it, and therefore in so many
Places binds us to Bow down and kneel before the Lord our Maker, acknowledge
our constant dependence on Him, for all we need.

Conclu. 4. As this God gave us the Copy of his Laws, and enjoins Obedience to
them; so He has given the highest Sanction that is possible. He Promises the
greatest Rewards, to allure and persuade to Obedience, no less than Everlasting
Life; God is the Rewarder of such as diligently seek him, Heb. 11 6. He has
Eternal Salvation to give to such as Obey him, Heb. 5.9. Romans 2.7. A Crown, a
Kingdom for such as love him, James 2.5. No Potentate in the World can give
such a Reward. Satan made the highest offer to Christ when he promised him the
Kingdoms of this World, and the Glory of them; but it was far more than ever he
could have made good: The highest reward men give is some earthly preferment;
but in Gods Government, He will give a Crown which fades not away.

Concl. 5. In this Sanction, God as he Promises a Reward of Eternal
blessedness, so he threatens, for contempt of his Laws, he will inflict
Everlasting Punishment. Mat. 25.46. These shall go into Everlasting Punishment:
God will punish both here and hereafter. Kings can condemn a Traitor but to
death, kill the body; but can do no more: but this King of Kings can after he
has killed the body cast into Hell the Soul also, Luke 12.5. He has prepared
a Tophet; He has Everlasting Burnings, 2 These. 8.9. Mark 9.44. He has an
Everlasting Prison to throw such into, who trample upon his Authority, and rise
up against their Maker.

Conclu. 6. God being Supreme, will certainly call all men to an account at his
Bar, for all the contempt of his Laws, and Government; and Sentence every one
according to the Merits of their Offenses. The Ancient of days will Sit on the
Throne of his Glory, the Books will be opened, and the Judge of all the Earth
will pass Sentence, which will never be reversed, and from which there lies no
Appeal; He is the Most High over all the Earth, and his Laws are settled in
Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. v. Such as die in their Sins, found guitly, will not be
cleared; though God be Gracious, yet he is Just also. God did upon man's first
transgression of the Law provide indeed a remedy, and passed an Act of Grace,
for such as would submit to the Terms of it; Gracious being one of Gods
essential Attributes, to be Good as well as Great, as in the Proclamation made
by God of Himself, Exodus 34 6, 7. will readily appear: God did in the second
Covenant, let his Subjects know, that by the interposition of Christ, and
satisfying his Law, Sinful man might by Faith, and Obedience to Christ as their
Lord for the future, be Saved; but where these Terms of Grace are neglected,
and slighted, and Sinners will not accept of the Man Christ Jesus to Reign over
them; such will be treated as Rebels, find no favor, but the Sentence of the
Law will remain untaken off, Joh. 3.36. There being no provision in the Book of
Statutes for the Salvation of such as despise the Gospel, though there be for
Sins against the Law, on Men's repenting and believing, Mark 16.16.

PROP. III. As God is the Supreme Governor of all, so He is to be Remembered,
and Owned as such by all; but especially by his Professing People, on what Spot
of the Creation so ever they are got. And here first of all.

1. The whole World, and all the Nations of it are under his Government. Gods
Dominion is Universal, it certainly reaches to all the Ends of the Earth; there
is no created Being, but its under the Rule of this Great GOD: All the Angels
good and bad were in Micaiahs vision, 1 King. 22.19. He had a representation of
the Divine Presence in the Air, attended with good and bad Angels, standing in
the posture of Servants, ready to receive Gods Commands; and in the Starry
Heaven, Isai. 48.13. -- When I call to them, they stand up together: As
Servants to their Master: every Creature, Wind and Seas obey him; and all is to
teach man his lesson and duty to God, much more of subjection to Him; but its
the subjection of Rational Beings to the Great God we are speaking of; this is
that which all ought to acknowledge, though all have not the Laws of Gods Kingdom
so clearly made known, having not the Gospel among them; yet, if they ask the
beasts, they would tell man a great deal of his duty, as Job 12.7. The crane
and swallow, Jer 8.7. Will teach man to know the time of Judgment, and the time
of Mercy. But to come to our selves.

2. Gods Professing People ought most especially to Remember and Turn to the
Lord. Such whom God has especially known of all the Families of the Earth,
these are under especial bonds to Own and Submit to his Government; so God
tells Israel, He had formed them for himself, Isai. 43.21. and they should show
forth his Praise: God did more for them than any others; they are called his
Peculiar People, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. The Lords by a special
Profession, and the objects of his peculiar care, privileged with his special
Protection; It is therefore their duty and interest to acknowledge, and most
readily submit to his Government. It is the unhappy lot of a Multitude of the
Nations, to live in darkness, and in the region of the shadow of Death; but
where God irradiates any dark corner of the Earth by the Sun of Righteousness,
and takes possession of it as a special part of his Dominion; such though they
dwell in a Wilderness ought to bow down before him, and serve him; and they
ought to be peculiar in their Recognition, and acknowledgment of his Sovereign
Authority over them; and the Name, Nature, Titles and Attributes of God, not
Notionally only, but Practically to be remembered and improved; and this in
whatever part of the World so ever they are got, all being under the
Jurisdiction of the Omnipresent God: There being no Place in the World where
God is not, no Privileged Place where any offenders can take Sanctuary, Amos
9.2, 3. Job 34.22. Which hints to us our duty in these ends of the World, and
will be found our best Method, as soon as we hear of him to obey him, and submit
our selves to him. But more of this in the Application of this truth, which I
must hasten to; but before that, I would say a little for the confirmation: And
if it be asked,

How God comes to be the Supreme, and why He must be owned, and submitted to as
such?

The equity and reasonableness of it will appear, if we consider the following
Particulars.

Reason 1. God by the right of Creation has a most unquestionable title to
this Government, and may well challenge it as his due. The World and Nations in
it had never been, if God by his Almighty Power had not given them their
Existence; It is an argument used in all Ages; the Church looks on it as her
duty to Serve Him, Psalm. 100.2, 3 He made us, and not we our selves: had the
Nations been their own Maker, there might have been some Pretense not to have
served him; but all must acknowledge they have their Being from God; Fear and
Worship appertains to Him therefore as his due, who made the Earth by his
Power, Jer. 10.7. and 13 verses: He is the Creator of the ends of the Earth,
Isai 40 28. Every part, the utmost ends of it. God was indeed from all
Eternity, the first Being that ever was, and all others must own themselves but
of yesterday, but God is from Everlasting to Everlasting, Psalm. 90.2. It is
this God, who formed the earth, and laid the foundations of it alone; and He
therefore has the highest reason to govern it: Fathers of the flesh, who give
but (under God) a Being to their Children, and but the less noble part, the
flesh, are to be reverenced, and submitted to, Heb. 12.9. The Father then of
their Spirits may much more challenge submission and subjection. Remember thy
Creator, Eccl. 12.1. carries with it an irrefragable argument, and motive, as
well as duty.

Reas. 2. Consider, That God is not only the Maker, but Preserver of all. He
nourishes, and brings them up; they are all at Gods finding; this is what the
Church declares and owns, in Neh. 9.6. Thou preservest them all, and the Host
of Heaven worshippeth thee; and its a strong argument why things on the Earth
also should do it, being all under the same Divine Hand of Providence. It was
the great aggravation of Isreal's Sin in the Wilderness, that when God had
furnished a Table for them in that desert Land, Opened the doors of Heaven,
rained down Manna upon them to eat, and given them of the Corn of Heaven, gave
them Flesh, and feathered Fowl; that yet for all this, they should Sin still,
and not believe, for his wondrous works, Psalm. 78.23. etc. In this great Family
of the World, God takes care even of the bruit Creatures, provides for the
Raven his food, fills the Appetite of the young Lions; and does much more for
Man, and has therefore the greatest reason to expect that man should be
willing to serve Him, who is the great Benefactour: and therefore God enters
his complaint against Israel, refers the equity of it to the senseless
creatures, to make judgment of it, That he had nourished and brought up
Children, and they had rebelled against him, Isai. 1.2, 3. Doing that which the
bruit Beasts in their kind would not do to their benefactour, but gave their
labor to such as provided a Crib for them.

Reas. 3. Gods Government must be owned, Because He is indeed the best
Governor in the World. He is as the first, so the best good: He is Optimus
Maximus; He has the most transcendent excellencies, and perfections
imaginable, all in the highest degree, and it is impossible there should be a
better. We may without the least shadow of flattery, and we ought to ascribe to
Him, the highest Encomiums; and when we have said all, it is but a very little
part of his Glory that we know or can express: Whatever Wisdom and Conduct, is
in Mortal Potentates here, falls infinitely short of the Wisdom of this Great
GOD. Heman and Chalchel, and Solomon himself, though men of great Wisdom, yet no
way to be compared with God's, who is Wise in heart, and called the Only Wise,
1 Timothy 1.17. Wise at all times, never did a foolish act; and as his Wisdom
excels the Wisdom of all, so his Strength also, Job 9.4. None has Arm like
God; never was God put to a nonplus, but was able to do whatever he pleased to
do among the Inhabitants of the World: He is in a Word, the Only ONE, in whose
Reign never any blemish could be really found, so Holy and Just in all His
Administrations, that nothing ever done by Him can be excepted against, 1 Samuel
2.2. The least thought of any such thing was that which Elihu abhorred, Job
34.10, 12. And challenges any that could say, That God wrought ever any
iniquity, Job 36.23. His own Will is indeed the highest Rule, by which God
governs, but its so holy and just, that it is as impossible, that God should do
any wrong to any Creature, as it is for God to act against Himself contrary to
His Own Mind and Will; and therefore though wicked men complain sometimes, as
those did in Ezekiel. 18 29. To be punished for the Sins of Manasseh, but God
vindicates his own Act, and declares, That their ways were unequal, and not the
Lords* and that if they would repent and turn, iniquity should not be their
ruin. Gods judgment being a great deep, but always righteous, Psalm 36 6. Romans
11.33.

But to close this head:

Reas. 4. Its most certain, that Gods Government is the Easiest Government; His
Laws are the most Just and Equal. And if this be demonstrated, sound Reason as
well as Conscience in every man will give its suffrage that God should be
Governor in Chief over all, and all deference, and submission should be given
to Him above and before any other; its so equal, that God reasons the case,
Micah 6.2, 3. And would have his People testify against him, if they knew any
just cause to be weary of him: And in Jer. 2.5. Would have Israel tell, What
iniquity they found in Him, to go far from Him. God governs indeed by Law, and
will uphold the honor of his Government, not let his Authority be trampled
upon, but will punish the contempt of it; but He imposes no grievous burdens,
as men sometimes do, Luke 11.46. Christ's commands are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.
And hence Christ assures us, That his Yoke is easy, and will be so where it is
lined with love, Mat. 11.30. And a new Nature given, which our blessed Lord
has purchased by his blood, and is One among the All things delivered Him by
the Father, as is hinted, in Matt. 11.27. He being made of God to us,
Sanctification, as well as Righteousness, as we find inserted, 1 Cor. 1.30. Its
only therefore corrupt Nature that will complain, not Grace: And these Laws of
Gods Government are the most beneficial, useful, and every way profitable to
the Subject: Godliness being profitable to all things, having the promise of
this life, as well as that to come; so that upon the whole, it may be well
called, a reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. And the easiest in the World. And
here, I might summon the experience of Christ's faithful Subjects: David invites
the faithful, Psalm. 34.8. O taste and see that the Lord is good: What sweetness
did he find in Gods Laws! Read, Psalm. 19.10. They were sweeter than honey; and
Psalm. 119.16. It was his delight; and so 24. and 72. verses. And as God has
among us a number of faithful and loyal Subjects, so there are such as have
lived under both Governments; Once were in a State of Nature, Now in a State of
Grace; other Lords have had dominion over you, but through Grace you have
submitted to Gods Name, and His only; Surely you can speak well of his
Government, and would not change this God, nor yield your selves to be Servants
of Sin, and Satan again; you never repented your choice, but grieved only that
you submitted no sooner thereto, and can readily give your Affidavit to the
World, that it is the easiest, and best Government, and far more eligible than
to be under the Tyranny and Bondage of Sin and Satan. But I must not enlarge
any further, but come to the APPLICATION: Briefly, in a threefold USE; and
first by way of Inference.

USE, I* We may hence learn, That if God be the Supreme Governor, and has, as
you have heard, such an indubitable Right to Govern the World, That Sin, and
especially wilful Sin, what ever Advocates it may have in the World, is
certainly the most Malignant and Mischievous Evil, that can possibly be. The
Laws of Gods Realm are so holy, just and good, that Sin which is the
transgression of such Laws must needs be very Evil; and will be very bitter at
last, how light a matter so ever men make of it; and ready to say, as Lot of
his Zoar, Is it not a little One? When he would have it spared: But yet where
it reigns, it is rebellion against the Lord, as it is a departing and wandering
from the best Rule; so its disobedience to the highest Authority, it is a
Traitor to the Crown, and dignity of Heaven, and deserves exemplary Justice to
be executed upon it, usurps the Government which is the Lords only due, its a
slighting and despising of God, 1 Samuel 2.30. Makes light of Gods Commands, sets
at naught his Counsel, Prove. 1.25. Strikes at the very Being and Essence of
God; every such reigning Sin would have no God. Its Deicidium, as the Schools
call it, contrary to God as Lawgiver, Enmity in the abstract to the Law of God,
Romans 8.7. An act of disloyalty to the Eternal God, like Absaloms Treason
against his own Father, and like Sheba lifts up its hand against the King, and
therefore not to be dealt gently withal, but pursued, and brought to condign
Punishment: It is Satan's work who Sinned from the beginning, 1 John 3.8. And
was the Arch-rebell against Gods Government, would not be under Gods Rule, and
made it his work to draw man into that horrid conspiracy, to take the
Government on himself, and break off that yoke? And among men, we find Treason
against Government made such a crime, that men's Lives and Estates are little
enough to atone for such an offense, and satisfy for such a transgression: the
Law of Rebellion of Children against their Parents was in the Levitical Law a
Capital offense, Deuteronomy. 21.18. and 22. verses. What then is Rebellion against
the Living GOD: God has proclaimed it to be the great enemy of His Government,
and that ought not to reign in our Mortal Bodies, Romans 6.12. It being that
abominable thing which his Soul hates, Jer. 44 4. And which he charges every
one to have no fellowship with, Ephesians. 5.11. To hold no correspond with this
Rebellion, SIN, but bring it forth, that it may be slain, and destroyed, as
Jehojada did with Athaliah, the usurper of the Crown of Judah, 2 King. 11.15.

But by way of Enquiry,

USE, II. This Truth should put us on searching our own hearts, and inquiring,
Whether indeed we have really Owned, and in our hearts Submitted to God as we
should, and ought to have done? Whether his Sovereign Authority and Government
has been so far regarded among us in these ends of the World, as it ought, and
should have been. It is not enough to come as Hushai sometimes did to Absalom
with good words, Let the King Live; when in his heart it was King David, and
not King Absalom he meant. God knows all our hearts; Let us then see that our
hearts be right in this matter. It is most certain, that we are by Profession
the Lords People: Our Predecessors openly professed themselves the Servants of
the most High God, and that their Errand hither was to enjoy the Worship and
Ordinances of God in their Power and Purity; and we are now a small handful got
into these Corners of the Earth, where I presume there are none amongst us,
that can possibly think themselves out of Gods Jurisdiction, but do certainly
owe a duty of Subjection and Allegiance, as to our Gracious QUEEN: so also to
the KING of Heaven; and here GOD has Mercifully increased and blessed us, He
has been accommodating us with all necessaries, and furnished our Tables in
this Wilderness: Let us take heed of Jeshuruns Sin, Deuteronomy. 32.18. To be
unmindful of, and forget the God who formed us; and made us His People: We have
professedly taken God for our King and Governor; He has given us his book of
Statutes, the Laws of His Kingdom; if we have not the first (...), what was
written by His own hand, and the hands of his faithful Secretaries; yet we have
well attested Copies of the same: and as He has given us this to be the Rule
of our Lives, so He has told us, on what terms we may expect, that He will own
and bless us; and I hope none of you are without a Copy of these Laws; You all
have, or may easily get the Holy BIBLE to Read in, all the days of your Lives.
The Enquiry then should be, How far we have been careful as to call Christ our
Lord; So to do what He has said to us, and enjoined us to do? to allude to
Luke 6.46. He has shown us what is good, and what he requires of us; He has
the most incontestable right, and authority over us; its not matter of
indifferency, whether we will obey or not, but of absolute necessity on pain of
his everlasting displeasure. I am satisfied, God has among us a great many
good and faithful Subjects to His Kingdom and Government, who readily,
sincerely and willingly submit to His Laws and Government among us, upright Men
who would on no account be false and treacherous, but careful to keep
themselves unspotted from the World, and would not harbor Sin that enemy to
Gods Government, nor countenance or suffer to their power, Wickedness to dwell
in their Tabernacles; but are Mourners for the Sins which they cannot Reform.
But I fear upon Enquiry, that there are too many who are too slight in this
matter, and have cause to be ashamed because they have not a respect to, and
for all our Lords Commandments: Many may be ready as Saul in the case of
Amalek, to tell Samuel, that he had performed the Commandment of the Lord,
which was to slay utterly that People, Young and Old, spare nothing, 1 Samuel
15.3. And yet had spared Agag, the best of the Sheep and Oxen, only the vile
and refuse they destroyed utterly. And its well if there be not some such like
evil among us, to allude to that History; its well if there be not a great many
gross Corruptions. If you have been so faithful; What means the bleating of the
Sheep and lowing of the Oxen in our Ears? What means, I Pray, all that Pride in
the Land, notwithstanding so many humbling and impoverishing Providence by Sea
and Land? So many Oaths and direful Imprecations? Such little regard to fear
that dreadful Name, The Lord thy God? What Poison of Asps is under the Lips of
so many? What brutish Drunkenness? Breaches of the Seventh Commandment? What a
deal of Profanity, neglect of the Worship of God? How much Sensuality,
Worldliness? Rules of Sobriety, Temperance and Justice are Violated. How many
Agags, Master Sins spared, which should have been hewed in pieces before the
Lord? And all this notwithstanding all the Warnings given by God in His Word
and Works. What a terrible severe Mulct did God lay the last year on this poor
Land, by those fearful Judgments at Sea and Land: The sore disappointment at
Canada, breaking our Ships with his East Wind: And that desolating FIRE in our
Metropolis, laying so much of our Glory in Ashes, destroying so many goodly
Edifices, turning us out of doors, where these Solemnities have been so many
years formerly Celebrated; both the Places, as if God were angry with both
Orders among us: Certainly these with many other remarkable occurrents; and the
continuance of the Heathen, and other Enemies rage against us, do most
evidently indicate the Lords great displeasure against this Land, and call
aloud on all to enquire, What means the heat of this great anger? and to Reform
and Amend what ever is amiss: Lest God punish us yet seven times more for our
walking so contrary to Him, and refusing to submit to His Government and Laws,
so clearly Published, and so often Explained, and urged on us to observe. But I
must now hasten. In the last Place.

USE, III. A word then of EXHORTATION; and first of all to the Shields of this
part of Gods Earth which belong to, and are put in by God to be the Fathers and
Protectors of His People; and defend them from all Wrongs and Oppressions.

May it then please Your EXCELLENCY;

The Supreme Governor and Lord of all has in kindness to this Land, Seated
you in this Post of Honor, and made you under our gracious QUEEN, His Chief
Minister of State, entrusting you with the Care and Charge of His People, and
furnished you with suitable Accomplishments for the discharge of the same, and
sent you for the Punishment of Evil Doers in His Realm, and for the Praise also
and incouragment of such as do well. Give me leave then with all due respect,
to request that your Excellency would please to lay out all your Talents for
the upholding and maintaining the Honor of Gods Government, and His Laws, that
He has given out for the Regulating of all the Actions of the Children of Men.
Let not Gods Authority be trampled upon; Its the Lord of all, who has
Mercifully continued you in this Post some years longer than your former
Predecessors, whom the King of Heaven was pleased long ago to send for home.
Permit me then to be your humble Monitor, and put you in Remembrance, (though
you know these things,) from whom it is you hold your Place; the King of Kings:
and though our Governor, and so to be honored, regarded, and submitted to,
yet the God of Heaven is your Lord and Governor, to whom You and all of us
must give an account for all our Betrustments. Men in the highest Posts on
Earth are yet Servants to the Great GOD, and its certainly a Privilege as well
as a duty so to be. Among men its a great honor to Serve in Kings Courts: All
Officers about them are honorable; much more in Gods Court. The Epitaph on
Moses his Grave, and the Title given him by God was, Josh. 1.2. Moses my
Servant is Dead. Give me leave then only to Request, You would be good and
faithful to God, and His Interest, and Gods Euge will be better than all the
Acclamations of Men whatever. Imitate good Nehemiah's Pattern, Seek the welfare
of this People; with Joshua, Be Strong and very Courageous, and God will not
fail nor forsake you. And that God who was with Moses, Joshua, David, lives
still, and is among us, and can make His Service a Place of Profit, as well as
Honor, and in another World however, bountifully Reward such as are careful to
do the things which are pleasing in His sight in this World.

Secondly. Those Honorable Persons, The Lieutenant GOVERNOR and COUNSELORS,
into whose Lap the Lot for Election of them may fall this day, to assist in
Government. Let me entreat all of you, to tender the Honor and Glory of God
above all; Stand for and maintain the Honor of Gods Laws, which must be
observed to the End of the World. Be careful to make no Laws repugnant to the
Statutes of Gods Realm, dispense with none of those immutable Rules which God
the Governor of all has set down in His Word; no Mortal can make that Lawful
which God has forbidden. Let all of you what Place so ever in the Government
you sustain, in the Legislative Power, or the Executive part of it; Be Men of
Integrity and Truth; answer the great Expectation of God and His People: In all
Emergencies whatever, put to your helping hand. Say as Shecaniah did to Ezra,
We also will be with thee, Ezra 10.4. Take notice of all the disorders in Gods
Realm, do your utmost to Reform and Amend what possibly can be done; You are
Gods Warrant-Officers; be Men fearing God at all times: Do Gods Work
faithfully, and He will stand by you. Rehum the Chancellor, and the Enemies of
the Jews, pretend to Artaxerxes, Ezra 4.14. Because they had Maintenance from
the Kings Palace, it was not meet for them to see the Kings dishonor; What
they pretended, it is certainly your duty with respect to the King of Heaven,
and is no way meet for you to see His great dishonor, nor His Authority
trampled on, who is King of all the Earth, and from whose Palace all have their
Maintenance. Let no affection of Popularity, or fear of Man, which brings a
snare, impede you in Gods work: Let not Vice and gross Immoralites go
Unpunished: Be just in all your Administrations; You are called Gods, Psalm.
82.6. by God and by Men. Your Title is Worshipful, Endeavor to imitate your
Maker, and Credit that Post God has put you in.

Third Branch of the Exhortation: To the Representatives, and Worthy Gentlemen
concerned in the Government. Remember, you have a great Trust committed to you.
Let me request that you would be faithful to God and His People. What was
lodged formerly in the hands of a considerable body of People, is now devolved
upon your Care and Prudence. Be careful then in your choice, to choose such as
are really friends to the Government, (I mean) to the Great GOD and LORD of
all. Choose none who are disaffected to Gods Government; do not imagine your
Suffrages are your own; there is a God among you, to whom you stand accountable
for this, and every days work. Let all sinister ends and by-respects be laid
aside: You must choose for God, as Jehoshaphat told his Judges, They judged not
for Man, but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. For it must be remembered, You are
under Gods Government, choosing for God: Choose able Men, and such as will do
good Service for God and His People. And Remember, the Laws of Gods Realm are
by a Multitude miserably neglected; and you are entrusted with the Execution of
them. You have done well to give your Civil Sanction; and if any thing more can
be done, it will be very pleasing in the Lords sight, for the Suppresing those
gross Vices which abound so much among us. We have indeed good Laws against
Vice and Immorality, but there is certainly a fault among us, that they are not
better Executed. I know Counselors, Justices of the Peace cannot be every
where: God alone is Omnipresent. I know also that care is taken, that annually
Under Officers, Grand-jury-men, Tything-men, and Constables are Chosen, and all
put under the Oath of God, to inquire after, and not let Criminals go
Unpresented for favor or affection; and were such Under Officers so faithful
as they ought, much Sin might doubtless be Prevented and Suppressed. But whilst
Offenders are so studious, as to shift from one Town or County to another, and
tarry but their year and day; and Officers take so little notice, to exhibit
timely complaints; and are so dull of hearing, so ready to close their eyes, as
the Jews of old, with respect to Spiritual Truths: Sin abounds exceedingly. I
confess, the burden is too heavy to be thrown too often on a few, and such
Places are what Men decline as much as may be, having from Men mostly, the ill
will of their Neighbors only, so that iniquity so prevails that its very
difficult to find a faithful Man, Prove. 20.6. And this is our wound, and will
be our woe; we may cry to God with David, Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord, for the Godly
man cease, for the faithful fail from among the Children of Men. And indeed
could any Expedient be yet found, or remedy discovered, which might be equal to
the mischief, it is likely to bring upon us; it would certainly be a piece of
good Service to the Crown of Heaven, and might be advantageous to the
lengthening out the Tranquillity of this Land. But,

Fourth Branch of this Exhortation, to the Lords Stewards, and Ministers in His
House.

My Fathers, in many respects, and Brethren. It is indeed one part of our
Ministerial Work to put our Hearers in Remembrance of their duty, 2 Timothy 2.14.
and 1 Timothy 4.6. If we would be good Ministers of Jesus Christ, but we our
Selves also need to be put in mind of our Duty, and Place; though we know it,
and are established in the Truth: It is therefore very meet to Remember the
Post we are in, and by whom it is we are put in, in this Supreme Government of
God over the Nations, and among his People; It has been the pleasure of His
Grace to put us in as Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. By Him
entrusted to dispense the Word of Truth, and give every one their Portion,
according to those Orders we have received from God our Master, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth, as Workmen that need not be ashamed; if we are but
careful to approve our Selves to God, more than to please men, 2 Timothy 2.15. But
who is sufficient for these things? Its of such Stewards most especially
required, That they be found Faithful, 2 Cor. 4.2. Our Worthy Predecessors are
gone off the Stage, sent for home by their Lord and Master; Let us who are left
behind, follow their faith, and consider the End of their Conversation; and as
in Doctrine, showing Uncorruptness, Gravity and Sincerity; so in all things, to
show our Selves Patterns of Good Works. Its the care of Souls, the noblest and
best part of Man which is committed to us, and we must certainly give account
to Him who will Judge both the Quick and Dead at His Appearing: but let us
attend to Gods order to Jeremiah, with respect to his Hearers, Let them return
to thee, but return thou not to them, and I will make thee unto this People, a
fenced brazen Wall. And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not
prevail, for I am with thee to save thee, and to deliver thee, says the Lord,
Jer. 15.19, 20. Let us endeavor to answer the Character given of Tychi^^^, A
beloved Brother, and faithful Minister of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.21. And Epaphras,
Col 1.7. If God say to us its Well Done, though men should say it was ill done,
unadvisedly spoke. We Serve a good God, who will pass by, what a captious,
critical Ear will find fault withal. We have a great many disorders in Gods
House; We want a great deal of Wisdom to know how we ought to behave our Selves
in it, our difficulties and discouragements are many; We are exposed to
censures and hard Speeches; We live in a time of great Degeneracy; but nothing
must daunt or dismay us; Let nothing put us, who are the Lords Commission
Officers, to throw up our Commission, or lay down our work, till God give us an
honorable dismission out of the Field at last. Our Lords Joy will abundantly
compensate all our Sorrows and Troubles. But I must not enlarge on these things.

I have only One Word more to the Body of this People* That they would all
Remember and Turn to the Lord. Own Him as your Lord, Submit readily to His
Government, Obey Him in all things, and hearken to His Voice. Let me pray that
what ever has been amiss may be humbly Lamented over, and really and sincerely
at last Reformed. I presume we have no such Independents among us, but will
most roadily Own their great Dependence is certainly on this God for all we
need, for Time, and for Eternity. Let all then show themselves Loyal Subjects
to this Great KING, and Walk suitably as such: We are now on our good
Behavior, and its only Quam diu se been gesserint, that God will own us and
bless us. And here I might bring in all the reasons of the Doctrine, to be
improved as so many Motives to press you to a cheerful and willing Subjection
to this Government; but I shall be too tedious. I have only one more Motive to
pross and compel you to come in; and this is to Remember that our Protection
and Safety in this day of Trouble, this time of Battle and War, depends most
certainly on our Obedience: Kings do protect their Subjects: but a Subject may
so transgress, as to be Outlawed by Him: We have most certainly done enough to
provoke the Lord, to do so by us, to Outlaw us, and throw us out of His
Protection: But God is a Patient, and a good God, but it is our Wisdom not to
Provoke Him too far: We are a naked People: What terrible work do the Heathen
(a contemptible Enemy as we accounted them,) make among us every Year? How many
ever and anon cut off, and destroyed? and how easily can God hiss for the fly;
to allude to what we find, Isai 7.18. That is in the uttermost part of the
Rivers of Egypt, to come upon us; and the Be of Assyria to infest our Coasts?
And what this Summer will Produce, we know not: God has indeed made many
gracious Promises in His Word, but there are Conditions to be performed on our
part; and if we refuse and rebel against Him, He will deliver us into the Hands
of Men, Proclaim a liberty to the Sword, as He threatened Jerusalem, Jer. 34.17.
He can break down the Hedge, take away the Wall, let us be a prey to any who
will devour us. Let all therefore Remember and Turn: Make God our friend, and
He can soon subdue our Enemies, and turn His Hand against our Adversaries; He
can cause us to dwell in safety alone, and it then may be said of us, with
which I close, as Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel: Who is like unto thee,
O People! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of
thy excellency: and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread upon their high places.

FINIS.

