The Unreasonableness and Danger of a Peoples renouncing their subjection to
God.

A Sermon, Preached at the General Court of Election, at Hartford in the Colony
of Connecticut on May the Tenth 1711.

By Stephen Buckingham M. A and Pastor of the Church in Norwalk,

Jer. 25. Thus says the Lord, what Iniquity have your Fathers found in me,
that ye are gone far from me and have walked after vanity and are become vain.
NEW LONDON in N E Printed by Thomas Short, Printer to the Governor and Company
of the Colony of Connecticut. 1711*

The Unreasonableness and Danger of a Peoples Renouncing their Subjection unto
GOD.
Jer. II. XXXI* O Generation, see ye the Word of the Lord: have I been a
Wilderness unto Israel? a Land of darkness? whe^efore say my people, We are
Lords, we will come no more unto thee?
THE Lords Visible Professing people, having ^een, by sundry foregoing (...)
wa^ned of their horrible provoking E^i^s and invited to Repentance and
Reformation, left they should Invol^e themselves under his heavy Judgments, but
all this in great measure in vain, and to no purpose, the people being so
greatly hardened; He does at last raise up this Prophet, whose name, as the
Learned observe, denotes the (...) or the Exaltation of the Lord, a name well
becoming one, by whose Ministry the Lord was so Exalted, in many close and
sharp Reproof^ of sins terrible denunciations of approaching Judgments, and
also Divine Promises of Mercy, I say, He raises up this Proph^t, not so much to
invite those hopeless ones to Repentance, as to Denounce the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and the Temple, and the peoples Seventy Years Captivity in Babylon,
for their Incorrigible persisting in their Sins. Whether this Chapter contains
in it the first Sermon, that the Prophet Jeremiah Preached directly (...) this
People, or not as it is not positively determine^d, so neither is it Material
for us to inquire, although it be the first that we have upon Record

The former Chapter contains in it the Commission, which God gave him to this
Office of a People, together with some necessary Instructions and Directions,
in order to the right discharge thereof, and being set upon so great a piece of
service, attended with many Difficulties and hazards, and Weight being added to
all these by his being Called to this Work in his (...); the ^o^d does as there
was occasion, present him with some strengthening, and supporting
Considerations. The Prophet being thus called, furnished, and fortified to his
Work, is in this Chapter manifestly set about it: which chiefly consists of
matters of C^^^icti^n laid before this people (which were visibly Gods
Professing people) of the greatness of their evil in departing away from God:
the Unreasonableness of their so doing he manifests, in that God never gave
them any real Occasion so to do. v (...). Thus (...) the Lord, wha^ (...) have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
v^n^ty and (...) become vain? In the words now read the Lord does return to his
former Expostulation with them, and therein puts them upon showing, wherein* He
had by neglecting, or wronging them, laid them under any Necessity, or given
them any Occasion, to depart away from Him: And therein makes it evidently, and
beyond all question to appear, that if Reason, Experience, or Gratitude had
born any sway with them, they would not have forsaken Him In the Words we may
observe,

1. The Lords clearing Himself from blame, in what He had been to, and done for
this people, propounded by way of Interrogation: Which Interrogation implies a
ve^errent negation, Have I been a Wilderness unto Israel? etc. q. d I have not
been so, but on the contrary, like a pleasant fruitful Land to them

2. The Lords Charge drawn up against them by way of Expostulation. Wherefore
say my people, we are Lords, we will come no more unto the?

Particularly 1. A Compellation. O Generation.

2. Their serious attendance to what he had to propose to them, Required, see
ye the Word of the Lord.

3. The Principal thing proposed. Wherein we have

1 An account of the great care which the Lord had had of, and the great
kindness He had showed to them, Have (...) etc etc

2. Their Evil from hence argued, and aggravated, Wherefore ^ay my people, etc.
O Generation* some would have this to be a Note of Admiration, and Exclamation,
and Read it thus, Oh Generation! or Oh what a strange Generation is this, into
what Times are we fallen! But it rather seems to be a Note of Compellatic
calling upon and inviting the People then living, seriously to consider what he
was now about to deliver to them, pressing that upon them now, which he had
upon their Fathers. v. 5. See ye the Word of the Lord. i. e. Seriously consider
it To see, the Word is a Phrase not much unlike to the Hearing the Rod, MIc 6:
9. For the heart has an Eye to see the one, as well as an Ear to hear the
other, there is an Inward, as well as an Outward Eye Dent. 29, 2, 3, 4. And
Moses called unto all Israel and said unto them, ye have seen all that the Lord
did before your Eyes in the Land of Egypt unto Pharaoh and unto all his
Servants and unto all his land; The great Temptations which thine Eyes have
seen, the signs, and those great Miracles: Yet the Lord has not given you an
heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto this day Pro. 20.
11. The hearing Ear, and the seeing Eye, the Lord has made even both of them.
Have I been a Wilderness unto Israel? Israel was a Name firstly given unto
Jacob on occasion of his wrestling, and prevailing for a Blessing Gen 32. 28.
And ^e said, thy Name shall be called no, more Jacob, but Israel: for as a
Prince thou have power with God, and with Men, and have Prevailed. From hence
his Posterity were called I^^a^l; of them consisted the Visible Church of God,
until the coming of Christ Psalm. 76. I. In Judah God is known, his Name is
great in Israel. And from thence the Holy Ghost has seen meet to make it a
name of the whole Invi^^ble Catholic Church, Col, 6. 16. And as many as walk
according to this Rule, peace be on them, (...) Mercy* and upon the Israel of
God. Have I been a Wilderness etc;? Have I held My People to hard fare, as
Cattle that are kept on some barren Heath? Have My People served Me and Reaped
no Fruit thereby, as if they had tilled a Barren piece of Land? Have I not
rather blessed them, and abundantly Rewarded them, while they were Loyal and
Faithful to Me? (...). Your wants were not such, while you kept close to Me, as
to enforce you to leave Me, and to look out for new Quarters. A Land of
Darkness? A Land of extreme misery; Darkness is sometimes put for misery, Lam.
(...). 2. He has led one, and brought me into darkness but not into Light. A
lateward Land, that is very slow in yielding fruit; Have I not been bountiful
and forward in doing you good? Wherefore say my People etc; Say, Why do they
entertain such Thoughts? as Psalm. 14. I. We are Lords, We have gotten that
strength that we have no more need of thy support. We will come no more unto
thee? We will be ruled no longer by Thee, q. d. We will cast off dependence
upon, and Renounce Obedience to God.

DOCT. That when the Lord, Visible professing people, under the deepest Bonds,
and Obligations revolt from, and renounce Obedience unto Him, it is most
unreasonable in them, and highly provoking unto Him.

This was a people highly favored by the Lord* He calls them His People, and
He had done very much for them, yea so much as that He might say, what could
have been done more? He drew them with the Cords of a M^n and with Bands of
lov^^^ Now by how much the more kind, and obliging He had been unto them; so
much the more unreasonable must their revolt from God be, and consequently very
provoking unto God. Jer 8. 5. Why then is this people of (...) back, (...)
perpetual back slidi^^? This Doctrine contains many things in it, which for
brevity sake may be comprehended in these two Propositions.

PROP I. That the Lords Visible professing people, under the deepest Bonds and
Obligations, (...) liable to revolt from and renounce Obedience to Him. (...)

PROP. II. That when (...), that such a people do revolt from the God of their
Mercies, and renounce Obedience to Him; it is most unreasonable in them (...)
highly provoking to Him.

PROP. I. That the Lords Visible professing people, under the deepest Bonds and
Obligations, are liable to revolt from and renounce Obedience to Him.

What an undeniable instance have we of this in our Context v. 5. and 6. Thus
faith the (...), what in^quity have your Fathers found (...), that they are
gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? Neither
said they, where is the Lord this bro't us up out of the land of (...), that
led us through the Wilderness etc Yea the Truth of this Truth may be undeniably
argued from the many, and solemn cautions, which the Lord gave unto Israel of
old against their so doing, when they came to their fullness and grandeur in the
land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. Then beware least thou forget the Lord, which
bro't thee forth out of Egypt, from the house of Bondage. And again, Deuteronomy. 8,
10, 11. When thou have eaten, and art full, then thou shall bless the Lord thy
God, for the good land which he has given thee, beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments, and his Judgments, and his
Statutes, which I command thee this day. And yet so it was, that
notwithstanding all these cautions, they forgot, and carried it very
undutifully and ungratefully to the God of their Mercys. Some of the great
things which the Lord did for them, which if rightly considered were very
binding and obliging, together with the great abuse of those mercies, which
they were guilty of, we have an account of Deuteronomy. 32. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. He
found him in a desert land, and in the waste bowling Wilderness: He led him
about, He instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye* As an Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her Wings,
takes them, bareth them on her Wings; So the Lord alone did lead (...), and
there was no strange God with him. He made him ride on the high Places of the
Earth, that he might eat the Increase of (...), and he made him to suck honey
out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty Rock* Butter of kine etc But
Jesh^^un waxed fat and kicked: Thou art waxen ^at, thou art covered with (...);
then ^e f^rsook so^k G^d which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his
Salvation. Thus the Lord had led them, and sed them, he had skilfully guided
them, and safely guarded them; and after many trials and difficulties bro't
them to a comfortable settlement; and yet we see, what ill requital He met with
from them. When Jeshurun was by the doles of Divine bounty Waxen fa^, he in a
Beast like or worse manner kicked, grew masterless, and forsook the God that
made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock (...) his Salvation. God was of no
account with him: a prosperous is a dangerous Condition: and a People bro't
into it, are set in slippery places from whence too often they slide away from
God, and are cast down into destruction, Prove. 1. 22. And the P^^sperity of
Fools shall destroy them If it be here asked whence it is that the Lords
visible professing people under the Bonds of deepest obligations, are liable to
revolt from, and renounce Obedience unto God? I answer

1. Because all that are the Lords visible professing people, are not really
what they profess themselves to be. Romans 9. 6. For they are not all Israel
which are of (...). There are many that have the name of God called upon them,
who do not as in Duty bound depart from iniquity: among the many that have a
name to live, there are but comparitively a few, that are alive: Many for some
low and Sinister ends list themselves in Christ's service, who are ^et are far
from being cordial to him; and from hence after the hardness and Imp^^^ten^y of
their hearts, Treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the
Revelation of the Righ^e^^s Judgments of God; not ^^^ing that 'the goodness
(...) God leads them (...) Repentance.

2 Because Those who are truly (...) are but in (...). There is a body of sin
dwelling in them, which will not be wholly rooted out of them; during their
state of imperfection The great Apostle, who had truth of, and a great measure
of Grace, yet declares that of himself, which truly gracious ones may seal to
themselves, Rom 72^. (...) see another (...) in my Memb^^^, warring (...) the
law of my mind, and bringing me into (...) to the law of sin, which is in my
members From hence it is that we read of David, Peter, and many others that had
deservedly the characters of godly men, that yet were left to grievous falls.
Thus we see the first Proposition made good, which affores solemn warning to
all Professors of their danger, and to advise them to bear in mind that of the
Apostle, 1 (...) ^^^fore ^et him that thinks be stands take heed (...) be
fast.

PROP 11 That when it is so, that the Lord visible professing people, under
the Bonds of deeped ^^^^tions revolt from, and renounce Obedience unto (...);
it is most unreasonable in them; and (...) to him When because the Lord dea's
Well with a people the, deal (...) with Him, see how the Lord upbraid^^^^
People with their ill requiting Him, Deuteronomy 32 6. Do you (...) Lord, (...)
people, and unwise? Is not be thy Father, that (...) bought thee? has ^e not
made thee, and established thee? It is a most unreasonable thing, it would
better become Unreasonable than Reasonable Creatures, Yea it is in some
respects to act below unreasonable Creatures, for they do in their way, and
according to their capacity, pay some kind of acknowledgements and respects to
their benefactors, Isa. I. 3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
Crib: But Israel does not know, my people does not consider, That thus to do is
very unreasonable, on the part of the Lords professing people, and likewise
very provoking unto God, will appear from these Reasons.

Reason, ^I. Because the Revolting of such a people must needs be spontantous
and very willful. This is laid to their charge in the context, v 25. With h^ld
thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou said, there
is no hope. No, for I have loved strangers and after them will I go. It could
not be, because the Lord had been harsh and severe to them, and so had laid
them under Necessity to revolt from Him; there was no iniquity to be found in
God see v. 5. of the context God did not begin to for sake them. Isa. 50. 1.
Thus says the Lord, where is the bill of your Mothers divorcement, whom I have
put away? A Woman that deserted her Husband, and had not a bill of Divorcement
under his hand, was to be accounted the peccant party, so says the Lord, if I
have laid you under any necessity to forsake Me, bring forth the evidence; if I
have put you away, then show the Bill of Divorce. Moreover it could not be from
Ignorance, because this was a place of great light, it was a place where God
had recorded His name, unto whom He had given good statutes and right
Judgments, He had unto this People above any other showed what was right* Psa^.
147. 19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his (...) and his judgments unto
Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation and for his judgments; they have
not known them. They were compar^^ with other Nations, as sitting in Gothen,
and the rest groping in the dark. Now if the revolt of such a People be neither
of necessity, nor Ignorance, then it must needs be Spontanious, and wilful, and
so very unreasonable, and highly provoking.

2. Reas. Because this is to deal very ungratefully with God. Ingratitude is
condemned by the light of Nature, the very Heathen have looked upon it as a
grievous sin, yea as the Mother of many other sins; and much more is it
Condemned by God, who has joined the Unthankful, and Unholy together, 2 ^^m. 2.
2. Unthankfulness was one of the sins mentioned, Rom 1. 21. For the sake of
which, God was provoked to give them up to a Repropa^e mind, and vile
affections. To requite Evil for Evil is very sinful: But to requite Evil for
Good Oh how heinous! The Lord may in a Wrathful way say to such a People* as
A^la^om said to H^sha^ a Sam 16. 17. (...) t^o thy (...) friend* Such a people
for whom the Lord has done so much, are under greater and stronger Bonds to
walk with and obey God, than any others, Yea, such bonds one would think Holy
Ingenuity would feel, and be Commanded by, Deuteronomy. 32 6. God had cared for them
as a tender hearted Father, He had bought them with a great price, He had given
men for them, and people for their life, He had well formed them, both as to
Civils and Ecclesiasticals. This People were risen higher in their Profession,
and raised higher in their Privileges, than the rest of the Nations, a People
therefore, from whom the Lord might claim greater Loyalty, than from any others
What Prodigious Ingratitude must it needs be for such a people to be disloyal^
for such a people for whom the Lord had done so much, to lay aside all holy
Ingenuity, and to cast off all bonds of Love, and to bring forth the Chapes of
Sodom and the Clusters of Gomorrah, is very unreasonable, and also provoking,
Isa, I. 21. How is the faithful City become an Harlo^? it was full of Judgment,
Righteousness lodged in it; but now Murderes. Amos 3. 2. You only have I known
of all the Families of the ^arth* therefore I will punish you for all your
Iniquities. To ^ight against God with such Weapons given for no such end, is
for such a people to show themselves worse than the very Publican^, of whom we
find it Recorded, M^t. 5 46. That they love them that love them.

3. Reas. Because thus to do is for a people to run a bead of their own
Experience and to give (...), and feeling the lie. Past experiences may
rationally be expected, to afford present counsel: and so to be improved by
Men, who are capable of being guided by reason, and much more by Christians*
Now there never was a professing people taken near to God, but he gave them
some Experience of the Good of keeping close to him: He has very liberally, and
richly rewarded them, they have been no loosers while they have been faithful
to God; He has given them to see, that His service is the most profitable, and
occasion to say, when they have revolted from Him as Hosea 2. 7. I will go and
return to my first husband, for then was it better with me than now. God
remembers, and expects that His People should not forget the kindness that he
shows to them, while they walk with Him. vid, Context. v. 2, 3. Thus says the
Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy Youth, the love of thine espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness; in a land that was not sown.
Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first Fruits of his Increase: all
that devour him, shall offend: Evil shall come upon them ^aith the Lord. In a
Word God was with them, while they were with Him, so that their own experience
might teach them other and better than to revolt from God.

4. Reas. Because such a People in so doing are sadly regardless of their own
Interst. It is a part of the Covenant which God has made with His People, and
which He will (...) alter or break, that if they do transgress. He will
Chastise, that He will visit their transgressions with the R^d, and their
Iniquities with stripes, Psalm. 89 32. And when once the Lords Professing people
revolt from Him, it is not long before He takes His Rod into His hand. Now for
a people to revolt, while Divine Judgments are hanging over their heads, and
fairly within their view, is very unreasonable, and to be more brutal, than the
Feasts, who are not easily driven into Places, where danger is seen, Balaams
Ass would not go forward, when she saw the Angel stand in the way with a drawn
Sword.

How many hardships, and sorrows do a Professing people expose themselves unto,
while they forsake God, vid context, v. 25. Withold thy Foot from being unshod,
and thy Threat from thirst: but thou said, there is no hope, q. d Do you not
see, how that by departing from Me You do forsake Your own Mercies, cross and
oppose Your own Interest? How greatly are You Impoverished by it? Did You while
You were Loyal to me, want Shoos for Your Feet, and Water to quench Your
Thirst? and now how do You groan for the want of what You then had? Oh how
unnaturally cruel to themselves are a revolting people and even contrary to
nature hating their own flesh!

5 Reason, Because thus to do is an argument that They do not suitably improve^
the Instructions, which from the harms of (...) has have been offered unto
them. Is it not highly Irrational for any Man to go on in such a way, which to
his own observation has been fatal to others. It was an aggravat^^^ of
^e'shazzars sin in that he had had a prospect of his Fathers Punishment, by
which he migh have been warned, and yet he made no good improvement of it, Dan.
5. 22. And thou his son, O B^^shazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou
knew all this; though thou knew that pride was the overthrow, and downfall
of thy predecessor, yet thou wast not humbled Oh the harms of others will (if
rightly improved) make those who are observers thereof, cautious.

6 Reason, Because a professing people in thus doing, Crossite Lord, what in
them lies, of his reasonable expectation. Where much is given answerable
returns may reasonably be expected: Hence the Lord to speak after the manner of
Men promises to himself more, and better from a people for whom he has done
more and greater things than for others, Isa 41. 21. This people have I formed
for my self, they shall show forth my praise. The Lord does, and reasonably may
expect, that his people should be such as will not lie, and he false to him,
Isa. 63 8. For he said, surely they are (...) people* children that will not
lie: so he was their Savior.

7 Reason, Because thus to do is to deal worse by a good God, than the beathen
do by their dumb Idols As it is an argument of their folly, to trust in them,
which are but the works of men's hands, they have mouths but they speak^^, yes
have they but they see n^^, Psalm 115. 4, 5, 6, 7. so this their ^^^fide^ce in
and lovalty to their Idols reproves a Pr^^essing people for their revolt from
the true God Tho^^ the Context, v 11, 12, 13. Has a Nation changed their gods,
(...) are (...) no gods? but my people have chang^^ (...) glory, for that which
does not profit. To change a Fountain for a Fountain, may not some times be
disadvantagious: but to change a Fountain for a Cistern, Oh how unreasonable* A
professing people are highly unreasonable in revolting from the true and living
God, when the Heathen clave to their Idols which will appear from these
Particulars.

1. The Heathens Gods are Impotent, and unable to afford help to them They can
neither do Good nor Evil, they can neither Comfort nor Afflict, Isa 41. 23.
Hence the Heathen have no real occasion, either to love them, or to be afraid
of them. But the true God can do every thing: His hand is under no other
limitation but his own Job 42. 2. I (...) that thou can do every thing. He
^^n do good and he can do evil, i. e. Afflictive evil, Isa 45. 7. I form the
Light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all
these things Now seeing the Heathen do not part with their Gods* who they think
can, though indeed they cannot help them, a professing people m^st needs be very
unreasonable in revolting from God All sufficient

2. The Heathens gods are dep^^d^^t, but the true God is absolutely I^de^endent
They neither have their beings of themselves nor can they uphold their own
beings: But the true God has his being of himself, and by himself does sust^in
his own being

3. The Heathen have not experienced any thing from their gods, that might
oblidge them unto them, but a professing People have had manifold obligations
laid upon them by the true God, even their and Gods Enemies being judges. Psalm.
126. 2, 3. Then said they among the Hea^^^n, the Lord has done great things
for them. Deuteronomy ^2 ^1. For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies
themselves being judges.

8. Reason Because such a people are Gods People, th^s in the Text wherefore
say my People: They are Gods people not only by Crea^^^^ but also by Co^v^nant,
hence for them to make alienation of themselves from God and to revolt from God
must be to rob God of his due.

9. Reason, Because the Revelting of such a People from God casts in^olerable
reflection upon G^d. It is practically to say, that they had found iniquity in
God; it is to charge him with being an hard Master; Yea, that he had been to
them, what a Wilderness is to them that dwell therein. The Language of their
forsaking, God is that he had by the straits that they were bro't into
necessitated them to look out for some better quarters. What Re^^exion of
impotency and Weakness, or unfaithfulness may be expected to be cast upon God
by the World, when a professing People depart away from him.

USE Having confirmed the Doctrine, I would proceed as the time, and particular
occasions of this day will allow, to make some Improvement of it, which may be
principally by way of Reflection upon our selves

Whether we in these parts of the World have not reason to look upon our selves
a people so circumstanced, as that the Truth we have now heard, affords us a
Glass, wherein we may see the merciful obliging bonds we have been under unto
God, and at the same time, how unreasonable we have been in revolting from, and
renouncing obedience to God.

^ Have we not been laid under the Bonds of deepest obligations? has not the
Lord been far from being a Wilderness, or a land of darkness to us? So that we
have had reason in some measure, from what the Lord has done for us, to seal to
what is said Deuteronomy. 23 29 Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! There has been a time when we were in a Wilderness, and the Lord
was not a Wilderness to us. What our own eyes have seen, and our Fathers also
have told us, show* that we have been greatly favored by the Lord, so that it
may be said to u^, to New England, to Connecticut, to this (...) at Assembly
containing as much of it, as may be expected to be spoken to at once, See ye
the word of the Lord. The Lord has not in that respect put us off with Words
which we can only hear, and ought to believe, but he has made his words to be
things, such as we might see, yea and others also might see; God has not only
set New England as a seal upon his Heart, but as a seal upon his Arm; There
have been practical, visible Testimonies of his love to this Wilderness; Yea
the time has been, that the Heathen could say, that the Lord was with us, and
that he had done great things for us; Psalm. 126 2. Then said they among the
heathen, the Lord has done great things for them Oh they were good times with
Israel, when their enemies could see, that the Lord was among them, Number. 23. 21
The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them.

The time was (and it may be for a Lamentation, that we are so much forced to
say, it was!) that God was with us; It is seldom to be found that a people have
had more clear and uninterrupted experience of Divine bounty, that New England
has had* therefore suffer me to make use of what Samuel once said to the
General Assembly of Israel with particular application to this Great and
Honorable Assembly 1 Samuel 12. 7. Now therefore stand still, that I may reason
with you before the Lord, of all the righteous acts of the Lord, which be did
to you and to your fathers. I have studied brevity and may not here enlarge,
but only hint at things briefly.

1 How wonderfully did the Lord appear for the first Settlement of this land,
when our Fathers followed God into this Wilderness* The Lord did as it were
gather* a nation out of the midst of a Nation, and spirit them upon a Religious
account, to follow the Lord into a land not sown, so that what is said in the
Con^^^t, may be in some respect applied for the Lords Justification and our
Humiliation v. 21. Yet I (...) ^lanted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed:
how then art thou turned into the degenerate pl^nt of a stran^^ Vine unto me?

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, that the religious Settlement, of this Land
had be Royal (...). The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, And he was
pleased to turn it toward this Good design; when Ez^a chap. 6 v. 22 had
obtained the Royal favor for carrying on the building of the House of the
Lord, they do joyfully acknowledge it to be the work of the Lord For the Lord
had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the King of Assyria unto them; to
strengthen their hands in the work of the House of God the God of Israel.

2. How has the Lord taken the part, and appeared on the behalf of His People
against those who sought our Ruin? How were those who attempted to devour us,
looked upon and dealt with by Heaven as offenders, and how did evil come upon
them! How early did the Devil animate his vassals the Heathen to make inrode
upon this Land with Malice, Murder, and Cruelty* yet how manifestly did Gods
Hand appear against them and made room for his People? How could one as it were
chase a Thousand and two put Ten Thousand to flight?

Moreover, how many endeavors have there been at home, and abroad to disturb
our quiet Settlement, and yet those Counsels have been turned (...)
foolishness, and those Weapons formed against us, have not Prospered. And
although God has many ways, and many times sorely chastned us; Yet he has stay^d
his rough wind in the day of his East wind, so that God has not been a
Wilderness to us, by laying us open without being our Protection.

3 How has the Lord been far from being a land of darkness to us, in that there
have been, and still are Nurseries of Learning, and Piety amongst us. What a
land of darkness would this otherwise have been? From those wholesome Fountains
how many Streams have Issued forth to make glad the Cities of our God? The Lord
may in this respect appeal to us, as in Amos 2. 11. And I raised up of your
sons for Prophets, and o^ your Young Men for Nazarites Is it not even thus, O
ye Children of Israel? says the Lord. Yea how may we not only see the Churches
of our Land Illuminated by hopeful Persons thus Trained up among ourselves; But
also the Seats of our Civil Government, and places of Importance filling up
with Persons of Worth, who besides their other good Accomplishments have the
additions of a Liberal Education?

And here we may not in silence pass over the Tokens for good in this Colony in
that some Pious and well disposed persons have moved for and have had the
Approbation, Countenance and Support of this Government, in order to the
obtaining a School of the Prophets among us, the flourishing of which (as it
has not for the Time been unfruitful) we hope will not only encourage the
Public (whose advantage is Principally aimed at therein) to continue their
support: But also Particular Persons of Ability to follow the examples of some,
who already by their Liberal Donations have done Worthily for i^s Foundation.

4. What smiles of Providential encouragements has this Land been favored
with? Although it cannot be denied, but that there have been days wherein God
has Afflicted us, and Years wherein we have seen evil; Yet what great mixtures
of mercies have we had? The Peace we have had when surrounded with the Heathen,
Health and Plentiful Provision in a Wilderness are mercies not to be forgotten
For how long a Time were our fields unacquainted with Blastings, and the Trees
strangers to devouring Worms, and our Plantations to many Diseases which now
are come among us* so that the Inquiry may be made Joel 1. 2* Hear this, ye old
men, and give ear, all ye the Inhabitants of the land: has this been in your
days?

5. And above all, how has the time been, that we have had the glory of God in
the midst of us, His presence in, and with his Ordinances? How has there been
to be seen the goings of our God and King in his Sanctuary, so that there was
Reason rejoycingly to ^ay of our Zions, this and that man ^as born in them? How
did God own his own Ordinances, to the convincing and converting, of Sinners
the edifying and building up of Saints? How many were there that did (...) as a
Cloud, and as the D^ves to their windows? so that that eminent Servant of God
who Preached on this occasion many years since see Mr F^c^'s Election (...)
reflecting on the first glory of New England, had such expressions as these.

Multitudes were converted to thee, even to thee O H^r^ford, to thee O New
Haven, and to thee O Windsor, and the like might be said of many of the
Churches in New England.

Surely these things being seriously thought of, may be sufficient to convince
us that we are the People that have been under the bonds of deepest
obligations. We proceed to inquire*

II Whether the Lords way to us be as it has been? We have indeed great reason
to bless God, that things are so well with us as they are, that forfeited, and
undeserved Mercies are so plentifully heaped upon us; But yet how often, how
many ways, and for how long a Time, has the Lord born aw^ul Testimony against
us, and loudly proclaimed that he has (...) controversy with us; and if God
be with us as formerly, why are we thus? Has not the Lord been Testifying
against us by the Sword of a Cruel and Ba^ba^^^, Enemy unto the Diminishing and
greatly Impoverishing of us* by Fr^wnin^ upon our M^^^tary enterprises so a^ to
cause our enemy to laugh among themselves; by amazing Droughts so as to make it
a time of great distress; by B^astings, Catterpilars; and more lately by
unusual (...) of the Fruits (...) the field? And what can be the reason of all
this? Truly it would be for us to flatter our selves and to shut our Eyes
against the Light, if we do not conclude that it is our revolting from God,
that does lie at the bottom of all this, according to our Context v. 17. Have
thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God, when (...) thee by the war? While we dutyfully owned God to be our Leader,
he did not fail to be our protector If we had been true to God, and had not
L^ed to him, can it be supposed that he would have become our enemy, and so
many ways have fought against us? Isa. 63. 8. ^0 (...) ^e said surely they are
my people, Children that will not lie: so he was their Savior. But they
rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: Therefore he was turned (...) enemy, and
he fought against them.

Things being thus, is it not high time for us to be Redecting upon our Revolt
from God, h^ve we not too much practically said, we are Lords we (...) him?

1 (...) time been when New Englands walk was (...) than it is? I do not here
speak any thing that is liable to Controversy or Dispute; But purely of the
beauty of Holiness. Are the Commands of God so weighty with us as they have
been heretofore? are the Ordinances of God of that esteem as they have been? Is
there now so much of the Fear of God, so much zeal for God, so much
Righteousness among men, as always is needful, and as sometimes has been
visible among us? What coldness and remissness is there to be found in
Religious concerns? what neglect of Family Instruction and Government? Is o^r
way and Walk so becoming and adorning the Gospel, as our Predecessors? We are,
it may be, too ready to find fault with some things that they did; but it were
well, if we were not in many more things to blame -- Truly,

If our pious Predecessors should come from the Dead, how justly and greatly
would they blame our revolt from God? Might they not sharply say to us, Is this
according to thee good Counsels and Instructions we have given You, and the
good examples we have set before You? When did you see us make so light
a^matter of Profaning the Name or day of God? Were we ever so Wordly, so
voluptuous^, so regardless, of our duty to God and Man? (...) Is our Posterity
come to this! Assuredly our sins must needs be greatly aggravated in turning
quickly out of the good ways, which our Fathers walked in, Judge. 217. They
turned quickly out of the way, whi^^ (...) Fathers walked in, obeying the
Commandments of the Lord; but they did not (...)

Are we not become greatly degenerate? look we into Hearts, Families,
Plantations, the Land, and think what has been, and what is? are not our
Hearts more Carnal, and our ways more Offensive than formerly Particularly,

1 Is there not among is a great neglect of Christ, the Gospel and Gospel
Ordinances? The Tender of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel to the World is
the greatest tender, that ever God made: hence he is called the gift of God Joh
4 10 Now in the Gospel and Gospel Ordinances there is the most clear, plain and
affectionate Tender of him It is there that he stands, and cries Himself unto
poor Sinners John 7. 37. Jesus stood and (...), saying, of any Man thirst, let
him come unto me, an^ drink. There he stands Bes^eching poor Sinners to be
Rec^^ciled to God, 2 C^r. 5. 20. There he ^^and and kn^^k^ at the (...) of poor
Sinners h^arts, using the most powerful Arguments, and offering the highest
Encouragements unto them to open to him, Rev. 2 ^0. Yea there it is, that he
presents poor sinners with a lively prospect of his direful Passion, thereby
to pers^vade them to open unto him, Cant 5 2 O^en (...), my Sister, my Love, my
Dove, my undefiled: For my head is filled with dew, and my (...) the (...) of
the (...). There he proclaims himself every way able to afford help and relief
to poor perishing Sinners, that he has Righteousness to cloth those that are
naked, Gold to enrich those that are poor* ^ye solve to make those that are
born blind to see: And that all this with whatsoever they stand in need of he
stands ready to bestow upon those that will accept of it, upon Terms ha^ are
very agreeable to their Circumstances, viz. most (...), John 6 3^. Him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Rev 22. 17. And the Spirit and the
Bride say come, and let him that hears say* come. And let him that is a
thirst, come: And whosoever will, let him take the water of Life freely.

Now the neglecting, disregarding, and under valuing the^e offers must needs be
very provoking unto God Mat. 23. 37, 38. How often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a hen gathers her (...) under her Wings, and ye
would not! Behold your hou^^ is left unto you desolate. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great salvation? How is the dearest love of God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost trampled upon by Gospel neglecters, and the alone
Remedy refused* And is there not a great deal of this to be found among us, and
is not this that which lies at the bottom and is the very Fountain of the rest
of our sins and miseries? If the greatest love be slighted greatest Grace
rejected, what but proportionable Wrath may be expected? And surely the Lord
has a great Controversy with us on this account* nothing wounds God more,
than a regardless contempt of the Gospel; Will not God visit for these things?

And what abundance of evidence can there be brought in against us on this
account? The Glorio ^s Gospel which we have been so long favored with, beings
in plentiful evidence against us, and we may hear it plea^ing against us, Where
is the Ch^^^, which I have so plainly revealed, so freely offered, so strictly
Commanded you to receive, so earnestly beseeched you to give Entertainment to?
Where is the prizing of the Pearl of great price? Where is there a desire of
him, that is desirable for all N^^^^^?

Moreover the Ministers of the Gospel have abundant reason to renew that
Ancient Complaint, We have labored in vain, who has believed our Report? When
poor Sinners have been Piped unto, they have not danced; When they have been
Mourned over, they have not lamented. How much cause have they had to fear,
that much of their Ministerial labor has been in vain? Yea the Consciences of
Sinners do Testify against them for their Gospel neglects, and assure them,
that often when Christ speaks they stop their Ears, when the Spirit strives
they quench its motions; And are like the deaf Adder that stops her ear:
Which will not hearken to the voice of Charmers Charming ^ever so wisely Psalm.
58. 4, 5. Assuredly Gospel Sinners are the greatest Sinners, and will certainy
be found to be the most inexcusable. It will be more Tolerable for the blind
Heathen in the lay of the Lords Vengeance than for them Job. (...) 22 If I had
not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: But now they have no
clo^k for their sin.

2. How much Worldly mindedness is there to be found ^m^^g us? And this
Generally follows upon the former: for it is not to be wondered at where the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness are set light by, ^f add^^ional things are
too much set by How manifestly is the design of the first Settlement of this
Land very much forgotten, and a Worldly design come in its place? Un lo^^
(...), there were higher, more nob^e and excellent Things in the E^es and much
upon the Hearts of those, who left a pl^a^ant land and under went many
hardships in coming to this Wilderness Those who were the H^ng^ of this motion,
their Design was the following of the Lord, the promoting of Religion the free
enjoyment of God in the Purity of all his Ordinances; They soon did experience,
that They did leave Greater Things from whence they came than Thy could attain
unto here: not but that some of them might too much forget, what they came out
into the Wilderness to see: But I speak of them that were Leaders in that Great
Undertaking.

But what is the Design that now bears Sway? how light do men make of the
Things of the Kingdom? And the Thing that is most minded is the World. F^ming,
and M^^chandizing, i. e. secular affairs how violently pursued by almost all,
except those, who are apparently slothfal? From whence else is it, that there
is so much Covetousness, soaring more than (...) meet, Grudging at Public and
Necessary Charges? Oh! Is it not to be feared, that the love of the World will
leave us as little room in Gods Heart, as it has done him in ours?

3. Is not there much ^ride to be found among us? From whence else is it, that
Persons know not or keep not their proper places? The Ch^^d behaves himself
proudly against the ^^^cient, and the base against the Honorable? Whence also
but from pride is it, that there is so much stout Heartedness, which transports
men to an awlessness of men vested with Gods Authority? Pride goe^h before
destruction, and surely our Circumstances loudly call upon us to walk humbly
with God

4. Is there no^ much sensu^lity to be found (...)? How much Precious Time
spent, Estates wasted Families Impoverished, and which is worst of all Bodies
and Souls wounded and destroyed, by means of prevailing Insobriety,
Intemperance, and Excess?

5 Is there not great formality and outsideness in the (...) of God and
Godliness? We are indeed conversant in external acts of Worship, but inside
Godliness and that which is indeed the Life and Soul of it how Rare to be
found? How much do the generality take up satisfied with having a name to live,
if so much be attained) with having as form of Godliness, not regarding the
power there^f? In a Word how does Iniquity greatly abound, and the ^^ve of many
wax cold Things being thus be we all of us Solemnly, Admonished of our great
revolt, warned of our great danger and Counseled to our Important duty. Our
Sins are too visible to be denied, our dangers greatly to be feared: Therefore
before the decree bring forth, let us fall to our duty, and Return wherein we
have Revolted, and take heed that we be not farther Unreasonably G^^^^y And
this we had need to be very serious and busy about, because it is neither
casi^ to keep from revolting, nor yea to recover when we have Revolted. It
(...) not eas^ to keep from Revoking: It is a thing natural unto men to draw
off from and forsake God. It is that, which the nature of man does not need to
be Instructed in* hence we are said to go astray from the Womb, Psa. 58. (...).
Now to get an head of Nature (which there is too much of even in those that are
in part sanctified) this Requires Labor this Requires Work.

Moreover, It is not (...) to recover from has (...) from God. This will be
found to be up hill work, Afflictions though they be sharp and heavy, yet will
not of themselves prevail A^^^. 4. 6. etc. The Lord does there reckon up
several heavie^ judgments, which he had bro't upon them, and tell^ them how
^^^ffectual they had been, five times he does compl^ion. And yet ye have not
returned into (...). Nothing short of the special work of God will Recover such
a people. Let all Friends all Providence, ^all Ordinances agree to do what
they can, yet all of them will do nothing, except God be pleased to put to his
hand. Therefore we had need with utmost earnestness to joyn^^ with the Church
in Psalm 80. (...), 7, 19. (...) O God. To stir us up hereunto, let us Consider.

I. That our Sins are greatly, aggravated.

1. We have fallen from an high pitch of Profession, and Privileges. It is
indeed a great mercy for a people to be taken nigh to God, and to be dealt with
in a distinguishing way as to religious privileges: But it is no less
dangerous to Revold under such Circumstances. Duty and Priv^ledge do or should
go together* and a neglect^ of the former forfeits the latter, or exposes to
distinguishing judgments. Amos 3. 2. You (...) have I known of all the families
of the Earth: Therefore I will punish you for all your iniq^i^ies.

2. Have we not Revolted under, (...) been reclaimed by d^s^ries of rebu^es?
Have we not Revolted yet mere and more (...) 1. 5.

3. Are not our Revoltings become very (...) There are indeed and it would be
very sad if there were not some who do Sigh and cry for (...) the (...) that
are done in the Land, Ezekiel 4. 9. But are not the generality Revolting?

2. Consider that our con^^^^^g to Revolt from God may be expected to (...)
followed with the Lord, severe an^madversions: What might we expect upon ou^
going on to abuse the goodness of God, but that he should turn and do us hu^t
and consume us, after that he has done us good.

How just would it be for the Lord to be a W^^derness and a Land of darkness*
to that people who practically (...) we are Lords and wi^^ come no (...) There
is no greater misery th^^ to have been happy. It is more afflicting to (...)
brough^ than to be ^orn low.

3. Consider, How sad it would be* ^should i^ come this, that the Lord should
be to us, what a Wildernes^ is to those that dwell there. Should he leave us
unhedged, unwalled, not be our Protection and Defense, what people can there be
found more helpless than we should be?

Now seeing our danger, let every one fall to their duty Oh is there Room for
us to hope for such a comfortable word as that, J^r. 2. 22. Retur^ ye back
s^^ding Children, and I will heal your back s^^ding let us then heartily say,
behold, we come unto the, ^or thou art the Lord our God.

For which end it is necessary.

1. That each o^e du^ing (...) and reflect upon his own Particular (...).
Indeed the disease is general, but the Recovery must be wrought by dealing with
particulars So long as we content our selves with a general c^y, Oh^ it is a
declining apostatising time, (...) abounds, and love wa^^^ and, and all this
without any particular Reflection upon what each of us have done, this does
nothing toward Amendment So long as (...) busy our selves in complaining and
casting stones at the sins of others, and remain insensible of our own guilt we
are far from making the case better so long as no man S^^^ what have I done? No
man (...) one will (...) J^r. 8* 6* The Co^nsel of the King of Nineveh was
good, Jon^h 3. 8. Let them (...) every one from his (...) way, and (...) that
(...) in their hands. This is the promising blessed frame of a People
Cha^^ized, but yet not ^estroyed. Ez^k. 7. 16. (...) all of (...) his (...)
Until we come to this we do nothing to purpose.

2. It is needful that true and unfeigned Repentance be laid a^ the bottom of
our ret^rnings If Judah do not return with their whole heart, The Lord looks
upon what they do to be done feignedly. Jer. 3. 10 Our uncircum^^^^^ hearts
must be humbled within us (...) 2^ 41. If the Spirit of God with converting,
Edirving Influences may be given to us, this is the Catholieon, that will cure
us of our sins and for rows too, yea it will ensure blessings to us, Ezekiel. 39
19 Neither will I bide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my
Spirit upon the house of Israel says the Lord God.

3 It is needful that each be vigorous to improve their proper Talent, and
Station. There is no Person,' to whom any trust is committed whether Civil,
Ecclesiastical, or Domestical, but are thereby advantaged to forward our return
to God, and indeed very much of success does depend upon our lifting together
Particularly,

1. Let it be proposed as incumbent upon those Honorable Persons, that may be
this day Established, or Restablished Rulers ^over this People in the Civil
Authority, to be concerned to prevent our farther Revolt, and to help us to
return wherein we have backsidden

You need not, right Honorable and Worshipful to be informed, that it is the
property as well as the duty of Pious Rulers to seek the welfare of the people
over whom they are se^, and methinks our declined condition, and the danger we
are in of perpetuating our Revolt from God, does with utmost earnestness
bespeak your Honors in those words Ezra 10. 4 Arise for this matter belongs
unto you. It is your greatest Honor that you are betrusted with so much of the
charge o^ Religion in the Civil concerns of it, if you may be Instrumental to
prevent our farther backsliding, that so the Lord may not be a Wilderness (...)
it will be your and our hapiness* Gods honor, your honor and our sa^ety do
much depend upon it. Much of our way is to be chosen out by you, Right
Honorable, whom, we have the privilege to see setting chief among us. We have
indeed abundant reason, Reflecting upon your indefatigable and unwearied
endeavors to promote the Public Weal of this Colony by suppressing growing
Vice and Immorality, by bearing up against the sins of the times, and by giving
^^most encouragement unto Godliness, to accept it always and in all places w^^h
all Thankfullness* And we do with deepest submission beseech your Honors, that
ye continue to be strong, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall
be rewarded.

Your being set over a declined people, and that also in a Stormy time, make*
your work to be the more hard and difficult: But you have the Prayers of all
whose prayers are worth the having* yea the Gods of Gods will be with you; and
may he think upon you for good, according to all that you have done, and shall
do, for this people.

2. Those, to w^^m the ministration of the Gospel is committed, are also
greatly concerned in this matter Surely it is high time for such to lift up
their voices like a Trumpet, to show the Lord people their Trans^ressing, and
the house of Israel (...) If a declining people are flattered this makes their
breach like the Breach of the Sea and their wound Incurable. Lam. (...). 13,
14. The Lord help all such to deal plainly and faithfully and though men will
not hear, yet you shall reap the fruit of your faithful laborers, surely your
Judgment shall be with the Lord, and your work with your God.

3. Moreover the Station, in which those, who are the Representatives, of this
Colony, do stand advantages them to help our return. The trust (Gentlemen)
which is put into your hands is great, you may do much for the preventing our
farther Revolt from God, Oh if any thing farther can be done to crush
growinging iniquity it will be well worth your deepest consultation!

4 Head^ of Families ought to look upon themselves concerned to prevent our
farther Revolt from, and to help ^ur Return unto God. Families are the
Nurseries out of which Commonwealths, and Churches are Replenished; If there
be Degenerate Plants and Strange Children, can it be expected but that more
Public Societies should bare Sour fruits

You that are Parents and Masters betray not your Authority, set good examples,
Watch, counsel, strive Pray against the Sins of the Times Let not your Houses
be receptacles of vain men, and son of Belial, left you should give occasion
for your Children and Servants to rise up and call you cursed; But resolve by
the help of God, that You and Your houses will serve the Lord.

Finally, Let us beg the down pourings of the Spirit of God, the Reviving of
his work, the strengthening of those things that remain, which are ready to
die; Then might we hope that instead of the Lords being to us a Wilderness or a
Land of Darkness, we might have the Lord making good to us such comfortable
words as those. Isa. 51. 3. For the Lord shall comfort Zion, He will comfort
all her ^ast places, and he will make her Wilderness like Eden, and her D^sort
like the Garden of the LORD.

FINIS.

