PROPOSALS Touching the Accomplishment OF PROPHESIES Humbly Offered

By SAMUEL SEWALL M. A. and sometime Fellow of Harvard College at Cambridge in
New England.

Ezekiel. xlvii. 8. Then said he unto me, These Waters issue out toward the East
Country, and go down into the desert, and go into the Sea: which being brought
forth into the Sea, the Waters shall be healed. Quid igitur? Damnamus Veteres?
Minime! Sed post priorum studia in Domo Domini, quod possumus, laboramus -- Non
tam Prophetiam quam Historiam scribimus.

H^^^^on. prolog. in Pentateuchum. MASSACHVSET; BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew
Green. 1713.

PROPOSALS Touching the Accomplishment OF PROPHESIES.
AMongst all the Ornaments wherewith the Chaste Mother is enriched, there is
none more constantly worn, or more adorning than that of the Peremptory desire
of her Husband's Presence. This causes her to record the time of his departure,
keep an exact reckoning of his absence; and with frequent Calculations and
Enquiries, to long and look out for the appointed Season of his Expected
Return. And to every Message, Letter, Bill of Exchange or Lading, the close of
her dutyful Answer is,

-- Attamen IPSE veni.

This Conjugal Love is Honorable in it self; and CHRIST has ennobled it, by
speaking to his Church, in Phrases taken from it; My Sister! My Spouse! And we
see the Church's disposition after the Receipt of her last Letter, Rev. 22.
17, 20. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come! -- Amen. Even so, Come LORD
JESUS!

Now, Anno, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Eleven, more than Sixteen Hundred
Years are rolld away since CHRIST said and Writ, Surely I come Quickly.
Therefore an earnest Looking out for the Time, and Place of His Appearance,
must needs be very seasonable, very beautiful. And might we take it for
granted that the Antichristian Plantation spoken of, Dan. 11. 45. intended
their American Plantation; it would cast a great Light upon the Apocalyptical
Scenes: because the Time of this Plantation is certainly known. The Fables that
have been Written of former Plantations, will give little disturbance; seeing
the Godly and Learned Witsius has said, Neque Hornij Conjecturam cassa nuce
emerim. Exercit. (...). p. 450. These. 28. Indeed, except Horn^^^ had given
better Words of Command for the Reduction of his Phoniden Colonies; none will
be forward to choose him for their Leader. Lib. 2. p. 129. Suppose that hidden
Age afforded Unparalleld Instances of Obedience; Yet how came the Net-Cattel,
the Horses, the Swine by their Annihilation? To remove them from off America is
humanely impossible. Of these and many other Animals there was neither Name,
nor Thing when the Spaniards arrived; Neither was there the use of Iron.

Yet be shall come to his end ] Notwithstanding the great benefit accruing to
Antichrist by these Plantations; yet he shall come to his end. Or, and he shall
come to his end. His planting of these Tabernacles was to be a Signal, whereby
the Lovers of Jerusalem might certainly know that Babylon's downfall was near.
In Media bac Plantatione aliquid sinistri accidet huic hertulane. -- Subito
exorietur tempestas, quae naufragium adferet huic nauclere, Alsted. de Mill
annis. p. 203.

The Vulgar reads, Et veniet usque ad Summitatem ejus] When Antichrist should
clamber up to the top of his imperial Tyranny, by extending it over the New
World also; then he was to come to his End.

To make sure work with Antichrist, our English Translation Printed at London,
1540. expresses this End, by Death. "for he shall come to his Death. And
pertinent Places of the Revelation are noted in the Margin. Antichrist is so to
end, as never to begin again: No remnant of Life, no Resurrection belongs to
his Death.

If we consider the Time of this Plantation in the New World, and the Decay of
Antichrist; the Accommodation may seem fair. GOD appeared remarkably, when He
raised up Nicolaum de Lyra. This Christian Jew by his learned Commentaries on
the whole Bible, did very much in clearing away the Rubbish, and beginning to
lay the Foundations of the New Jerusalem. This noble Work began more generally
to be communicated in the year 1485. when it was Printed in a fair Character at
Nuremberg. About the same time Christopher Columbus was wholly taken up in
Supplicating Princes to afford him their Assistance in his Attempt to discover
a New World. This was at last effected by the Spaniards October the Eleventh,
One Thousand four Hundred Ninety and Two: and the Plantation vigorously carried
on in the Years following. In the beginning of the next Century, Anno 1517. the
Lutheran Reformation sprung up like the Palm Tree. The great Value Luther had
for Lyra may be seen in his own Words; Ego Lyram ideo amo, et inter optimos
pono, quod ubique diligenter retinet, et persequitur historiam: Quanquam
authoritate patrum se vinci paticur, et non nunquam eorum exemplo deflectit a
proprietate sententiae, ad ineptas allegorias, Genesis 2. fol. 21. -- Saepe dixi
qualis Theologia esset, cum ego primum hoc genus studij ingrederer. Literam
dicebant occidere: igitur oderam ego, prae omnibus interpretibus, Lyram, quod
tam diligenter literalem sententiam persequeretur. Sed nunc, hanc ipsam ob
Commendationem, Omnibus fere Scripturae interpretibus eum antepono. Genesis 9.
fol. 118. And Sixtus Senensis, and Dr. John Raynolds, give Lyra a very good
Character.

And none shall be able to help him.] When the Sixth Vial comes to be poured
out, the Word at Rome will be,

-- Acheronta movebo.

But as Heaven will not; so Hell cannot help her. When Henry the Eigth Writ a
Book against Luther; Antichrist expected some considerable Help from that
Quarter, and for joy thereof, gave him the Title of Defender of the Faith. In
this, like Balaam, or Caiaphas, the Pontiff unawares Prophesied of the great
Things that Prince and his Successors were to accomplish in abrogating the
Papal Power, and Supporting the Reformation.

As to Daniel, 12. 7. The Scattering the Power of the holy People there
mentioned, may design the same Thing that is termed Slaying the Witnesses, in
the Eleventh of the Revelation. In Mr. Mede's account, The Book of Daniel is
Apocalypsis Contracta: It Is probable the Slain Witnesses are to be found in
this part of it; I know not of a more convenient Situtation. The Witnesses are
clothed with Civil, and Ecclesiastical Authority: When this is taken away from
them, they are slain. The Jews have no Authority: LoAmmi is their proper Name.
That which is not, cannot be taken away. Where there are neither Sheep, nor
Shepherd; the Shepherd cannot be smitten, nor the Sheep of the Flock scattered
abroad. When the Witnesses are slain, then Dimiel's People shall be delivered;
All Israel shall be Saved. And this Receiving the Jews into Favor again, shall
be Life from the dead to the Gentile Christians. Oecolam^^dius, Dr. John Mayer
Dr. Thomas Goadwin, Mr. Samuel Petto expound Dan. 12. 7. as a Prophecy of the
Slaying of the Witnesses; and the Exposition seems genuine.

To pass to the New Testament, I have for several years supposed that something
of a Local consideration is couched in the Parable of the Sower recorded Mat.
13. Mark, 4. and Luke, 8. The Parable comprehends the whole Series of Gospel
Administration continued to the end of the World: and that not only under a
general Notion, as there are all these sorts of Ground every where, and at all
times: but also with notable distinguishing Chronological, and Chorographical
Characters, respecting the Four Fields into which the World is parted.

At first the Gospel was Preached in Asia, where this precious. Seed was
quickly trodden down and devoured; the Government setting themselves with all
Earnestness against it; and the body of the People, by a fatal Mistake,
wilfully chasing away the SeedsMen from them.

In Africa, the numerous flourishing Churches were quickly scorched and dried
up by the Vehement Heat of Persecution; not unlike the Grass in Summer, in that
burning Clime. For then the Trees only dare show their heads; as Austin
observes.

In Europe, it is too well known how it was choked with Worldly Hypocritical
Interests. Though it continued growing there; yet these Thorns rendered it,
comparatively, Unfruitful.

Why may we not, without being Envied, or derided, hope that the Americans
shall be made the good Ground that shall once at last prove Especially, and
Wonderfully fruitful? It Is to be noted that the same order of the several
sorts of Ground is observed by all the Three Evangelists. This Parable marches
in the Front of all the Parables; and a mention of the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, is annexed to it in every Place of its Recital. I think [Mysteries]
appears not elsewhere in the Gospels. In Mark, it is ushered in with a note of
Attention, Hearken! And in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, it has for a Conclusion
that Solemn Epiphonema, He that has Ears to hear, let him bear. Our Savior's
going into a Ship to Preach, might intimate to his Countrymen, that if they
refused to entertain his Doctrine; He would embark, and carry his despised
Gospel to far-distant Regions. Indeed He has made great use of Ships in
Propagating the Christian Religion. Paul was carried in a Ship to Rome, where
he had the advantage of Sowing the Truth all over the Empire. This is the only
way whereby Islands are Gospellised; and whereby, in a peculiar manner, the
Kingdoms of the New World become the Kingdoms of our LORD, and of His CHRIST.
It Is a great Encouragement to Ministers in these later Ages, to be diligent in
Sowing, because we have reason to believe that the Evening Seed will more
abundantly prosper, in Asis, Africa, Europe, and America.

Whether this be granted, or no; I am sure it is well for the Aboriginal
Natives of America, that the Apostle, whose Emblem is the Eagle, whose
Character is Love; was instructed to begin his Gospel with the Recognition of
his Master's Title to the New World. For, if all Things were made by Him; and
without Him was not any thing made that was made: Then America was made by Him,
with all its Inhabitants in all their Sorrowful Circumstances. This that we
call the New World, was made by Him, though it knew Him not. And when he Visits
those that dwell in it. He comes to his Own. Oh that they would at last Receive
Him! and that they might have Power given them to become the Sons of GOD, to
believe in His Name! There is a fair Possibility of their being made the happy
Subjects of this Royal Privilege and Authority: for all Saints are born not of
blood, nor of the Will of the flesh, nor of the Will of Min; but of GOD.

There is another portion of Scripture written by the same Apostle; the Tenth
Chapter of the Revelation, which I now pass unto.

Although most Expositors take the Angel therein mentioned, to be CHRIST, the
great Angel of the Covenant; yet, amongst them that I have before me, Lyranus,
John Bale, John Fox, Ribera, John Mayer, Cluverus, are otherwise minded. I
shall content my self with mentioning a few words of Bale, his Paraphrase on
this Chapter, fol. 139, 140. In the midst of this most Vengeable time, wherein
the Antichrists and Hypocrites most fiercly stirs about them to vex all the
World with their fiery blasts, their filthy smoke and their stinking Brimstone,
to restore again their pleasant Euphrates: The Lord has sent to the comfort of
his, certain peculiar and chosen learned Men, most constantly to defend his
Verity: and them this present Revelation compares to a strong Angel. This
Angel was clothed with a Cloud, betokening these godly Supporters of the
Lord's Truth to be compassed with many hard Showers, and troublous Crosses of
opprobrious Rebukes, Scorns, Slanders, Lies, and open Blasphemies. And this
Cloud hides from the World all that is in them spiritual and godly, like as it
did in Christ; that to many they seem not that they are indeed. --

Mr. Samuel Petto in his Revelation Unvaild, speaks thus, I am persuaded that
most of the Vials are poured out before the Witnesses Resurrection. p. 93.
Aaron, and Peter had their falls, their blemishes: so many pourers out of
Vials, for the hardening of their Enemies, and humbling of themselves; which
here I intimate once for all. p. 102.

To this may be added all other Evils of Affliction wherewith they are made
black, and as our Proverb is, are under a Cloud. Yet this Darkness is
irradiated with the brightness and solace of the concomitant Rainbow. And though
the Storm increase and grow never so Violent; yet this Angel persists with
Courage and Constancy to Proclaim the certain approach of a Fair Day.

N. 2. And he set his Right foot upon the Sea; and his Left foot on the Earth.
I humbly conceive that in the Words there is a Distribution of the whole
habitable Earth into the New and Old World; as if it had been said, He set his
Right foot upon America; and his Left foot, on Asia, Africa, and Europe. If we
respect the quantity, the Distribution is not very unequal: for Brerewood makes
the Proportion between the New and Old World, to be as Seven is to Fifteen. And
America is more distinguished and separated by the Sea, from Asia, Africa, and
Europe, than they are from each other. And in the Maps, America only and the
adjacent Oceans are placed in the Right Hemisphere. In the Opinion of the
Ancients, the Sea it self occupied all that space.

And he set his Right foot upon the Sea, but the Left upon the Earth] Id est,
ad praedicandum trans Mare, et in universo orb terrarum To Preach beyond Sea,
and all the World over. Augustine, Tom. 9. Hom. 7. Col. 673. Pareus makes no
question but this strong Angel is the same as Michael standing upon the Waters,
and Swearing by the Living God, Daniel, 12. 7. From whence this part of the
Vision seems to be taken. -- Therefore this Angel is either CHRIST himself, or
to be sure, an Angel representing the Person of CHRIST.

To Set the Foot any where, is to challenge Possession and Dominion. Hodierno
die primum P. C. longo intervallo, in possessionem libertatis p^dem pouimut.
Cicero Philippic. 3. fol. 255. B.


Upon the Sea] That is Maritim Provinces and Islands. Pareus, Col. 420, and 425.

Right Foot] In Military Exercises the Right foot is the foot of Motion, and
Enterprise. It was infinitely profitable for the New World to be Entered upon,
and Seized for CHRIST: Yet such was the indisposition and Averseness of its
Inhabitants; that it behoved this strong Angel to put forth his Strength, and
to Set the best foot foremost.

If this Interpretation prove true, there will be this Advantage by it, the
Chronology of Expositions on the Revelation will be thereby Rectified. The Time
of this Mighty Angel, his Setting his Right Foot on the Sea, cannot probably be
earlier than the Year of our Lord GOD, One Thousand Four Hundred Ninety and
Two, when Christopher Columbus, by his Discovery of it, brought the New World
into Acquaintance with the Old.

Lyranus makes this strong Angel to be Justin the Emperor, whose Reign began
in the Year 518. By his Imperial Power he subdued the Arrians, and restored.
Orthodox Christians to their Liberty. This seams to be much out of Time. And
indeed, the appearance of this Angel, the Slaughter of the Witnesses, the
Drying up of Euphrates, and the Conversion of the Jews may fall in very close
together. It is matter of strong Consolation to the Two Witnesses, in the
prospect they have of their approaching Death, that they cannot be held long
under the Power of it; and that their Death shall usher in so great and
glorious a Birth. This quick and sudden Birth of the Hebrews, will make the
Witnesses to forget their Sorrows; and animate them to lay by their Sack cloth,
and joyfully to undertake a most illustrious Reiteration of their Prophecy.

And he Set his Right foot upon the Sea, etc. ] Haec admirabilis statis Augeli
non caret Mysterio, says Learned Cluverus. This is mentioned three times in
this short Chapter, which must be notably Significant and Characteristical.
Justus Heurnius, supposes that the Churches Planted in those Regions termed
Sea, shall Excel in Glory: as the Right Foot in common acceptance excels the
Left. But I had rather Heurnius should speak for himself.

Aspergetque Israel gentes multas, super ipsum claudent reges os suum, quia
quod non suerat narratum Videbunt, et quod non audierant intelligent. Isai. 52.
15.
Ubi videlicet Angelus ille Magni Consilij de quo Johamnes in Apocalypst, Apoc.
10. 1.
collocarit ex pedibus suis ignitis, Dexterum super insulas maris, and regiones
maritimo tantum itinere frequentatas: Ut in ijs Columnam, and stabilimentum
Veritatis; Ecclesiam newpe veram, ignitam igneque Purgatam Collocet: quae in
illis partibus Splendore, dignitate, and rebore, tantum Ecclesiam quae bisce
locis sedem suam babet, superatura est, quantum sinistro dexter Communi sensus
praepollet; id Mystice Aposteli Visions nobis indicante. Ut enim in prima
Vocatione gentium, major Ecclesiae gloria fuit in Europa, eamque respicientibus
Asiae oris, id est, ijs Orbis partibus, quas inter insulas, Maritimaque loca,
Judaei veteres recensebant; quam vel in Assyria, vel Persia, vel Arabia, quae
ipsis terra Continua, et interior prope dicebatur: Sic jam Speciosior long,
Spousa Christi, promittitur in ijs locis, quas ut insulas, (...) adire cogimur;
quam in his habeamus, quae nobis vicinae sunt aus Contiguae. Justus Heurnius,
De legatione Evangelica ad Indos, p. 171, 172. Lugduni Batavorum. (I) I)C
XXVIII.

Let not the Old World, let not Europe, let not England, let not Hampshire, let
not any Shire be grieved that the Angel takes possession of the New World with
his Right Foot: but rather rejoice that he keeps possession of the Old, with
his Left. It would not be well taken, if Asia, and Africa in their Rubbish and
Ruin should envy Europe the many Ages wherein the Europeans have almost alone
enjoyed the Gospel. Parents, and Tutors are freest from the torment of Envy.
Europe is Columbina's Nurse; The Noble Isabella of Spain first laid her to the
Breast. The English Nation have done Worthily in Settleing a considerable
Revenue toward defraying part of the Charge of her Younger Sister's Schooling.
Let not Europe Envy any Preferment Spoken of for her Younger Sister. It Would be
most Honorable and Profitable for Europe to Strip! and Run! Run with so much
Regularity, Strength, and Nimbleness, as if it were possible, to Out run
Columbina!

-- Aut in nobis non habitat Deus, aut ut ubique habitet, seris ^esideremus
necesse est -- Justus Heurnius, p. 283. Either God does not dwell in us; or we
shall in good earnest Wish that God may dwell every where.

As to the Two Witnesses, Godly Learned Men seem to have a propensity to give
their own Country the Honor of them. No less a Man than Dr. Thomas Goodwin
puts in his claim for Great Britain.

Only in the Witnesses of Great Britain, both the Light and Heat of Religion
have been kept up and increased; and among them only has the Profession of the
Power of Godliness been continued, with difference from the Crowd of Common
Professors. And (according to what appears in view) more of such true Witnesses
now in these last days (wherein this Slaughter is to fall out) are to be found
in it, and belonging unto it, than in all the Reformed Churches besides; and
that according to the Testimony which they of those Churches (who in these
times of Scattering have come hither for Refuge) have, and do give. And surely,
the Place of this Killing the Witnesses, must be where most Witnesses are. And
so, that Kingdom may be designed more than any other; as in which also more
eminently are found those last sort of Champions for the Beast, who receive
only the Number of his Name; who yet shall be the chief Executioners of this
last Slaughter. --

Goodwin, Rev. fol. 164, 165. An anonymous French Divine, said to be Mr.
Phillipot, who writ in the Year 1685. finds the Witnesses in France.

Mr. Peter Jurieu Expresses himself thus; The bodies of the two Witnesses shall
lie in the Street of the Great City. It Is to be observed, that in the Text,
it is not in the Streets, in the Plural, as the French Translation reads: It Is
in the Street, in the Singular. And I cannot hinder my self from believing,
that this has a particular regard to France, which at this day is certainly
the most eminent Country which belongs to the Popish Kingdom. -- And I believe,
that it is particularly in France that the Witnesses must remain Dead, i. e.
that the Profession of the True Religion must be utterly abolisht. This is
already done by the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and by the enormous
Cruelties of the Soldiers, who have been let loose upon the Protestants, of
whatsoever Sex, Quality, and Condition. Accompl. of Prophecies, p. 247, 248.
But it must be Considered, The Bad must be taken with the Good. They that have
the Credit of having the Witnesses, must brook the Discredit of having the
Slayers of the Witnesses: For where JESUS is, there Judas must also be; that he
may be Nigh, and betray with a Kiss!

Rev. 11. 8. The great City] I enquire whether this can be conveniently
Understood of Rome it self, or of the whole Roman Jurisdiction? It seems
probable, that seeing the Beast is to slay the Witnesses, they must be, and
must be slain within the compass of the Beast's Jurisdiction; if they were out
of it, they would not be within reach. But if the Great City so graphically
described, prove to be some more peculiar and limited Jurisdiction; the
Indigitation of the Holy Ghost will appear with much more Particularity and
Distinction; Persons will be directed which way to look, that they may behold
this sad Spectacle. Now, may not the Jurisdiction of GREAT BRITAIN be this
Great City? Ever since the Acts of the Parliaments which made the Union, this
Jurisdiction has been Great both in Name and Thing; Great in the Islands, which
are the Seat of the Empire, at Home; and Great in the Islands and Continent of
its Plantations, abroad. If the Elaborat Calculations of my Learned Country man
Sir William Petry be Credited, LONDON, the Metropolis, is not only a Great
City; but it excels in Greatness, if compared with Paris, or Rome. And if the
Regal Style in its Compleatness [GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND] be
regarded; it will certainly be allowed to be a Great Jurisdiction. This
proposal being admitted, what is Spoken of this Great City in the 13th verse of
this Chapter, will be more easily accounted for.

Revel. 16. 19. This Great City is generally taken to be the same that is
spoken of, Rev. 11. 8. To me it seems to be mentioned as diverse from great
Babylon. And the Great City was divided into Three parts, [ was made into three
parts, as the Vulgar Latin, Stephanus, and the Rhemists Translate] and the
Cities of the Nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God,
to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the furceness of his Wrath.

No Argument taken from these Words, for the Destruction of the Great City, can
be cogent: they admit of a Favorable Interpretation. There are Three distinct
Articles in the Verse; and to each of them a very distinct Event is assigned.

Alcasar mentions some Expositors that take this great City, and Babylon, to be
two distinct Cities. Nonnulli cum Areta (...) persuadent, non csse unam
eandemque urbem; sed duas diversas, quae in versiculo assignantur. -- Hanc
juva^ conjecturam interpositio eorum verborum, Et civitates Gentium c^dount
quae inter utramque partem sunt interjecta. Quare quod postede Babylone
subjungitur, non videtur connecti cum co, quod de civitate magna antecesserat.
Hine fit, per civitatem magnam ab ijs in praesenti designati Ier^solymam; quam
dicu^ sub mundi finem suturam esse maximam. Alcasar, Rev. 16. 19. p ^8.

As the Cities are diverse, and not the same so the Dispensation of Divine
Providence toward them, is expressed with very remarkable Diversity. And this
Hypothesis affords help for Salving the Phenomenon of the Prophecy. However it
be, To have spoken Partially for Great Britain, would have done it no good; and
my self, a great deal of Hurt. I have endeavored to speak Secundum allegata,
et probata. And I most earnestly desire to be instructed, and reduced; if in
any Expression I have made a deviation from the Truth. All the Grief I wish my
dear Native Country, is that Recorded of the Faithful Disciples, (...). XXVI.
22. (Take part of the Context together with it.)

Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. And as they did eat,
he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. 22. And they
were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is
it I? And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,
the same shall betray me. The Son of man goes as it is written of him: but woe
unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that man
if he had not been born.

July, 23. 1713.
FINIS.
WEDNESDAY, January 1. 1701.
A little before Break-a-Day, at Boston of the Massachusetts.
ONCE more! Our GOD, vouchsafe to Shine:
Tame Thou the Rigor of our Clime.
Make haste with thy Impartial Light,
And terminate this long dark Night.
Let the transplanted English Vine
Spread further still: still Call it Thine.
Prune it with Skill: for yield it can
More Fruit to Thee the Husbandman.
Give the poor Indians Eyes to see
The Light of Life: and set them free;
That they Religion may profess,
Denying all Ungodliness.
From hardened Jews the Vail remove,
Let them their Martyred JESUS love;
And Homage unto Him afford,
Because He is their Rightful LORD.
So false Religions shall decay,
And Darkness fly before bright Day
So Men shall GOD in CHRIST adore;
And worship Idols vain, no more.
So Asia, and Africa,
Europa, with America;
All Four, in Consort joined, shall Sing
Now Songs of Praise to CHRIST our KING.

