GOSPEL -- TIMES, OR OATHS FORBIDDEN UNDER THE GOSPEL.

Herein being shown, that the Quaker's DOCTRINE. Not to SWEAR at all as it is
sufficiently Grounded upon the Commands of Our SAVIOR CHRIST JESUS, and his
Apostle James, so is it Exactly Consistent with the declared Doctrine of the
Primitive, and many Later Christians, as appears by the Writings of diverse
famous and pious Men among them, many of whom were godly Martyrs, and are to
this day by the Christian world esteemed and called Fathers in the Church and
whose Writings and Sayings sufficiently answer the most usual Objections
brought against us on this Account, being briefly abstracted out of larger
Instances of the like kind.

From a Book called a Treatise of Oaths etc. formerly presented to the King and
Parliament and subscribed by our Friends, William Penn, Alexander Parker,
Stephen C^^sp, George Whitehead, James Claypool, William Mead, With some others.

Published for the serious Consideration of all, and to clear our Christian
Doctrine in this Respct, from being esteemed a Novelty of Quakerism*

Matt. 5 34 But I say unto you, Swear not at all. John 14 15 If you love me,
keep my Commandments. C^rysostom, It is not Lawful to Swear, neither in a Just
nor Unjust Couse. Philadelphia Printed MDCCXII.

Friendly and Christian Reader,
AS we believe it to be the Express Command of our blessed Savior Matthew. 5.34
Not to swear at all, and that therefore we refuse to swear in any case so it is
chiefly the Subject of the following undertaking to show that our Testimony
therein is truly consistent with the harmonious Belief and Testimony of diverse
Primitive Christians, famous Fathers godly Martyrs and learned Protestants,
leaving behind for brevity sake many more that might be instanced: for though
Christianity has sustained a great Degeneracy in this and also many other
things, yet there was often found many of great Account in the Church Godly
Witnesses that kept up and bore a faithful Testimony to the Doctrine of our
Lord in this Matter.

Our Testimonies are abstracted and taken from a book called a Treatise of
Oaths, as mentioned in the Title Page in which book our Friends Reasons against
Swearing in any Case are largely set forth and then fortified with diverse
Testimonies of excellent Men and Christians; but that it may not swell too
bulky we at present choose to collect and abstract such of them as appear most
suitable to our present Purpose.

The Pages of the said book are set down at the End of each ^itation that they
may readily as well as more at large be found.

Our desire in this Work is first to inform those who among our selves may be
ignorant how our Christian Doctrine has been kept to and maintained by the
most Ancient, as well as modern Christians. Secondly, that those our Neighbors
and others who are not of our Persuasion in this case and may think sometimes
themselves unsafe under our plain Affirmation, may see that the sentiments of
their and our Predecessors, called Fathers in the Church (in Respect to
Christ's Prohibition, and of the little Security there is in Oaths) were
exactly one with us in this matter.

And we desire our Neighbors to consider, that our Pensilvania plain Attest
(to wit) I solemnly promise etc. we had in the beginning of our Settlement
^here, and afterward by Law Established by Coll. Fletcher, and was confirmed
by King William, and was practiced among us, before and since, that time for
about twenty years, without any known Prejudice to any one, either in Person or
Estate: and until an Order from the Queen was procured to put in practice the
English Affirmation.

We also think it pertinent to this present work to desire all to consider,
that in the Netherlands, the Menists, who are a considerable Body of sober
Religious People, and who cannot for Conscience sake take an Oath, nor, as is
said bear A^ms. are, and have been tolerated among them, for about 130 years,
last past, yet do not find any prejudice, or inconveniency in that Respect, to
their Commonwealth, Trade or Commerce. And that they were so tolerated, appears
by Letters sent from the Prince of Orange, to the Inhabitants of Middelburgh,
part of one of which Letters is as follows the said Prince having first
showed that the said People supplicated him for Re^^ef in respect to Oaths,
says thus, -- Seeing they do therein not desire any thing else, than to live
in the Liberty of their Consciences, upon which Account this present war
against the King of Spain has been by his Subjects taken up, and all
Ceremonies contrary thereunto resisted: in which such Advance is, through the
help of God, made, that the aforesaid Liberty of Conscience is preserved, and
therefore it would be an unequal thing to deprive the Supplicants thereof who
have helped to acquire the same by bearing Taxes, Contributions and other
Burdens etc. Especially seeing the aforesaid Petitioners do proffer, that
their Yea passing for an Oath, the Transgressor shall be punished as Oath --
breakers; therefore his Excellency having considered the premises, and having
maturely deliberated upon the same, has, with the previous Advice of the
Governor and Council of Zealand, Ordered that the aforesaid Petitioners Yea,
shall be received, by the Magistrates of the aforesaid City instead of an Oath,
provided, the Transgressors shall be punished as Oathbreakers. Page 162.

This was done in the year 1577, and we hear nothing but they continue so to
this day -- And in Hoo^t's History of the Netherlands, we find one Lord etc.
Aldegonde had pressed the Prince against giving the said Menists the Liberty
desired, upon which it is ^s said, the Prince answered sharply, viz. That these
men's Yea must pass for an Oath, or we must confess that the Papists had Reason
enough to force us to a Religion contrary to our Conscien'ces.

Also in a Treaty of peace, between the States General, Kings of Spain, England
etc. Anno 1674 there is a Special Article that all Ship Masters of Merchant
ships shall carry along with them a sea Brief, declaring that the Master did
upon Oath testify that such ship did properly belong etc. -- Yet the solemn
Affirmation of those who cannot swear is there taken instead of an Oath, and
then their Certificate runs thus, viz. These are to Certify etc. that A. B.
has solemnly Affirmed and Declared that the Ship etc. page 165.

From which it is observable, That though those People cannot swear, no, nor
bear Arms, yet paying their Taxes and Contributions (as they declared in their
said Supplication they had freely done equal with others,) they had free
Liberty to dwell, trade and merchandise among them, upon their bear Yea and
Nay, or upon their plain and solemn Affirming or Declaring this or that,
without any Oath, they suffering for the Transgression thereof as Oath
breakers. Note, so it is by Law Established with us in Pensilvania, and indeed
we remember not in scripture, any greater punishment threat'ned against
perjured persons than against liars; for all liars are to have part in the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, Revel 21 8. Since, therefore, not only
God's holy Law, but also our own human Law, gives as great punishment to liars
as to perjured Persons, what should then Induce any man to break his solemn
Word, more than to break his Oath.

Gospel Times, OR OATHS FORBIDDEN Under the GOSPEL.
WE cannot but deem it strange, that notwithstanding in our Savior's holy
Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5.34. he so expressly forbids us to Swear at all,
and afterward, his Apostle James has it Neither by Heaven etc. nor by ANY
OTHER OATH, (...) ^.12. that any should blame us for keeping to those holy
Precepts, so as not to swear on any Account; however to show that we are not
singular, nor that we put any meaning upon those holy Precepts, contrary to the
plain and right meaning thereof, as acknowledged to be such by many godly
Fathers and Martyrs, of the primitive Church, and also by many since that time,
we have here presented the Reader with abundance of Instances out of their
Writings; whereby it may be seen, that we are, as it were encompassed with a
Cloud of Witnesses, and therefore may be the more encouraged to hold fast our
holy Profession, without wavering; yet so as that we first and principally look
unto Jesus as the Author and Foundation of this our faith, to wit, Not to Swear
at all, yet so as that when we are legally called to give Evidence etc. and
thereupon openly declare that what we shall say (whether in the Affirmative or
Negative) shall be the Truth etc. that we take care it be so; then will our Yea
be Yea, and our Nay, Nay, without violating the holy Precept, or being unjust
to our Neighbors.

Our Instances, or Testimonies of the Ancients are collected out of the
aforesaid Treatise of Oaths, and at the end of each Citation, still citing the
pages in which they are, also giving the names of the Authors of the said
Testimonies, with the Titles of their books etc. as far as they are set down.
And we shall begin with the first we find, after James the Apostle reorded
against swearing, and that was the holy Martyr Polycarpus Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
lib. 4. cap. 15.
about about twenty years after James wrote, and was said to be a disciple of
John at his death when the Governor bid him swear by the Fortune of Caesar, he
refused, saying ' Hear freely who I am I am a Christian. p. 40. Mark; he did
not say, we must swear by the true God, if at all, or the like (no such
Objection do we find) but I am a Christian that was enough.

And Bishop Gauden tells us That the Ancient Christians and Fathers (that they
might not be short of the Esseni) Refused to swear, See his Discourse for
solemn Swearing
saying to the heathen, Christianus sum. I am a Christian, and to each other,
Yea Yea, and Nay Nay: thereby keeping up the sanctity of their Profession. Page
154

Justin Martyr Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 16
says Christ has thus commanded, Swear not at all, but let your Yea be Yea,
and your Nay Nay, and what is more than these, is of Evil. Apol. 2 pro
Christianis, ad Ant. Pium Oper. p. 63. -- page 41.

Basilides, who had been a soldier, Ibid. lib. 6. cap. 4.
but convinced of the Truth in Christ, being required to swear, he affirmed
plainly it was not lawful for him to swear at all, for (said he) I am a
Christian. page 42 Note, had Christians then believed it lawful to swear in any
Case, is it likely that this Godly Man would have alleged, that his being a
Christian was the cause he could not swear at all?

Tert. Apol. pro Christianis advers. Gent. cap. 32. Tertullian was a Lawyer, a
strict and learned man, Tertull. de Id. latria cap. 11.
who wrote a very notable Apology for the Christians, says he 'I speak not of
perjury, seeing it is not lawful 'to swear. page 43. And in Chap. 23 says He
which signs a Bill of security containing, and confirmed by an Oath, is guilty
of swearing, as if he had spoken it, and Transgresses Christ's Command, who has
prescribed not to swear; which if any should do, he should surely be the
servant of Covetousness, in undertaking an unlawful practice for gain. page 44

Clem. Alex. l. 7. Clemens Alexandrinus, famous for Learning and strict living,
speaking of a believer says, It suffices to add add unto his Affirming, or
Denying, viz. I Speak truly. pa. 47.

Origin in Matthew. Tract. 25. speaking of Christ's prohibiting the Jews from
swearing by Heaven etc. says; These things he speak to the J^ws, forbidding
them to give heed to the Traditions of the Pharisees, otherwise before he
manifestly forbad to swear at all. page 49

Cyprian lib. 3. Testini. ad Quirin. a famous Father and faithful Martyr,
having at the Request of Quirinus, drawn out several Heads from the holy
Scriptures of the Christian Religion, his 12 th Head is Not to swear. p. 51.

Hilary *on Matthew. 5.34.* very famous in the days of Constantius, says, That
God not only suffers us not to make Oaths to God, because all the Truth of God
is to be held in the Simplicity of our Word and Deed; but also condemns the
superstition of old disobedience, etc. page 58.

Basilius Magnus on Psalm 14 ('it is the 15 with us) He that Swears and
deceives not his Neighbor, (so Basilius has it, and upon it these words)
Here he seems to allow an Oath to a perfect man, which in the Gospel is
altogether forbidden; But I say unto you, not to Swear at all. Again, the Lord
to take away all occasion of Perjury etc. takes away Swearing ALTOGETHER. (Pray
mark that) Again, Is the thing not done? Let there be a denial. Is it done? Let
it be Affirmed by Word, and he that shall, not Assent to him so Affirming, let
him look to it, and feel the Harm of his unbelief pa. 60 61. Again, in his 29
Canon to Amphitochius, Because an Oath is altogether forbidforbidden, such an
one as is taken to an evil purpose is much more to be condemned. pa. 62.

Ambros. (de Virgin. l. 3.) A Citizen of Milan, was by the people (against his
will) chosen Bishop, for his great Worth and Godliness, speaking of the
Inconveniences occasioned by an oath, says, Wherefore not without cause, does
the Lord, in the Gospel, command not to swear, that there may be no cause of
forswearing, that there may be no Necessity of offending. -- Again, Ambros. on
Mat. 5.
The Lord who came to teach the Little ones, to Inspire Novices, to confirm the
Perfect, says, in the Gospel, You must not SWEAR AT ALL. page 68.69.

Chrysostom (on Genesis Hom. 15.) was very famous in the Church, and therefore
styled the Golden Doctor, says, A Christian must flee Oaths by all means,
hearing the Sentence of Christ, who says It was aid to them of old, Thou shall
not Forswear, but I say unto you Swear not at all. Let none say therefore, I
swear in a Just Business: It is not lawful to Swear neither in a just, nor
unjust thing. p. 70.

Again in answer to the Objection, What evil has Swearing? Much evil without
question; -- But now at this time, after so great Manifestation of Power, not
by any means. p. 76. -- Again, Let all men know, that none may Swear who are of
this Congregation: and hereby we may be assured and by this Sign be
distinguished from the Greeks, and from all men. -- And we also may be known,
if we speak as the Apostles, and speak as the Angels: for if any one say,
Swear, let him hear that CHRIST has commanded, even not to Swear. Ho^. 10. 101.
page 89. Again, Christ has made a Law that none Swear; tell me now, what is
done about this Law? lest, perchance coming again (as the Apostle says) I do
not spare you. page 91. Again Do as you list, I Impose this Law, NOT TO SWEAR
AT ALL; what Hope is there of Salvation, when you so contemn and despise all
things.

I. 1 c. 15
Isidorus Pelasiota, who, Evagrius Schol. says, led the life of an Angel, and
wrote many notable works, Ep. lib. 1. Epist. 155.
in one whereof he writes against Swearing thus, If thou art of our Flock, and
art ordered under a good Shepherd, deny the nature of wild Beasts, and obey his
Voice that forbids to Swear at all, page 104.

On Mat. 5.
Chromatius, Bishop of Aquilcia, says The Law given by Moses, received a
Growth Proficiency or Perfection, by the Grace of the Doctrine of the Gospel.
In the Law it was commanded not ^o Forswear; but in the Gospel, not to Swear.
-- Every one that Swears shall not be purged from sin, wherefore it is not
meet for us to Swear at all: for what need is there for any of us to Swear,
seeing it is not at all lawful for us to Lie. p 105.

As in an Oath there ought to be no Perfidiousness, so in our words there ought
to be no Lie, in that both Perjury and Lying are condemed by the punishment of
the Judgment of God, seeeing the Scripture says, The mouth which Lies kills
the Soul. Parallel. l. 3. c. 16.
Idem. Johannes Damascenus, brings a Testimony of one Nilus against swearing,
the words are these, It is not profitable to Swear, but very pernicious, and
execrable and abominable; wherefore hereafter make an end of Swearing. etc. p.
107

Antio^hus, said to be a man famous for Holiness and Learning, about the Year
614 in his Pandects of Scripture, Hom. 62 says thus in the Greek, The old Law,
as giving Laws to children, which for their Age were not capable of more holy
Doctrine, not unseasonably commands to Swear nothing to their Neighbor in
deceit: but us our Lord and Savior commands not to Swear at all, neither out
of season, nor in season: for he says unto us, Let your Yea be Yea, and your
Nay Nay, for whatsoever is more, is of the Evil.

And says he to the first People, of a Stiff Neck, I Command thou shall not
forswear; but to you that believe in me, I Command NOT TO SWEAR AT ALL; neither
Little nor Great Oaths; that a Difference may plainly appear who are Bastards,
and who are true Sons. Let us therefore, dear Friends, fear him who has
vouchsafed us so much Honor, even the Lord and Father, with all fear, as
Sincere Ingenuous Servants, let us keep his Commandments, Not to Swear at all:
l^st he say, as in Esai. 1. I have nourished and brought up Children, and they
have rebelled against me. page 109, 110.

In the Plowmans J. Fox Mart. V 1, page 527
Complaint it is said Lord thou give us a Command of Truth, in bidding us say
Yea Yea, and Swear for nothing: but Lord he (Pope) that calls himself thy Vicar
on Earth, has broken the Commandment, so makes a Law to Compel men to Swear.
This was R^ored by John Fox as not unworthy to keep company with Protestant
Martyrs. p. 121.

Theohpylact Arch Bishop of the Bulgarians, very famous about the ninth
Century, in his Comment on Matt 5 says, To Swear, or Adjure more to Yea or
Nay, is of the Devil. -- If thou should say, Also the Law given to Moses was
evil, because it Commands to Swear: Learn that then it was not evil to swear,
but after Christ it is evil, as also to be Circumcised, and in brief,
whatsoever is Jewish page 113.

J. Fox Mart V. 1. p. 614, 618.
William Swinderby lived in the time of Richard ^ being charged for holding
that no man ought to Swear for any thing but simply, without an Oath to Affirm
or deny, answers thus, Whereas Christ's Law forbibs Swearing, the Popes Law
Justifies Swearing: me thinks says he there is no need to comfort or
encourage the People in swearing. -- page 123. He was a zealous follower of
John Wickliff.

J. Fox Mart V. 1. p. 623.359.
Walter Brute an Intimate of William Swinderby, being charged with saying, It
is not lawful for Christians for any cause to SWEAR, by the Creator, neither by
the Creature, he answered for himself, in part thus, As the Perfection of the
Ancient Men of the Old Testament was, Not to Forswear, so the Perfection of
Christian men is, Not to Swear at all: because we are so Commanded of Christ,
whose Commandments must in no case be broken. page 124.

Ibid. V. 3 p. 910 911
Eliz. Young, who was brought to Examination in the Marian days (the Bishop
said, why Will thou not swear before a Judge?) answered. My Lord I will not
swear that this Hand is mine. No, said the Bishop; and why? She answered Christ
says, That whatsoever is more than Yea Yea and Nay Nay, it comes of Evil. And
so she persisted until it pleased God to deliver her out of their hands. page
126.

Michael Sadler (an Eminent Man called a Lord) was cruelly tortured and put to
death by some Papists under the Emperor of Germany, W. C. Albrid. p.
193.194-195.
whose brethren were also executed with the sword and his wife and children
drowned, Anno 1527. One Article alleged against him was, that he had said,
That Men should not swear to, or before a Magistrate. page 128.

The Christian Protestants of Piedmont, who were cruelly tortured to death by
the Papists. about Ann. 1655. Mort. Hist. p. 217.218. Comm. on Mat 5
One Article alleged against them was, That they believ,d it was not lawful to
swear any thing, be it true or false.

Erasmus, Among Jews and Heathens for Fidelity sake there is an Oath put, but
among Christians which ought neither to distrust any man, ^o^ to deceive, it is
a vain thing to Swear. -- Again, speaking of the Law of the Gospel* says* It
does utterly condemn all manner of Oaths.

Jo. Major Hadingtoniani, on Matt. 5th. Not to Swear at all, That Precept was
given to the Disciples (the Basis) of the first Church, page 143.

Peter Charron, Doctor of Law in Paris, in his Book of Wisdom, chap. 37. says,
An Oath, what is it, but a Symptom, and shameful Mark of Distrust, Infidelity,
Ignorance. Humane Infirmity, both in him that requires it, that gives it, that
Ordains it. (alluding to Christ's words, says he) What is more, is from the
Devil. p. 144.

Bezi on James 5.12. That which you have to say or affirm speak, or Affirm it
simply, and without an Oath and that you have to deny, deny it simply and
flatly.

Lodovicus Soto Major, Comm. on 1. Tim 1.
having shown that Christ's Words Amen, or Verily Verily is not Swearing says,
He ( Christ) not only forbad his to Swear, but also at the same time, and that
very Wholsomly, that they should only use in their Speech, a Simple Affirmation
or Denial without an Oath. page 145.

Now behold Friendly, Reader, Is not here a Series of Christian Testimonies, of
the Ancient and Famous Men of the Church, from the Apostle James's time
downwards, against taking any Oath, or Swearing at all, and abundance more
might be brought; yet in as much as according to the Proverb, there is nothing
can be said but some may Object against it, and knowing many objections to
these two positive Precepts, of our LORD and his Apostle James, are brought to
oppugn their said Doctrine as professed by us ( viz.) Not to swear in any Case
we think it therefore needful, what in us lies, to remove those objections, and
that chiefly in the very words of the forementioned, and other Famous and
Learned Men, as cited in the said Treatise of Oaths, still citing the pages
where to find them.

Object. 1. St. Paul says, That an Oath for confirmation was to them an End of
all strife. Hebr. 6.16.

Answer. Though Paul as it were indefinitely speaking, says That among men it
was so yet it does not follow that it was always, nor at any time, universally
so: for in page 37. of the said Treatise, we read that the Essaeans the most
Religions People among the Jews, shunned Oaths as Perjury, and cites Joseph. de
Bello Judaico l 2. c. 7. and in page 30. cites Sociad. in Stob. 28. saying It
was one part of the Doctrine of the Seven Sages so famous in Greece; That men
ought not to Swear. And many more in the said Treatise are cited both of Jews
and Gentiles, even before Christ's time, that denied-Swearing. And cites
Diodorus Siculus l. 16, saying That the Persians (which was a great People)
gave the Right Hand as a Token of Truth Speaking, and he that did it
deceitfully was counted more detestable than if he had sworn. page 28. (Mark)
did they not then esteem Swearing detestable? Again in page 29. cites Quint.
Curt. in Vit Alex. What the Scythians (also a Great People) said to Alexander,
upon the occasion of an expected Security, thus, Think not that the Scythians
confirm 'their Friedship by Oath; they Swear by keeping 'their Word. And we
find Chrysostom saying, That before Abraham's time, which was about 2000 Years
after the Creation, there was not an Oath; and then Queries, Whence then came
in an Oath? and answers, 'When Evils increased, when all things became topsy
turvy, when they inclined to Idolatry, then verily, when they appeared
unfaithful, they called God to witness, as giving Surety for security for their
words etc, page 83. However, were they more or less that in Paul's time, or
since that, did or do swear, the Question is not what men did, or now do, but
what the Lord and Savior of men has commanded to do, which is, Not to Swear at
all.

Objest. 2 Christ forbids only swearing by the Creature, as by Heaven etc. but
not by the true God.

Answer. It seems then that Christ forbidding to Swear by the Heaven, forbad to
Swear by the true God: for he that Swears by Heaven, Swears by the Throne of
God, and by him that sits thereon which surely is the True God. Matt. 23 22.
And Chrysostom says, That Christ to put off the hearers that they should not
Swear by God, he says neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne etc. page 37.

See Bibliotheca Veter. Patrum.
Euthymius Zagabonus on Matthew, 5 page 43. speaking about Swearing by Heaven,
says, He that Swears by these things, Swears again by God who fills these
things etc. page 117.

De Quaest. jur. Christ. p. 227.
Suarez says, If Christ therefore forbids to Swear by Heaven, because God
dwells therein, much more he forbids to Swear by God. etc. page 141.

Object. 3. But God commanded his People the Jews to Swear by him, therefore
not unlawful.

Answer. First in the words of Theophylact aforementioned, very famous about
the ninth Century, being as it were their Apostle, who on Matthew. 5. says. To
Swear or Adjure more to Yea or Nay, is of the Devil. If thou should say the
Law also given to Moses was evil because it commands to Swear; learn that
then it was not evil to Swear, but after Christ it is evil, as also to be
circumcised? and in brief whatsoever is Jewish. p. 113.

On Matt. Hom. 17
Chrysostom upon the Question, How can it be that the same [Swearing] is
sometimes good and sometimes not? answers, To be carried in ones arms is a good
part in the first Age, afterward a very pitiful thing. -- Again, even Man
slaughter it self, which Christ calls a work of the Devil, sometime in due
season done, has been praised; as Phineas killed a man, and it was imputed to
him for Righteousness. -- And Peter slew two, but that was a Spiritual work: so
we must not only consider the Action, but the Time, Cause, Will, Difference of
Persons, and all other Circumstances. p. 77

Again, says he, Will you learn why they allowed them of old to swear? It was
because they swore by Idols. page 91.

Paschalius Ratbertus on Matt. 5 says, By the Law for the carnal People, it
was lawful to swear by God, and this was allowed as to little ones, that as
they offered Sacrifices to God lest they should offer them to Idols; so also it
was permitted to them to Swear by God: because it was better to give it to God
than to Devils. page 113.114. To the same Purpose says Tho. Aqinas. page 132.

Druthmarus on Matt. 5. 'Lest the Jews should Sweat by Idol's Names, the Lord
suffered them to Swear by his own Name. page 114.

Euthymius. etc. aforesaid, upon the Question, If an Oath be of the Devil, how
did the old Law permit it? answers, Because the Sacrifices of Living Creature
were also of evil, yet the Law Permitted them, because of the Infirmity of the
Hebrews* for whereas they were gluttonous and Smell-Feasts, they loved the
Sacrifices of Idols; and whereas also they were unbelieving, they also loved an
Oath, and that they should not afterward either Sacrifice or Swear by Idols,
the Law permitted them to Sacrifice and Swear. page 118

Anshelmus Bishop of Canterbury, about Ann. 1090. on Matt. 5. about Oaths,
says, Lest they should make the Creatures Gods to themselves, he commands them
to render their Oaths to God, and not to swear by Creatures: but the Lord
removes them more perfectly from Perjury when he forbids them to Swear at all.
p. 120.

Object. 4. But God Swore, say they, he swore to Abraham, as Moses witnesses,
and (in the Psalms) The Lord swore and will not repent, and thereby there seems
to be permitted to men a Liberty of Swearing.

Answ. To which let Athanasius (a man in great Renown in the days of
Constantine, and whose Creed is the Faith and Test to Christendom at this day)
give answer: On the Passion of Christ
He says, This is not so: God swears by none; for how can he, seeing he is
Lord and Master of all things?

This also God does declare in Genesis, saying, I have sworn by my self, but
that is not an Oath: for he swear not by another, which is proper for an Oath;
but this is done that the sureness of the Promise might appear. So God does not
swear after the manner of men, neither must we be induced thereby to take
Oaths, but let us so say and so do etc. page 57. Jamb. 20
Gregory Nazianzen, a great man in the Churh, in his Dialogue against Swearing,
answers the Objection, that God swore (thus) Is there any thing better than
God? Surely nothing. If therefore nothing be found better than he, it should
follow that he never swear: when God says any thing that is the Oath of God,
page 64

See Catena 65 Graec. Patr on Lnk 1.
Cyrill, whom Evagrius Scholasticus styles Renowned Let none because he hears
that God swear to Abraham, use to swear: -- for God does not swear, for the
Oath of God is his own Word etc. pags 108.

Object. 5. Christ swore, therefore etc.

Answ. Jansenius on Matt 5. Yea, and Amen are the same 2. Cor. 1. Not Swearing
but Affirming, so Christ Swore not. p. 115.

Jacobus Faber on Matt. 5 p. 23.24. saiths Who spoke more seriously than our
Savior? Who more Necessary things? Yet he Used no other than that Verily
Verily I say unto you, or some other such like, which was a true Form or Manner
to them that swore not. page 138. -- Again, says he, The Lord made Answer to
an Adjuration, but he did not swear. page 139

Jerem Libr. Epistol. part. 3. Tract. 2. Epist. 2. of Obedience, Knowledge and
Revenge, says, It is not lawful for us servants to swear: because we are
forbidden by the Law of the Lord; but lest we should suffer an Offense by his
Example, since the time he forbade us to swear, neither did he himself ever
swear. etc p. 92.

Suarez: He affirms Christ never swear. De Quaest. jur. Christ. p. 306.
-- It is spoken of him only sometimes, that he said Amen, or Truly or Verily,
which we have before showed to be no particle of swearing, p. 140.

Object. 6. But Paul swear therefore etc.

Answ. As to Paul; Basil aforementioned says There be some Speeches which have
the forms of Oaths, which are no Oaths at all, but rather Remedies to persuade.
-- The Apostle willing to show his Love to the Corinthians, said, By the
Glorying of you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord: For he did not depart
from the Doctrine of the Gospel, who by a thing before all most dear unto him,
sought belief to the Truth p. 61.62.

And Gregory Nazianzen, in his Dialogue against swearing, on the Objection that
Paul swore, says, Oh! what a vain Jangler was he that said it! Quoth he, God is
my witness; and God knows those words are not an Oath, but a certain
Asseveration in such great things (mark such great things constant and
inviolable. p. 61,

Object. 7. We tak^ Christ's Prohibition to respect only common conversation
oaths: but not when required to take them by any lawful Authority, as
Magistrate Court or the like.

Answ. Then it seems by our opposers way of Arguing else where, if Paul swore
he broke Christ's Commandment, being not called thereto by any Magistrate etc.
but as the Text Swear not at all, seems to us to give no favor to this
objection, so neither did it in the Apprehension or Sense of the Ancient
Fathers of the Church: Against tde Jews, Hom. 34.
for Chrysostom seeing one called a Christian compelling a certain honest
faithful Matron to go to the Jews Synagogue, there to be sworn about some
business in controversy betwixt them, she desiring help, I, says he, kindled
with ZEAL, arose, and not suffering her to be drawn into this prevarication.
Rescued her. -- And going on in speaking I taught him out of the Holy Gospel,
that it is not lawful to swear at all, not to incite any to swear etc.

Here we may see Chrysostom thought swearing unlawful, On Matt. Hom, 17
'though before Authority. -- Again says he, Hear Oye Clergy Men, who bring
the Holy Gospel for men to swear upon. -- If it were well done to swear ye said
rightly, That we gave 'em the Gospel to swear not to for wear: but now ye know
it is a Sin even to swear well. page 81. -- But what shall I say of Oaths of
the Court: for there for six pence both Oaths and Perjury are made. for, His
Imperfect Work, c. 5.
because a Thunderbolt does not come down from above, and all things are not
turned, thou stand and and wilt bind God: Why? that thou may get herbs
and shoes for a small price, thou call him to witness, do we therefore think
we do not sin, because they are not punished? This is the Lord's Mercy, not our
desert. page 85.86. -- Again says he, Has he forsworn? thou have lost both
thy self and him: but has not forsworn? even so thou have lost, who have
driven him to transgress the Commandment. Let us expel this disease from the
Soul, let us drive it now from the Court, mark, from the Court, and from all
Merchants and Trades Man's shops, it was a greater Labor to us, do not you
think that worldly things are corrected by the Transgressings of divine Laws.
page 87.83. (Mark this)

And about compelling to swear, Origin says, But I account that a man that
will live according to the Gospel must not adjure another. -- For if it be not
law-to swear, as to the Gospel command of Christ, it is also true, that it is
not lawful to adjure another, or compel him to swear. page 50.

Cyprian says, De mortal. Adv. Here Is. l. 1. ord. 19. 6.
It is unlawful for any man to compel another to take an Oath. page 52

Epiphanius says, We must not swear, no not by the Lord him self; nor by any
other Oath: for it is an evil thing to swear at all; therefore he is evil that
compels, not only to swear by God, but by any other things etc. page 68.

Chrysostom says, On Matt. Hom. 17.
He that compels has a more unavoidable punishment than he that swears. page
84.

Isidorus l. 1. c. 15. says. If the man speaks truth usually, he will always
speak Truth without an Oath, but if he is a Liar, he will lie though he swear
(Note, Where is then the service of an Oath?) Therefore for both these causes,
one ought not to require an oath. page 104

William Tindal says That no Judge, or other, On Matt. Hom. 17.
ought in any Case to Compel any man to swear against his Will. page 149. --
Again, Chrysostom says Behold my Friend, (...), not to Force any man to swear.
-- Again, O foolish man! that compellest another to Swear, thou know not
what thou do. p. 80.

Upon the Question, What if any lay on me a necessity of swearing? etc.
Certainiy (says he) where the Law is violated, one must not make any mention
of necessity; there is one unavoidable necessity, Not to Offend GOD: for that
mouth that has learned to flee an Oath, if any would compel it ten thousand
times, it never will admit of fall^ng into that custom etc. -- But if thou fear
nothing else, at least fear that Book, which thou take in thy hands, Hom. 5.
ad pop. Antioc.
bidding another to swear -- And markest what Christ has there commanded
concerning Oaths, Quake and Forbear. p. 72. Note, Sure no Body will say, all
this is meant of common Conversation Oaths. -- Again Chrysostom further says,
that those that inhabit the City Antioch had rather their tongues should be cut
out, than an Oath should proceed out of their mouth. p. 73. Again, concerning
swearing by the true God' and how Reverently we ought to speak of him; Socrates
Scholast. lib. 4. cap. 22.
fiirst hear Gregory Thaumaturgus, so called for his working of Miracles, It is
meet says he, to give diligent heed to the words of the King, and to flee an
Oath by all means, especially that whih is taken in the name of God. page 51.

Adv. Here Is. l. 1. ord. 19. 6.
Epiphanius says, we must not swear, no, not by the Lord him self; nor by any
other Oath: for it is an evil thing to Swear at all: therefore he is evil that
compels, not only to Swear by God, but by other things etc. p. 68

And Erasmus, speaking of the Law of the Gospel, says, That we may be the more
remote from peejury, it does utterly condem all Oaths: and that it is not
lawful to Swear, neither by God, neither by Heaven, etc. page 129. And the
famous Athanasius before mentioned says, The Evangelical Sentence of the Lord
is, Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay Nay: On the Passion of Christ.
thus far we who are in Christ, may Confirm our words with Asseverations; and
with no further Progress let us flee to, or approach Oaths, that we allege not
God for witness for corruptible Money's sake: Especially since Moses so sets
down the Law, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for if
any one is plainly worthy to name the Name of God, he is worthy of belief.

On the Contrary, if he be not worthy of belief, that may be Credated without
an Oath, surely he is not worthy to name God. -- If therefore he that swears
has Faith and Truth, what use is there of an oath? but if he has no Faith nor
Truth, why do we undertake such an Impiety, that for poor silly men, and those
mortal too, we call to witness God that is above men? For if it be a base part
to call to witness na earthly King to the lowest Judicatures. Why do we cite
him that is Uncreated, to Created things, and make God to be despised of men?
Hout, that exceeds all Iniquity and and Audaciousness: what then is to be done?
No more but that our Yea be Yea and our Nay be Nay and in short that we do not
Lie. p. 54.55. Again Chrysostom upon the Subject of Oaths says, On Matt. Hom.
17.
Ye know not what God is, and with what a mouth he ought to be invocated. --
Again, Ought not one even to dread when God is named? -- Even among the Jews
this Name was so Reverend that it was written on the Plate of the Mitre, and
none might bear those Letters of the Name of God but only the High Priest. --
If it was not lawful for all to Name God simply, how great Audaciousness is it
to call it in Witness! p. 86.

Suarez says, It seems plain that an Oath is not an Act of Religion; it may be
declared by Reason: because first, It is impossible that men can bring God for
a witness, therefore the Name of God is taken vain, as often as it is taken to
Swear, therefore it is Evil in it self. p. 142. Note then, surely not any Part
of God's worship, for that is not Evil in it self. -- Again Erasmus says, 'Be
you afraid, Comm. on James 5.
not only to swear by God in Human Affairs, and in Matters: but also abstain
from all kind of Swearing. -- p. 130.

Hom. 28, Cant. p. ^76.
Again says Suarez, Grant it were possible to bring God for a witness, it seems
disorderly to confirm men's Business, Covenants or Words, because it is
disorderly to order things of an higher Order to those that are inferior, much
more is it disorderly to mix the Sacred Authority of God, to the profane (or
common) words or business Men.

Certainly these thing ought to have weight with all Professed Christians, yet
the Fears of some are such, that notwithstanding what has been said, we expect
to be accosted with this distrustful Argument, That without Oaths, or calling
God to Witness we may be deprived of Justice etc. To which let the Answer be
from those An^itient Christians and Fathers. And first hear once more that
often mentioned and Famous Chrysostom, (his Imperfect Work cap. 5.) who says,
Tell me my friend what do thou get by swearing; for if thy Adversary did
believe thou would swear well he would not force thee to swear but because
he thinks thou will ^wear falsely therefore it is he Compels thee to swear; and
when thou have Sworn, he does not sit down satisfied in the Truth of thine
Oath, but goes away full of Revenge etc. Then he brings, and Answers some
Objections, first thus But what shall I do, he neither does nor will believe
me, unless I swear.

Answ. Be content rather to lose thy money than thy Salvation; set more by thy
Soul than by thy Estate: if thou should lose any part of thy Estate, thou
may live notwithstanding, but if thou lose God, wherein will thou live? Do
thou not know that what thou partest self denyingly with for the Fear of God,
thou receivest a greater Reward for it than if thou had given Alms: because
the more we bear the Cross, the more worthily are we Crowned for it: Behold my
Friend, I advise thee not to force any to swear. -- He that does nor stick at
Lying does not fear Swearing, he therefore that is not afraid to set light by
the Commands of God in Swearing, will not be afraid to do the like in
Forswearing; but what would thou have? Does he fear God? or does he not fear
him? If he be one that fears God, he will not lie, though he be not sworn, but
if he be one that does not fear God, he cannot speak Truth though he be sworn.
-- Again because we so little trust one another, we seek God for a Surety. --
He is in the same Crime who receives an Oath, if he draw God to be a Surety,
and say, That he will not Trust except he have Him. O Monstrous thing! O
shameful Disgrace! Thou a worm, dust and ashes, and a vapor, do thou snatch
thy Lord (who art such an one) for a Surety, and Compellest to accept him? Tell
me if a fellow Servant should say to your Children, striving among them selves
and not trusting one another Unless the Common Master become a Surety There is
no Trusting Would not many stripes be inflicted? -- Tell me, thou halest a man
to an Oath What do thou seek? Would thou have him to Forswear? -- It were
better to lose thy Means, than that he should be lost. Object. But I expect
that he may not Forswear. Therefoe believe him without an Oath also. But there
are many, say they who without an Oath 'dare Defraud, who with an Oath do not
do it. Thou deceivest thy self O Man! A man who has learn,d to Steal, and to
wrong a man, will also Trample upon an Oath. -- But if he have a Reverence in
Swearing, much more in doing unjustly. p. 79.80.81 83. And Erasmus says, A
Good man will believe a man without Swearing, and he that is Naught will not
trust a man though he swear: Again whosoever dares be bold to Lie without
swearing he dares do the same also when he swears, if he List. page 131.

Otho Brunfelsius on Matt. 5. says But thou will say I shall not be trusted
unless I Swear. -- But such Distrust ought not to Reing in the Faithful; but if
we trust not words, what should an Oath do? It is a proverb, None is less
Trusted than he which shall often swear. page 114.

On Matt. 5. page 43.
Enthymius, aforementioned brings a Question, What then it to be done if any
require an Oath, yea, compel to swear? and answers, Let the fear of God be more
forcible than this Compulsion. -- And Chose rather to suffer all things, than
to transgress the Command. -- Unless thou Esteem the Command of God more
forcible, all things wilt depart from thee, void and unperform'd page 118.

On Matt. 5 Page 23.24.
Jacobus Faber says Perhaps also there is a danger when an Oath is required in
Judgment lest he that Exacteth it Sin: for if it be manifest that he that is
called into Judgment be verily Good and true, it is enough to hear of him Yea
or Nay, but if that be not Evident, or that it be Evident that he is bad,
perhaps that is required of him which ought not. page 139.

And Bishop Gauden beforementioned says, That neither a true Christian and Good
Man need be Compelled to swear, in order to the Awing him into Truth telling,
not is ill M^n's Swearing of much Credit.

Note how near this late Bishop agrees with the above Authors, especially
Chrysostom, who argues of a man, that if he fear God he will not Lie, though
not sworn, but if he fear not God he will Lie though sworn. etc.

And as Isodorus says, If he be a Liar he will lie tho he swear. And as
Erasmus says, Whosoever dares be bold to lie without swearing he dares do the
same also when he swears, if he list. (as before)

Our last Instance is the Waldenses, who were reputed to have continued
uncorrupted with the Grosness of the Apostasy ever since the Apostles times;
they were defended by Bishop Usher, in his Book de Successione, but Persecuted
by the Papists; one Article Charged against them was That they would not Swear
at all. page. 110

As from the foregoing it is evident, that the Fathers held it to be according
to Scripture that Swearing by the true God was lawful under the Law to keep
them from swearing by Idols, yet no ways lawful under the Gospel consequently
no Part of God's Worship or as Suarez has it No Religious Act; And the
Scriptures no where say that Christ swore nor Paul swore nor that it was in
common Conversation only, or by the Heavens etc. that our Lord forbade to
Swear: So also according to the Judgments and Testimonies of the aforegring
many cited Fathers, Martyrs and Learned Protestants that though Swearing was
allowed under the Law, yet not under the Gospel in any Case, neither with, nor
without swearing by the Name of the Lord nor with, nor upon a Book, nor that we
should be compelled before a Judge, or otherwise to Swear; nor did they make
the least Exception to Court Oaths, or of taking them before Authority, but
absolutely forbidding to compel any to Swear, this must respect Magistrates,
because none else have Power to compel to swear: nor that Christ nor Paul did
swear nor that there is the expected Security in Swearing, but that, as B^za
has it, on James 5.12. What you have to say or Affirm, speak or affirm it
without an Oath. Or as Lodovicus on Matt. 5. has it, To use only in our Speech
a simple Affirmation and Denial, without an Oath.

Upon which we Conclude and say, first, This we are Satisfied is according to
the Doctrine of our Blessed Savior, and therefore Necessary to be kept to:
what remains we also deem very needful to speak to, and indispensibly Necessary
to be kept and performed by all, as they tender the Honor of God, doing
Justice to their Neighbor, true Peace to their Consciences, and the
everlasting Happiness of their Souls, and that is as Erasmus has it. As often
as You Confirm any thing, Confirm it with all your Heart, and perform indeed
the thing that you speak: at often as you deny any thing deny it with your
whole Heart; neither let any else be in your Heart, than your mouth speaks,
that there be no Counterfeiting in you etc. page 131.

Under the Law it was, Thou shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths Matt. 5 34
Under the Gospel it is, Swear not at all but speak every man Truth with his
Neighbor. Matthew. 5 34. Ephesians 4.25.

But since notwithstanding what our Friends have offered, there is still
pleading a necessity for Oaths; we shall therefore in the words of another
Ancient Author, make one Answer more, it was given by way of a Close and Home
Query (and needful to be deeply considered by all) to such as pleaded for the
permission of Swearing, his Answer was this, But where shall we dispose, or how
shall we dispense with the Evangelical Precept in the Gospel that forbids us
taking ANY OATH AT ALL. Blastaris Syntagma Tit. E c. 32. p. 62.

And that it may further appear* That this is no Novelty, even in our own
Nation, but has met with Indulgence by our Superiors in former Ages, Observe a
Charter of King Ethe^^tan before the Conquest, in which are these words as
Quoted in Blount's Law Dictionary, viz. Quod Homines sui (Riponenses) sunt
Credendi per suum Ye, and per suum Na^* in omnibus Querel^s and Curiis, licet
tangen. FREED MORTEL or FRODMORTEL -- That is, That the Kings Men of Rippon
(where the Charter was Granted) were to be Credited by their YEA and by their
NAY, in all Controversies (or Pleas) and in all Courts* although touching MURDER
or MANSLAUGHTER.

Published in the Behalf of our Friends and others who for Conscience Sake
cannot SWEAR AT ALL.

POSTSCRIPT
There is a Great Controversy in the World about Religion, and it is much
among them that are called Christians: yet we find in the Scriptures, which we
all say we believe, how that the Christians in the primitive Times were all of
one accord Acts 2.1. And that the Multitude of them that believed were of one
Heart and of one Soul Acts. 4. 32. What is the matter now? or how comes it to
pass that there is such a Split among Christians now?

The New Testament says, There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond
nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female; for they are all one in Christ
Jesus, see Gal. 3.28.

Here is plain Scripture Testimony where the Oneness is, though several Nations,
Male or Female, yet all One in Christ Jesus.

But now we see many are Professors of Christ Jesus, that are not one; but one
against another, every one saying My Way is Right, and Thine is Wrong.

What shall we do in this Case, to be of one Body? how came the Christians in
the primitive times to be of one Body, of one Heart, and of one Soul? Will not
the same thing do now, as did then, if we would Receive it?

What is that? (may some say) It is the Spirit: for by one Spirit were all
Baptized into One Body; whether they were Jews or Gentiles Bond or Free, they
were all made to drink into one Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13.

Now if all that profess Christianity, would come to this one Spirit, and so be
Baptized by this one Spirit, it would soon end the Controversy.

THE END

