FRAUD AND INJUSTICE Detected AND Condemned. In a Lecture SERMON in Boston,
Feb. 28. 1711, 12.

By Benj. Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston, N.E.

Mark 10.19. -- Defraud not --

2 Cor. 7.2. -- We have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have
defrauded no man.

1 These. 4.6. That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter,
because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such: as we also have forewarned
you, and testified.

Boston: Printed by B. Green. 1712.

Fraud and Injustice, Detected and Condemned.
I. COR. VI. 8. Nay, you do wrong, and defraud, and that your Brethren.


IN our Context, the holy Apostle blames the Christian Corinthians, for going
to Law before the Unjust, v. 1. before Unbelievers, v. 6. and that about
smallest matters, v. 2. They were very ready to Sue one another at the Law,
about small matters, and that before infidels, before Heathen, Pagan Judges:
This he blames them for. He does not absolutely, blame or condemn, the using of
wholesome humane Laws, for the defending men from Injuries, or for the
obtaining of their right. The Apostle himself, when in danger of being
wrongfully and illegally Scourged, pleaded the Roman Law in his own defense,
saying, Act. 22.25. Is it lawful for you to Scourge a man that is a Roman, and
uncondemned? Yea God himself appointed, that there should be Judges among his
People, to hear Causes and to see Justice done. Deuteronomy. 25.1. If there be a
Controvesy between men, and they come unto Judgment that the Judges may Judge
them, then they shall justify the Righteous and condemn the Wicked. It Is not
therefore absolutely and in it self considered, a Sin, to go to Law; though
circumstances are often such, that many do very Sinfully in going to Law. And
such were the circumstances at this time, among the Corinthians; they went to
Law about little matters, and that before Heathen Judges, who were ready from
their contentions to vilify and reproach their Religion. The Christian
Religion does oblige the Professors of it, to be loving, quiet, peaceable,
harmless, self-denying. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18. Our blessed Savior said, Joh. 13.35. By
this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another. Since Christians are so plainly required, to be loving, peaceable,
self-denying; no doubt but the heathen Judges before whom the Christian
Corinthians managed their controversies, did thence take occasion, to reproach
their Religion as well as their Persons. The Apostle therefore blames the
Corinthians, because they had no more regard to the Credit and Reputation of
their Religion: he tells them they had better Suffer themselves to be
defrauded, than that their Religion should thus suffer by their means, v. 7.
But then the Apostle goes on, and charge these Christians, with an higher
crime than their going to Law with one another; and that was, That they
themselves did wrong and defraud one another. They were so far from being
willing to suffer wrong, and to deny themselves, for the Credit of Religion;
that indeed they did wrong and defrauded, and that their Brethren. This he
charges on them as a great Sin, in our Text. Persons may be said to do wrong,
and to defraud, in other matters as well as in Worldly goods or Outward estate;
yet this latter seems to be chiefly intended in our Text, and in this sense I
shall speak to it at present. The words may afford us this,

DOCTRINE, viz.
It Is a very great Sin, for Christians to wrong and defraud one another (or
indeed any Persons) in their Worldly Goods or Outward Estate. Doubtless all
Christians, will readily assent to the truth of this Doctrine; yet possibly
they wont so well agree, who are guilty of the crime here mentioned. I shall
therefore inquire,

Quest. When may Persons be said to wrong or defraud others, in their Worldly
Goods or Outward Estates; Or, when may they be said, to get dishonest gain?

Answ. There are various ways, wherein Persons may be said to be thus guilty.
They defraud others, (or get dishonest gain.)

1. When they Rob them of their Right. By Robbery, I here intend, an open
forcible taking away a Person's right from him, without any pretense of Law or
of giving any valuable consideration for it. Such Robberies are often committed
by Land, and also on the Sea by Pirates. Such forcible taking away, we read of,
Judge. 9.25. They robbed all that came along that way, by them. Such Robbery, is
contrary to the light and law of Nature, and expressly forbidden in the word of
God. Lev. 19.13. Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, neither rob him. Psalm.
62.10. Become not vain in Robbery. What Is gotten by Robbery, must needs be
dishonest gain.

2. When they Steal from any. By Stealing, I here mean, the taking away from
Persons what they are justly possessed of, and that in a fly, secret manner,
un-be-known to the Persons wronged. Thus, when Persons Secretly remove
Landmarks to enlarge their own borders, this is Stealing of Land, contrary to
the Divine Law, Deuteronomy. 27.17. So, Pick-Pockets are guilty of Stealing; so those
who in the dark, or when they think none sees or observes them, will use that
advantage for taking to themselves what justly belongs to others. This is a
crime, directly contrary to the express letter of the Eight Commandment, viz.
Thou shall not Steal. This Sin is greatly aggravated, when Persons take
advantage for it, from Shipwrecks or burning of Houses. When by such Afflictive
Providence, men's goods are thrown hastily out of doors, or lie scattered on
the Sea-shoar (the owners not being able to secure them) others will take this
advantage to Steal them; I say, when they do thus, it is a great aggravation of
their Theft. They add Affliction to the Afflicted. As for direct Robbing and
Stealing, they are such heinous notorious crimes, that an honest Heathen would
abhor them. But there are many other methods, wherein Persons often do wrong,
defraud, and get dishonest gain, as,

3. When they Sell things at an excessive rate, an unreasonable high price.
There Is a just profit and gain, belonging (or due) to those, whose employment
it is to buy and sell. It Is no easy matter exactly to state the case, and to
say, how much profit is justly to be allowed to the Seller. The nature of the
Commodities, the trouble of the business, and other considerations may alter
the case very much; and render it allowable to take more profit (proportionably
to the worth or price of the thing) in one case; than in another. Many
circumstances should be seriously weighed by those, who would approve their
Consciences to God in these matters. And those who will seriously consider, and
consult their own Consciences, may ordinarily if they will, avoid wronging
themselves or others in Selling. It Is good therefore, to consult the profit of
the buyer as well as of the Seller, that both may rejoice together. 1 Cor.
10.24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth. That is, we
should have regard to the good and profit of others, as well as of our selves.
But when the Seller's principle is, to get as much as possibly he can, and
regards only his own profit and not the buyer's; he then acts unjustly. To ask
and receive an excessive unreasonable price for what is (...), is Oppression
and Extortion. And it is an Aggravation of this Sin, when the Seller takes
advantage for it, from the Ignorance of the buyer; Imposing on his weakness,
making him believe the thing is worth much more than it is. It aggravates the
crime also, when he takes advantage of the buyer's Necessity; it may be he has
great, urgent Necessity for such or such a thing, cannot get it else where, and
this advantage the Seller takes to ask extravagantly: this is aggravated
wickedness. Prove. 22.22. Rob not the poor, because he is poor; neither oppress
the afflicted in the gate. It Is wrong and unjust also, for Persons to Ingross or
Monopolize commodities (getting them all into their own hands) on purpose that
they may get an unreasonable high price for them; especially if such
commodities are necessary for humane Life, such as Food or Raiment. Prove.
11.26. He that withholds corn, the People shall curse him. Corn, is
necessary for the support of humane Life, if therefore in time of scarcity, any
will buy up all the Corn they can, on purpose to get an unreasonable high price
for it; the People will curse such an one, yea and God will curse him too. So
it is an aggravation of the crime, when Persons ask an excessive unreasonable
price, for Tools or Instruments, which are necessary for men's following their
honest Callings with. Deuteronomy. 24.6. No man shall take the nether or upper
Millstone to pledge, for he takes a man's Life to pledge. Some of the Poor,
did grind with Hand-mills for a living, if either of the Millstones was taken
as a Pawn or Security for a debt, or for a thing lent; thereby the man was
hindered from his Calling, from working for a Livelihood: such barbarity
therefore was forbidden. Indeed as for trifles, baubles, things only to please
the fancy; if an high price be asked for them, it is not so bad as to ask high
for things that are necessary. But surely, Christians should make Conscience of
their ways, they should take heed that they don't defraud in buying or selling.
Lev. 25.14. If thou sell ought unto thy Neighbor, or buyest ought of thy
Neighbor's hand; ye shall not oppress one another. When the Buyer would get
things at an under rate, for less than they are worth, not allowing to the
Seller an honest gain or reasonable profit; this also is unjust. Prove. 20.14.
It is naught, it is naught, (says the buyer) but when he is gone his way, then
he boasts. When the buyer, by dispraising and under-valuing commodities, gets
them for less than they are worth, and then brags of his good bargain; this is
unjust, it is a wicked defrauding.

4. When men cheat and deceive in their dealings. As men sometimes ask too high
a price for what they Sell, so they some times defraud, by Selling Worse or
Less than what they pretend to. When the Seller knows his commodity to be
Unsound, not good, and will yet affirm it to be Good and Sound, and will ask
and take a full price for it as such; this is vile Cheating; it is Lying and
Stealing joined together. So when persons deceive in Weight or Measure, and
part with less than what they pretend to, this is wicked cheating and
defrauding. Lev. 19.35, 36. Ye shall do no Unrighteousness in Judgment, in
meteyard, in weight, or in measure; just balances, just weights, a just ephah,
and a just him shall ye have. God required, that they should have just
Balances, that is, true Soales (to Sell things by weight) not such as they
could make to turn deceitfully, to serve a Knavish design. Just weights, not
two Setts of weights, heavier ones to buy with, and lighter ones to sell with.
A just Ephah, that was a common Measure for dry things, is Corn, etc. A just
Hin, that was a common Measure for Liquids, as Wine, Oil, etc. These Measures
should be just, according to the Standard, according to Law, such as Measures
of such a denomination, were commonly supposed or reputed to (...) So God
required Justice in Meteyard; that (...) things Sold by the Foot or by the
Yard, by (...) Measure, as it is commonly called. To de^^^^e or cheat by unjust
Weights or Measures, is ^^^^ctly forbidden. Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14, 15. Thou shall not
have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small. Thou shall not have in
thine house diverse measures, a great and a small. But thou shall have a
perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shall thou have. Indeed God
abominates men's deceiving in weight and measure. Prove. 20.10. Diverse weights
and diverse measures, both of them are alike abomination to the Lord. Mic. 6.11.
Shall I count them pure with the wicked Balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights? No, God wont count such practices to be pure; but on the
other hand, a just weight is his delight, Prove. 11.1. Christians should be fair
and honest in their dealings. That no man go beyond or defraud his brother in
any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 These. 4.6. God
Smites his hand at those, who greedily gain by Extortion, who make dishonest
gain, Ezekiel. 22.12, 13. Sometimes a person being justly displeased with a Son,
or Servant, will Smite his hand, Saying, Well, I Will pay you for this, I Will
punish you for this. Gods Smiting his hand, seems to allude to such a practice
among men, as if God should say, You that are so greedy of dishonest gain, that
cheat, extort, oppress for the getting of it, I Will pay you, I Will surely punish
you for such your wickedness.

5. When Persons ask an excessive price, for Service expected from or performed
by them. As some ask too high a price for the goods or commodities they Sell;
So some ask too high a price for their Service or Labor; this also is doing
wrong and defrauding. Thus, Physicians defraud, if they ask an excessive reward
for their Medicines or Visits. So if Attorneys, Clarks, Sheriffs, Constables,
or any Employed in any such Faculty, Office or Business, do ask excessive Rates
or Fees for what they do, therein they are fraudulent and unjust. So when
Tradesmen or Laborers ask an excessive price for their Work, therein they act
unjustly and unrighteously. For men may be unjust and unrighteous, in asking
too high a price for the use of their skill in any Art or Mystery, or in asking
too much for their Work; as in asking an unreasonable high price for the Goods
they sell. So men are unjust, when being hired by the Day, Week Month or Year,
they are Slothful, Lazy, and Idle away their Time. For Instance, Suppose, that
Four Shillings a Day, is reckoned the just and common Wages for such or such
sort of Work; the Workman does not expect nor ask more; I say in such a Case,
if the Workman Idles away one quarter of his time, and yet asks and receives
full Wages, he then wrongs his Imployers of a Shilling: he as really defrauds
him of a Shilling, as if he Stole it out of his Pocket. The Slothful Servant,
is justly called Wicked. Mat. 25.26 So men Defraud, when they do their Work
slightily or deceitfully: Deceitful Workmanship, is often a great Cheat. It may
be a man has not half the Service he might have from Shoes, Clothes, Tools or
Instruments to work with, etc. merely from deceitfulness in Workmanship; either
in those who prepared Materials, or in those who wrought them up. So if a man
Builds an House, and the Work be slightily and deceitfully done; so that the
House speedily needs Repair, and is ready to tumble down, here is vast damage to
the Owner by such deceitfulness. By such deceitful Workmanship, the Buyer or
Imployer often loses, not only the Money paid for Labor, but in a great
measure the cost of Materials too. But as for Ship Carpenters, if they do their
Work deceitfully, they are yet more guilty; for not only the Goods but the
Lives of men are hazarded, by their carelessness and deceit. If in Building
Vessels they do their Work deceitfully, they are in a remote sense chargeable
with Murder, because men's Lives are endangered by their wicked carelessness.
Surely these methods of Fraud and Injustice, are abominable. They are quite
contrary to that Golden Rule, which requires us to do to others, as we would
have them do to us, Mat. 7.12. and contrary to, Phil. 2.4. Look not every man
on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. When any ask and
take excessive Fees or too high Wages for their Service, are Idle when they are
hired for such a Time, or do their work Deceitfully; then they do wrong and
defraud.

6. When Persons gain by any dishonest business. There are some practices
unlawful in themselves, by which Persons endeavor to get Money. Thus some will
pretend to Tell Fortunes, to predict future events; and also by secret unlawful
arts, to discover left goods, etc. Now it is all unrighteous gain, that is gotten
by such wicked practices as these. So if men make Images or Pictures for
Idolatrous uses, this is unlawful business, and so the gain gotten thereby must
needs be unlawful. Such was the making Silver shrines for Diana, which brought
no small gain to the Crafts-men, Act. 19.24. So when Attorneys for the sake of
a Fee, will plead a cause which they know to be unjust and unrighteous, and
will endeavor that it may prevail and succeed; such their gain, is wickedly
and unrighteously gotten. For none should endeavor to promote an unrighteous
thing. Abhor that which is evil, Cleave to that which is good, Romans 12.9. Any
gain gotten by business in it self unlawful, is unlawful gain. Yea what is got
by Gaming, is unlawful gain. Though some Games, if moderately and seasonably used
for needful Recreation, are lawful; yet it is unlawful to game for the getting a
Man's Money or Goods. This is not a giving and receiving in way of Alms; nor
in way of Bounty or Generosity; it is not commutative Justice, for he that
receives, does not pretend to give a Valuable consideration for what he gets.
He that games for Money, desires (and designs if he can) only to gain and not
to lose; and so it is quite contrary to that forementioned, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no
man seek his own, but every man another's wealth. That is, every man should
seek the good and profit of his Neighbor, that his Neighbor may be benefitted
and prosper, as well as himself. He should Love his Neighbor as himself, Mat.
22.39. Gaming for Money, directly breaks this Divine Law. Again, we should
Acknowledge God in all our ways, Prove. 3.6. And in every thing by Prayer make
known our requests to him, Phil. 4.6. We should not desire nor endeavor any
thing, but what we may with a good Conscience recommend to God in Prayer. But
with what face can a Christian Pray to God, that He would Succeed him in
Gaming, and give him his Neighbor's Estate without his rendering a valuable
consideration for it? Therefore to Game for Money or Goods, is a cursed
practice; a defrauding unrighteous Method of gain. Prove. 13.11. Wealth gotten
by vanity, shall be diminished.

7. When Persons knowingly conceal or retain for their own profit, stolen or
lost Goods. As it is a great Sin, directly to Steal from others; so it is, to abet,
favor or encourage others in such wickedness. Psalm. 50.18. When thou saw a
thief, then thou consentedst with him. Prove. 29.24. Whosoever is partner with a
thief, hates his own Soul. If for our own gain, we abet or encourage Theft in
others, or conceal or retain stolen goods; this is defrauding, it is wicked and
unjust. So if we have found Money, Goods, Beasts that are Lost or strayed away;
and know the Owners, and can return them, and yet retain or keep them for our
own profit, this is unrighteous gain. God requires, that a Stray Ox or Sheep,
should be returned to the owner, Deuteronomy. 22.1. And so of other things too. Lev.
6.4. He shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he
has deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost
thing which he found.

8. When Persons receive griping oppressive Usury. Usury (or the taking some
Reward for the Use of Money or Goods lent) is not in it self unlawful, as Lying
and Stealing are. Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto a Stranger, thou may lend upon Usury.
This would not be allowed, if the thing in it self were unlawful. Yet it is
unrighteous gain, to receive Usury from a Poor Neighbor (who borrows for
present Necessity, and not to enrich himself.) Exodus 22.25. If thou lend Money
to any of my People that is Poor by thee, thou shall not be unto him as an
Usurer; neither shall thou lay upon him Usury. As it is Sinful to take any Usury
of a Poor man, who borrows only for present necessity; so it is Sinful to ask
Excessive Usury from any though never so able. So it is unrighteous gain, when
Persons take Excessive Rents for their Houses, Ships, Lands, Farms; or for the
use and service of their Beasts, as Horses, Oxen, etc. To receive an excessive
price for such things, is defrauding. On the other hand, it is defrauding, not to
pay for the use (or loan) of such things, what the same is justly worth and
honestly agre'd for.

9. When Persons unfaithfully appropriate to their own use, what was betrusted
with them for the use and benefit of others. If Money or Goods are left with a
friend to keep, and by him to be restored upon demand; if the Person thus
betrusted, appropriates these things to his own use, he then does wrong and
defrauds, Lev. 6.2, 3. So those betrusted with Public Moneys, Goods or Stores,
whether they are Commissaries, Pursers, Stewards, Treasurers, (or by what
denomination soever they are distinguished) whether they are Stewards or
Treasurers of a Kingdom, a Country, a Town, a College, a Church, a School, a
Fort, a Ship or of any Society; I say if Persons thus betrusted with Money or
Goods for the benefit of others, do fallaciously appropriate the same or any
part thereof to their own private use, therein they do wrong and defraud. For
it is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. Nehemiah
appointed faithful men, to be Treasurers, Neh. 13.13. He Is justly called an
Unjust Steward, who wasted the Goods betrusted with him, Luke 16.1, 8. So when
Executors of Wills, Administrators on Intestate Estates, those who are
Guardians of Minors, of Fatherless ones; I say, when Persons thus betrusted, do
appropriate to their own use and benefit what was betrusted with them for the
good of others, it is defrauding, it is vile injustice and doing of wrong. I might
add, if Officers bring in a false Muster-Roll or List of Soldiers, demanding
Subsisting Money, or Wages for Persons never Employed in the Public Service,
or after they are Dead, Run, or Dismissed from Public Service; all the gain
thus gotten is fraudulent and unjust: to receive Money on such deceitful
grounds, is Stealing from the Public.

10. When Persons detain Just Wages, or defer the Seasonable Payment of Just
Debts. Those who do Service for others, deserve a recompense for it; The
Labourer is worthy of his reward. It Is therefore fraud and injustice wilfully to
withold from any, what they justly deserve and expect for Service done. It Is
unjust, when Persons are unwilling to grant a suitable Support or Reward to
those, who Serve the Public in Civil Authority. Mat. 21.7. Render therefore to
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their
due, Tribute to whom Tribute is due. It Is unjust, when Persons are unwilling to
give due Support or Maintenance to Gospel Ministers, Prove. 3.9. Honor the
Lord with thy Substance. 1 Cor. 9.14. So has the Lord Ordained, that they who
Preach the Gospel should Live of the Gospel. The withholding of such
Maintenance from the Ministry, is by God Himself called, a Robbing of God,
Mal. 3.8. It Is also unjust, to withhold a due reward, from those who instruct
and govern Colleges or Schools. It Is unjust, to withhold a due reward from
Physicians, Attorneys, Chyrurgeons, Clarks, Sheriffs, or any employed in any
honest Faculty or Office; I say it is unjust, to withold the reward due for
Service done by them. So when Soldiers or Seamen are employed to Serve the
Public, and suitable Food is not granted them, nor just Wages seasonably paid
them; they are then wronged and unjustly dealt with. 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a
Warfare at any time at his own Charges? I'ts great fraud and injustice, to
withold from those who Serve the Public, whether as Officers or Private
Sentinels or Seamen, the Wages righteously due to them. So it is fraud and
injustice, to withhold from Tradesmen or Laborers, the Wages justly due to
them. Jam. 5.4. Behold, the hire of the Laborers which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them which
have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Jer. 22.13. Woe
unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong:
that uses his neighbor's Service without wages, and gives him not for his
work. God himself pronounces a Woe against those, who wont pay just Wages.
Honest Wages for work done, should be readily paid; it is injustice, it is
abominable fraud to withold the same. Yea, when a man has done a piece of
work, brings in a fair honest Account, makes but just demands for his work; I
say in such a case, to curtail his Bill, beat him down, and pay him but part of
his honest demands, is vile fraud and injustice. God threatens to be, a Swift
witness against those, that oppress the hireling in his wages, Mal. 3.5. Nay
it is fraud and injustice, willingly to defer the seasonable payment of wages.
Lev. 19.13. The wages of him that is hired, shall not abide with thee all night
until the morning. Very often, the poor Labourer really Needs his Wages, as
soon as his work is done; therefore it should be presently paid him. Indeed if
the Labourer agrees to wait such a time for his wages, it is no injustice so long
to defer payment; but if no time be set, then as soon as the work is done and
the wages asked for, they should be presently and honestly paid. We should not
only pay Wages, or pay for what we Borrow or Buy; but we should pay seasonably
too, as soon as by agreement it is due. It Is the Divine Command, Romans 13.8. Owe no
man any thing, but to love one another. So the Prophet said to the Widow, whose
oil had been miraculously increased: 2 King. 4.7. Pay thy debt. It Is said, Psalm.
37.21. The wicked borrows, and pays not again. It Is a Wicked thing, wilfully
to delay paying what is due. Prove. 3.27, 28. Withhold not good from them to
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Say not to thy
Neighbor, go, and come again, and to morrow will I give, when thou have it by
thee. If out Neighbor ask for his due, and we can pay it, we should not put
him to the trouble of coming again, but we should pay him forthwith. Indeed we
should be so just and honest, that as soon as able we should rather carry our
just Debts and pay them, than defer and keep others out of their right. There Is
often much fraud, injustice and wickedness, even in delaying to pay just debts;
though the payment be not utterly refused or denied, but the debts plainly owned.
By the way therefore, it is base, vile and sordid, for Persons to be Angry and
Huffy when they are asked for what they justly owe. Possibly they will say, What,
Do you think I Am a bankrupt? cannot you trust me? Do you think I Am running away,
that you thus haunt me? I say, it is base and sordid, for any thus to Huff and be
Angry, when asked to pay what they justly owe. If they are able, it is unjust not
to pay a just debt when demanded, though by the meanest Labourer, (he does but
ask for his due, his right) if they are not able to pay presently, yet justice
and good manners, should teach them to give better words in such a case. But,
though Justice requires Debtors, seasonably to pay what they owe if possibly they
can; yet on the other hand, Kindness and Charity may often require Creditors,
patiently to bear a while with their Debtors, and not rigorously exact upon
them when they find them honestly disposed. A Debtor once said, Have Patience
with me and I will pay thee all; his cruel Creditor laid hands on him, took him
by the threat, cast him into Prison till he should pay the debt; but our Lord's
Parable calls this Creditor, a Wicked Servant, Mat. 18.28. -- 32.

11. When Persons for the sake of a Bribe, Gift, or Private Gain, will speak or
do unjust things. Thus, those do wrong and are unjust, who for the sake of some
Private Reward, will Bear False Witness in any Case; as those Soldiers did,
who were set to Guard our Lord's Sepulcher, Mat. 28.12 -- 15. When for the sake
of some Private Gain, (or out of Favor to one, or III Will to another)
Jurymen will bring in an Unrighteous Verdict, Judges pronounce an Unrighteous
Sentence, or Arbitrators give in an Unrighteous Award; I say, when it is thus,
there is vile fraud and doing of wrong. So when men Impressed to Serve the
Public by Sea or Land, are for the sake of some Private Gain to Officers, Sold
or Set free from Serving the Public; this is Fraudulent and Unjust: Gain so
gotten, is Unrighteous Gain. When those in Authority or Office in one Station
or other, will for the sake of Private Gain, do those things that are Unjust,
or neglect to do what their Place or Office does Oblige them to do; this is
doing Wrong and Defrauding. When any for the sake of Private Gain, refuse to
give Testimony in a Case, where Justice Requires it for the Right Decision of a
Controversy, or for the just punishing of a Criminal; this is doing Wrong, and
Defrauding. When for the sake of Private Gain, Well-qualified Persons are kept
out of Places of Trust and Profit, and Unqualified Persons brought in; this is
doing unjustly and fraudulently. The doing unjust things, for the sake of a
Bribe, Gift or Private Gain; is plainly forbidden by God, and abominable in his
sight. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall not respect
Persons, neither take a Gift; for a Gift does blind the eyes of the Wise, and
pervert the words of the Righteous. Amos 5.12. They afflict the Just, they take
a Bribe, and they turn aside the Poor in the gate from their Right. Those who
are wedded to Bribes and Gifts, scarce care how much Injustice they do, if they
can but promote their own Gain. But all such Gain will prove Loss at last, if
true Repentance prevent not. Job 15.34. A Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of
Bribery.

12. When Persons are false to their Word, their Engagements, and break their
just Promises. We should never speak falsely in any Case, yet Justice and
Equity do not require, that we should speak the whole truth in every Case We
may be questioned in some Cases, wherein Equity does not require our
discovering the whole matter, there is no (falsehood, nor) Injustice to any one
in concealing part. When Samuel went to Bethlehem, 'twas enough to say, became
to Sacrifice; 'twas no Injustice to Saul, tho he concealed the Anointing of
David, 1 Samuel 16.1 2. It Was enough for Jeremiah to tell the Princes, he
Requested of the King that he might not (...) sent to the House of Jonathan;
Justice did not require, that he should tell them the other Discourse which
passed between the King and him, Jer. 38.24 -- 27. But now in matters of
Dealing between men and men, Justice requires that they should speak their
minds plainly. They should not speak contrary to what they design, nor promise
contrary to their Abilities or Intentions. They should not promise to do such a
piece of Work, or pay such a Debt, by such or such a time; unless they have a
rational prospect of being able to do it, and do heartily design if able to do
it. If Persons promise what they know they cannot perform, or what they don't
design to perform; they do wickedly, they Lie in such Promises, for they design
thereby to deceive others, contrary to Justice and Equity. By men's thus
breaking their Word and Promises, they often defraud and wrong others very
much. If a man has not his Work done for him, or his Money paid to him,
according to the time promised; it may (and often does) prove a great damage to
him. It may possibly hurt him as much, as the thing promised is worth; nay, the
failing of a Promise, may sometimes hurt him more than the thing promised in it
self is worth. Possibly upon a firm Promise made to a man, that such Work shall
be done for him, or such a Debt paid to him, by such or such a time; he may
accordingly make Promises and Engagements to others, which he wont be able to
perform, if the former Promises made to him be not fulfilled. And thus many
Persons may be deceived, wronged, kept out of their just Dues, and greatly
Injured, and that through one man's falsness to his word, and breaking his just
Promise. It must needs be a vast damage and wrong in Dealing, when men are so
false and deceitful in their words, that there is no trusting them, no
dependence on what they say. It may be Persons have had Accounts a long time
depending between them, one earnestly desires and urges to have Accounts made
up, that he may know what he has to Pay or Receive, that he may know how his
Affairs stand, and order them accordingly; but the other, though he promise at
such a time, and at such a time to make up Accounts, yet he Whiffles, Shuffles,
Delays, and wont do what he has so often promised; thus to do, is vile, base
and wicked, it is unjust and unrighteous. Persons are often much wronged and
defrauded in their Interest, for want of having Accounts made up, and Matters
well adjusted. Whatever men think of it, it is vile Fraud, Injustice, Wickedness,
thus to break their Word and Just Promises; and so to carry themselves that
there is no trust to what they say. Honest Heathen, would abominate such
Deceitfulness. And when Christians, and those who make the hightest Profession
( Communicants at the Lords Table) are thus guilty, it is the greater Scandal:
when they thus deceive, by their good words and fair promises, they discredit
their Profession, break Gods Law, and highly provoke him. Ephesians. 4.25. Putting
away Lying, speak every man truth with his Neighbor. Lev. 19.11. Ye shall not
Steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another. When men will use false
lying words or Promises in their Dealing; this is a sort of Stealing; it may in
some sense be called Theft. Many among the Jews of old, were thus guilty. Jer.
9.5. They will deceive every one his Neighbor, they will not speak the truth;
they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit
Iniquity. Mic. 6.12. The Inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue
is deceitful in their mouth. The Apostle mentions it on purpose, as a plain
proof of men's Corruption, their wickedness. Romans 3.13. With their tongues they
have used deceit. Whereas it is part of the Good man's Character, Psalm. 15.2. He
speaks the truth in his heart. And thus men must speak the truth, if they
would have their Conversation in simplicity and godly sincerity, as they
should, 2 Cor. 1.12. Therefore Christians should not dare, to deceive with good
words and false promises, as too many often do: it is a great shame, a crying
scandal, that many Christians make no more Conscience of keeping their word,
and fulfilling their just promises, than they do.

Thus I have showed some Instances, wherein Persons may be said to be guilty of
defrauding and doing wrong. And such defrauding is a great Sin, it exposes to
the Divine Displeasure. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven,
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. 1 Cor. 6.9. The Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

By way of USE, I Will say two Things.

1. So far as any have defrauded and done wrong, they ought to Repent of it.
When we hear any Duty Inculcated in Preaching, we should Examine, Have we done
this Duty? So when we hear any Sin laid open and condemned, we should Examine,
Have we been guilty of this? And when upon Inquiry we find our selves faulty,
we should repent. Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to
the Lord. Nay, if we have defrauded any, we should if possible make Reparation
to the Injured, as well as Repent of our Sin. Penitent Zacheus did so, Luke
19.8. True Repentance will bring forth agreeable fruits; we do not truly Repent
of our having wronged any one, unless we do what we can to right him again. He
shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he has
deceitfully, gotten, Lev. 6.4.

2. Let us take great care, that we don't wrong or defraud any one for the
future. Let us take heed, that we don't wrong any one by Cheating, Extorting, by
unreasonably neglecting to pay our Debts, by fair words and false promises, by
neglecting to make up Accounts, or adjust Matters depending, or indeed by any
other method whatsoever. And that we may not wrong or defraud any in his
Estate, let these Directions be observed, viz.

1. Let us Mortify our Coveteousness. Coveteousness, or excessive Love to the
World, puts persons on many methods of unrighteousness. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. They
that will be Rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
burtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of
money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred
from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Since love to
the World is so great a Sin, so dangerous a snare, it should be carefully
subdued. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Coveteousness, which
is Idolatry, Col. 3.5.

2. Let us Mortify our Pride. Pride, did put the unjust Steward on Deceitful
methods to advantage himself; for he was Ashamed to beg, Luke 16.3 4. Some are
so Proud, that they are Ashamed to beg, or to do this or the other mean Service
for an honest Support; but are not Ashamed to Lie, Steal, Cheat, break their
Promises, etc. Pride, puts many on unjust practices. Some are so Proud, they
think they must live so as to make some figure and show, must live in such or
such state or fashion; must have fine Houses well finished and adorned, must be
richly clothed, and must be answerable thereto in their housekeeping and
entertainments; thus they desire to live, though their Estates and Business cannot
support such an Expens;ive-way of living: and this puts them upon unrighteous
methods, to support the figure they would appear in. It may be they often break
their just Promises, they cannot pay their just debts, are angry if so much as
asked to pay what they owe; Possibly they live high, when it is really on the
Estates and at the charge of others. Let us subdue such Pride, if we would be
just. Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.8.

3. Let us avoid Intemperance, vain Company, and Idleness. These Sins tend to
Poverty, and that brings temptations to unrighteousness. Lest I be Poor and
Steal, Prove. 30.9. Idleness it self, (if Intemperance and vain Company are
avoided) tends to Poverty, and so to make men take unjust courses. When men are
lazy and idle, will do little or no business; how can they pay their debts, or
get a Maintenance for themselves and Families? They Are in danger of being
Worse than Infidels, by not providing for those of their own Houses, 1 Timothy
5.8. It Is a Scandalous Sin for Christians to Live in Idleness. It Is directly
contrary to the express command of God: 1 These. 4.11, 12. Study to be quiet,
and to do your own business, and to work with your hands as we commanded you;
that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have
lack of nothing. Those who live Idly, are not likely to live Honestly. Ephesians.
4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor working with
his bands the thing that is good. He that wont work, is in danger of Stealing,
or if he does not come directly and speedily to that Sin; yet possibly he
breaks his Promises, lies long in debt to the great wrong and hurt of his
Creditors, and herein he acts wickedly and unrighteously. 2 These. 3.10, 11. --
This we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For
we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at
all, but are buisy-bodies. Those who don't work, they walk disorderly; and very
often are buisy-bodies, troublesome mischievous Persons.

4. Let us realize God's Eye on us, and the Future Judgment. If we duly
considered, that God always sees us, and will call us to an Account for what we
do, this would strengthen us much against ill practices. Genesis 39.9. How shall I
do this great wickedness and sin against God? Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any
Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are open and naked
to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. With whom we have to do, that is,
to whom we must give an account. Let us therefore consider, that we must give
an account to God for all our actions, this will tend much to prevent Fraud and
Injustice.

5. Let us highly prize and hunger after Spiritual Treasures. The more these
are valued and sought for by men, the less danger they will be in of defrauding
any in their Worldly Goods. Nay, if need be, they will gladly suffer the loss of
their own Goods, when they know they have in Heaven a better and an enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. Instead of wronging others of their Worldly Goods or
Estate; they will rather say to God as, Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in heaven
but thee, and there is none on earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and
my heart fails; but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

FINIS.

