THE A, B, C, of Religion.

Lessons Relating to the FEAR OF GOD, Fitted unto the Youngest and Lowest
CAPACITIES, AND CHILDREN Suitably instructed in the Maxims of Religion.

1 John ii. 13. I Write unto you, Little Children. BOSTON, Printed and Sold by
Timothy Green, at the Lower End of Middle-Street, 1713.

The Shortest of all CATECHISMS, to begin with the Youngest, and the Dullest
Capacities.
Quest. WHO Made You and all the World?

Answ. The Great GOD Made me, to Serve Him.

Q. Who Saves the Children of Men from all their Miseries?

A. JESUS CHRIST, who is both God and Man, Saves them that Look unto Him.

Q. What will become of You, when You Die?

A. If I Obey JESUS CHRIST, my Soul will go to the Heavenly Paradise; and He
will afterward Raise me from the Dead. If I continue Wicked, I shall be Cast
among the Devils.

THE A, B, C. OF Religion.
Psalm. XXXIV. 11. Come, Ye Children, Hearken unto me; I will Teach you the Fear
of the Lord.
A Dead Child was once raised unto Life, by GOD, at the Prayer of an Holy
Prophet unto Him. And in the Raising of this Child, we read, 2 King. IV. 34. He
lay upon the Child, and (first) put his Mouth upon his Mouth; and (then) his
Eyes upon his Eyes; and (afterward) his Hands upon his Hands; -- and the Child
opened his Eyes. We Pray, That the Souls of our Children may Live. If we are
our Selves the true Children of Abraham, it will appear in this; we shall
importunately. Pray to God for our Children, Oh! that they may Live in thy
sight! But Praying for them, is not all we have to do for them. The Enlivening
Word of God must be applied unto them. We must apply the Lively Oracles of the
Word, unto the Mouths, and the Eyes, and the Hands of the Children. If our God
please then to make an Application of it unto their Hearts, this will cause
them to Live. Yea, though the Children are Cast forth unto the Loathing their
Person, and evenly Dead, and rotting and stinking in their Sin; yet, O Lord,
Thou will say unto them, Live; yea, thou will say unto them in their Blood,
Live. There is is that Excellency in the Word of God, that it suits all Ages.
It has Milk for the Babes, as well as Meat for the Strong. It instructs both
the Old and the Young, to Praise the Lord. You have here a Psalm, of Lessons to
be Learned by Children; even as soon as they learn their Letters. In the
Hebrew, every Verse begins with a New Letter, according to the Order of the
Alphabet; Perhaps, that so the Hebrew Children might have it as Early as they
had their Alphabet. Children are here called upon. The Fear of God is Commanded
and Commended unto Children. It is here shown unto children, what they are to
do, that they may be Happy Children.

And the Doctrine which I now gather from it, is;

There are in the Word of God, Good Lessons for Children; There are Lessons
relating to the Fear of God, which may be Understood, even by them who are come
to the Least Understanding; which should be Considerd by them that can Use the
Least Consideration.

Luther would say, The best Preacher is he, that Preaches what we call,
Childishly; that so accommodates the Truths of the Gospel, unto his Hearers,
that even the Little Children may mind them when they hear them, and grow
sensible of them. I propose at this Time, to make an Essay at such Preaching;
and speak such Things, as they who are in the Age of Little Children, and many
Others, who have not much more Sense than they, may take a Good Notice of.
There are Truths of the Gospel, which may be apprehended by the Smallest
Capacities; and by the Youngest that are capable of Minding any thing in the
World. I am now to set such Things before you, and such Lessons relating to the
Fear of God, as may be apprehended by the very Children in the Congregation; I
desire to do it, in such Plain Terms, that the Smallest Capacities may
Entertain the Lessons of Piety; and be Quickened unto the Fear of God. And yet
the Things now to be set before you, will be such, that the most Illuminated
Christians in the Auditory, and such as are in the highest Form of Christianity
shall hear nothing but what may be for their Edification too. Though the Lambs
may Wade in the Still Waters, to which the Shepherd of their Souls, is now
leading of them, yet they will be such, that the Elephants may also Swim in
them. Sirs, Don't count your selves neglected, in a Discourse now so adapted
unto Infancy. But rather with Shame and Grief make this Reflection, Alas, that
after so long a Time, I should be so little improved, as to need still that the
first Elements of Piety should be inculcated upon me!

Let all our People, attend unto the Plainest Maxims of Piety; Hear these, O
all ye People, every one of you! And let even the Weakest and Youngest of our
People, give attention; Come, ye Children, Hearken to me.

1. The Weakest, and even the Youngest People, Children themselves, while yet
in their Minority, may be Taught, That and How the Great God is to be Feared,
and what the Fear of God will bring them to. Plainly, They that are of the
Lowest Capacity among you, may know this; The Great God is He who Made me, and
I ought to Fear and Serve my Maker! That plain Lesson is not above the Lowest
Capacity; Psalm. LXXVI. 7. Thou, even thou are to be Feared, O Lord. But then,
What is implied in, The Fear of God? They that are of the Lowest Capacity may
be taught thus much; I am to show my Fear of God, by being afraid of Sinning
against Him. That Lesson is not above them; Prove. VIII. 13. The Fear of the
Lord is to hate Evil. They may be taught thus much; I am to show my Fear of
God, by being afraid of having Him Angry with me. That Lesson is not above
them; Heb. X. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living
God. They may be taught thus much; I must Fear God, and fly to my Savior, that
I may be delivered from the Wrath of God. That Lesson is not above them; Psalm.
CXLVII. 11. The Lord takes Pleasure is those that Fear Him, and that Hope in
His Mercy. And thus much may be taught unto them; I must Fear God, and I must
Choose the Things that Please God. they may Con that Lesson; Eccl. XII. 13. Fear
God, and keep His Commandments; for this is the whole Duty of Man. These Plain
Things may be instilled into our Children themselves; and will be so, when they
are Taught of God. Well, And, if this Fear of God be in us, what will be the
Issue of it? They that are of the Lowest Capacity may be taught thus much; I
shall be no loser by the Fear of God. And thus much, It is good for me to draw
near unto God. And thus much, God is a Rewarder of them who diligently Seek
Him. They that are of such a Low Capacity, as to have no other Wisdom, yet may
be taught this, That until we have the Fear of God, we have no Wisdom at all.
This Lesson is a very Easy one; We may teach it our Children; it was the first
Instruction of Solomon unto his, as it had been the Instruction which his
Father had before given unto him, Prove. 1. 7. The Fear of the Lord is the
Beginning of Wisdom. Child, Thou do never begin to be Wise, till thou Fear
God; And the Fear of God will make thee Wise unto Salvation. This thou may
know; And with the Knowledge thou may attain to something of the Wisdom.
There is no Obscurity, no Difficulty, in this Lesson; it is a Plain Song that may
be presently learnt; Psalm. XXXL. 1st. Oh! how great is thy Goodness, which thou
have laid up for them that Fear thee. The Promises which the Conenant of God
makes to them that Fear Him, as they are very Great, so they are very Plain
Promises. It Is Plainly Promised, and very Intelligibly Declared, so that our
poor Children themselves may be affected with the Declaration; Child, Fear God;
Resolve to be Religious; and Walk in the ways of His Religion; Then, thou shall
find, As a Father Pities his Children, so the Lord Pities them that Fear Him;
and will Pardon their Sins. Thou shall find, The Sun of Righteousness will
arise with Healing in His Wings, to them that Fear His Name. Thou shall find,
The Lord will fulfill the Desire of them that Fear Him. Thou shall find, The
Angel of the Lord Encamps about them that Fear Him. Thou shall find, The Fear
of the Lord will be a Fountain of Life. Thou shall find, When the Time of the
Dead comes, that they shall be Judged, God will give a Reward unto all that
Fear His Name. These are no Dark Sayings. People of the Lowest Capacity may be
apprised of these Things. When they are so, then they are taught the Fear of
the Lord!

11. The Weakest, and even the Youngest People, and our Children while yet but
Infants, may be taught, That there are Evil Practices, which will prove
Dangerous to them; and What are those Evil Practices. The Fear of God will
cause People to Shun those Evil Practices, which are Condemned in the Word of
God. Even People of the Lowest Capacity may be taught that Lesson; Job XXVIII.
28. Behold, The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to Depart from Evil is
Understanding. Be the Capacity of People, never so Ordinary, yet they have
something of the Divine Law Written upon their Hearts; The Finger of God has
Written something of the Law on the Fleshly Tables. A Conscience will betimes
begin to Work, in the Children of Men. A Conscience will tell them, while they
are vet in their Childhood, that such and such Things are Evil Things, and that
the Wrath of God will come on the Children of Disobedience, who do such Things.
Let the Capacity of People be never so Low, yet they may learn this Lesson; I
must not Venture to do any thing that is Condemend by the Light of God in my
Soul. That Lesson is not too High for the Lowest Capacity; Job XXIV. 13. Wicked
Men, They are of those that Rebel against the Light. But there are many special
Cautions in the Word of God, which may be bro't unto People of the Lowest
Capacity; and it will he found, that their Conscience will agree to them; and
so it will be found the Lessons will not be above them. All the Ten
Commandments are such Things; They are Calculated for the Lowest Capacity Our
Children may betimes learn the Ten Commandment* What is Forbidden and What is
Required in the Ten Commandments. In the Ten Commandments, there is done, what
we read; Psalm. LXXVIII. 5. God has appointed a Law, which He Commanded our
Fathers, that they should make them known unto their Children. It would be a
Sad Thing, if any Child of Seven Years Old, should be so Uncultivated, as to be
Unable to say, the Ten Commandments, or to be Ignorant, what that Fear of God
is, which is taught in the Ten Commandments.

But we may Specify several Points, in which People of a very Mean Capacity may
be taught that Fear of God, which is to be Expressed in the avoiding of some
Evil Practices.

First. People of Low Degree, You may learn this Lesson in the Fear of God; The
Name of God must always be treated Awfully, and Holily, and Seriously; and have
an awful Respect Paid unto it. You must not use the Name of the Glorious GOD,
Vainly, Lightly, Irreverently. You must not Swear Prosantly by the Name of the
High and Lasty One. You must not Test on or with the Word of the Great GOD.
When you are Engaged in the Worship of God, you must behave your selves, as in
the Presence of the Great King, whose Name is Dreadful. No Sleeping, and no
Sporting, is to be indulged in the Assembly's, wherein God is Greatly to be
feared, and had in Reverence. These are very Evident Things. It Is a plain
Lesson; O Lord, They are thine Enemy's, who take thy Name in Vain. Children,
You can reach to that Lesson; Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 58, 59. If thou will not fear this
Glorious and Fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD, the Lord will make thy Plagues
Wonderful.

Secondly. They must be very Senseless indeed, who cannot learnt this Lesson in
the Fear of God; I must not Abuse the Good Creatures of God; nor abuse any Self
in the Use of them. Every Body knows, That our Drink, and our Meat, and our
Clothing, are the Good Creatures of God. It may therefore be soon known, by
our very Children themselves, That it is a Wicked Thing to Drink too much; It
is a Brutish Thing to Eat too much; God has not given us our Apparel, to hang
out the Flags of Pride, and gratify our Vanity. Children, This Lesson is not
beyond you; Romans XIII. 13, 14. Let us Walk Honestly; not in rioting and
drunkenness; Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh.

Thirdly. There is this Lesson in the Fear of God, which every one may learn,
as soon as it is possible; The Lord's Day must be kept Holy to the Lord; the
Sabbaths of the Lord must be the Lord's. Our Children themselves, cannot but
soon perceive, that we distinguish One Day in Seven for the peculiar Service of
God. When the Passover was instituted, it was then supposed; It shall come to
pass, Your Children shall say to you, What mean you by this Service? On the
Institution of the Lord's Day, we may soon inform our Children, What we mean by
the Service. Even these, and they who cannot Comprehend any more than these,
may be informed; The Glorious God having Made the World is Six Day, and Rested
on the Seventh, He has allowed us to Work in the world Six Days, but Commanded
us to Rest from doing so, that we be Wholly for Him on the Seventh. And our
Savior JESUS, Rising from the Dead, on this Day, we ought this Day to
Remember, that He now appeared our Victorious Redeemer. By spending this Day in
Communion with God, we prepare for the Rest which remains for His People, at
the Resurrection of the Dead; but if we Mispend this Day, we deserve to fall
short of Entering into the Rest of God. -- The Lesson is quickly learnt; Lev.
XIX. 30. Ye shall keep My Sabbaths, and reverence My Sanctuary.

Fourthly. The Fear of God has this Lesson in it, than which there can be
nothing more easy to learn; Parents must be Obeyed; God will not bear to see
Parents Wronged and Grieved by a Disobedient Offspring. Where are the Children
so Blockish, as not to be aware of this? Children owe much Obedience to their
Parents. Disobedient, Disingenuous, Disobliging Children, know themselves to
be, what they ought not to be. Undutiful Children, are Self-Condemned, and know
that they do not their Duty. Obedience, and Reverence, and Recompense to
Parents, one would think, there should scarce be any Need of teaching them.
There is no Mystery in this Matter; It Is no Sublime abstruse Notion; It Is not a
Deep Thing that cannot be fathomed; The short Arm of a Child may fathom it;
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long in the Land. By
that time the Child shall have Knowledge to Cry, My Father, or my Mother, it
may have this Knowledge with it, I must do, as my Father, and as my Mother bids
me! Ere the Children go off our Knees, we may learn them this Lesson; Ephesians. VI
1. Children, Obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right.

Fifthly. They must be very Stupid, unto whom this Lesson in the Fear of: God,
is not a very fair one; I may Meddle with nothing but what is my own, or with
the leave of the Owner. It Is nothing but what our very Children may be aware of;
That it is a Crime to Steal. Every one may come to the Knowledge or this; If
you Wrongfully take a Penny from another, it is a Crime that you are guilty of. If
you rob an Orchard, you have the Guilt of a Crime lying on you. If you Cheat
any one in your dealing with him, there is a Crime in the Fraud. It is a
Criminal Thing, to Encroach on the Propriety of a Neighbor. These are such
Obvious Things, our very Children may and should be acquainted with them. There
is nothing in all this, but what any body in the World may be advised of. It Is a
Lesson which there is no Trouble in learning of: Jer. 11. 26. A Thief is
ashamed, when he is found.

Sixthly. There is this Lesson in the Fear of God, which all may learn, even as
soon as they can speak; To tell a Lie is to do a base thing; A Lying Tongue is
an Abomination to the Lord. There needs no Pains to insinuate this, into the
dullest Minds that we can Meet withal; It should be your care always to speak
the Truth. You must be Children that will not Lie, else the Lord will not be
your Savior. No Minds are of such a Dullness, that they cannot be Convinced of
this; You must have a Care of Lying. While we have our Children, but as
Chickens yet under our Wings, we may easily infuse this into them; You must
never tell a Lie; It Is a Vile Thing to tell a Lie; If you have done a Fault, you
must not cover it with a Lie; Such a Covering will but make you yet More Faulty
than you were before. It will not require May Strokes to beat this Truth into the
Children. By that time the Child shall know to refuse the Evil, and abuse the
Good, it may know, that Lying is to be Abhorred; and the Liar shall be forsaken
of all his Friends. It Is a Lesson, that can hardly come too soon; Ephesians. Iv. 25.
Put away Lying; Speak the Truth, every one with his Neighbor.

Seventhly. And who is there, to whom this Lesson in the Fear of God, will be
Unintelligible? I must wish Ill unto none; but as far as I can do Good unto
all. There are those, who may Confess, I have not the Understanding of a Man; I
have not learned Wisdom, nor have I the Knowledge of the Holy Ones. But yet
even these, may come to so much Understanding, and so much Wisdom, and so much
Knowledge, as this; You should hurt no body; You should be harmless and
blameless; You should be Glad, when your Neighbor sees Prosperity, and enjoys
Good Things, and not Enviously Wish, that you had them from him. You should be
Grieved when your Neighbor is in Advorsity, and be ready to help him against
any Bad Things that may threaten him. These are Dictates which cannot be
Questioned; It may be said, These things cannot be spoken against. Our very
Children may take in such things as these. This is a Lesson that any one may
learn, under the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; Romans XII. 10. Be kindly
affectioned one to another, in Brotherly Love.

Oh! If our Children, and the People of the Lowest Capacities, would come and
hearken to us, in such Plain Things, as these, they would be taught the Fear of
the Lord.

111. The Weakest, and even the Youngest People, our Children soon after they
have done hanging on the Breast; May be taught, That their Conversion to God is
necessary, and What they will do, if ever they come to be Converted. The Fear
of God will imply a Sincere and Thorough Conversion unto Him: it will bring
People to do those things, which are done by none but those that are Converted
unto God. The People of the Lowest Capacity, may and should Concern themselves,
about the Grand Concern of a Real Conversion. Our Children themselves, though it
be not long since they were Weaned, yet, supposing they can act Reasonably,
they will not Exercise themselves in things too high for them, if they are
Exercised about the Great Matters of their Conversion to God; It will be but a
Reasonable Thing of them to think often on this; What shall I do if I am
Converted unto God? And, What will become of me, if I am not Converted unto God?

Be the Capacity of the People, in the Lowest Class that can be; yet the
Children may be taught, some things of the Greatest importance for all the
People in the World. That Vast Concern, of Conversion to God, is to be indeed
addressed at this rate, Hear this, All ye People, Give Ear, All ye inhabitants
of the World; Both Low and High, Rich and Poor together. Truly, Low People, and
Poor People, and Young People, and All that have Souls to look after, are to be
called upon, thus to look after their Souls. Indeed, the Highest and the
Richest upon Earth, have infinite cause to be Sollicitous on this Greatest of
all Occasions. To You, Sirs, it must be said; If you Die Unconverted unto the
Fear of God, be your other Excellencies what they will, yet you die without
Wisdom. And then; Though a Man have the Wisdom to Govern and Manage Whole Nations
of Men, if he die without this Wisdom, How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, Son of the Morning, who did Order the Nations? Though a Man have the
Wisdom to Understand as Many Languages as a Mithridates, or a Mordecai; if he
die without this Wisdom, he must be Lodged where he shall gnaw his Tongue for
Pain, and know no Speech but that of Roaring and Blasphemy. Though a Man have the
Wisdom to Understand as Many Sciences as an Alsted, or a Scaliger, if he die
without this Wisdom, he must go into Utter Darkness, and know nothing but his
own Unutterable increase of Sorrow. A Man may have the Wisdom to Calculate the
Motions of the Heavens, and yet Unconverted unto the Fear of God, he will be
turned into Hell after all. But I must not forget, the Small Folks with whom I
am now Concerned. We read concerning, The First Principles of the Oracles of
God, which they that have need of Milk, should have taught unto them; and we
find, Heb. VI. 1. Repentance from Dead Works, and Faith toward God, are some
of those Principles. Verily, our Children that have need of Milk, are to be
taught these things; You must Repent of your Sin against God, and you must
Believe in God your Savior; else you Die and Perish Wonderfully.

First; Children, You are to be thus Taught in the Fear of God, such a Lesson
as this; If I do not in Time and in Truth Turn unto God, I shall die in my Sins;
and, Oh! Miserable my Death, if it find me so! It Is a Plain Lesson, Mat. XVIII.
3. Except ye be Converetd, and become as Little Children, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Even our Little Children themselves may Learn this
Lesson; Without Conversion I shall be shut out of Heaven. It Is a Plain Lesson;
Joh. III. 3. Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Even
our Children within a few Years after they are Firstborn, may learn this
Lesson; If I am not Newborn, I shall find it good for me that I had never been
born at all. They that are but Little Creatures, and such as are very Shallow
ones, yet may drink in this Lesson of God; I must be a New Creature; or else He
that Made me will not have Mercy on me. Our very Children may soon Learn this;
That if they be Wicked Children, they are Cursed Children; That if they are
Ungodly Children, they are not the Children of God; That if they are not the
Children of God, they are the Children of Satan; That Satan's Children are all
Slaves, and shall be thrown into the same Fire, with the Devil and his Angels.

Secondly; Go on, Children, and be Taught, for you may be so, what is done for,
and what is done by, them that are by Conversion bro't unto the Fear of God.

More Particularly.

First. They that are not got beyond the Capacity of Children, may be taught
this Lesson; I cannot of my self Turn unto God; I must Cry unto God, that He
would Graciously Turn me to Himself. You must be very Sottish indeed; you are
Stones, and no Children of Abraham, if you don't feel your selves Unable to
Turn your Selves. But we read of one bemoaning himself; Jer. XXXI. 18. I have
been as a Bullock unaccustomed unto the Took; Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; For thou art the Lord my God. It follows, This is a dear Son, a
pleasant Child, I will surely have Mercy on him. Ah, Dear Children; If ever God
Surely have Mercy on you, He will bring you to this; You will see that you
shall never come under the Yoke of Obedience to Him, till He bring you to it.
And then, as Young as you are, you will Cry out, Oh! Turn thou me, my God; Oh!
Turn thou me, that I may be turned.

Secondly. They that are not got beyond the Capacity of Children, may be taught
this Lesson; Woe is unto me, that I have Sinned; I am in a Woeful, because I am
in a Sinful Condition. If you are but as Children, yet you may see, The Sin of
your First Father is Your Sin. Yet you may see, The Sin of your Vile Nature,
has in it All Sin. Yet you may see, That your Sins are indeed without Number;
Innumerable Evils Compassing of you, more than the Hairs of your Heads. Yet you
may see, That for your Sins you have the Wrath of God abiding on you. Yet you
may see, the Image of Satan defiling of you; the Power of Satan Enslaving of
you; the Devouring Pit ready to Swallow you up. As Young as you are, you may be
taught that Cry; Luke XVIII. 13. God be Merciful to me a Sinner.

Thirdly. They that are not got beyond the Capacity of Children, may be taught
this Lesson; There is a Savior willing to receive me, and relieve me; and if I
would be Saved, I must come unto Him. The Eternal Son of God, who dwells in our
JESUS, took Little Children, into His Arms, and Blessed them: Oh! Children
Blessed indeed! And You too, may be so. He added, Mat. XIX. 14. Suffer Little
Children to come unto Me; for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Ah, Little
Children, You may come unto your Savior. If you can take notice of what is now
spoken, you may come to this Thought, There is a JESUS, who Saves His People
from their Sins. You may come to this Thought; My JESUS is able to Save unto
the Uttermost, all that come unto Him. You may come to this Thought; My JESUS
will Cast out none that come unto Him. As Young as you are, you may then come
into such Thoughts and such Cries as these; O Lord, I beseech thee to deliver
my Soul; O my Savior, Bind up my Soul in the Bundle of Life! O my Savior, Let
thy Blood Cleanse me from all my Sin! O my Savior, Guide me by thy Counsel,
and bring me to thy Glory! If you can request any Person to do you any
Kindness, can you not make this Request unto the Blessed Jesus, O my Savior,
Take me into thy Precious Hands. If you can ask for Bread when you are Hungry,
or for Help when you are Uneasy; Cannot you as well say, O my Savior, I am
distressed, undertake for me!

Fourthly. Though you are not got beyond the Capacity of Children, yet you may be
taught this Lesson; I must Resolve to Live an Holy Life, and be fixed in my
Resolutions. We read of such a thing as that; Jer. III. 4. Will thou not from
this Time Cry unto me, My Father, Thou art the Guide of my Youth? Why, Though you
are yet in your Youth, Young in Years, and perhaps Young and Weak in every
thing; Yet you may Resolve, The Great God shall be my God for ever and ever,
and my Guide even unto Death. It was the Counsel; 1 John V. 21. Little
Children, Keep your selves from Idols. As Young as you are, Little Children,
you may Resolve, I will not Sin to Please the Flesh, I will not Sin to Gain the
World, I will not hearken to the Sinful Motions of the Devil. Of a Little Child
we are told; 1 King. XIV. 13. In him there is found some Good Thing toward the
Lord God of Israel. As Young as you are, though not beyond a Little Child, You
may Resolve; I will above all things desire to Know God, and Serve God, and be
in Good Terms with God, and Uphold Communion with God; And I will place my
Happiness in these things. We read of Children walking in the Truth. Even
Children may Resolve to take such a Walk, as is directed by the Truth of God.
We read of being Followers of God as Obedient Children. Even Children may
Resolve to Follow God, in imitating the Example of the Holy One. And so
Resolved, our Young People, and such as are of a Low Capacity, they may keep
Constant in these Resolutions; Their Constancy may be Perpetual; They may begin
Betimes, and hold out unto the End.

IV. The Weakest, and even the Youngest People, Children soon after their first
going alone; may be taught, That there are Certain Duties wherein they are to
Walk with God; and What those Duties are, and How to be Managed, How to be
Performed. The Fear of God will put People upon Certain Duties, wherein God is
to be Glorified. It was the Wish, Deuteronomy. V. 29. O that they would fear Me, and
keep all My Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their Children for ever. There are Commandments, in Conformity to which, the
Fear of God will uphold a Walk with God; and they are so Plain, that our
Children themselves may Conform unto them. Two or Three of them shall be
intimated.

First. There is Prayer to God; they that are yet but in the Capacity of
Children, may do something at it; may Pray without Ceasing. It is a Lesson
which any one of you all may learn; there is nothing impracticable in it by the
Lowest Capacity; Mat. VI. 6. Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy
Door, Pray to thy Father which is in Secret. Say not, my Child, I know not how
to Pray. What? Have thou fallen into so many Sins, and can thou not Pray, For
thy Names sake, Lord, Pardon my Iniquity, for it is Great! Have thou so many
Ails in thy Soul, and can thou not Pray, Lord, Heal my Soul, for I have
Sinned against thee! Do thou so much need a New Heart, and can thou not
Pray, Lord, Create in me a Clean Heart, and Renew a Right Spirit within me! Art
thou Dying every Day, and can thou not Pray, Lord, Let not my Death overtake
me, before I have begun to Live unto God? Do thou know of no Mischiefs, which
thou art afraid of? Do thou know of no Mercies worth asking for? Consult the
Book of Psalms; Consult the State of thy own Soul; and thou can not be such
an awkward Thing, as to have nothing to say on thy Knees before the Lord.

Secondly. You have the Word of God; they that are yet but in the Capacity of
Children, may perceive whose Word it is; that they have God speaking to them in
it. He was a Young Child, who when the Word of God called upon him, said; 1 Samuel III. 10. Lord, Speak, for thy Servant hears. One must be more Silly than
a Child in the School-boyes boys Clothes, who Paies no Regard unto the Word
of God. There is in this Word, that which the Angels themselves desire to look
into; and there is that which be speaks Regards from the Lowest Capacity.
Children, As soon as you can Read, you may take the Bible, and in Reading of
it, think, This is the Voice of God; God now Speaks unto me. When you hear
Sermons from the Ministers of God, you have to do with God in their Ministry,
and may think; Here are Messages from God; God now Speaks unto me. The Lesson
is a short one; I will bear what God the Lord will Speak!

Thirdly. They that are yet got no further than the Capacity of Children, have
a Lesson to learn, which their Duty to their Neighour is Comprised in. The
Wayfaring Ones, though Feels, need not Err, in the Way of their Duty to their
Neighbor; Let them only keep to that plain Rule; Mat. VII. 12. All things
whatsoever ye would, that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them. Children
themselves would forbear many an Ill Thing toward another, if they would but
think; Should I be willing, to have such a thing done by another to me?
Children themselves would be ready to do a Good Thing unto another in Distress,
if they would but think; Would not I be glad, if such a thing might be done by
another to me? And, Children, You are not of such a Low Capacity, that you
cannot form such Thoughts as these.

V. There are some Religious and Awakening Meditations, with which the Weakest,
and the Youngest of us all, and People of the Lowest Capacities, may Awaken
themselves unto the Fear of God. There are Certain Meditations which have a
Notable Tendency to Enkindle the Fear of God in the Souls of Men. Though People
are of never such Low Capacities, yet they can form such Meditations. The
Children that Play in the Streets, may leave their Play, and fall into such
Meditations. Children, Wherever you are, and as Young as you are, You may
think; The Eye of God is now upon me; God hears all that I Say; God is
acquainted with all my Ways. Add to this; It is said, Gal. III. 27. As many of
you as have been Baptized into Christ have put en Christ. Children, When once
you have been told, that you have been Baptized, which ought to be very Early,
You should think, What was I Baptized for? I was bound in my Baptism to the
Service of my Savior. I have been Washed in His Name, and I shall do a Dirty
thing, if I Sin against my Savior. Again; Our Savior says; Mat. XI. 28, 29.
Come unto Me, and Learn of Me. When you are going to School, you may think; My
Savior is willing to be my Tuter; O my dear Savior, I will come and Learn of
Thee. None teaches like to thee. Once more; We read; 1 King. XIV. 17. The Child
died. You see Children carried unto their Graves: In the Burying-place you see
Graves not longer than you are. How lately have you seen a Lovely Flower Cropped?
You may now think; I may Die as Young as I am. I know not the Day of my Death.
Lord, Make me Ready for it. Moreover, We read, Rev. XX. 12. I saw the Dead,
Small and Great Stand before God. You may Lodge such Thoughts as these, and
throw away your Vain Ones; I must One Day appear before the Iudgment-Seat of
God. As Little as I am, I shall not be left Unconsidered by the Glorious Judge
of the World. Carry on the Thoughts; Think; If I Fear God, I shall for ever be
With the Lord, and be unspeakably Blessed in His Heavenly Places. Think; If I
have not the Fear of God, I shall be thrown into a place of Torment; and an
Everlasting Punishment will be my Portion.

Thus you have had Lessons relating to the Fear of God Plainly set before you;
Such Lessons, and so Plainly offered, that People of the Lowest Capacity may
Understand them and Consider them.

There are Two Remarks, which I have now to make upon them.

The First Remark.
We cannot be Satisfied, that our People of the Lowest Capacity, and
Particularly our Children, should remain Strangers to the Fear of God.
Children, As Young as you are, it is not too Soon for you to Die; it is not too
Soon for you to fall into a Damnation that Slumbers not; it is not too Soon for
you to Mind what you are a doing, and where you are a going. Then it is not too
Soon for you to Fear God; it is not too Soon for you to Understand and Consider,
what you have to Know and to Do in the Fear of God. We read, Isa. XXVIII. 9.
Whom shall He teach Knowledge? And whom shall He make to Understand Doctrine?
Them that are Weaned from the Milk, and Drawn from the Breasts. Truly, E're you
have been any long time Weaned from the Milk, and Drawn from the Breasts, you
may be Taught the Fear of God, and you may Mind what you are Taught. Oh! When
shall it be said of our Children, Behold, they Pray! When will our Children
answer all Temptation to Sin, How shall I do this Wickedness, and Sin against
God! When will our Children make that Enquiry, What shall I do to be Saved? O
our Children, and You also that in your Capacity are not better than Children;
to YOU is this Lesson sent; Acquaint your selves now with God; thereby Good
shall come unto you!

The Second Remark.
Then People of an Higher Capacity, and such as have Out-grown the Years and
Wits of Children, are most Inexcusable, if they should persist without the Fear
of God. It was a sharp Censure and Satyr upon some; 1 Cor. III. 1. I could not
speak unto you, but as unto Babes. But it must come with a greater Sharpness,
if it may be said, You have not so much Fear of God in you, as might be
expected in Babes. Alas, It would be Inexcusable in our Children, if they
should Know and Do no better, than many People who pretend unto the Years of
Discretion. O You that are come to some Forwardness, and it may be, some Figure
and Station in the World; it cannot be endured, that YOU should go on still in
your Trespasses. When Life and Death are set before you; What? Are you not Old
enough to Choose; And will you still make a Choice, like an Infant or an Idiot?
You have the Path on the Right Hand, and the Path on the Left, set before you;
What? Will you act as if you were the Children of Ninive, not knowing the Right
Hand from the Left? The Demand of God was that; Show your selves Men.
Certainly, it is time for many of you to Show your selves Men; and not Prove
your selves Worse than Children. It Is to be shown by the Fear of God.

Instructions for CHILDREN.
I. The Ancient Creed.
IN GOD the FATHER I Believe;
He Is the Almighty One.
I JESUS CHRIST, our Lord, Receive,
God's Dear and Only SON.
I do Adore the Holy SPIRIT;
Who is to Raise the Dead,
And bring His People to Inherit,
Life that shall never Fade.
II. The Child's Resolution.
Help me my God! For unto thee
I do Resolve to Pray,
To Grant thy Christ and Grace to me;
I Will do it every Day.
HEavenly Father, Give me thy Christ; Give me thy Spirit; Pardon my Sins; Make
me thy Servant; Bring me to thy Kingdom; O Great GOD, who art Father, and Son,
and Holy Spirit; I Desire to be Thine for evermore. Amen.

III. The Child at his Food.
At Eating, thus I ever should
Devout and Thankful be;
My God, I Bless thee for my Food;
Let it be Blessed to me.
A Child, that when he goes to Eat,
Thinks not of GOD at all,
Is like the Bruits, which at their Meat
On God do never call.
IV. The Child thinking on his Baptism.
Baptized for thee, O Glorious One,
Thee for my GOD I take:
Thee will I Love and Serve alone;
And Thee my Portion make.
My Baptism gave me unto thee;
Possess me then, O Lord;
My Father, Savior, Leader be,
According to thy Word.
V. The Child on the Lord's Day.
My Savior's Risen from the Dead,
And Lives Enthroned Above;
The Price of my Salvation's Paid,
My Life is in His Love.
With Holy Sabbaths He, in Peace,
Has me Victorious blessed;
Lord, Bring thou me, through Holiness,
To Victory, and Rest.
VI. The Child seeing the Funeral of another Child.
I in the Burying Place may see
Graves not so long as I.
From Deaths Arrest no Age is free;
Young Children too may Die.
My God, may such an awful sight
Awakening be to me!
Oh! that by Early Grace I might
For Death prepared be.
VII. The Body of Divinity Versifyed.
1.
A GOD there is, a GOD of boundless Might,
In Wisdom, Justice, Goodness Infinite. [Heb. XI. 6. Psalm. CXLVII. 5. CXLV. 9.
17.]
2.
God is but ONE, and yet in Persons Three
The Father, Sin, and Spirit, One God we see. [1 Ioh. V. 7.]
3.
Our God, by His Great Name JEHOVAH Known
HE the World Made, and Keeps, and Rules Alone. [Neh. IX. 6.]
4.
To Glorify the Glorious GOD, is That
For which He did all Men, and me Create. [Isai. XLI. 21.]
5.
God a Just Rule does in our Bible give,
A Rule, both what to Think, and how to Live [2 Timothy III. 15, 16, 17]
6.
Holy and Happy our first Parents came
From Gods Hand, with Gods Image in our Frame [Gen. 1. 27.]
7.
Tasting Forbidden Fruit our Parents fell;
This Taste has plunged Mankind all down to Hell. [Rom. V. 12.]
8.
Our Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST, in our Distress,
Comes to fetch us from Hell to Blessedness. [Luk. XIX. 10.]
9.
Into His Person, the Bright Son of God
A Virgins Son took; There He makes Abode. [Isa. VII. 14.]
10.
Life as a Priest CHRIST will His People bring,
Light as a Prophet, and Law as a King [Psal. CX. 4. Acts. III. 22. Isa. XXXI.
II. 22.]
11.
For us our Surety Lived, for us He Died,
And Rising did to Heaven in Triumph Ride. [Phil. 11. 7, 8, 9.]
12.
By Faith to CHRIST we for Salvation go;
Faith too, as well as That must He bestow. [Eph. 11. 8.]
13.
For Sin will the Renewed Believer Mourn,
And from all Sin, he will by Repentance Turn. [Acts XX. 21.]
14.
Sinners receiving of Gods Pardon, they
Gods Precept will, made Saints, with Love Obey. [Tit. 11. 12, 13, 14.]
15.
All Homage we must yield unto the Lord;
In all Directed, by his Heavenly Word.
His Works and Names, we may not use in Vain;
Nor by our Works thereon His Days profane.
With Honors due we must our Neighbors treat;
And sweetly wish them Lives both Long and Sweet.
With Chastity we must our selves Behave;
And do no Wrong in what we get or Save.
Truth we must utter, and Abhor to Lie;
And be Content, though in Adversity. [Exod. XX. 3-17. Matthew. XXI. 37, 38, 39]
16.
Them who to be in CHRIST, through Grace, Consent,
God brings into His Gracious Covenant. [Isa. LV. 3.]
17.
The Baptism of the Lord, assures that we
Both Washed from Sin and Raised from Death, shall be. [Rom. VI. 4, 5]
18.
To See thel ord, we at His ^able Sit,
And show that we shall in His Kingdom eat. [1 Cor. XI. 26.]
19
Gods Children His Good Promises Enjoy;
And Good comes of what Ill may them annoy. [2 Per. 1. 4. Romans VIII. 28.]
20.
His Angels He to them does Guardians make,
And these their Souls, at their Departure take. [Heb. ^. 14.]
21.
To Judge the World, CHRIST will descend at Last;
A Righteous Doom shall by that Judge be past. [ Acts XVI. 31.]
22.
The Wicked shall bear bitter Pain and Shame,
With Wicked Spirits in Eternal Flame.
The Godly shall, with their Great GOD, on High,
Reap Joys, High Joys, to all Eternity. [ Matthew. XXV. 46.]
FINIS.

