Spiritual Anatomizing: OR, A few Characteristical Notes OF A Godly State
Offered, Under Ten Heads of TRIAL FOR Our fullest Resolution and Decision; With
a brief Introduction thereto.

By AMES ANGIER A. M.

Been dicere ad Pancos, been autem vivere ad Omnes homines Pertinet: Lactant.
Lib. 1. Inst. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence
to make your Calling and Election Sure; for if ye do these things ye shall
never fall.

For so an Entrance shall be administered unto you into the Everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord, and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, in Middle Street. 1714.

A brief POEM on the Title.
SKilful Anatomizing does descry
What Parts, and State did hid, and distant ly:
So Subjects both, our Solus and Bodies be
Of that fine needful Art Anatomy.
By Gods safe Rule our Souls dissect Rip up, and lay Open.
, and see
How stands their Case; What Air, and State their's be.
Thus Conscience, Gods Vicegerent will it decide
By Verdict just, in which we may confide.
There Is no Trustee with it compared may be
For Punctual Dealing, and Fidelity.
If Natures; Then, to Christ with speed Apply
Who Solely can dispense their Remedy;
To Christ, God clothed in Humane Flesh, repair,
He will them save from Sin and Devils Snare.
If Grace adorned them; in high Notes of Praise
To GOD, the Sacred Three, Who did them raise,
From Death of Sin to Life Immortal Sing
Hallelujahs to our Heavenly King:
Say, Blessing, Glory; Honor, Power belong
To God, with Miryads in the Seraphick Song.
Our Lives then Jubilees will ever be,
Till we in Glory Face to Face shall see
With unmixt Joys Possessed Eternally.
Reader,
THe Scriptures of Truth do not only clearly deliver to, and plainly teach us
the Dortrine of a Future State; That we must Exist, and Live after this Mortal
Life Expires; in our Souls Separatim, immediately upon our Dissolution, as
Written in Eccl. 3.21. So 12 7. Then shall the Dust return to the Earth, as it
was; and the Spirit shall return to God, who gave it. -- And in our Whole
Persons Incorruptibly reunited at the Sound of the Last Trump of God, when
Death shall be Swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.52, 54. So 1 These. 4.16. --
But our Natures, and Condition in this Life do strongly argue it; Our
Understandings, though naturally-darkened, have a realizing View of it; Our
Consciences dictate it, and frequently Alarm us with it: Nothing has a deeper
Impression on us, nor appears with a more black, and formidable Aspect to us
than this: -- Our Minds hence keep ruffled and uneasy; Our Thoughts confused,
and racked, as well they may, Till we have made up and settled our Accounts with
GOD, and got our Evidences clear for Heaven, Happiness and Glory.

Nothing concerns us like to this,
That Settled well our Soul's State is.
All the Business of Time is not worth the Naming with, being perfect Nothing
to this Great and Truly Necessary Work, so nearly relating to ETERNITY, that
continued NEVER ENDING NOW. No refreshment in Our Journeying through the Hideous
Wilderness of this World, like this; No Cordial so reviving, none so lasting:
it is infinitely better than Cool Waters to a Dying thirsty Soul. -- To be
provided therefore is an Argument of our Christian Prudence, and Highest
Wisdom: As an Help whereto this Small Tract, Entitled, Spiritual Anatomizing
offers it Self to Public View, in hopes of Answering the Design thereof, and
meeting with a Candid Interpretation.

If thine be Christ, thine then is All;
But without Christ, thine Naught can Call.
The CONTENTS.
I. FIve Assertions are Offered, as a Needful Preface. viz. I. Asser. Shows the
Incumbency, and Prositableness of Trying our Spiritual State. II. Asser.
Prescribes the Manner necessary to be attended by us therein. III. Asser. Gives
the Rule, by which we only must proceed. IV. Asser. Urges the Necessity and
Advantage of our frequency in it. V. Asser. Obliges our Invocating the Almighty
GOD, for, and depending on His Special Assistance for our Agreeable Performing
it.
II. Ten General Rules in the most Familiar Method given to Try our Spiritual
State by: Which may resolve us. 1. Rule, Whether we have the Spirit of Christ,
or no? 2. Rule, Whether we are Sincere Believers on Christ, or no? 3. Rule,
Whether we make a prefering Choice of the favor, friendship, and fellowship of
Christ Jesus, or no? 4. Rule, Whether we are thorough Penitents in the sight of
God, or no? 5. Rule, Whether we are Obedient Subjects of God, or no? 6. Rule,
Whether we truly love the Godly, as such, or no? 7. Rule, Whether we heartily
Forgive those that Injure us, or no? 8. Rule, Whether when Prosperity attends
us, it attains holy Ends upon us, or no? 9. Rule, Whether our Afflictions are
Fatherly Chastizements, or no? 10. Rule, Whether we are really Holy in Gods
Account, or no?
III. A brief Postscript showing How and to Whom these Rules of Trial become
determining and decisive.
These things Adverted to must pondered be
Digested well, and Practiced Finally.
Spiritual Anatomizing: OR, Characteristical Notes of a Godly State Proposed,
In the Ten following Heads of Queries.
As Introductory whereto it is briefly Offered in Five Assertions. viz.
I. Asser. THAT Self Examination is a plain Gospel Duty, urged on all the
Disciples of Christ; in 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the
Faith: [that is] Search and Try, Whether ye be True Christians, or no: For
Faith that is Evangelical, is our Spiritual Life: 1 John 5.1. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and gives the Subjects of
it a just claim to that Honorable and Distinguishing Character. Whence, it is
Evident, That the Attendance of this Duty of Self Trial gives not the Being,
though it may prove an happy Occasion of it, but is truly Necessary for the Well
Being, Comfort and Serenity of a Christian.

The Precept here recommended and pressing it, is general; it Reaches and
Affects all Men under the Gospel: Both Good and Bad are concerned therein: Gal.
6.4. Let every Man prove his own Work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another. And not only Duty to God obliges them; but
Self Interest steps in and lays an indefeazible claim thereto. Self Trial is a
Debt to both God, and our Selves; and can we be so Unjust, and Unreasonable, as
to forget, and neglect it, when the paying it may every way prove our Benefit
and Advantage? For hereby we may Anatomize our Souls, Unveil their State, and
so Discover, bring to Light, and take a Prospect of the Truth of Grace; or its
Counterfeit in us. It will give us some Satisfying, if not undeniable Evidence,
What our Estate is before the All-seeing, and Heartsearching God: Jer. 17.10.
Heb. 4.13. -- Whether we have ever been born of God, Job. 3.3. And so are
become New Creatures, or no? -- Whether we have the Graces of the Spirit
infused, and implanted in our Souls, or not? Even those better things, as,
Faith, Repentance, Love, etc. That accompany Salvation, Heb. 6.9.

Whence, we shall be able to make a right judgment of our Spiritual State, How
the case stands with us before the Holy GOD; and so having set things in a true
and clear Light, may have the Advantage of Rectifying all Previous Mistakes of
our Selves, if any be, Whether resulting from a Criminal Neglect of, or
Inadvertency in the Attendance of this Duty; and thereby prevent what otherwise
might prove of Fatal Consequence: For (says the Apostle, Gal. 6.3.) if a Man
think himself to be something, when he is Nothing, he Deceives himself.

II. Asser. That this Trial of our Selves must be Intense, Serious, Searching,
Particular and Impartial: intimated by the Apostle in the next Paragragh of
forecited, 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your own Selves. A Phrase very significant, and
expressive; both dictating the manner, How we should perform it, and pointing
us to the Rule we must observe therein. As though it had been said, See that ye
do it so, as will be to Effect; Attend that rational Method, and those likely
Measures square your Selves by, That will bring all to a Narrow, and fully
resolve you of your Case. The work is Great, and Weighty, both in it self,
Tendency and Consequents, and therefore must be gone about regularly, with
utmost Care and Diligence. The Nature of it is Spiritual and nearly Concerns a
future Life, to the rendering which gloriously happy, we must diligently
inspect, and carefully correct our present State. We must attend it with
fervor and zeal; Yea, with the Closest Application, and Intenseness of Mind,
that is possible; Whereby we shall but consult our Comfort and Happiness, and
use One good Medium to our Cheerful Persevering in Grace, should we find the
Root of the Matter in us, Job 19.38.

We must be strict, severe and thorough in this our Search; Admit of no
Diversion, stop, or remora whatever, but be fixed, and resolute therein, lest
Satan our common avowed Enemy, and our deceitful and desperately Wicked Hearts,
Jer. 17.9. do from their Aversion to the Duty hurry us along, and precipitately
throw us into fatal Mistakes, that might urge our building on a Sandy
foundation.

Besides, We must not content our Selves with a Trial of our State in Gross,
but be very Curious, Critical, and Exact therein: Attend it Gradatim, by steps,
taking every thing in Course, Viewing them successively and well: Ever having
in our Eye the New Creature in all its fine Parts, and charming Features, by
which we must Compare our Selves, if we mean to make a true discovery of our
State.

We must beware, we Omit nothing Essential in our Trial, nor are wanting in our
particular Personal Applications therein. We should Ask our Selves all
Pertinent Questions, and Summons Conscience to Answer them in Order, and Wait
unwilling to pass any over unresolved: Gal. 6.7. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked.

III. Asser. That we must be conformable to the Word of God; that Written
Declaration of the Divine Will, which necessarily is our Rule therein: for
therein only is the Natural Man deciphered and drawn in his truest Colors to
us: As in Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 8.7, 8. So Romans 3.10. to 18. inclusive; and
in ver. 23. All have sinned and come short of the Glory of God, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
Dead in Trespasses and Sins. Children of Disobedience; fulfilling the Will of
the Flesh, and of the Mind; conformable to the Prince of the Power of the Air,
the Spirit that rules them; Naturally Children of Wrath' 1 Cor. 2.14. etc. The
New Creature is likewise there, and no where else livelily represented, and
with a spiritual Air delineated: Thus, 2 Cor. 5.17, 21. The New Creature is in
Christ; Old things are past away, all things are become New. He is made the
Righteousness of God in Christ. Ephesians. 4.24. The New Man is after God created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. Col. 3.10. Renewed in Knowledge after the
Image of Him that created him. So 1 John 1.4, 12, 18, 20, etc. Gods Written
Word is the only Glass, wherein we may take a View of their respective
Complexions, and see how they stand in direct Opposition each to Other; and are
not only of quite different Make and Shape, but of irreconcilable Tempers.

The true Character of One, as Portrayed in the Scriptures of Truth is, ipso
facto, the Reverse, in truth the Contradiction of the Other. This Divine Line,
is what we only may measure our selves by, the stretch whereof must be our
Boundary, whence we may obtain a full Resolution, and fetch a final Answer. It
is a more sure Word of Prophesy, Whereunto (says the Apostle) we do well, that
we take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.

IV. Asser. That we should be Frequent therein. 'Twas the Advice of an Heathen
Poet, Tecum Habita, Dwell with thy self; and is very Applicable and Instructive
to the Christians; for the continuance of their Peace, and Increase of their
Comfort depend thereon. Aug. Medit. page 221.
During this Mortal State we cannot attain to perfect Security, but are still
left Exposed to Temptation, and Danger, that we may accomplish our Warfare with
greater Circumspection, that our Obedience may be preserved with awe, Psalm.
2.11. And our Joy Tempered with Humility, and Trembling; not boasting our
selves, whilst girding on our Armor, as they that put it off, 1 King. 20.11.
But be renewing our Scrutiny, and Keeping our Watch. In his way we may Enjoy
more of the Light of Gods Countenance, the Rays whereof falling upon our Souls,
will set us a moving in the Ways of Holiness, like the Chariots of Amminadab,
Cant. 2.11. with a Nimble Spontaneity, and be quickening our Advances toward
making with diligence Our Calling and Election Sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. By this Means
we may see in what we have declined, and seemingly gone back in, to our
Humiliation, and more speedy Amendment; Or how we have been Progressive
Christians, and our Path has been that of the Just, Prove. 4.18 shining
resplendently with repeated Increase and additional Luster, stretching it self
to the Perfection of Meridian Beauty.

Thus we may come to know what Ground we get, Bern. -- Lib. Animae. Page 376.
or lose: what Alterations are in us, how qualified, and circumstantiated; what
Resemblance to, or Degeneracy from God; how near Approaches we have made, or to
what distance we are cast. A Distance and Approach to be measured, not by
Extension, and space, but by Actions and Dispositions.

We shall find it a Motive to Obedience and an Incentive to Holiness; 'twill
keep us more Constant and Watchful on our Guard against the Wiles of the Devil,
the Temptations and Snares of the World, and the Lustings of our Hearts; Whence
we shall be more strong and powerful to withstand and repel the fiercest and
most surprising Assaults thereof. -- In short, This will be a means to our
gaining the Victory, and with Trophies of Honor triumphing over all the
Enemies of our Spiritual Welfare, to brighten our Graces, and make us with
Christ's Spouse, in Cant. 6.10. with a Charming Blush, To look forth as the
Morning; fair as the Moon; clear as the Sun, and Terrible as an Army with
Banners. --

Lastly,

V. Asser. Seeing we have no Strength, nor Ability of our Own for such a
Performance of this great and important Duty of Trying our State, as would
attain the desired End, for our Sufficiency only is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. -- And
besides, since we are to take our Measures by the written Word of God for
Direction, and Conduct herein, Job. 5.39. -- It highly concerns us to rely on,
and trust in the LORD JEHOVAH in whom is Everlasting Strength, Isai. 26.4. For
His Divine Aids, and Grace to well furnish us to, and help us in every part of
This so Necessary, and so Weighty a Business; Submissively Prefacing our
Entering thereon with our most Serious, Hearty, and Fervent Prayer to our
Omniscient God, Agreeable with, if not in the Words of the Holy Psalmist,
recorded, Psalm. 26.2. (...) me, (...) Lord, and prove me; Try my veins and my
heart. And Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart; Try me and
know my Thoughts, and see (...) any Wicked way in me, discover it to me, (...)
in the way Everlasting. And with the (...). I (...) to the Ephesians, Chap. 3.
verse 16. That he would (...) us according to the Riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man: which would well
qualify, and prepare us to sincerely Answer and in our Minds resolve the Ten
Heads of Questions nextly here recited, being all drawn from, and grounded on
the Holy Scriptures: -- Which would not only give us Peace in our Minds, while
we Live; but raise in us an holy Joy, when we dye: The former from a sense we
may gain thereby of an Interest in Gods favor through Christ; and the latter
from a Comfortable Assurance thence of a Triumphant Resurrection to Eternal
Life, and Glory: -- Agreeably says the Apostle in 2 Cor. 1.12. Our Rejoicing is
this, (...) Testimony of our (...), that in Simplicity, and Godly (...) by the
Grace of God we have Lived in this World. And the (...) his Departure hence
with a well grounded (...) upon his Reflection and Profession; as written in
(...) Tim. 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my (...), I have
kept the Faith; Triumphantly concludes, Hence forth there is laid up for me A
(...) OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, which the Lord will give in that Day, not to me only,
but to all them also, that love his Appearing.

And now the following Rules for the Trial of our Spiritual State are
Comprehensive Marks of the New Creature, Legible Characters of a Godly State,
being fairly painted out to us in the written Word of God, and proposed here in
a Method most easy, and familiar; as well adapted to Babes in Christ, 1 Cor.
3.1. as to those, that are Strong in the Faith, Romans 4.20.

Ten Interrogative Rules of Trial.
1. Rule. HAve we the Spirit of Christ? Otherwise (says the Apostle) We are
none of His, Romans 8.9. Are our Minds Spiritually Enlightened? Be the Eyes of
our Understandings Opened? Acts 26.18. So as in any measure to convince and
satisfy us of the Evil of Sin? Of the vile Nature, and Monstrous Deformity of
it? This then is an happy Effect of the Spirits Office, Joh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11.
Are we hence become Uneasy under the Yoke of Sin? Are we weary of its Tyranny?
and so made willing to part with it? Do we see and judge our Selves miserable,
whilst under the Power of, and Acted by Sin? And are we truly desirous of a
Remedy? Matthew. 5.3. -- Have we a Spiritual Palate? Do we relish the Heavenly
Manna? Do we savor Spiritual things? and Mind the things of God? pressing
after a better Acquaintance with them? A more thorough Understanding of them?
Romans 8.5. They that are after the Spirit, or become Spiritual, Mind the things
of the Spirit. Do we live Mortified Lives? Do we not pamper the Flesh? and
indulge our carnal Lusts? but do we what we can, Strive against and oppose the
corrupt Dictates of our Natures? Do we Endeavor to withstand the Lustings of
our Evil Hearts, and Carnal Minds? Which are said to be Enmity against God,
Ver. 7. Do we not willingly make Provision for, foster up, and gratify 'em?
It Is written, Ver. 13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye, but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body ye shall live. Do we follow
the Dictates of the Spirit of God? Are we in the General course of our Lives
under the Divine Conduct of it? Be we guided thereby in the Way of Truth? Joh.
16.13. Does it lead us in the Paths of the Lords Precepts? And direct us to
walk in his Statutes? This shows our Sonship, Ver. 14. -- Do we find our
Infirmities helped in our Applications by Prayer unto God? Do we Supplicate in
the Spirit? And Pray with true Devotion of Soul? Are we Fervent, Zealous and
Sincere in our Religious Addresses unto God? Do our Hearts go with our Mouths?
Do we truly desire the Good we ask for? Do we find the Spirit of Grace
breathing in us in our breathings up unto God? Ver. 26. Do we taste the first
fruits of the Spirit? Ver. 23. -- Does the Spirit witness to us for our
Comfort? As that we are Pardoned Ones? That we are the Adopted of God? And the
Sanctified in Christ Jesus? Ver. 15, 16. So 1 Cor. 2.12. Helping us with an
holy Filial Confidence to cry, Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Have we therein sweet
intimate Converse, and endearing fellowship with Christ, and God the Father,
through him? It Is Written, 1 John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ. Have we any ravishing Interviews with Heaven? -- Do
we Anticipate the Joys above? And does this Wing, and Enlarge our Desires to
nearer Approaches? To more Open Views, and fairer Prospects? And does this
Serve to take us off from the Vanities of Time, and Sense; and to set us a
longing for the immediate Enjoyments of God, and Glory? If so we have the
Earnest of our Inheritance until the Redemption of the Purchased Possession to
the Praise of the Glory of Christ, Ephesians. 1.14. And 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know,
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.
Gal. 6.7, 8. Whatsoever a Man Sows, that shall be also reap: -- He that
sows to the Flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap LIFE EVERLASTING.

This is an Undoubted Evidence.

II. Rule. Do we Unfeignedly Believe on Christ? Do we heartily Credit the
Report given of Him in the Scriptures of Truth? Are our Desires to Him, as to
One Mighty, Able, and Willing to Save? Are we willing to take Him in all his
Offices? As Prophet to Enlighten, and Instruct us? As Priest to Atone for, and
Reconcile us to God? And as our King to Reign in, Rule over, and Govern us
according to his Will, and to Restrain, and Subdue our Spiritual Enemies for
us? Do we roll, and cast our Selves on Him, as an only Savior? Acts 4.12. Our
only Atonement, that Infinite Wisdom has provided? Prove. 33.24. Can we leave
our All with Him? Consecrating, and Devoting our All unto Him? 2 Cor. 8.5. Is
this, though faint, yet the true desires, and attempts of our Souls? Are their
Outgoings, though weak, yet only after Him? Did we ever discern any real, and
distinguishing Excellency in Christ? Had we ever such a realizing View of his
Form, Comeliness, and Beauty, as did carry Out, and Enlarge our Desires after
Him? -- Did we ever so Apprehend them, as rendered Him Lovely, yea altogether
Lovely in our Eyes? Cant. 5.16. The truly, and only desirable One of our
Souls? To be the Rose of Sharon, the (...) of the Valleys? Cant. 2.1.
Infinitely surpassing a Solomon in his most Splendid Appearances of Royalty and
Glory; -- Is Christ become Precious to our Souls? Thus He is to true Believers
on Him, 1 Pet. 2.7. Are our Hearts set upon Him? Are our Thoughts most an end
going out after Him? Are our Minds frequently Engaged in a sweet, if not a
ravishing Contemplating on Him? Do we look upon Him, as the Power of God, and
the Wisdom of God? 1 Cor. 1.24. Do we labor to Suppress Vain Thoughts? And in
no wise cherish and indulge them? We have then a glorious Title to the
Beatifick Vision, Math. 5.8. Do we design, and accordingly, as we can, Apply
our Selves to Oppose such Sinful Ebullitions of Heart? To check, and stifle Sin
in its first Motions, and Stirrings therein? Do we thus make it our business to
Purify our Hearts? So indeed do Believers on Christ: Acts 15.9. Purifying their
Hearts by Faith.

We then do believe in Christ, and have a Faith, of the right Kind; such a
Faith, as is Operative, and Saving, A Faith, that always works by Love, Gal.
5.6. The End of which, 1 Pet. 1.9. Is the Salvation of the Soul.

This is a Sure Token.

III. Rule. Is it our real Desire, our Sincere, and Main Endeavor to be
Interested in the Favor and Friendship of Christ? Do we so Esteem, and
Appretiate the same, as in Comparison therewith to contemn and despise the
Friendship of the World? Do we not lay out our Selves after the Latter? Or
rather do we neglect to secure it, as being Enmity to God, and Christ? James
4.4. Is the Bent of our Inclinations chiefly, yea, only toward, and do we make
a preferring Choice of Christ's Friendship? Is it dear to us, as our Lives? And
if standing in Competition therewith, could we not rather Sacrifice them, than
willingly sustain the loss of that? -- And be we led hence to Value the
fellowship of Jesus Christ? Do we prize it above, and prefer it to the
fellowship of any Creature, whether intimatest Friend, or nearest and dearest
Relative what ever? Math. 10.31. So Luke 14.26. We must hate All to that, or we
cannot be Christ's Disciple. -- Do we walk in All the Ordinances of Christ's
Instituting with sincere Desires, and Breathings of Soul, yea with Uncessant
Hart-like Pantings after Communion with Him therein? Psalm. 42.1. Is the
reaching of our Soul, the stretch of our Inclinations therefore? And does the
Experience of Christ's Presence, the Breathings of his Spirit in upon our Souls
in Ordinances give a pleasing Satisfaction to us? Does it cause us to sit under
his Shadow with great delight? Do we find his fruit sweet unto our Taste? And
his Banner over us to be Love? Cant. 2.4. And do such Discoveries refresh our
Minds? Do they revive us, though we walk in the midst of outward trouble? Psalm.
138.7. Do they replenish, and fill our hearts with holy Joy, and make us to
rejoice more, than in the Increase of Temporal Comforts? Or greatest Affluence
of Worldly Enjoyments? Thus was it with the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 4.6, 7. We may
then triumph, and say with him, in Psalm. 73.25. Whom have we in Heaven, but
thee; and there is none upon Earth, that we desire besides thee. Ver. 26. God
is the Strength of our Hearts, and our Portion for ever.

This is a Comfortable and Sure Sign.

IV. Rule. Are we true Penitents before God? Have we ever seen the Evil of Sin?
How contrary to the pure Nature, and holy Will of God it is? How destructive to
the Nature, Comfort, and Happiness of Man it proves? And is it thence become
distastful to us? Yea is it rendered Odious in our Eyes? -- Do we Own and
Acknowledge our Selves Sinners by Nature? Under Original Guilt before God,
which binds us over to Eternal Death? Romans 6.23. And do we Mourn therefore? Are
we Sorry for our Personal Transgressions? Do we with true Compunction of Soul
bewail them unto God? Do we grieve for our heart sins, as well as our Life
sins? For our Inward, and Overt Acts of Obliquity, and Rebellion? As sinful
Thoughts, as well as sinful Words, and Actions? For the Commandment is
Exceeding broad, reaching both the Inner, and Outward Man, Psalm. 119.96. Is
Sin, as Sin, [i. e.] as it is an Offense to the Holy God, hateful to us? Can we
say, We have a real Aversion to it, as such? Do we hate Sin with a perfect
hatred? Is it our burden? Christ then Invites us with a Promise of Relief, and
Ease, Matthew. 11.28. Do we grieve, that we can grieve no more for Sin? Do we
make it the Matter of our greatest Complaint at the Throne of Grace in our
Prayers unto God? -- Is it our troublesome Companion? Our continual, constant
Affliction, yea our greatest, and carried as such in our Addresses unto God? Do
we groan to be delivered from this Body of Death? And deem, and call our Selves
Wretched, till we be? Romans 7.24. Do we treat Sin, as our Foe? and worst Enemy?
Do we knowingly, and willingly indulge no Sin? Do we, what we can, abstain from
our Own Iniquities? Our Constitution, and Complexion Sins? Do we Endeavor to
lay aside the Sin, that Easily besets us? Our respective Natures lead, and
prompt us to? Heb. 12.1. And, as we can, do we at all times turn from it?
Shunning all Ways of Sin? All foreseen Temptations thereto? Yea, and do we
avoid, what in us lies, all Appearances, and seeming Occasions of Sinning? 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. -- We have then a Sound Repentance, the fruit of a Godly Sorrow
for Sin, which will prove to Salvation, not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.12. If
the wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous his Thoughts, and return unto
the Lord, Isai. 55.7. He will have Mercy on him, and abundantly Pardon him.

This is a Clear Evidence.

V. Rule. Be we Loyal Subjects of GOD, the King of Heaven? Do we Esteem His
Commandments to be Holy, Just and Good, and concerning all things to be Right?
Romans 7.12. Do we make his Will revealed in His Word the Rule, and Measure of
all our Actions? Do we designedly Square them by Christ's Gospel Rules? Do we
willingly take Christ for our Lord, and Serve Him accordingly? Luke 4.8. Are we
as willing Christ should Rule and Govern us, as Reconcile us to God, and Save
us? Do we Receive Him upon the Terms of the Gospel, as Prophet, Priest and
King? Do we with designed Cheerfulness Submit unto His Royal Scepter? Are both
his Precepts and Examples, 1 Pet. 2.21. the matter of our Imitation and
Practice? Is a Conformity thereto in the Progressive Course of our Lives,
endeavored after by us? Do we labor, that our Obedience does consist therein?
Have we a respect unto all His Commandments? So shall we be void of shame
before Him, Psalm. 119.6. And if our Hearts Condemn us not, we have then
Confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21. Do we Worship Christ in the Manner He
prescribes, approving of His Wisdom therein? Do we attend on all His
Ordinances, when possibly we can; whether of a public, or of a more private
Nature? Otherwise we shall fall under Christ's sharp Reproof, and severest
Censure, in Luke 6.46. And why call ye Me, LORD, LORD, and do not the things
that I say. Is our Care Exercised in neglecting no known Duty, either to God,
or our Fellow Creatures, though never so cross to our corrupt Dispositions of
Nature, or evil Inclinations thereof? Do we designedly comply with every way of
Duty, let it be never so thwart to our Temporal Interest? Yea, though we Incurr
the utmost Disrespect and Displeasure of Men thereby? And become liable to
undergo the greatest of Temporal Sufferings therefore? Do we thus, as Occasion
calls for it, Deny our Natural Selves, take up our Cross, and follow Christ?
Matthew. 16.24. Have we an Holy Ambition in us of blamelessly Walking in the
Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord, with them in Luke 1.2. and so of
being Righteous before God? Christ is then ours to Save us for ever: It Is
Written, Heb 5.9. He being made Perfect, became the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all them that Obey Him.

A Full, and Satisfying Token.

VI. Rule. Have we a true Love to the Godly? Have we an Hearty Affection for
the Saints in the Earth? Do we account such as bear Christ's Image, and are
carefully conforming to His Pattern and Precepts, the truly Excellent Ones?
Prove. 12.26. Do we Affect their Society? Do we frequent their Company? Thus did
the Psalmist, wh^^^ Example is recorded for our Imitation, Psalm. 119.63. I am
(says he) a Companion of all them that fear Thee, of them that keep thy
Precepts. And is all our Delight in them? Do we really take Pleasure in them?
Is their Conversation Pleasing and agreeable to us? Thus was it with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 16.3. Do we the rather do good to such? Do we even seek for
Opportunities to do the best Offices we can for them? Are we in waiting
Postures to Serve them? And do we cheerfully Embrace Opportunities when they
offer? Are we ready to Comfort, Relieve, and Help them, as their Need, and our
knowledge thereof calls for? It Is Written in Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore
Opportunity, Let us do Good to all Men, especially unto them who are of the
Household of Faith. Do we make the several Conditions of the People of God, the
respective Cases of the Household of Faith, to be even as our own? Do we
rejoice in and at the Flourishing Circumstances of any of Christ's Disciples?
Be we likewise Deeply Affected with the sad Exercises, and grievous Sufferings
of any of them that Fear His Name, and are watchful against all Iniquity?
Agreeable to 2 Timothy 2.19. They that name the Name of Christ, must depart from
Iniquity. -- Do we so Sympathize with them, as to become Afflicted with their
Afflictions; and Heartily grieve at the Afflictions of Joseph? Now he that thus
dwells in Love with the Brethren, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.
This is a most Infallible Mark.

As appears expressly from 1 John 3.14. We know (says the Apostle) we have
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren.

VII. Rule. Are we of a Reconciling, and Forgiving Spirit? Can we easily
Overlook Injuries, that are done us? Put up Affronts that are offered us? And
readily pass by Offenses, when given us by any whomsoever? Do we owe such as
wrong us in Body, Name, Estate, or Relatives, no ill Will? Do we not Maintain
and Cherish a rancour of Spirit at them for it? And in no Wise insist on OUR
HONOR, as a Motive to Vent it? Do we retain no Grudge against them therefore?
-- And when we speak of the Harm we received, and the Hurt that is done us by
any, have we no evil Design therein against them? Is it with no Spirit of
Revenge? No such Rash Desire of Satisfaction therefore? Nay, not allowedly in a
Thought? -- Or is it only offered by us, and mentioned, as the Matter of our
Grievance? As what nearly Affects and Afflicts us? -- Do we in no Wise, though in
our Power, requite 'em with Ill? Do we Designedly forbear Injuring them, when
we can, either in Name, or Interest, Directly, or Remotely, in our own Persons,
or by Proxy? It Is written, Avenge not your selves, but give place to Wrath; for
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, SAYS THE LORD, Romans 12.19. But rather do we
return Friendly and Religious Offices, Acts of Christian Love, and Kindness to
them, as we can? Romans 12.20. -- Do we in our Prayers to God, sincerely ask,
that His Bowels of Compassion might move toward them, for their Weakness, or
Wilfulness in Abusing, or Treating us Illy? Do we therein Petition, and from
our Hearts desire, that the Divine Favor might be shown them, and God's Mercy
be Displayed and Magnified in Forgiving them, though they should pursue us with
their Cursings, and Spiteful Usages? Do we take all Occasions to Serve them? Do
we Embrace every Opportunity convenient to do them what Good we can? -- And
though we choose not their Company, nor ever Embrace them as INTIMATES, yet, can
we when Occasionally met, speak Kindly unto them? Do we Treat them Civilly, and
Entertain them Heartily, with Christian Friendship? -- This is but according to
what Christ, our LORD and MASTER has taught us, As written in Matthew. 5.44. Love
your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you; Do Good to them that hate you, and
Pray for them which Despitefully use you, and Persecute you. This (says He)
will Evidence your being the Children of God, ver. 45. -- If we thus Forgive
Men their Trespasses, our Heavenly FATHER will also Forgive us, Matthew. 6.14. So
Luke 6.39. Forgive, and ye shall be Forgiven.

This is a Clear Evidence.

VIII. Rule. When Prosperity Attends us, does it attain Holy Ends upon us? Are
we Thankful that God's Candle shines upon us? That the Secret of God is upon
our Tabernacle? Job 29.3, 4. Do we Rejoice in the Lord herefor? Phil. 4.4. And
in the Language of the Psalmist, say, Psalm. 68.19. Blessed be the Lord, who
Daily Loadeth us with His Benefits, even the God of our Salvation. Are we not
Puff't up with Pride by our Increase? Do we not use Violence? This is the
Character of the Wicked, Psalm. 73.6. But what we can, do we withstand, and
avoid Temptations thereto? Are we not allowedly Lofty, but Humble in Speech and
Behavior? Are we careful to Improve such a Talent to God's Glory? Do we not
take up our Satisfaction in uncertain Riches? Or rather do we Trust in the
Living God, Who gives us Richly all things to Enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Do we not
Convert the Affluence of good Things, we are Blessed with by God, to our own
private Use and Service only? Do we not appropriate our Plenty to our
particular Interest? Or rather do we Honor God with our Substance, with the
First Fruits of all our Increase? Prove. 3.9. Do we cheerfully distribute any
part thereof to Public, and Pious Uses? And are we free from doing it
grudgingly, or of necessity? For God leveth a Cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. Are
we careful to abound in Works of Piety toward God, and Charity toward Men?
And do we design to be Rich in Good Works in some measure in proportion to what
God does Lend to, and Honor us with? Are our Hearts herein? Do we attend it
from a Sense of our Duty, and not Eye the Applause, and Encomium's of Men, as
our Motive therein? Do we in Obedience to Christ, Matthew. 6 3.4 Choose and Study
Secrecy therein, that our (...) may not know what our Right Hand does? Are our
Hearts full of Grateful Resentments unto God therefore? And are our Lives thus
livelily Expressive thereof? We then* as it is Written in 1 Timothy 6.19. Lay up
for our selves (...) Store, a good Foundation against the Time to come; that we
may lay hold on Eternal Life.

This is a Satisfying Evidence.

IX. Rule. Have Afflictions a Sanctified Influence, and Effect upon us? Do we
see God's Hand therein? Do we own it to be most Just, and Holy? Do they put us
upon a Strict Search after, and Enquiry into the Reasons of His Contending with
us? Job 10.2. And do we Judge our selves before him? But Justify God in the
Measures he takes with us? Saying, as Written in Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is
Righteous in all His Ways, and Holy, yea, Merciful in all His Works. Does a
Sense of God's Displeasure with us therein produce a true Contrition of Spirit
in us? Does it procure Brokenness of Heart, and fill us with profound Humility
of Soul before Him for our Sins? Are we made the more Holy thereby? Do we find
our Afflictions Yielding to us the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness Heb.
12.10, 11. When we are Exercised with pressing Temptations, and sore
Distressing Trials, is this the Happy Fruit thereof, To Purge away our
Iniquity, and take away our Sin? Isa. 27.9. Does it help us to make Advances in
Holiness? Do our Losses, and Crosses make us more Humble and Submissive unto
God? Are we Designedly Patient under Divine Corrections? Readily saying, as in
I Sam. 3.18. It Is the Lord, let him do what seems him Good. And again, Lam.
3.39. Why does a Living Man Complain; A Man for the Punishment of his Sons. Do
we thence Endeavor quietly to bear them? Do we in no Wise willingly, and
allowedly Despise the Chastening of the Lord, nor Faint when we are Rebuked of
him? Prove. 3.11. Do we thus Endure Chastening, desiring its continuance till we
are made Spiritual Gainers by it, rather than its removal only for our Ease? Do
we Learn Obedience thereby, and to be more in Subjection to the Father of
Spirits, that we may Live, Heb. 12.9. Do our Afflictive Exercises wean, and
take us off from Creature Trust, and Dependence? Do we Learn, and see more of
the Uncertainty, and Vanity thereof by all? And are we brought thereby to Roll
our selves on God, and to Trust in Him as our only Satisfying Portion? Hab.
3.17, 18. Are we not led thence to a more Exact Conformity to His Word, that
Transcript of the Divine Will, as the Rule of our Lives? Are we made more
careful to Square all our Actions by it? Are we more Close Walkers with God by
all? Thus was it with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was Afflicted, I
went astray, but now (says he) have I kept thy Word. And will not this minister
Comfort and Satisfaction to us? Since God says, in Rev. 3.19. As many as I
Love, I Rebuke and Chasten. So Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord Loves He Chasteneth,
and Scourges every Son whom He receives. And do we not Rejoice herein, and
say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for us, that we have been
Afflicted, that we might Learn Thy Statutes. Do we hence Encourage our selves
in God, and in a way of Gospel Obedience, wait for Him under all, hoping in His
Mercy, through Christ, for His Salvation? Lam. 3.24, 25, 26. Romans 8.18. I
reckon (says the Apostle) the Sufferings of this present Time, are not worthy
to be Compared with the GLORY, that shall be Revealed in us. So 2 Cor. 4 17.
Our light Affliction, which is but for a Moment, shall then work for us a far
more Exceeding, and Eternal Weight of GLORY.

This then is a sure Mark.

X. Rule. Are we Truly, and Evangelically Holy? Have we an Habit of Holiness in
our Hearts, and have we Holy Actions Exhibiting it in Our Lives? Do we Act from
Grace Imparted, and Infused? from God, and not from Nature? Is the Love of God,
and Christ shed abroad in our Hearts? Romans 5.5. Does that Irresistably
Constrain us? 2 Cor. 5.14. Does a Sense of the Divine Love to us, raise
Grateful Resentments in our Souls? And cares thence to return a Cheerful
Obedience? Do we find in us a Love to God, and His Ways? To Christ, and His
Gospel Precepts? And do we delight our selves therein? Does not this then Argue
a Divine Principle in us? 1 John 4.19. We Love Him, because He first Loved us.
Is not then our Love to God, a Fruit of His Eternal Love to us? Nay is it not a
Clear, and Satisfying Manifestation of it? -- Do we Act, as under God's Eye?
Are we fearful of doing any thing Offensive, and Displeasing to Him? Be we
careful in all things not to Grieve Him? But to be Dutiful, and Obliging? Col.
1.10. Followers of God, as Dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1. Are we under the Governing
Influence of the Strict, and Awful Account, we must give e're long unto God?
And do we thence press forward in Duty, Endeavoring after higher Seize
in Holiness? To be more in resemblance like the Holy God? As commanded in 1
Pet. 1.16. As He which has Called you is Holy, so be ye Holy in all manner of
Conversation: Be ye Holy, for I am Holy. Are we depending only on the
Righteousness of Christ to Justify us? Phil. 3.8. On the Spirit of Grace to
renew, and Sanctify us? 1 Cor. 6.11. To Furnish and Strengthen us to, and in
every good Way, and Work? Yea, and to Seal us to the Day of Redemption? Ephesians
4.30. Do we seek the Honor that is from Above? Which only comes from God? Joh.
5.44. Do we design to give, and do God all the Honor we can? Do we pay Him the
highest Respect, and Reverence? Do we Honor Him in our Hearts, and Lives? Have
we High, and Holy Thoughts of God? And are we Humble, and Circumspect in our
Walking before Him? Do we Eye God's Glory in all we do? Do we make that the
Compass of our Thoughts, our Words, our Ways, and Actions? Our Chief, our
Last, our Highest End in All? Hereby we shall answer the End of our Creation,
Preservation, and Redemption, by Christ our Savior, 1 Timothy 1.15. and 4.10. The
Natural Son of the Eternal God, Col. 1.16, 17. and Heb. 1.2, 3. It Is Written, 1
Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not your own, for ye are Bought with a Price: Therefore
Glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's. So 10.31.
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. And by thus having our Fruit
(...) Holiness, we shall find the End Everlasting Life, Romans 6.22. and in Psalm.
50.23. The Divine Promise is to them that well dispose their Way, (as some
render the Words) or (as our Translation is) Order their Conversation Aright,
will I show the Salvation of God. This then is a Full Evidence.

POSTSCRIPT.
THese Heads of Trial, or Rules for Self-Examination, are so Disposed and
Accommodated, as being well and Seriously Weighed; Closely, and Particularly
Applied; may Satisfy any, how the Case stands between the Great God, and their
poor Souls: Whether they are in Good Terms with Heaven, or not? And so prove an
Hopeful Means, in some Measure at least, to Awaken the Sleeping, to Alarm the
Secure, and to Dissolve the Bands of Presuming SINNERS. Therewith also to rouse
the Drowsy, to resolve the Doubting, to recover the Desponding, and to scatter
the groundless Fears of any SINCERE CHRISTIANS, whereby their designed End
would be happily Attained. But Alas! the Wicked, though perhaps convinced of the
Necessity of Trying their State, for the Cure of Self-Ignorance, and securing
Solid Peace at present, and confirmed Hopes of Happiness hereafter; yet are
Averse to, and do really Abhor so Holy an Exercise. They form at best, but dark
Idea's of it, and start at the Thoughts of attending it, least they should
disclose, and bring to view such a Spiritual Gastliness, and Deformity, as
would only Minister to them matter of greatest Terror, and Confusion: Whence
they either wholly decline it, or but Superficially perform it; both which are
sad Symtoms of being Sealed to the Day of WRATH, and Final Retribution. Whereas
the Godly are critical, through, and frequent in this Spiritual Scrutiny,
attending it with pleasure, in hopes of a Joyful Result: Agreeably we have it
drawn by the Pencil of the Unerring Spirit of God, in Joh. 3.20, 21. Every one
that does Evil (i. e. allowedly, and of choice) hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be discovered and Reproved; But he
that does Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God. So 1 John 3.19, 20, 21. And hereby we know, that we
(...) of the Truth, and shall persuade and assure our Hearts before God; for if
our Heart (or Conscience) Condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and
knows all things: Beloved, If our Heart Condemn us not, then have we
Confidence toward God.

FINIS.
ERRATA. In the Title Page, for pancos, read paucos, p. 1. l. 15. r.
recommending. p. 2. l. 25. r. Paragraph.


