Thoughts for the Day of Rain.

In Two ESSAY'S: I. The GOSPEL of the Rainbow. In the MEDITATIONS of Piety, on
the Appearance of the BRIGHT CLOUDS, with the BOW OF GOD upon them. II. The
SAVIOR with His Rainbow. And the COVENANT which GOD will Remember to His
People in the CLOUDY TIMES that are passing over them.

By COTTON MATHER, D. D.

Psalm. lxv 8.9. They who dwell in the Uttermost Parts have a reverence for thy
TOKENS. -- Thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it

Qui Meteora Videt liquido radiantia Caelo
Hic Videt Aeterni facta stupenda Dei
In English

Who sees bright Meteors in the Liquid Skies,
The wondrous works of the Eternal spies
BOSTON in N.E.: Printed by B. Green Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop at the
Sign of the Buck over against the South Meeting House 1712.

PREFACE.
IT was in Compliance with the Desire of an Honorable Friend that I Wrote
both, and Preached One, of those ESSAYS which I now present unto his, and the
Public Acceptance. I did it from a perfect Concurrence I had with him, and
many other Good men, in the Opinion, That among the Engines of Piety, wherewith
our Good God has accommodated us, the Rainbow is one too much neglected with
the Professors of our Holy Religion. To Recover the Rainbow unto the Use of our
Faith, and Hope, and Joy, and thus to teach the Praising Tribe, the Use of the
Bow, I saw to be so sensible a Service unto the Designs of Piety, that I could
not but cheerfully Embrace it. A very few Hours, and not many more, than the
Modern Inspection finds Colors in the Rainbow, made me an* Owner of such
Thoughts upon my bright Theme, that I began to imagine, I had honest Old
Bernards Imprimatur for them; Si metu forte, aut Segnitie, aut minus discreta
Humilitat, Verbum bonum, quod possit prodesse multis, inutili, imo et damnabili
Ligas Silentio, certe maledictus eris, qui Frumenta abscondis in Populis.
Accordingly they are now offered unto the Children of the Covenant And One of
the Things wanting in the Christian Asceticks is thus brought in to the
Churches Treasury.

The Readers for whose Edification these Essays are chiefly Calculated, are
for the most part Plain men, Dwelling in Tents. It would rather puzzle such
Readers, than Instruct them, to give them a Lecture on the Mathematics of the
Rainbow Nor does the Author profess himself to be so much of a Mathematician,
as to do it with the Exactness, wherewith it ought to be done, or to be any
more than a Wellwiller to such Mathematics.

A Famous Clergyman of Spalato, in a Book De Radijs Visus et Lucis, Written
before the Beginning of the former Century, began Mathematically to describe
how the Interior Bow of the Iris, is made in Round Drops of Rain, by a
Refraction of the Suns Light, and One Reflection between them; and the
Exterior, by Two Refractions, and Two sorts of Reflections between them, in
each Drop of Water.

Descartes, (who don't use to betray his Tutors,) took the Hints from Antonius
De Dominis, and went on Mathematically, and with much Demonstration, to give us
a Theory of the Iris, from the Laws of Refraction, which Lucid Rays do suffer
in passing through Diaphanous Bodies. He clearly demonstrated the primary Iris,
to be only, The Suns Image, reflected from the Concave Surfaces, of an
Innumerable Quantity of small Sphaerical Drops of falling Rain, with this
Necessary Circumstance, that those Rays which fell on the Objects, parallel to
each other, should not after One Reflection, and Two Refractions, (viz. At
going into the Drop and coming out again) be Dispersed, or made to diverge, but
come back again also to the Eye, parallel to each other. The Secondary Iris he
supposes produced by those Rays of the Sun, which fall more obliquely, but
after the same manner as before, only in these there are Two Reflections before
the Suns Rays refracted a second time, and tending toward his Eye, in a
parallel Position, can get out from the Aqueous Globules.

The Acute and Accurate Mr. Halley comes after the French Philosopher, and
shows how the Cartesian Problems were more easily solved than the Author
himself imagined, He shows how to determine the Angle, by which the Iris is
distant from the opposite Point of the Sun, and the Ratio of the Refraction
being given Geometrically, or, Vice Versa, the Iris being given, to determine
the Refractive Power of the Liquor. And he goes on to Cultivate the Subject,
with the Ingenuity proper to that accomplished Gentleman.

But then comes the Admirable Sir Isaac Newton; One whom I may venture to call
The Perpetual Dictator of the Learned World in the Principles of Natural
Philosophy; and the most Sagacious Reasoner upon the Laws of Nature, that has
yet Shone among Mankind; and which is the Crown of all, The most Victorious
Assertor of an Infinite GOD, that has appeared in the bright Army of them that
have driven the baffled Herd of Atheists away from the Tents of Humanity. This
Rare Person, in his Incomparable Treatise of Optics, has yet further Explained
the Phenomenon of the Rainbow; and has not only shown how the Bow is made, but
also how the COLORS are formed; How the Rays do strike the Senses, with the
Colors, in the Order which is required by their Degrees of Refrangibility, in
the Progress from the Inside of the Bow to the Outside; the Violet, the Indico,
the Blue, the Green, the Yellow, the Orange, and the Red.

But if all my Countrymen could Read Oughtreds Characters, or ken the Terms and
Rules of Trigonometry, with the Doctrine of Fluxions; yet my Printer could not
easily accommodate us, with the Schemes that would be needful for Dilucidation.
The very few that would be gratified with such things, I leave to Consult the
Authors themselves, and shall proceed unto more Theological and Agreeable
Contemplations.

QUoniam vero Collegium Harvardinum ter-illustre, de Gradu illo (...)
Theologia, quo me nec Merentem, nec Quaerentem, In lyrissima Academia
Glascuensis (...) de Honor in suum Filium (...), Academice et Benevole
judicasse, atque in Tabulas Publicas Diploma indignissimo homunculo concessum
retulisse. Sentiam: Gratias me Almae venerandaeque meae Matri publicas ( et
multo (...) quam in (...)) devere (...) debitasque hoc Munusculo Iride
decorato, jam ex part persolvo. Fait enim, Dignissimi Domini, (...) inter
Academiae Vestrae, dum talem Gradum Confer in Animo (...) potestate habuerit,
Statuta; Quod Unusquisque illius Gradus Candidatus, Tractatum quendam in Utile
quoddam Argumentum, pro Ecclesiarum Commodo in Lucem emittere tenebitur. Quum
autem idem pro ista Relatione hujusce Dignitatis, quod pro ipsa Collatione (Si
Licuerit et placuerit) Officium a me Expectari poterit; En Tractatulum in
Utile, et Sane Nobile, Argumentum, vobis Optimo Jure Dedicatum,

In Societate Vestra Spectatissima quot video, et quam amabiles Ecclefiae
Irides! Vivat igitur, vigeat ac floreat, (...). De Cantabrigia vestra ( cujus
et idcirco sit Nomen Eucarpia!) dicatur, Vir et Vir eft in illa natus; Multi
Pietate, Ingenio, Doctrina Insignes, in illa Renati, atque Formati, Viri; viri
qui in Templo Dei refulgeant, et, (quod de Simone olim Syracides) (...): Et qui
de Diluvio quod jam Christianismo imminet, ac omni pietati mortem intentat,
Ecclesiae metus pellent, Lacrymaique Solabuntur. Fulgidae denique ex illa,
primaeque Magnitudinis quam plurimoe Stellae, et quae ad CHRISTUM suo ducant
Fulgore, Oriantur.

Sic ex animo precatur, Vester adhuc et in Aeternum, COTTONUS MATHERUS.

The Gospel of the Rainbow.
Elegia Frytschij.
SIC ubi Caelestem subo^iri adspexeris Arcum,
Quo Caelum melius non Meteoron habet:
Ille quidem varios ducens e nube Colores,
Humano Generi conspiciundus adest,
Hunc ita conspicias, ceu very pignus Amoris
Ae olim facti faederis esto memor.
Quod Deus Omnipotens Noah sancto contulit ipso,
Se Servaturum totius Orbis opus.
Nec perpessurum submersum Fluminis unda
Iri hominem sicut fecerat ante quidem.
Frytschius Englished.
WHen you discern the Bow of Heaven to rise,
The Brightest Meteor there salutes your eyes.
Producing various Colors on the Cloud,
Mankind beholds it, that survives the Flood.
Behold it, Syrs, a Sign of Heavenly Love,
And of a Covenant made by GOD Above.
Almighty GOD, did by that Sign Engage
To keep His Noah's World from Age to Age.
It Is thus Engaged, God will no more Employ
Deep Waters, as of old, men to destroy.
The GOSPEL of the Rainbow.
ZECH. X. 1. The Lord shall make Bright Clouds.


A Mind commonly forming of Good Thoughts, and filled with them on all
Occasions is thereby really Ennobled and Enriched: And Thoughts do not more
prove the Existence of it, than Good and Right and Wise Ones will contribute
unto its Felicity. Such a Mind makes a just claim, to the Dignity, which in
REASON belongs unto it; and it has, yea, it makes, a sort of Heaven for it
self, with an Holy Anticipation of the more Local Flight, it is e're long to
take into the Heavenly World. It follows, that One of the best Kindnesses that
can be done unto the Children of Men, is to Supply them with Good Thoughts: One
of the Kindest Offices that we can do for our Neighbors, is to awaken in them
the Thought of the Rational and Religious; and help them in Thinking on the
Things wherein they are concerned. Of Writing many Books for this End, our
Ecclesiastes long since advised, Let there be no End! Though the Study of Writing
them should be never such a Weariness to the Flesh, yet we will not be Weary of
Well-doing in this way, nor count it a Vanity, in this way to go on with
Essays to cure Vanity.

We are surrounded with the Preachers of Truth unto us; All the Elements are
full of them: In all Creatures we have the Faithful Preachers; if we have but
Ears to hear them. To put the Creatures unto such an Use, as that of being Led
by them unto Good Thoughts, and unto the due Acknowledgments of Their and Our
Maker and Savior; it is, to do something toward the Restitution of all Things,
unto the Primitive and Paradisian State; yea, O Sons of God, it is a little to
bring on the State, for which the whole Creation groaneth! Of our Duties, and
of His Praises to whom we owe our Duties, I will say, Great is the Army that
Publishes them! And the Kingdom of METEORS has raised for us a particular Army
of Monitors; among which there is none that makes a more Illustrious Figure,
than One which I am going to rescue from the Neglect, with which it has been
too much disregarded and overlooked in a World, which owes more pious Regards
unto it.

It is the Rainbow. Of this you Expect not from me, any Attempts at Philology.
To tell you, that the Hebrew Name for it is, Ketcheth; The Greek (...), as well
as the Latin, Iris; the French, L'arc du Ciel; (or, the Bow of Heaven;) and in
like manner, the Italian L'arco del Cielo; and the Spanish, El arco del Cielo;
(as also, El arco de las nueues, or, The Bow of the Clouds:) and the German
(more akin to ours) Ein Regenbogen; This would perhaps as little Edify you, as
to tell you, that our Indians call it by some such Name, as Ukqumogquoanuh. I
shall as little attempt the Philosophy of it; For, after I have given you the
common Definition of it, Arcus Coelestis, qui fit ex Solis Luce, in Nubem vary
compositam et temperatam, sed ex Diametro Soli ipsi incurrente ac incidente,
pluvioso tempore; and should add more than as many more, as there be Colors in
the Rainbow; and with the Modern Corrections of ancient Errors, proceed unto
the Differences between the Solar Iris, and the Lunar: and between the Iris and
the Halo; so little progress have we yet made in real and certain Knowledge,
that I should Leave you after all, with the Subject of my Discourse, but in the
Clouds.

It Is a Theological Consideration of this Meteor that is now proposed. The
Gospel of the Rainbow, is the Theme I have undertaken very briefly to treat
upon. I take the Rainbow to be intended, when we read of Bright Clouds. The
Glorious One, directed His People to Ask Rain of Him; a moderate Rain in the
Time that should render it Seasonable and Serviceable. It is hereupon promised,
So the Lord shall make Bright Clouds: that is to say, Clouds brightned with the
Rainbow; and such as a Moderate Rain, uses to be distilled from. Compare Job
XXVII. 11. We often enjoy this Favor of Heaven; but I am now to bring you the
Gospel of it. And my Treatise must begin with a Complaint, That the Christian
World have taken so little Notice of a Meteor, upon which the Great God that
formed all things, has put such a Stamp of peculiar Excellency. It has pleased
His Infinite Majesty, to Stamp a Sacramental Character upon it, and make it as
a Sacrament of His Covenant with the Children of Men. We all know, that when
the Patriarch Noah, with his Family, came out of the Ark, the Glorious GOD
comforted him, and his Posterity, with such an Advice as this; Genesis IX. 13. --
17. I set my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be for a Token of a Covenant,
between Me, and the Earth. And it shall come to pass, when I bring a Cloud over
the Earth, that the Bow shall be seen in the Cloud; and I will Look upon it,
that I may Remember the Everlasting Covenant between God, and every living
Creature of all Flesh that is upon the Earth. And God said unto Noah, This is
the Token of the Covenant which I have Established between Me and all Flesh
that is upon the Earth. I believe the Bishop of Milain is the only Author in
the World, that ever understood this Bow of any other than the Rainbow. Now,
certainly after this, Whenever a Rainbow is Exhibited, there is a Set of Good
Thoughts, with which it should always be Looked upon. But God is not Glorified
upon the view of the Rainbow so Commonly, so Devoutly, and with such Good
Thoughts, as ought to be: nor does it generally put us upon such Reflections of
Christianity, as might be expected from a People of our Illuminations in the
Covenant of the Glorious Lord. I must not make a Fruitless Complaint; and
therefore my Design is, now to fit some Arrows for the Bow of God, and make
ready a Quiver of Good Thoughts, Which are to be shot from that Bow into the
Minds of the Faithful, as often as it appears unto us.

Indeed the First Use that we unavoidably make of the Rainbow, will be in a way
of Admiration. It Is truly an Admirable Spectacle. The Spectator of it, is to be
called forth in those Terms; Job XXXVII. 14. Stand still, Consider the Wondrous
Works of God. And this the more Emphatically, because the Rainbow appears in
the very next words of Elihu; for the Rainbow is meant in those words, He
causes the Light of His Cloud to shine. The Pagan Theology makes the Rainbow,
to be the Daughter of Thaumas [(...)] because of the Wonderment wherewith we
behold it; It is to us, we would rather say, The Mother of Wonderment. But the
Wonders which it raises in our Minds, ought to be tuned into Praises of the
Great God, whose Strength is in the Clouds, and who displays His Power there.
HE is to be Admired and Adored, and with Devout Souls, we are to Look through
the Bright Clouds, and shoot up our Hallelujahs. Glorious LORD, How Various and
how Beauteous are thy Works! With what Wisdom and what Beauty have thou made
them all! The Lesson is Apocryphal, but Agreeable, which was long since given
by the Son of Sirach; [Eccles. XLIII. 11, 12.] Look upon the Rainbow, and
praise Him that made it; very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof; It
compasses the Heaven above with a Glorious Circle, and the Hands of the most
High have bended it.

But we may not, we will not flop here. We will go on to such an Useful
Contemplation of the Rainbow as may render it a noble Instrument of Piety, in
our whole Conversation. I shall not Enquire into the old Opinion, that the
Spots of Earth, where the Feet of the Rainbow strike, are made singularly
Fruitful by the Influences or it. But I am sure, the Rainbow striking on our
Minds, may produce many Sweet Fruits of Pious Meditation. When it pleases the
Holy One to bring out His Rainbow unto our View, Let us Glorify Him, and
Meditate such things as these upon it.

The First MEDITATION.
What a Woeful, what a Fearful Desolation, once came upon a Wicked World, whose
Foundation was overflown with a Flood! Inasmuch as it was the Flood which
introduced the Consideration of the Rainbow, the sight of it, may very suitably
bring to Remembrance with us, that horrible Flood, in which as we have read, 2
Pet. II. 5. God spared not the Old World, bringing in the Flood upon the
Ungodly. It has been well enough proposed, Admoneat Iris horrendi illius
Judicii, quod in Di uvio ostensum fuit. Mercer tells us, That the Religious
Jews, in many Places, upon the Appearance of the Rainbow, go forth, and fall
down, and confess their Sins, and own themselves worthy to be Drowned with a
Flood, for their Iniquities. To us, that are Christians, Our LORD says, What do
you more than they?

There is no room to doubt the Relation which the Mosaic Records have given us,
of that astonishing Revolution, The FLOOD, wherein all Mankind, except the One
Family of a Righteous Noah, perished. It is a Matter of Fact, whereof the
Evidences are so many and so mighty, that they must Overwhelm all the
Contradiction of Infidelity, and, like the Flood it self, carry all before
them. It was acknowledged by the most Ancient Writers among the Pagans, quoted
by Josephus, and by Eusebius, and by Cyril, and others. Plutarch also has the
Story of the Dove in the Flood sent out of the Ark. It Is demonstrated likewise
by Kirker in his Arca Noae, that the Deucalion of Antiquity was our Noah. Yea,
The Tradition of a General Flood, was every where Current for Thousands of
years among all People; especially in the Countries near the Place, where the
Ark rested after the Flood. Even in the Coins used among them, especially those
mentioned by Falconerius, there were Commemorations of it. Martinius reports,
that the Chinese have a Tradition of a Flood, in an History very agreeable to
ours in the Book of Genesis. Acosta and Herrera find the like Tradition among
the Indians of their Acquaintance in America; Corata found it among the
Peruvians, and Gomara among the Mexicans. The insolent Attempts of Petrerius,
and some others, to restrain the Flood unto Palaestine, or to some few
Countries thereabouts, are not worthy of a Laborious Confutation. The Ruins
and Relics every where sound in the Subterraneous World, which could proceed
from nothing but the Flood, (as our Accomplished and Victorious Woodward among
the rest, and beyond them all, has rendered incontestable,) abundantly confute
the Impiety of those Men* and make it most evidently appear, that the Flood was
nothing less than Universal. Among the rest, the Undisputed Skeleton of an
Humane Body, of about Seventy Foot Long, and his Teeth, some above Two Pounds,
and others more than Four Pounds in Weight, lately dug up in our Neighborhood
at Albany, at such a Distance from the Sea, that it could be no Animal of the
Sea: This can be no other, than a Lively Proof, brought from America. [How it
came hither, Heaven knows!] to go into the Scale with many of the same kind in
the other Hemisphere, to confirm that passage of Moses, There were Giants in
the Earth in those Days. In M. DC. LVI. years, there prevailed such a Flood of
Wickedness in the World, that the Holy and Righteous God, by a Flood of Water,
brought upon it, a most horrible Desolation. But, who can comprehend, who can
imagine, the horror of the Desolation! Many Refined Wits have Employed
themselves, to frame Hypotheses, of the Methods of Nature, in which the Flood
was brought about; until some of them fall into the Distemper, which Learned
Men have wisely called an, Hypothesimania; and some of them have too much
Excluded that Immediate Interposition of the Almighty GOD, in a way
transcending the usual course, and common Law, of Nature, which was doubtless
made on this tremendous Occasion. The Fancies and Fictions which Burnet has
offered us in his Theory, (proved by Ramazzini, to be no other, than what
Patritius an Italian, Published as a part of the Abyssertian Philosophy, an
hundred and fifty years ago,) have met with sharp castigations, from them, who
have had at heart, the cause and credit of the Sacred Scriptures. But, As of
old, a Musician being asked, a Definition of the Soul, his answer was, It Is an
Harmony! An answer that had a Tincture of his own Profession in it: So, I do
not wonder, when I observe, what the Speculations of Some Gentlemen on this
Noble Subject, are tinged withal. A Professor of the Mathematics, brings in a
Comet, as producing all the hideous hurly burly of the Flood, by approaching
too near our Globe, in its Elliptick Motion. A Nation (of Whistons) that is not
without its Probabilities: And agreeably to it, some Learned Men, foretell the
Appearance of another Comet, [For old Seneca's Prediction about such
Predictions is now accomplished!] which may bring our Globe, under the other
Destruction, for which, we know, it is reserved. Nor am I without Suspicions,
That a Comet may be intended by the Vapor of Smoke, which is to bring on the
Great and Notable Day of the Lord; which also is most Literally, A Star falling
from Heaven: And some think, A World in a State of Punishment! A Professor of
Chemistry, from what he had seen in the Effervescence between an Acid and an
Alcali, concludes, that there are great Cavities in the Bowels of the Earth,
full of Water; that Minerals are generated in these Cavities; that by the
colluctation of several Salts meeting together here, an Air was generated,
which caused horrendous Earthquakes; that some of the Exhalation Escaping into
our open Air, it produced vast Rains, with such Thunder and Lightning, as
filled the Ungodly Men with a most confounding Amazement; and that by the Air
still Enclosed under ground, the Water of the Abyss, raged and swelled, and
broke out, and overflowed the highest Mountains. This (of St. Clairs) as
probably conjectured as the other, I will pass over Mr. Delaprymes Imagination,
That God broke the Foundations, Pillars, and Hollows, of the Earth, which till
then had stood above the Water. The continual Rains helped forward the
Dissolution; the Earth yielded, and sunk down; it and all the wicked Burden of
it, Subsided, and was absorbed in the Sea, which now covers it; As this Old
Earth fell in, our New Earth rose up; This was lifted up, to balance the
other; and as it Rose, the Waters rolled off, and left it at length to be what
it is. This conjecture, seems liable to more objections than the former; and
will have little but Plato's Tradition of the vast Island Swallowed up in the
Atlantic Ocean, to Support it. Our Warren takes the Account of the Flood given
in the Sacred Scriptures, to be Sufficiently Explained, by Saying; That there
were vast Caverns, filled with Waters, in the Antediluvian Mountains. The Great
GOD broke them open, and they came rolling down, and over-turning all that was
in the way of the Mighty Inundation. At the same time, there fell prodigious
Rains for Forty Days together. It was impossible for People to ascend these
Mountains, when the Waters were issuing out from them, with such an impetuous
Power and Plenty: and the Laden Clouds, hanging and bagging about them,
Emptied themselves there, like pressed Spunges, and ran down in irresistible
Torrents. Doubtless, the Air was full of Water-spouts, like the Exhydriae,
which are at Sea sometimes met withal; and the Hills were full of Cataracts
Poured out by the Vengeance of God. This Gentleman, finds enough here to drown
the World; and thinks there is no Necessity of understanding the Bible, as if
the Waters of the Flood, were Fifteen Cubits above the Tops of the Highest
Mountains.

There is an Excellent Ray, who will bring us yet more Light, concerning this
wondrous Revolution. According to him, the Windows of Heaven were now Opened,
by the Quantities of Water, descending from thence; all the Water Suspended in
the Air descending on the Earth. The Fountains of the Great Deep were now also
broken up, in that the Subterraneous Waters which communicate with the Sea, did
through great Apertures rush out upon the World. But for the cause of all this,
he Supposes, that the Glorious God, now changed the Center of the Earth, and
set it nearer to the Middle of that Haemisphere, which was then principally
inhabited! Here-upon the Atlantic and Pacifick Oceans, must needs press upon
the Subterraneous Abyss. By the Mediation thereof, they must force the Water
upward, and compel it to run out at those Wide Mouths, which the Indignation
of God had made for it. The Water poured out from these direful Orifices, upon
the Earth, must needs overflow it; until the Omnipotent God restored the former
Center of the World Finally; The Incomparable Sir Isaac Newton, judges the
Universal Flood, cannot have better, and fairer Account given of it, than this,
To Suppose the Center of Gravitation removed for a Time, toward the Middle of
the then inhabited Parts of the World: And a change of its Place, but the Two
Thousandth part of the Radius of this Globe, were enough to bury the Tops of
the Highest Mountains under Water. But we have notorious Proofs, in our
Subterraneous Occurrences, that the Flood reached unto America too. I add
therefore, the same cause operating a little further, would over-whelm this, as
well as the other Haemisphere. After all, we may truly say, that there was a
concurrence of many Causes, to bring on the Deluge. It is admirable, that
Seneca, treating of that Fatal Day, (which he dreamt of, as being still to
come,) when a Deluge is to come; He joins together many Causes for such a
thing; but all concurring, Uno agmine ad Exitium humani generis. But he does it
in such Terms, that the Acute Heidegger cries out; Oration ita concepta est, ut
de industria Explicare voluisse Mosen videri Posset. And Patrick after him; His
Words are written, as if he had been directed to make a Commentary upon Moses.

Let a Touch of the Modern Poetry at last write a short Epitaph, on this Liquid
Grave of the World.

WHen the most Great Creator of the Earth,
Would drown that World, to which He first gave Birth;
Commissioned Storms of Rain rush from on High,
Through the Wide Sluices of the clouded sky.
But while without Effect those Waters fall,
And only wash the Surface of the Ball,
Heavens Mighty Voice in dreadful Accents Spoke;
The vast Abyss loud Peals of Thunder broke.
Imprisoned Sea's impetuous Passage found,
And rolled a Liquid Ruin over the Ground.
The roots of Mountains from their Seats are torn,
And floating Islands on high Pillows born.
Lightnings keen Flashes Swiftly down-ward fly,
And rattling Thunder cracks the trembling sky.
From frowning Heaven, each dreadful Plague is hurled;
And Nature groaning quits the Deluged World.
But, my most Honored BLACKMORE, Do thou take this Theme into thy Masterly
hand. Let thy Matchless, and Immortal, and Envied Pen, adorn so Stupendous a
Subject. When thy Song, shall be Creation, Sing also the astonishing Funeral of
so considerable a Globe in the Creation. The Inimitable Monuments of thy
Erecting, are such as nothing but another Flood can damnify!

What remains, is, That the view of the Rainbow calls us to look back upon the
Desolation which the Flood once brought upon a Well-peopled World.
Well-peopled, I may say; For considering the Longevity of the Antediluvians, it
is not unlikely, That more People Perished in the Flood, than there be now
alive in the World. Suppose a Man to have Children, at sixty years of Age, and
only in the next forty years to have Twenty Children. Single out now the
shortest Liver of any mentioned, Except Enoch, before the Flood; and from that
one Stock of Seven hundred years, multiplying still by Twenty, you will find the
produce to be more than One thousand, three hundred, and forty seven Millions;
More People than are now Alive on the face of the Earth. And yet, I must also
say, Ill-peopled. For it was, The World of the Ungodly. A World wherein, Genesis
VI. 11, 12. The Earth was corrupt before God, and the Earth was filled with
Violence. God Looked upon the Earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all Flesh
had corrupted His way upon the Earth. Behold then, to what our Meditation shall
carry us, on this occasion.

O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty. The Sin of Mankind once Provoked thee,
to destroy a World of Men, with a dreadful Flood of thy Wrath; and with them,
to destroy all the works of their Hands; to destroy the Creatures also, which
by their Sin were Perverted and Polluted unto other Purposes, than those for
which thou had created them. I see, I see, Thou art of Purer Eyes, than to
behold Evil, and thou can not Look upon Iniquity. Oh! the Evil of Sin! Oh!
what a Destroying Evil! My God, Affect me with deep Apprehensions of that
Monstrous Evil. Oh! let me not be one of the Fools, that shall make Light of
such a Matchless Evil. Make me most Particularly afraid of the Sins, which were
most reigning among the Antediluvian Sinners; Afraid of that Intemperance, that
Unchastity, that Oppression and Injustice, for which the Generation of Sinners
before the Flood, are branded in thine Oracles. Oh! Do not leave me to do those
abominable Things, which are hated by thy Soul, O my God!

The Second MEDITATION.
The Great GOD, will not have this World, though a very Sinful one, to be drowned
any more; nor His Church in the World. This is the COVENANT, which our God has
made with the Earth; and the Rainbow is the Sign and Seal to the Covenant. We
should thankfully Remember it, as often as we see the Rainbow, and Say; Blessed
be our Gracious and Merciful and Long-suffering Lord, who has Swarn, that the
Waters of Noah shall go over the Earth no more!

Before I go any further, I Suppose, it will be Expected; that we a little
Consider that noted Question.

Whether there were any Rainbow before the Flood?

I answer two things. First; There is nothing in Scripture, no, nor Nature
neither, to assure us, that there was. We are not sure, that the Constitution
of the Air, and of the Clouds, before the Flood, was the same, that it was
afterward. We are sure, that the Flood brought a Mavelous Alteration on the
World; probably on the Air, as well as on the Earth. Doubtless the New
Constitution of the Air, was that which had a Share in changing the
Constitution of our Bodies, till there came on that Abbrevation of Humane Life,
which we are now brought unto. Dr. Jackson argues, That if other Natural Causes
depend upon the Final, which we are taught in the Scriptural Philosophy, we may
well think, that the Air before the Flood, had not the peculiar Disposition,
which is required unto the Production of the Rainbow; which then had not such
an End, as that for which it is now Employed by the Glorious God. It is now a
Messenger, that Reports and Confirms unto the New World, the Covenant of God,
for the Preservation of it. If it had been a common appearance unto the Old
World, it would scarce have appeared now with so Confirming and Comforting an
Efficacy, to Noah and his timorous Posterity.

But then, Secondly; Though Aben Ezra thinks there was no Rainbow before the
Flood, and many Christians also deny the Antediluvian Existence of it; yet very
many will say with my Learned Helvetian, Oppido falluntur; They are very much
mistaken. The Army of them, who Engage on this side, will have no less than a
Great Calvin, for a Standard Bearer. The Lord speaks not of the Rainbow as a
New Thing; He seems to speak of it, as a Thing that had been already placed in
the Clouds; I have set my Bow in the Cloud. He invites us rather to Look on the
New Use which He assigns unto it. Suppose a Rainbow before the Flood. Why, so
it is in all our Sacramental Elements. The Water, the Bread, the Wine, that are
used in our Sacraments did Exist before; This is no prejudice to the
Sacramental Importance, which they carry with them, after a Consecration from
Heaven for that purpose on them. To this purpose Danaeus in his Physice
Christiana, says, To conclude from the Sacramental Importance of the Rainbow,
that there was no such thing before the Flood, is no other, quam si quis Bov^s
ante Sacrificia Lege Mos^s praescripta, vel Aquam ante Baptismum non fuis^^
Colligat.

I return to my Meditation

The Rainbow is Expressly called. A Token of the Covenant. One would suspect,
the Pagant had some Notion of this; when they would have this Meteor to be,
Internuncia Deorum, the Messenger of the Gods. With Homer it is, (...), as if
one should say, An Angel of the Covenant. He represents Iris therefore, as
being sent with a peremptory Command unto Neptune, that he should not aid the
Graecians; doubtless, by the Swelling of the Waters. The Name Iris, perhaps may
be from (...), i. e. (...). Or, from the Chaldee, Ir, an Angel.

Some will have the Rainbow, to be a Token of the Covenant, which may be
called, Quedammodo Natural; inasmuch as it is only seen, when the Clouds are
so thin, as to give no Apprehensions of Showers enough to make another Flood.
Valesius accordingly says, Qui enim possit, cum neque Caelum totum Obductum
nubibus sit neque quae adsunt sunt valde densae? Thus Aquinas, and Cajetan, and
Cardan; Thus among the Hebrews, R. Levi Ben Gerson; who is also followed by
Vossius. But some will hardly allow the Expression; because the Flood was not
accomplished by mere Showers; but with some Supernatural Circumstances. The
Rainbow they will have to be a Token of the Covenant purely by Institution. And
with very much of Reason, if the Prognostications of the (...), the Pluvius
Vates, (as the Rainbow was of old called) be as Uncertain as Pliny would make
them; Nam ne pluvios quidem, aut Serenos Dies, cum Fide portendunt. And yet we
cannot but own there is in the Rainbow some sort of Analogy, with the Covenant,
whereof it is Instituted for a Token; whereof one point is this; The Rainbow is
Naturally a Token, that the Rains will not be Great, nor Long; and that Fair
Weather is anon to be Looked for. Bodin speaks the Sense of the usual
Prognostications on the Appearance of the Rainbow; Certissimum est Argumentum,
Imbres fore Leviores. It Is therewithal a most agreeable and Symbolical Token,
that the World shall not be any more so Destructively, as once it was, Rained
upon. Look upon it accordingly; and say upon it; Oh! the Patience of our God!
Though the Earth deserve as much as ever, to be drowned, for the Wickedness of
Mankind upon it, yet thou sparest it, O Lord, and thou have promised, that thou will still do so.

But then, I propose, that our Thoughts go on to Consider, on whose, and on
what Account the World comes to be so spared by the Lord.

When the Lord says unto Noah, With thee will I establish my Covenant, it is a
Remark of Munster upon it; That this refers to the Covenant made at the
Beginning, about the Promised Seed, that was to break the Old Serpents Head.
This Covenant is now Renewed and Assured unto Noah; who now being satisfied,
That the Messiah was to descend from him, he could no longer doubt, that God
would have a Church continued among his Posterity. Accordingly, When we think
on the Preservation of the World, promised with the Rainbow, it should be with
such Thoughts as these; It Is for thy sake, O our Savior, that such a Sinful
World is preserved. O Just One, Thou art the Everlasting Foundation that the
World stands upon! Oh! What shall we do for thee, and for thy Service, Thou
Preserver of Men! The Name of Nazarene, signifies, A Preserver. Our JESUS of
Nazareth, is our Glorious Nazarene.

And then, as it is well remarked by Heidegger; The CHURCH of God has a
singular, a peculiar Concernment, in this Covenant of the Rainbow. The Churches
coming to Righteousness by the Messiah, and so the Inheritance of the
Righteous, lies Enwrapped in it. And that passage, Neither shall all Flesh be
cut off, carries an Intimation, that God will become the God of All Nations,
and bring some of All Nations into His Kingdom. Indeed, the Preservation of all
Creatures, is for the sake of the Church. All is yours! It was no mistake in
Ferus; Pactum cum Noe Prefiguravit Faedus Christi cum Ecclesia. But he might
have said more than so. Indeed, The Signification of the Rainbow is to be so
Summed up; That there shall not come another Universal Flood upon the World;
but that God will preserve a Church in the World; and make it Righteous, and
bring it to Inherit the World; and all this, for the sake of the Messiah, whom
we find afterward appearing with a Rainbow about Him.

Our Savior has a People in the World; A People, that believe in Him; that
follow His Conduct; that in the way of Obedience to Him, Look for a
Resurrection from the Dead, unto the Blessedness of a Better World. He will
always have such a People. All the Powers of Darkness have been always carrying
on a Design to Extinguish this People, and Leave no true Church of our Savior
in the World. This Catholic Church has been the Torment of the Devil, the Envy
and Eyesore of his Children; both his Invisible and his Incarnate Legions.
Horrible Floods of the Ungodly have often threatened the Ruin of the Church;
Floods of Corruptions; Floods of Haeresies; Floods of Persecutions. If our
Great Savior had not laid a strange Restraint upon them, there had not been
Left any true Church upon Earth. If the Lord had not been on our side, may the
Faithful now say, If the Lord had not been on our side, the Waters had
overwhelmed us, the Streams had gone over our Soul. There are mavelous
Repetitions of that Observation; The Wrath of Hell does but Praise the Lord,
and the Remainder of that Wrath does He Restrain! Hence, When the Church State
has been Deserted, Betrayed, Quite gone, in one place; and the Children of the
Kingdom have Sinned it away, and Sinned themselves into Outer Darkness, it has
been produced immediately in another place; the Kingdom has been translated
unto Other People, that have brought forth the Fruits thereof. This, This is
the Voice of the Rainbow unto us, Be Encouraged, O People of God: Let things
Look never so dismally, your Savior will have a Faithful People in the World:
He will come down from the Machin of Heaven where you now see this Rainbow, and
rescue His Church, when things come to an Extremity, and it Looks as if its
Help were gone; and as if there were none shut up or left. Sirs, What can we
now do, but return that Joyful Echo; Lord, I believe thy Promise for thy
People; Oh! Let me be one of that Holy People.

It may be Enquired, How far this Faith may be Exercised, with Relation to any
Particular Church, which may have any Floods assaulting and hazarding of it;
How far the Promise may be applied unto this or that Particular Church in the
Dangers of it? It must be sadly confessed; Some Churches are utterly Drowned in
the Floods which the Divine Indignation pours in upon them. Every one of those
that are mentioned in our Bible, alas, Every one of them have been so. All of
those many Thousands that once were in Asia, and in Africa, have been so.
Several Thousands in Europe, even in our Days have been so. But we may say,
Never, until the Covenant of God has been grievously neglected, shamefully
despised in them. Let there be a Godly People in a Church, and let these Humbly
plead with God, His Covenant, and represent His Rainbow before Him, in the
Distresses of that Church; and let the Duties of the Covenant then be Livelily
Prosecuted there. Then! That Church will be that House, whereof we read, The
Rain descends, the Floods come, and the Winds blow, and beat upon the House;
and it falls not, for it is founded on a Rock.

The Third MEDITATION.
A Glorious CHRIST! How can I Look to Heaven at any Time, and especially NOW!
without ravishing Thoughts of Him and of His Glories! The Rainbow will many
ways put us in mind of our Admirable Savior. He would not have appeared with
a Rainbow about Him, as He did in the Visions both of Ezekiel and of John, if
He did not intend that the Rainbow should Lead us to think of Him. Shall we
say, That the Covenant on which our Eternal Safety depends, is made with our
Savior? It Is verily so; The Agreement is between God the Father, and our
Savior. He is our Head; We are nothing but what we are in Him. Shall we go on
to say, That all the Good Engaged unto us in the Covenant of our Safety, is
owing to our Savior? It Is verily so; Our Savior is the Purchaser of it all;
the Dispenser of it all. The Rainbow is the Proclamation of, A God Reconciled
unto the Children of Men. Iris is related unto (...). It Is our JESUS that is
the Author of the Reconciliation. We read, 2 Cor. V. 19. Of, God in CHRIST,
Reconciling the World unto Himself. At the View of the Rainbow, this were a
very proper Acknowledgment; It Is by thy Mediation, O our dear Savior, that the
Great GOD becomes Reconciled unto us!

I will proceed; There are some, who would find in the Rainbow it self, some
Intimations of the Glories belonging to our Savior. In the Sun begetting of
the Rainbow, some would read a little of that incomprehensible Mystery, The
only begotten Son of God. In the Three Colors (for of old, they counted no
more) of the Rainbow, others would read, the Three Offices of our Great
Redeemer. But these are Strains that I would not insist upon; and I would not
Look upon the Clouds too fancifully. One would rather Consider the Sun, as an
Emblem of our Savior; that wonderful Sun of Righteousness. And here, though I am
somewhat gratified, with a Good Thought, which I find in a Sermon, Of the
Rainbow, Preached by Mr. Bourn, almost an hundred years ago; This Bow is in the
Clouds; the further we are from it, the less beautiful, and glorious does it
appear; and so, the further we are from Jesus Christ, by our Corruption, and
our Continuance and Impenitence in Sin, the less beautiful, and glorious, and
excellent will He appear unto us: But the nearer we approach to Him, in Faith
and Holiness, the more Glorious will He be to us, and the more Earnestly shall
we Long to Enjoy Him. Yet I would rather choose to turn it so; the Cloud, by
Receiving Beams from the Sun, and Reflecting of them, how Beautiful an
Appearance is there now produced on it? Lord, Let the Beams of my Savior fall
upon me. Let me receive His Knowledge; Let me reflect His Image; Let me be
under His Impressions; I cannot ask for a greater Glory! I remember it was of
old given as the Commendation of a Famous and Useful man; Ecclesiast. L. 7. He
was as the Rainbows giving Light in the Bright Clouds. The way to arrive unto
such a Glory is to get near, and keep near our Admirable Savior; to hold
Communion with Him, and to be under His Influences. The more a CHRIST is
Entertained by any man, the more Glorious is He!

But then, I will take Leave, to fetch from the Rainbow, an Instruction of the
Humility, that such a man will be adorned withal. The most Learned man perhaps
(I take him to have been so) that ever was in the world, was himself a bright
Instance of his own Observation, in his, Theologia Naturalis. The Higher the
Sun, the Lesser the Rainbow. So, Quo Altior est Sol Justitiae Deus in Cordibus
nostris, Et quo plura in nos Confert Dona, eo minores esse debemus, Et (...)
debemus Superbire. The Higher a Glorious CHRIST is with us, and in us, and the
more He does for us, the Smaller must we be in our own Eyes; it will Humble us,
and Abate our Pride most wonderfully!

The Fourth MEDITATION.
Though a Watery Flood that may drown the World, is no more to be feared, yet
there is a Fiery Flood, for the depredations whereof a miserable World is
growing horribly combustible. There is a Desolation to come on this Lower
World, which the Writings of the Ancients mention under the Name of, Diluvium
Ignis; a Fiery Flood. Some think, the Heathen themselves had some Notion of
this, Lying under the Embers of their Fable, that made Pyrrha, (a Name that
carries, Fire in it,) the Wife of their Deucalion. It Is well-known, that their
Philosophers tell of, an, (...), or, Conflagration, which the World is one day
to undergo. The Oracles of the Sacred Scripture have positively declared it; 2
Pet. III. 7. The Heavens and Earth which are now, be reserved unto Fire,
against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men. And some read it, in
the very Colors of the Rainbow; as plainly Legible there as ever it could be
upon Seths Pillars of old: The Watery Color Leads them, to think on the Water
which once destroyed the World. The Grassy Color Leads them, to think on the
Day of Patience which God now allows unto the World, to bring forth Fruit unto
Him: The Fiery Color Leads them to think, on that Fire which is e're long to
consume the World. Be that as it will; It is most certain from our Prophecies
of a Divine Inspiration, (and there can be no Color for the Infidelity that
questions it,) That the World which was once Drowned, is e're long to be
Burned. By Fire will the Lord plead with all Flesh, and the Slain of the Lord
shall be many. It Is true, In the Circumstances of the Conflagration to be
Expected, there are Some things hard to be understood. It seems that the
Descent of our Savior, at, and for the Destruction of Antichrist, and the
Beginning of the Blessed Millennium, will not be without a Conflagration. Then,
Our God shall come, and a Fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very
Tempestuous round about Him. Then a Fire shall go before the Lord, that shall
burn up His Enemies round about, and Lightnings will Enlighten the World, and
the Earth shall tremble, and the Hills melt like Wax, at the presence of the
Lord. But it looks as if this Conflagration would be Partial and Progressive.
The first and main Effects of it, will be on the Italian Territories. And a
Total Consumption of the whole world is not as yet to be accomplished. The
Things then to come on, are those whereof we have those Acclamations; Let the
Earth be Glad, Let the Field be Joyful, Let all the Trees of the Wood Rejoice.
A Total Consumption of them, could not be proposed as that wherein they might
be Glad, and be Joyful, and Rejoice. No; the Earnest expectation of the
Creature, waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God, is now to be
accomplished. That for which the Whole Creation groaneth, even to be brought
into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God, is now to be accomplished.
The worst that can then be supposed, is what Salonius of old, Expressed as the
Sense of many more; Caelum et Terra transibunt per Meliorationem, non per
Oblationem. Renovabuntur, non penitus distruentur. Tantum quippe ardebit
Sursum, et Terra deorsum, quantum malitia hominum simul et Daemonum Coinquinare
potuit. Yea, who can tell, but the Century is now begun, that shall see this
tremendous Revolution? I am sure, An Old Tradition, that the Rainbow shall
cease to appear, forty years before the End of the World, is a poor security to
be relied upon.

Et quis nostrum non pavebit
Quando Judex apparebit?
Ante quem Ignis ardebit,
Peccatores qui delebit.
But then, there seems to be a Consummation of all things, that must arrive,
after a Number of Ages known to God alone. And, if there must come upon this
World, a Substantial Destruction, it seems to be reserved until those Unknown
Ages be rolled about, and the Great Day of Judgment has had Every Work brought
into it.

There are many passages of this Importance, in the Writers of Primitive
Christianity; That the World shall (...) suffer a Dissolution. In Justin
Martyr, in Irenaeus, in Lactantius, there are many such passages. It Is enough to
recite the words of Hippolitus. Fluvius igneus Egrediens, cum furore, instar
maris saevi, exuret Montes et Colles, et Mare delebit ac aethera velut Ceram
inflammatione dissolvet. Yea, there are Praesages of this thing, in the Writing
of Pagan Antiquity. The Sibylline Oracles have it.

Tunc ardens flavius Caelo manabit ab alto
Igneus, atque Locos consumet funditus omnes.
And again, Omnia Cessabunt, tellus Confracta peribit;
Sic pariter fontes, torrentes, fluminaque igni.


Justin quotes Verses of Sophocles, that foretell a Conflagration wherein All
things will be utterly destroyed, and neither Earth nor Sea, shall be found any
where any more. Clemens Al. quotes Verses of Diphilus, that Sing the same
Ditty. Ovid also tells us, Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore Tempus
Quo Mare, quo Tellus, correptaque Regia Caeli
Ardeat, et mundi moles operosa laboret.


Yea, the Wicked Lucretius himself suspects, Una Dies dabit Exitium.

Indeed, with the Stoics it was a common Expectation.

I resume the proposal I was upon; Let the Rainbow bring to our Thoughts, the
Circumstances of the Terrible Day, when all these things shall be dissolved.
But at the same time, Oh! Let our Hearts be taken and weaned, from the Things
of a World, which an hideous Fire shall one Day sieze upon. Let us not be
bewitched with a World, that shall one Day be Burned. Think, and wish, at this
rate. O my God, Let me have my Portion in those Durable Blessings, which the
Last Fire cannot reach unto; O my Savior, I commit my self unto thee for my
Safety in the Day when the Last Fire shall carry all before it.

A Fifth Article.
Fifthly and Finally, I will present you with a whole Cluster of MEDITATIONS,
which the Rainbow will very agreeably produce in a Serious Mind; and many of
them, (which you will see when I mention them,) such as it has already
produced, in the Pens of the Servants of God.

And here, first; I do not ask you, to fall into Basils Meditation; who, when
he saw (for at that time of day, they would see no more,) the Rainbow appearing
in Three Colors, but One Bow, applied it unto the Doctrine of the Trinity;
Three Persons, but One God. Christian, To Converse with the Great GOD, and very
distinctly with each of the Three Persons in the Godhead, is the very
distinguishing Spirit and Glory of Christianity. May this part of the Divine
Asceticks be more Studied a more Practiced! I confess, the Rainbow will do a
Good Office, if it Excite such a Study and Practice; though this be not the
Office it was firstly intended for.

Nor Secondly, was it intended for a Representation of our Three Graces; Faith,
and Hope, and Love. Yet I find some, drawn from the Three Colors which were
all that Antiquity distinguished in the Rainbow into a Tropological Meditation
on the Three Graces. And it will do us no Hurt on this Occasion, to lift up our
Hearts unto the God of all Grace, with our Supplications; Lord, Let me have an
Holy Faith, and Hope, and Love, ever shining in my Soul!

It has been on all hands agreed, That in the Rainbow, we have, the Mercy of
our God, in Lively Colors Painted out unto us. And some will more Particularly
have the Three Colors of Red, and Green, and Blue, in the Rainbow, to intimate
the sweet Mixture of Justice and Mercy, accomplished by the Blood of the
Covenant. But it is a Prejudice to those Niceties, that the Colors of the
Rainbow are more than Three, This however, may, Thirdly, be a very Proper
Meditation on the Sight of the Rainbow. It Proclames the Mercy of God unto a
Sinful World. Yea, how Emblematically! It was noted by Ambrose of old; That our
God says, I will put my Bow in the Cloud. He says nothing of any Arrows. It Is
a Bow without Arrows. When we see this Bow, let us then call to mind the Mercy
of our God; and with a Grateful Soul acknowledge, Lam. III. 22. It is of the
Lord's Mercies, that we are not Consumed; because His Compassions fail not.
Indeed as the Rainbow is formed in a Cloud, (which Commenius observes,) a Luce
in millies millenis diffluentu Nubis Guttulis div^rsimode reflexa: the Mercies
of our God unto us, are far more than the Drops in that Cloud. Lord, How great
is the Sum of them!

The Mercy of God, holds out the Rainbow, like the Scepter of old, and invites
the worst of men, to come in unto Him, with an Exercise of true Repentance. He
says to the Rainbow, as in Jer. III. 12, 13. Go, and Proclaim these words, and
say, Return, and I will not cause my Anger to fall upon you, for I am Merciful,
says the Lord: Only acknowledge thine Iniquity.

But then, there are two Circumstances of the Rainbow, that carry much
Admonition in them. And there also, are to be taken into your Meditation.

First. The Bow is only to be seen above the Earth. Accordingly, it is only in
this Life, and while we are yet above the Earth, that we have our Opportunity
to lay Hold on the Offered Mercy of God. Lord, They that go down into the Pit,
cannot hope for thy Truth.

Secondly, Though the Bow has no Arrows upon it, yet the Impenitent will find,
the Great GOD, has His Quiver full of them. The Great God has Treasures of
Wrath, and fearful Reserves of Plagues for the Impenitent. He says, I will
heap Mischiefs upon them, I will spend my Arrows upon them.

I pass on, to take notice, in the Fourth place; of some Lessons which the
Rainbow may give us, concerning the Covenant and the Kingdom of our Savior.
Some of the most Judicious Men in the World, and such as have been the farthest
from indulging and humouring a roving Fancy, have ye noted such Things as
these. The Rainbow never fills a Circle, nor makes more than a Semicircle. The
Kingdom of our Lord in His Church, has in this thing a Picture of it. It is
part on Earth; part Above. Our Savior was on Earth when He Suffered for us,
and began His Kingdom; He went up from Earth to Heaven; and will come down from
Heaven to Earth again. The Afflictions attending the Kingdom of our Lord in the
World, and the Enemies not yet all wholly subdued, make the Condition of a
Semicircle too agreeable unto it. The Circle will not be filled up, till the
Kingdom shall be delivered up unto the Father, and God shall become All in All.

And since the Rainbow is not a Perfect Circle, if Moreover the Servants of God
are Warned from thence, of the Imperfection, which will attend all Sublunary
Things, we shall but go on to make an Improvement thereof, that some Wise Men
have made before us. Look upon the Rainbow that wants Perfection, [its nearness
to the Earth allows it not!] and say, I have Seen an End of all Perfection!

But, Finally, Let our Meditation carry us over, to another World, that has it.
The Excellent Alsted advises us, from the Rainbow, to form a Meditation, of the
Glory that shall be imparted by our Savior, to our Bodies, at the Resurrection
of the Dead. After this manner he gives us the Noble Reflection. Si Deus per
Solemn in Nubibus Excitat tam Splendidum Meteorum, multo magis ipse tanquam
(...) Justitiae in Corporibus nostris aliquando Progignet admirabilem
Splendorem. Our Savior fetching up our Bodies into the Heavenly Places, will
shine upon them, and communicate a Glory beyond that of the Rainbow to them; a
Glory wherein, being Changed into the likeness of His Glorious Body, they shall
Shine like the Brightness of the Firmament; Yea, Shine like the Sun, in the
Kingdom of our Father.

Ne timeas Imbres; datus est in Nubibus Obses. That we destructive Showers no
more may fear,
An Hostage, Lo! does in our Clouds appear.
THE Savior with His Rainbow.
Amici, quum legisset, Carmen Gratulatorium.
To the Reverend, Doctor COTTON MATHER. SIR,
AN Iris you display, that mars her Pride
Which on the Circuit of the Clouds does ride.
Though that exceeds all the Fair Tribes that come
To paint the Rooms in Pan-meteorum.
Your RAINBOW spreads a far more splendid Train,
Than Sol himself when Shining after Rain.
Nay, than the bright Effulgences that run
Through the Empyreal Court, and mock the Sun.
It Crowns the Temples of the Glorious Head
Which lasting Rays from Light Essential shed.
The Church has, how Good Aspects from the Bow!
What Arrows does it scatter on the Foe!
It tells the Changes of the Ages past,
And bodes the Glories coming in the last.
The Heavenly Messenger proclames the birth
Of the Redeemers Promised Reign on Earth.
The sense of this Fair Signal, who would know,
Let him unto out Cunning Archer go;
(To You, who Teach the Use, Sir, Of the Bow!)
The Bow is managed, he will confess at length,
By one, whose own, still, does Abide in Strength.
You show how Blind the Pagans were, and odd,
Who numiniz'd their Homers Bowyer God.
But, Oh! the fatal Occaecations which
The Gospellized Pagans do Bewitch;
Who when in Flesh they Manifested see
A God, deny His dread Divinity!
Rouse up, Angelick Doctor, once again;
Against the Arians your Bright Shafts Ordain.
Your Bow is Bent, which no deceits will show;
The Arrows feathered from your Pen, will do.
R. H.

The SAVIOR with His Rainbow. At BOSTON-Lecture. 12. d. 5. m. 1711.
REV. X. 1. A Rainbow was upon his Head.


IT is the Head of your admirable Savior, which, O Distressed People of God,
now appears before you. Oh! Behold it, with sweet Encouragements; with just
Astonishments! The Head about which we now see the comfortable Rainbow, is thy
Head, O thou Church of the Living God; It is HE, whom God has Placed as thy
Head, and thou thy Self have chosen Him, have owned Him.

When you see what it is that this Mighty Angel comes down from Heaven to do;
That He comes with a loud Voice to proclaim the End of the Time for the Reign
of Sin and Satan in the World, and make a Demand of this Lower World, for the
Kingdom of the Great Redeemer, how, how can you forbear a loud Voice of
Supplications* Great God, Send this Mighty Angel (...) wrong (...)

The Servant of God had seen the Face of the Roman Empire, down as Low as the
conclusion of the Saracen Oppressions, and the Turkish Hostilities; the very
Period unto which we are now certainly arrived. Then there appears unto him, a
Mighty Angel, in so Stately and so Splendid a Pomp, that many Interpreters can
hardly allow Him to be any less a Person than our Great Savior Himself. He
appears to Exhibit a New Scene of things Mavelous and very Amazing. And if
this be the Period for the Appearance of such an Angel, I do a very Seasonable
Thing this Day, in Showing Him among you. I dispute not, whether this Angel be
our Savior Himself, because He descends with a Glory too big and bright for
any Creature; Or, whether He be a Created Angel; For, if He be so, yet He comes
in the Name of our Savior; and He comes with a Representation of that Glory,
which belongs to none but our Savior.

The Design of the Descent made by this Mighty Angel, is, to foretell, and bring
on, a wonderful Reformation of the World. If he appears in a Cloud, this must
not be wondered at. There is a Super-celestial Cloud, which from the Beginning
has been Employed as a Symbol, and a Cover for the Majesty of our God, in His
Appearance. Not only the Israelites, who were favored sometimes with an actual
view of something that belonged unto that vast Cloud; but even the Pagans also,
and their Poets, had some Tradition of it.

There is an Intimation in it, that there will be Unsearchable Circumstances,
Unsearchable Dispensations, in His Appearances. And if thou will come unto us
in Cloudy Times, O Glorious Lord, Thy will be done: Yet, Even so come unto us!

The only Thing that we now Single out for consideration, is that Particular
Glory of our Appearing Savior; A Rainbow was upon his Head. The Rainbow is a
well-known Meteor, often beheld, but not with Eyes Devout enough, among us in
the Day of Rain. Perhaps, there is nothing in all the Meteorous Kingdom so very
Beautiful. Such is the Beauty of the Meteor, that while the Heathen Mythology
made it, The Daughter of Wonderment, Cicero makes it a matter of Wonderment
that it was not Lifted in the Number of their Gods. Let those declaim on this
Beauty, who can fetch a Text from the Son of Sirach, that says, Look on the
Rainbow, and Praise Him that made it; very Beautiful it is in the Brightness
thereof. That which it becomes us most of all to Ponder, is, That the Sovereign
Creator of the World, has in His Wisdom Stamped a Sacramental Character on the
Rainbow; He has Instituted the Rainbow, for a Sign, and Seal, of His Covenant
with the World. All Christians are apprised of the Signification which the
Ninth Chapter of Genesis, has left upon the Rainbow, for our perpetual
Consolation; and as our Assurance, that the World shall no more be Drowned, as
it was in the Days of Noah. Wherefore, our Savior appearing to us, with a
Rainbow, about His Head, Proposes to Preach this Joyful Doctrine unto us.

Our Glorious LORD, will Remember His Covenant with His People; Even in the
most Cloudy Times, that are Passing over them. And this is the Doctrine, which
I am now to insist upon; I wish you had a more able Barnabas, to insist upon
it. My Doctrine, it may drop as the Rain; as the Sweet, and Small Rain from a
Cloud, that has a Rainbow brightning of it. We may see Cloudy Times; Yea, we
may apprehend such a Flood of Calamity, as will carry all before it; yet now, O
People of God; You are a People in Covenant with Him; A Reliance on your
Sacrificed Savior, Secures your Title to His Covenant. O Now Look up to your
dear Savior. See, He appears to you, in your Cloudy Times, with a Rainbow
about His Head. He declares unto you, That He will Remember His Covenant; He
has not Forgotten to be Gracious. You shall not be Overwhelmed; The Evil
Things, which threaten you, shall not be too hard for you. You shall, you shall
be Gloriously Delivered.

I. In the first Place, I will show the Rainbow about the Head of a Savior,
unto every Particular Believer on that Faithful Savior. My Friend, Apply the
Glorious Rainbow, to thy own Particular Condition; Thy Savior invites thee to
do so. I will venture to lay this down, as a Rule of Application. The Promises
which belong to the whole Church of God, are the Portion of every Particular
Believer, and he is welcome to make use of them, as far as ever he can find his
own Case adapted in them. According to this Golden Rule of Faith, and of
Fellowship, I now say; Believer; Do thou not see Cloudy Times? I know, thou
do: There is no Believer, but what has his Times of Darkness: No Child of
Light, but what sometimes Walks in Darkness, and sees no Light. It Is often,
often the Case of every Believer; Lam. III. 1, 2. I am the man that has seen
Affliction; He has brought me into Darkness. He cannot understand the meaning
of the Divine Dealings with him; he cannot see the Face of God favorably
Shining on him; he cannot but fear a sad Issue of the Things which are breaking
of him. His Temptations make it the Hour and Power of Darkness with him. He
knows not what to do, nor what God intends to do. Perhaps it comes to that
Extremity; Lord, Thou have covered thy self with a Cloud, that my Prayer should
not pass through. In so dark a Time, the afflicted Believer is afraid of a
Flood that will totally over power him; that he shall perish in his Affliction.

But now, Comfort ye, Comfort ye my Children, says the Lord. Show my Rainbow
unto them; Tell them, that I will be Ever mindful of my Covenant. The Children
of God, may be sure, that in Remembrance of His Covenant with them, He will
save them from the Floods, which threaten Destruction to them. Only, My
Brethren, Be sure that you Remember one Direction; Psalm. XXXII. 6. For this
shall every one that is Godly pray unto thee, in a Time, when thou may be
found; Surely in the Floods of Great Waters, they shall not come nigh unto him.
[One has thus given us the true sense of it. For this shall every Good man
pray, when thou art to be found; And shall be safe in mighty Floods, when other
men are drowned.] I Will first of all show you, what the Comforts are, that May
delight and support your Souls, and keep you from Sinking in the multitude of
your Thoughts within you; The Comforts to be read in this Rainbow on the Head
of your Lovely Savior.

First. Have you a Flood of Adversity beating on you? Perhaps you may suffer a
vast weight of Adversity; Troublesome Occurrences, Innumerable, Irresistble.
The Roaring Billows of Adversity rolling in upon you, may make you cry out,
Save me, O God, for the Waters are come in unto my Soul, I am come into deep
Waters, where the Floods overflow me. Hear the Answer from the Rainbow. Ah,
Thou afflicted and tossed with Tempest; Be thou Comforted: Thy Lord will step
in and save thee. He will fulfill that Promise of His Covenant unto thee; Isa.
XLIII. 2. When thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee, they shall
not overflow thee.

Again; Does a Flood of Corruption rise in your Souls? Perhaps, the power of
Corruption in you may be such, that you may think, I shall one day perish by
the Hand of such or such a Sin! Lust may so prevail against Grace, that you can
see no hope of Grace ever getting the Upperhand. O Soul, Mourning because of
the Oppression of an Adversary that provokes thee sore* Mourn on, Mourn on;
And then know, that the Spirit of God will dry up those cursed Waters. Though thy
Grace be but a Spark, yet many Waters shall not quench it, neither the Floods
drown it. Thy Savior will fufil unto thee that promise of His Covenant; Romans
VI. 14. Sin shall not have Dominion over you.

Furthermore; In the Assaults of Hell upon your Souls, does the Enemy come in
like a Flood upon you? It may be the Powers of Darkness are pouring in upon
you. Your Tempted Souls are exceedingly born down; disordered with hideous
Injections; terrified at the Noise of the Water spouts. Yet, O Molested
Christian; Thy Savior, has Set Bars to the Tempter; and said, Hitherto shall
thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud Waves be staid. That
promise of His Covenant shall be fulfilled unto thee, 1 Cor. X. 13. God is
faithful who will not suffer you to be Tempted above what you are able.

Once more; We read concerning The Floods of the Ungodly. Sometimes the
Servants of God, are uneasy at the Power, the Number, the Malice of Men that
are disaffected unto them. If they are Engaged in more notable Services for
God, they may be Exposed unto the Rage of Wicked and Restless Men, which may
make them afraid, left their Serviceableness be utterly Extinguished. There may
be Times wherein Hell may be Evidently and Furiously broke Loose upon them. The
foaming Waves of Hell, may dash, and beat against them, and make a Noise that
reaches up to Heaven. Times when the Workers of Iniquity do as it were make an
Insurrection, and bend their Bows to shoot their Arrows, even bitter words. How
accommodated a Rainbow for such Times! What is the way, which, O Lord, thou
know thy Servants use to take, in such Storms as these! They repair humbly,
with Repentance, with Prayers, and with Tears, to their Compassionate Savior.
All their Opportunities to Do Good, they put into His Gracious Hands. Lo then,
then! they see the Rainbow about the Head of their Strong Friend in the Heavens
concerned for them. He sends this Advice unto them, and the Promise is
fulfilled unto the surprise of all wise Observers; Isa XLI. 10, 11. Fear thou
not, for I am with thee; Behold, all they that were Incensed against thee,
shall be ashamed, and confounded. This, this was the Ancient Experience. The
Floods of Ungodly men made me afraid. In my Distress I called upon the Lord,
and cried unto my God. He drew me out of the many waters; He delivered me from
them which hated me!

Finally; The Fate of Mankind, under the Law of Mortality, is thus described
unto us; Psalm. XC. 5. Thou carriest them away as with a Flood. Believer, Thou
also must in thy Fathers Time for it, be Carried away. Death, Death, is
unavoidable. But thy Head is always above Water; Thou shall not always ly among
the Dead. The Quickening Spirit of that Head will fetch out of the Grave, all
that belong unto Him. When the Black Waters of Death have Compassed thee about,
and the Depth has Closed thee round about, and thou art gone down to the Bottom
of the Mountains; thou shall not have cause to complain, The Earth with its
Bars is about me for ever! No, Thou will bring up our Life from Corruption, we
know it, we know it, O Lord our God. Ah, Dying Believer; Thy Savior who was
once Dead, is Risen from the Dead. On the Rainbow about His Head, O Read what
is written; Behold, I am alive, and I live for evermore. Because I live, thou
shall also live. Heaven, that high Seat of the Rainbow, yea, an higher Heaven
shall be the Seat of the Raised Believer too. The Risen Savior will infallibly
Raise the Believer. Child of God, Thy Sin has washed thee overboard. O cruel
Wave! It lays thee in the Deeps. But the Hand of thy Kind Savior will take
thee up; -- will pull thee up, and show wonders to the Dead; -- Thou shall
Rise, and Praise Him! A Marginal Note, will very agreeably come in, at the
Bottom of this Page; and relate such a Passage as this.

Quickly after the Preaching of this Sermon, there died a Person of Shining
Piety, a Christian of Uncommon Holiness, Devotion, Patience, and Humility, Mrs.
Abigail Whippo; Gloriously triumphing over the Sting of Death, and the Fear of
the King of Terrors. God marvellously blessed this Sermon, to produce and
assist the Triumphs of a Soul, so sweetly winged for the Heavenly World. With
Rapture she gave Thanks to Heaven, for these Consolations; Rapturously she
cried out, O the dear Savior, that I am now it see with a RAINBOW about His
Head! I am sure He will Remember the Covenant, which He has helped me a
Thousand times to lay hold upon! I am sure He will do me Good, according to His
Covenant! I do with Pleasure, answer the Desire of some, to Preserve the Memory
of such a Christian.




I will go on, and show you, Secondly; Some special Seasons, wherein you will
do Exceeding well, to make use of these Comforts. And there are Especially Two
such Seasons, that I will commend unto you. I shall sensibly Serve the cause of
Piety, by commending of them.

First. On the Sight of the Natural Rainbow, these comfortable Meditations on
the Covenant of God, and of Grace, will be very Seasonable. It is a real Fault
in the People of God, that they can be Spectators of the Rainbow, with no more
Proper, Holy, Heavenly Thoughts, produced in their Souls; A very Faulty
Unthankfulness to our Great Savior, who has placed it as His Bow in the
Clouds, and said unto us, O my dear People, Do you Look upon that, as the
Memorial of my Covenant! The Gospel of the Rainbow, is truly, One of the
Desiderata, among the Subjects that should be cultivated in the Church of God.
At present, I will only say; The Covenant with our Father Noah, whereof we have
the Rainbow, for an Obsignation, had such an Aspect upon the Messiah, that we
may fairly be led by the Rainbow, to Remember the whole Covenant of Grace, in
all the Very Great and Precious Promises of it. Concerning the Covenant which
God has made with our Savior, for the Redemption of His People; we read, Psalm.
LXXXIX 37. It shall be Established, as the Faithful Witness in Heaven. By the
Faithful Witness in Heaven, is meant, The Rainbow. Well then; when we have that
Comely Work of God before our Eyes, Let us Entertain such Thoughts as these;
May a Glorious CHRIST be my Savior, and my Surety, how Happy, how Happy, am I!
My Sins will be cast into the Depths of the Sea; I shall not my self be cast
thither for them. O my Soul, Be not thou cast down. Be not afraid of all thy
Sorrows; Thy Lord will not leave thee to Sink in any of thy Sorrows. Though the
Grave do Swallow me up, Oh! Let me not Fear to go down into the Grave; My Lord
will Bring me up again! I see a Faithful Witness in Heaven, that puts me in
Mind of an Established Covenant for such Blessings of Goodness.

Secondly. When we see the Baptism of the Lord administered, these Meditations
may be very Seasonably awakened. It is no small Advantage, to be minded of the
Covenant, which our God has made with our JESUS for us, and with us, in our
JESUS. We are minded of this Covenant after an Excellent Manner, by the
Administration of Baptism in our Congregations. God Sanctifies the Sight of
this Administration, as well as the other Ordinances in the Assembles of Zion;
and it is a Profane Folly to make light of a thing which God uses for an
Instrument of so much Good unto the Souls of Men. As in any Sprinkled Water,
the Light easily causes a sort of a Rainbow, so in the Baptismal Water, we see
the Rainbow about our Savior; He there and thence calls to the Beholders; O my
People, I will be ever mindful of my Covenant! Let our Glad Souls be Sensible
of this. I mention it the rather, because I find, 1 Pet. III. 19. Baptism is
made the Antitype of the Flood; unto which the Rainbow has Relation. The Old
Man in us, is like the Old World; under a Curse. The Blood of our Savior
washing away the Guilt of our Sin; and the Spirit of our Savior taking away
the Life of our Sin; are both of 'em compared unto Waters. By these Waters, the
Old Man is destroyed in our Souls, as the Old World was by the Flood. The New
Man, like Noah in the Ark, is by these Waters, Raised up, and brought nearer to
God. In this Way it is, that the Blessings of the Covenant become our Portion.
Sirs; When you see a Person Baptized in our Congregations; then think! O that
Blessed Covenant! According to that, only my Sin shall be drowned; But I my
self shall be Raised unto the nearest communion with Heaven. Yea, a
Resurrection from the Dead will be bestowed upon me!

But thus I Leave every Particular Believer to his own Meditations, on his own
share in the Covenant of God.

II. I am now to tell you, What a Messenger [Excuse and Indulge me if I make
Reprisals of the Term, A Messenger] of Happy Tidings, the Rainbow about the
Head of the Savior, is unto the Church in general, unto the whole Church of
the Living God upon Earth.

The Covenant of God, for the Continuance of His Church in this World, and its
Fruition of Blessedness in a New World; this was included in the Covenant made
with our Patriarch after the Flood. Our Holy God never gave the Rainbow for a
Token, that He would preserve a World, only to be a Rendezvous of Traitors and
Rebels: a Field for none but Wicked People to graze upon. The Preservation of
the World, is, that so our Savior may have an Elect People here Prepared for
Him, and that anon there may come on a Revolution wherein the Whole Earth shall
be filled with that People, and His Kingdom. You should Read this Glorious
Thing written on the Rainbow with Capitals! And hence this Covenant of God, is
Engrossed in those Terms; Isa. LIVE. 9, 10. This is as the Waters of Noah unto
me; for as I have sworn, that the Waters of Noah should no more go ever the
Earth, so -- my Kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my Peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. We are fallen
into Cloudy Times; and, The Floods have Lifted up, O Lord, the Floods have
Lifted up their (...); the Floods lift up their Waves. But we have a Lord with
a Rainbow about His Head; and this our Lord is mightier than the mighty Waves
of the Sea. You find me using some Expressions in the XCIII Psalm. I will go
on, and give you a very Good Gloss on the last verse of that Psalm, which I
find in a Late Version of it.

Because thy Promises O Lord,
are very firm and sure;
Thy Beautiful and Holy Church
for ever shall endurs.
O People of God, and you that have Jerusalem coming into your Minds; Look up,
Look up; see a Rainbow about the Head of your Savior; and hear that ravishing
Voice come out of His Mouth; I will take a sufficient Care of my Church in the
World. My Covenant for my Church, there shall be no breaking, no failing of it!

And is not this the meaning of that Exibition? Rev. IV. 3. There was a Rainbow
round about the Throne. Our JESUS is Enthroned in the Heavens; The Scepter of
God is in His Hands; But He will so manage every thing, that His Covenant for
the preservation of His Church in the World, shall be most punctually
accomplished.

First. I will give you some Reasons why the Rainbow about the Head of our
Savior will not prove an Empty Show; but He will fulfill to His Church, the
Covenant of His Mercy. It Is for such Reasons as these.

First. The Blessed God, is a most Faithful God: The God of Truth. Oh! Let our
God be True, in our Praises of Him, and Every man a Liar, that has the least
Murmur of His being any other. In the midst of our deepest Lamentations, we
must own that thing; Lam. III. 23. Great is thy Faithfulness. He is the
Unchangeable One. He makes a Covenant, and He Changes not; Therefore the Church
to be preserved according to His Covenant shall not be consumed. His Nature,
and His Glory is that; Psalm. III. 4, 5. The Lord is Gracious and full of
Compassion; He will ever be mindful of His Covenant.

Again; Our Savior with the Rainbow about His Head, appears before His Father,
as well as unto His People. The Eternal Father is the God of our JESUS, He is
in Covenant with Him. Our JESUS, is the Head of the Covenant which is made for
the People of God; it is made with Him. Our Savior presents Himself before
God, as the Mediator of the Covenant. He pleads the Cause of His Church; He
pleads for its Preservation. We are sure of that; Heb. IX. 24. He is gone into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. This Angel with
the Rainbow, if He who took not on Him the Nature of Angels, and He who is,
Above all Angels, may be ever called, An Angel; He is the Angel of the
Covenant; and I will add, He is the Angel of His Presence. In the Presence of
the Eternal Father, He makes this Demand; O my Father, my Father; The Church
which I have died for, it must, not be Lost; Oh! Let it Live Eternally!

Lastly. The People of God, they Mind Him of His Covenant; they point Him to
His own Rainbow. They are a Praying People. Because they see a Rainbow about
the Throne of Heaven, this Emboldens them to Approach the Throne; they come
with Boldness unto it, as a Throne of Grace. They lay hold on all the Promises.
The Cry of their Incessant Prayer to God is that; Jer. XIV. 21. O Remember,
Break not thy Covenant with us. They are a People that also wait upon God in
the Sacraments of His Covenant. By attending on the Sacraments, they Celebrate
the Covenant of God; they solicit for the performance of it. Yea, When they
see those Commemorations of the Covenant in the Churches of the Lord, they Lift
up their Hearts unto Him; O thou Great God, who keep Covenant and Mercy;
Remember thy Covenant of Mercy to thy People! And, I hope, the view of the
Rainbow will now more than ever, have the like Improvement with them. The
Glorious Hearer of Prayer will take notice of it.

I will proceed Secondly, to set before you, some Articles in the Covenant of
Mercy to the Church, which are declared and confirmed unto us, by the Rainbow
about the Head of our Merciful Savior. Be the Times never so Cloudy, and the
Floods never so boisterous, never so mountainous, the Church of God, has the
Expectations of the Rainbow to Live upon.

They are such as these.

First. The Church cannot be drowned. The Church of God may read that Motto on
the Rainbow; Jer. XLVI. 28. I will not make a full end of thee. Our Savior
will always have a Church, yea, a Visible Church, in the World. Though it may fly
for some Ages into the Valleys of Piemont, yet even there it shall be Visible.
No Flood shall utterly swallow it up. A Number of People visibly Embracing the
Truths, and obeying the Laws of the only Savior, will be always upon the Face
of the Earth. We read, Psalm. CXXV. 1 Of a Mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever. I will not say, This was a Covenant for the Literal Mount
Zion; for this has been Removed; the Hill was dug down, with a vast Labor of
three years, in the Days of the Maccabaean Simeon. The Jews on certain Accounts
of Policy, dug down their Zion with their own Hands. But, O Church of our
Blessed JESUS, Thou art that Mount Zion. The most Ancient of all the Mountains,
the most Lasting of all the Hills; Eternally Impregnable! No Flood can roll
over the Top of the Holy Hill of Zion. There is a word in the BIBLE, which has
been as an Ark for the Church of God, in the most Cloudy and Stormy Ages of it;
That word, Mat. XVI. 18. I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. I Incline to think, that our Savior alludes to what
occurred in the Flood which once Overthrew the Foundations of the Wicked. In
that Flood, we read, The Fountains of the Great Deep were broken up; and, The
Waters prevailed exceedingly upon the Earth; they prevailed, and the Mountains
were covered. Yet the Family of the Just One perished not. Sirs, It will be so!
Though the Bars of the Bottomless Pit should be broken up, and should pour out a
Flood of Mischiefs on the Church, yet there shall not issue out such a Flood
from thence, as to drown the Family of our Savior. The Flood shall not prevail
so far as to drown the Church in the World. Our Lord Sits King on the Floods,
and sets Bounds to them; they shall not prevail to carry all before them. Had
it not been for this Word, the Church had been drowned in the Days of
Dioclesian, when he set up his Pillars, with this Inscription on them,
Christiana Superstitione Deleta. Wretch, The Inscription on the Rainbow about
the Head of our Savior, confounded thine! Had it not been for this Word, the
Church had been drowned by the Flood, which the Dragon cast out of his Mouth in
the Arian Haeresies; when, The World Sighed, that it saw it self become almost
entirely Arian. Had it not been for this Word, the Church had been drowned in
the Flood of the Romish Apostasy, at the Latter end of the Fifteenth Century;
when there were left One Little Flock of Taborites in their Caves; and these
poor Speculani sent four Agents to the several points of the Compass, to find,
if it were possible, any pure Church in the World; and they all returned with a
Sorrowful Report, That there was none to be met withal. Were it not for this
Word, The Grand Assyrian of this Day would be Master of Europe, and the
Religion of Christ be every where Little better of it, than it is in his own
Bloody Dominions. But O thou Monster of Baseness, The Daughter of Zion despises
thee. And, O thou Troubler of the Nations, A Few Months more shall bring thee
down to the Sides of the Pit, and it shall be said by them that Consider thee,
Is this the man that shook the Kingdoms of the Earth!

In short* The Church of our Savior must Our live all the Attempts of Earth
and Hell against it. The Story of the Church Surviving all the Attempts of its
Adversaries in the former Ages, is a wonderful Story. The Thread of the Story
shall never be broken off! Our JESUS will have Subjects, His Bible will have
Students, His Spirit will have Temples, let all the Devils in Hell do what they
can to defeat such Intentions of Heaven. The Savior with the Rainbow about His
Head, will tread on the Head of the Old Serpent; All the Plots in that Bruised
Head, shall come to nothing!

Secondly. The most Cloudy Times that pass over the Church of God, have their
Mixtures of Mercy, and of Moderation in them. There Is a Rainbow; The Clouds of
Wrath are not so thick, not so spread, but there is a Sunshine of Mercy with
them. If the Floods rise high; yet not so high, that all shall be covered; all
overcome. It was a thing proposed; Hab. III 2. O Lord, Revive thy Work in the
midst of the years; In wrath remember Mercy. His Church is His Work. In the
midst of the Seventy Years assigned for the Captivity of the Jews, they found a
Remarkable savor from the Court of Babylon, in what was done to one who
represented them there. This Revived them in the midst of the years; This was
Mercy in the midst of Wrath* Indeed things may go very bad, with the Church;
yet never so Bad, but they might be Worse. O the amazing Supplies of Grace
which are sent in unto the Church, under its greatest Languishments* There will
be at least a battle Reviving. What Ezra of old called, A Little Reviving to
set up the House of our God. The Church will find that thing; Psalm LXXVIII.
38. He does not stir up all His wrath. The Church will find, the Savior with
His Rainbow, dealing according to that word; I am with thee, I will correct
thee in measure. That word; He stays His Rough Wind, in the Day of the East
Wind. The Calamities of the Church, have Glorious Mitigations.

Thirdly. The Church cannot be totally Drowned: The World is; But the Flood of
Wickedness, which overspreads the Whole World, is going off. We have a sad
Account of this wretched World, 1 John V. 19. The whole World lies in
Wickedness. Alas, the Whole World is under that Flood, which we find before the
Old Flood, and the Cause of it; we ought with unutterable Anguish, to make the
Complaint, Behold, the Earth is corrupt before God, and all Flesh has corrupted
his way upon the Earth. A Flood of wickedness, has laid Mankind groaning under
the Waters. The Exceptions to the Epidemical, the Universal Wickedness of
Mankind, are so very few, that we may still Complain, They are all gone aside;
they are together become filthy! But, my Brethren; It shall not always be so.
The Savior of Mankind shows Himself unto us with a Rainbow about His Head. It
is to inform us, That the Flood of Wickedness in which the World is at this Day
buried, shall one day be rolled off. Of the Angel coming down from Heaven with
a Rainbow on His Head, we read, He sets His Right Foot on the Sea, and His Left
Foot on the Earth. Our Savior will come to take possession both of the Sea,
and of the Earth. He will possess Himself of Mankind, both on the Sea, and on
the Earth. He will assert His Dominion both on the Sea, and on the Earth. He
will Chain up the Deceiver of the Nations. But, How Long, O Lord, Holy and
True, How Long ere thou So come down unto us! There is a Day a coming in which,
according to the ancient Prophecies; Psalm. XXII. 27. All the Ends of the World
shall turn unto the Lord. And, Psalm. LXXXVI. 9. All Nations whom thou have
made, shall come and Worship before thee, O Lord, and shall Glorify thy Name.
Most certainly, There will come a Day when there shall be more Godly People,
than there are now Wicked People in the World. I am certain, God will one day
destroy them that Corrupt the Earth; We shall see an Earth wherein shall dwell
Righteousness; it shall be filled with Righteous ones. The very first Time,
that an Hallelujah occurs in the Sacred Scriptures, it is on this occasion;
Psalm. CIV. 35. Let the Sinners be consumed out of the Earth, and let the wicked
be no more. Hallelujah. There will come a Time, when that Great Hallelujah
shall be heard in the World!

Fourthly. Our Great Savior, the Ruler of the World, aims at the Good of His
Church, in all the Changes which He brings upon the World. This, is a very
Turneable World; very Changeable. Others besides that King of Egypt, the Great
Sesostrys, whom our Bible calls by the Name of Shishak, have seen a Wheel
Turning about. It Is a most Elegant and Expressive Hieroglyphick, which our
Prophet Ezekiel had of it, in his Vision of the Wheels. There is a Tradition,
that Pythagoras invented his, from his Acquaintance with Ezekiels, who was his
contemporary. He saw four Wheels. Will you give me leave to Say, That here is a
Wheel for each of the Four Great Monarchies. The Last of them is now Turning
apace. Our Immortal King is bringing the Wheel over that wicked Empire. Will
you give me leave also to Say, That here is a Wheel for each of the Four
Quarters of the World? Then besure America must be concerned in the Turning of
the Last Wheel; and verily, we find it so to our Wonderment. Well, but who has
the Management of all these Wheels? Truly, Our Savior with a Rainbow about
Him? All the Angels in Heaven, who have their uncontroleable Influences on
Humane affairs, are but the Officers of our Savior; they Execute His Orders;
they are the Ministers which do His Pleasure. We read how the Wheels are
managed; Ezekiel. I. 26, 28. On the Throne, there was the Appearance of a MAN
above upon it: [That MAN, it is our JESUS, it is our JESUS! We know, it is He!] It
follows; As the Appearance of the Bow that is in the Cloud in the Day of Rain;
[The RAINBOW!] So was the Appearance of the Brightness round about. From our
JESUS on the Throne we are now so advertised; O my dear People, I remember my
Covenant for you: And in all the Turns which I bring upon the World, I am
fulfilling of it!

This is HE, whom the Disciple that Jesus Loved, had His Allowance to Look upon!

But may We also at this Day, be allowed and advanced unto a View of that
Glorious One! Yea, O People Highly favored of the Lord; unto You does the
Savior with a Rainbow about His Head give that Glorious Call; Behold me,
Behold me, O my People; Behold, and Believe my Remembrance of my Covenant, in
all the Cloudy Times that are passing over you.

We are fallen into a Day, whereof we may say, what we read; Zech. I. 15. It is
a Day of Trouble and of Distress, a Day of Clouds and of Thick Darkness. Yea,
it is a Day wherein the People of God have their Fears, Lest the Waters overwhelm
us, lest the Proud Waters go over our Soul. In the midst of these Clouds our
Savior appears to us, with a Rainbow about His Head.

And the first thing, with which I would animate my Brethren, is; That He is
Our Head, and we may safely trust Him with Our All. On that Passage; Eccl. II.
14. A wise man's Eyes are in his head, I remember two of the Ancient Gregory's,
both a Greek one, and a Latin one, have a devout Gloss, which is rather an
Allusion than an Exposition; Our Glorious Christ is our Head; and say they, in
Him we have our Eyes. This I may very Reasonably say; O Church of the Lord; Thy
Eyes are in thy Head; Even in that Head which has the Rainbow about it. His
Eyes will be on the Look-out for thy welfare: He will See to the fulfilling of
all that His Covenant has engaged for thee.

What though there be dismal Clouds! The Clouds gather; Look very dismally; it is
true. But, of thy Savior, thou have been told, Behold, He comes with Clouds!

I will go on to say; It Is a dreadful thing unto Good Men, to see such a Death
upon all that is Good in the World. Every thing lies Dead: Zeal, it is Dead;
Love, it is Cold and Dead; The Life of Religion is gone. A Public Spirit, its
Dead; The Success of the Gospel, seems Dead. Churches, Oh! how Cadaverous are
they! What Putrefactions in them! O ye Witnesses of the Lord, you also, are
either Dead, or at least have not got off your Grave-Cloathes. And yet, this
may the rather be the Time for a Speedy Appearance of our Savior. It was a
Prediction; Mat. XXIV. 28. Wheresoever the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together. I take it for a Prediction of our Lords coming, with His
Gospel, as the Lightning, to Ruin Antechrist, and Reform His People. The
Church at this Time; is to be like a Dead Carcass; partly so, by Sufferings:
much more so, by Corruptions. Our Savior will now come as a Glorious Eagle; so
He did, when He brought His Dead People from Egypt of old. And, because He will
use His Mighty Angels in what He is to do, marvel not, that you hear of Eagles,
in the Plural Number for it.

And, yet; I judge it not amiss to acquaint you, That there is of late, within
these few years, a most Surprising Revival of Good Things in the World. Should
I speak of but One Country; There are some strict observers of the Signs of the
Times, who have lately Published a Collection of Observable Things, wherein the
Kingdom of God has been more sensibly opening it self in the Heart of Germany;
Things of an Holy and Hopeful Tendency, to bring on a more ample Reign of
Piety; The Collection contains no fewer than Fourscore and Four Articles. In
many other places, there are some Excellent Things a doing. Essays to do Good,
begin to be in request. They grow more Fashionable, and Reputable.
North-Britain will become a peculiar Seat, and Example of them. Among the rest,
there is this to be observed; A Spirit of Association for Noble and Pious
Purposes, has of late begun Strangely to Visit the World; it begins to do
Wondrously. Some Societies perhaps are yet only laying Foundations, for
purposes of a more Exact Regulation hereafter to be built upon. But as far off
as in Switzerland they Prognosticate upon them; They annunciate a more
Illustrious State of the Church of God, that is Expected, in the Conversion of
Jews and Gentiles. These Things are the Rainbow of the Day!

In the next Place; I will freely confess to you, that there is not any One
thing at this day a doing, which I have my Eye more upon, than the Fate, and I
hope, the approaching Fall, of the Ottoman Empire. There is a Coincidence of
more than as many things, to persuade us, That the Threchundred and ninety odd
years allotted for the Turks to be the Plagues of the Roman Empire, Expired at
the late Peace of Carlowitz. If that Empire should once fall, what a Jubilee
would arrive to the poor Greek Churches! Oh! Let us Pray more for them! Yea,
the Jews as well as the Greeks would feel a quickening Energy upon it. Now, a
mighty shake seems to be giving unto the Ottoman Empire. There are Millions of
Oppressed Christians, who begin to see a Rainbow in that Thing, if God will
please to give the Word. If it should be so, that the Ottoman Empire be
falling, Then, Then, that Great Trumpet is going to be blown, which brings on
the Kingdoms of this World, to be the Kingdoms of the Lord.

I have one thing more to say. The Grandeur of Antichrist is plainly on a
Decline. Yea, the Clouds of this day, are big with desolating Thunderbolts, to
be discharged upon him. The Twelve hundred and Sixty years of the Papacy, could
not commence much later than the year Four hundred and fifty, or sixty. All
Rational computations conspire to proclaim this; A Great and Notable Day of the
Lord is at hand; The Day is near, it is near, and it hastes greatly! The Papal
Authority now Suffers a mavelous Diminution; it is Irrecoverably diminished.
Its Bulls roar very insignificately. Let it fulminate what it will, People do
but Squib at it. The Spirit of Persecution, which wherever it is found, is the
Spirit of Antichrist, it is wondrous to see, how it is going out of the World;
men grow Ashamed of it; They that would fain be at it, yet they also
Occasionally acknowledge, That it is Contrary to the Spirit of Christianity.
Some that have been most notorious for it, Labor mightily to shift off the
charge.

I greatly suspect, that we are fallen into the Period, for the Effusion of the
Vials, which brings the Last Plagues on the Papal Empire: It looks, as if the
first of them, were newly dispensed; A Boil on the Earth; A Pestilence on the
Inland Parts of that Empire. I tremble at the Second. -- But they will all be
Rainbowes of Hope, for the pure Worshippers and Followers of the Holy JESUS.

Finally; But must my poor NEW ENGLAND, have no part in the Rainbow, about Him,
that has hitherto been the Hope of NEW ENGLAND, and the Savior thereof in the
Time of Trouble! Yea; And though there is no Particular Church, but what may be
drowned, yet I Suppose, it is not until it neglect the Rainbow, and by overgrown
Impiety and Impenitency forget the Everlasting Covenant And, O poor Flocks in
the Wilderness; will you do so? I confess, we are very criminal; and all out
crimes have peculiar Aggravations. Yea, there are some very Base People among
us; People who do things that Pagans would abhor to do; People who bring a
Blemish on all the Country. But yet, first, the Body of the People, are a
Sober, Honest, Well-instructed People. All Civil Travelers who do them Justice
give them this Testimony. Then, there is also Scattered all over the Country, a
Generation of Serious, Prayerful, Watchful Christians; many that make no Noise,
are the Humble Favorites of Heaven; the Chariots and Horsemen of the Land, and
yet by their Modesty almost Invisible. The Charities of these Christians,
especially in this Town, they are going up as Memorials before God continually.
There is likewise a Set of Young Ministers, and Candidates for the Ministry,
who are full of Goodness; Lovely Young Men; Sons of Zion, comparable to fine
Gold; Nazarites, Purer than Snow, brighter than Pearl; their Polishing that of
Sapphire. God grant the Rainbowes may Multiply! O Multiply our Tokens for Good.

I will Conclude with Saying this thing* Methinks, A Savior with a Rainbow
about His Head, should most movingly. Invite every Sinner to come in unto Him.
I have read some-where, a Sorrowful Relation of a man who was a Drowning, at
the very Instant when he saw a Rainbow in the Sky before him; whereat he cried
out, Haec Iris, quid mihi proderit, si Ego peream. What Advantage to me the
Rainbow which secures the World from Drowning, if now I my self be Drowned.
This I will say; O poor Sinner, what Advantage can thou Expect from a Savior
with a Rainbow about His Head, if thou despise that Savior, and Provoke Him,
to cast thee off! Wherefore, Oh! Hearken to the Voice from the Cloud about the
Glorious High Throne of our Savior; Ah, Repenting Soul, I remember my Covenant
of Mercy; I am ready to receive thee! Behold His Bow; there are no Arrows in
it. But if any of you will go on still in your Trespasses, think on that word,
Psalm. VII. 11, 12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day; If he turn not,
He has bent His Bow, and made it ready; He ordains His Arrows against him.
Verily, The Clouds about Him, will Pour down terrible Thunderbolts! --

FINIS.

