Woe to Drunkards. TWO SERMONS Testifying against the Sin of Drunkenness:
WHEREIN The Wofulness of that Evil, and the Misery of all that are Addicted to
it, is Discovered from the WORD OF GOD.

By Increase Mather, D.D.

The Second Edition.

Habakkuk II. 15. Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink: That put thy
Battle to him, and make him Drunken also.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, at the Lower End of Middle Street,
1712.

To the READER.
GREAT Authors have affirmed, Th^^ Drunkenness has Slain more (...) ever the
Sword has done. If ^^ly Bodies had been Destroyed by it, the Evil had not been
so Woeful; but it has been the Ruin of Millions of immortal Souls. Not One of a
Thousand of those unhappy Souls who have been E^slaved to it have been
delivered from their Bondage. An Eminent Divine in Holland, (where this Vice
has Reigned) declares, Th^^ some who had been great Lovers of Wine and strong
Beer, were brought to a Sense of their Evil, so as to Repent and Forsake it;
but as for those who were Bewitched with the Love of Brandy, or such like
Spirits, he never could hear of One that was Reclamed. A Sad Observation. I
wish our Rum-drinkers would think of it.

There was a time ( as I have elsewhere noted) when a man might Live Seven
Years in New England, and not see a Drunken man. But how is it now? Several
sorts of Strong Liquors have been an occasion of the abounding of this
Iniquity. In Boston there uses to be plenty of Wine; but in many Towns in the
Country, there is not much of that. Nevertheless, they abound with other
intoxicating Drinks. Cider, and a Spirit Extracted out of it, has been much
abused to Intemporence. Some observe that since it has been so, a strange Blast
has been upon the fruit Trees, in many Places; so as that some whose Orchards
have yielded five hundred Barrel^^ of Cider in a Year, now produce very li^^^.
But there is another sort of Strong Drink, imported from the Sugar Islands,
which has been of all other the most-fatal. It is now called Rum; but it once
had another Name, and a ridiculous one, viz. Kill Devil. Renowned Mr. Wilson,
said, it should rather have been called, Kill men for the Devil.
Notwithstanding it is a sort of Strong Drink which does wof^^, (...) ^^en;
weakening their Memories and Understandings, and shortening their Lives;
nevertheless, many ( and some great pretenders to Religion) have been Enchanted
with it. And English Men who call themselves Christians, have Debauched the
miserable Indians with it; of which there have been some Tragical Effects. For
in their Drink, the Indians have Committed horrid Murders. Besides what has
been formerly, there were sad Examples two or three Years ago, when two Indians
were Executed for having Murdered two other Indians; when all four of them,
(...) Murderers and the Murdered were Drunk.

The Sermons Emitted herewith, were both Preached and Printed Nine and Thirty
Years ago, in 1673. There was then need of Preaching and Writing against this
prevailing Evil. There is so much more at this Day. I have therefore Encouraged
the Republication of them; hoping that a Blessing may a^tend this, as (through
Grace) it did the former Impression. I was willing in my Younger Years ( when
but 34.) and I am no less desi^ons now when through the Patience of God arrived
to Old Age, ( within a few weeks of 73.) to bear Witness against this growing
Evil. If but one Drunkard (the Lord can Bless it to many) shall be bro't to
Repentance for this Sin, that will be a blessed Reward for this Endeavor;
since he which Converts a Sinner from the Error of his way, shall Save a Soul
from Death.

B^ston, May 7th. 1712.

INCREASE MATHER.
Woe to Drunkards.
Isaiah XXVIII. 1. Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim. --


SERMON, I.
IN this Chapter we have the Substance of one of the Prophet Isaiah's Sermons,
of which there are two parts: The first does concern Israel, to the 4 th. ver.
The second has reference to Judah, from thence to the end of the Chapter. The
words before us fall under the first part of the Chapter, wherein we have,

1. The Subject Persons to whom the Prophet speaks; viz. The Ten Tribes of
Israel, who are here called, The Crown of Pride; that is, A Proud Kingdom, and
Ephraim: Often so it is, that Ephraim is put for the whole Kingdom of Israel,
partly because Ephraim was an honorable Tribe, descended from Joseph who was
the best of all the Sons of Jacob; and partly because Ephraim was the first
Royal Tribe i^ that Kingdom, Jeroboam who was the first King over the Ten
Tribes being an Ephraimite. Also the Subject that this Prophecy lights upon,
is said to be the Head of the fat Valleys overcome with Wine, by which the City
of Samaria is meant, which was built upon a Mountain to the which there were
frui^ful Valleys belonging; thus described, because they did yield much Wine
and Oil. Now Samaria being the Royal City, the Place where the Court and
Representative Body of the whole People used to be, therefore it is put for all
the Kingdom.

2. We have the Judgment denounced by the Prophet against this Kingdom of
Israel, Woe to them; i.e. Woeful Misery shall surely come upon them: Woe to the
Crown of Pride, Woe to the Drunkards, Woe to Ephraim. And in the Verses following
we have a more particular description of the Woe which is in this Verse
generally threatened, the sum whereof is, A denunciation of speedy and utter
Ruin, which was executed accordingly by Salman^sser.

3. We have the Causes of this Woe, viz. Their Sins; of which two are mentioned
in the Text, Namely, Pride and Drunkenness. No doubt but there were many other
Evils which they were guilty of; but these two were Principal, and the Causes
of many others, and thence put for all the rest. The DOCTRINE therefore from
the Words, is,

That Pride and Drunkenness are Two Woeful Evils.

Having Discoursed at several times concerning the Evil of that Sin of Pride,
we proceed now to speak concerning that of Drunkenness. And in the Doctrinal
handling of this Point, we shall only attend Two Things: [ I.] To Enquire what
that Drunkenness is that the Scripture denounces Woe against. [ II.] How it
does appear that Drunkenness is a Woeful Evil.

Quest. I. What is that Drunkenness, against which the Scripture denounces Woe?


Answ. There is a Twofold Drunkenness:

(1.) A Drunkenness which is Metaphotical and Spiritual, Isa. 51.21. O thou
that art drunken, but not with wine. The Jews were in such a c^se, as Drunken
men are wont to be in, by reason of the Wine of Divine Judgment that was given
to them. And one may be Drunken with Error and Spiritual Delusion; therefore is
it said concerning Mystical Babylon, that is Rome, That the Inhabitants of the
Earth have been made drunk with the wine of her Fornication, Rev. 17.2.
Antichristian Corrupt Doctrines do as it were intoxicate and inebriate the
Souls of them that do imbibe or embrace them: they become Drunkard-like,
vertiginous thereby. Also one may be Drunk with Security, Isa. 29.9, 10. They
are drunken but not with wine, they stagger but not with strong drink: for the
Lord has poured cut upon them the spirit of deep Sleep. Delusion and Security
had made them as it were dead Drunk. Some think that that is the Drunkenness
which the Text speaks of; for Pride and Security are wont to go together, the
one being the cause of the other. Woe to the Drunkards, that is (say some) to
those that are secure in their Sins, and settled upon their Lees in an evil
course. No doubt but that this is implied, and partly intended here, but that
is not the only nor the principal Evil here aimed at. Therefore,

(2.) Drunkenness is taken in a Literal, Proper sense: There is Corporal as
well as Spiritual Drunkenness, a Drunkenness which not so much the Soul as the
Body is the subject of; and that is it which the Prophet here denounces
Judgment for: Therefore in the latter end of ^^is Verse he speaks of being
overcome with w^^e. The Valleys near S^m^ria abounded with fruitful Vines,
whence they had store of Wine, and they abused that Creature to great
Intemperance. When men abuse their Bodies by immoderate drinking, that is the
Sin the Text Condemns. Now further; there is,

1. Drunkenness in the sight of GOD, that is, when a man does drink more wine,
or of any other inebriating drink, than the Rule allows of: Ephesians. 5.18. Be not
drunk with wine, wherein is excess. The Apostle mentions Wine, because that was
the common drink in those days, and the greatest danger was in respect of that,
by reason of the strength and pleasantness thereof: But under that expression
of Wine, all other inebriating drinks are comprehended. Now if there be any
Excess in the use thereof, that is Drunkenness; if there be an inordinate
affection or love to strong drink, that is Drunkenness in the sight of Him that
tries the R^ins and searches the Hearts. Hence the Apostle speaks of the
excess of wine, 1 Pet. 4.3. The Greek word ( Dinophlogia,) there used notes an
inordinate affection and desire after Wine. And Solomon's description of a
Drunkard, is, that he is a lover of wine, Prove. 21.17. Such an one is an
habitual Drunkard, and he whose practice is according to that inordinate
Affection, is actually so: Yea, if a man does but drink a cup of Wine more than
is good for him, he is guilty of this woeful Evil. As he that eats more than
is good for him, is guilty of the sin of Gluttony; so he that drinks to any
excess is justly charged with Drunkenness.

2. There is Drunkenness in the sight of Men. Sometimes this Evil is so gross
and notorious, as that the wholesome Laws of men take hold of it and Punish it;
Namely, when a man is so overcome with wine, as that he c^n neither speak nor
act like a rational Creature, when Reason is disturbed thereby, and Sense and
Speech and Motion fail, when neither the Head nor Hand can do their Offices
aright: Prove. 16.9. A thorn goes up into the hand of a drunkard. Had he his
wits about him, he would not suffer thorns to be thrust into his hands. Psalm.
107.27. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their
wits end: This is palpable Drunkenness. We must know that a man may be deeply
and damnably guilty of this Evil in the sight of God, though it should never
proceed to those outrageous out-breakings, whereby men cannot but observe it.

We come then unto the Second thing propounded for the clearing of the Truth
before us; viz.


Quest. II. How does it appear that Drunkenness is a Woeful Evil?


Answ. Several things may here be mentioned, as Demonstrations of the Doctrine.

1. If we look into the Original and Causes of this Sin, we shall see the Evil
of it. It has no better an Author than the Devil himself, who never was the
Author of any good (except accidentally, besides his intention, and against his
will) since he was a Devil. Drink is in it self a good Creature of God, and to
be received with thankfulness; but the abuse of drink is from Satan: The Wine
is from God, but the Drunkard is from the Devil; 1 John 3.8. He that commits
Sin is of the Devil; for the Devil Sins from the beginning. For this purpose
was the Son of God manifest, that He might destroy the works of the Devil.
Therefore he that commits Drunkenness (for that is Sin) that is, (if in his
ordinary course he commi^ i^) is of the Devil. Drunkenness was one of the works
of the Devil which Christ came to destroy. It has also another Cause, as bad,
nay worse than the Devil, namely, Sin. It is a Sin, and the Cause of Sin, (as
afterward will be showed) and also the Effect of Sin. Therefore what a woeful
Evil is it? That Corrupt Nature which is in sinners, causes them to become
guilty of this Evil; J^m. 1.14. He is drawn array of his own lust, and ^nticed.
When a sinner is drawn into Drunkenness, his own Lust has enticed him. Hence
Drunkenness is exp^esly and by name mentioned amongst the works of the Flesh;
Gal. 5.19 ^1. The works of the ^^^^h are manifest, drunkenness, re^ellings, and
such like. How woeful must that Evil needs be, that has no other Causes but
such as these?

2. The very Light and Law of Nature Condemns this Practice. Drunkards sin not
only against the written Word of God, but against that Light and Law which is
written in their Consciences. Now those are woeful Transgressions. The Apostle
does aggravate the sins of some, in that in those things which they know
naturally, as bruit Beasts they corrupt themselves, Jude ver. 10. A Drunkard,
though he be a bruit Beast, yet he knows Naturally that he ought not to Corrupt
himself with this vile Practice. If there were no Scripture to Condemn this
Evil, yet he has that within him, a Candle of the Lord in his own Breast,
which shows him that this is an Iniquity which the Judge will Punish. Hence
even Heathens, that have had nothing but the Ligh^ of Nature to guide them, yet
have spoken against this Evil, yea, and made severe Laws to Punish it. Solon
(who is accounted amongst the wisest of the Grecian Princes) made it a Law.
That if a man in Public Place should abuse himself with Drink, his Crime
should be deemed Capital. If he were Drunken but once, he was Punished with
Death for that Transgression: Which I mention not to justify the severity of
that Law, but to show how Odious this detestable Evil has been even to those
who had nothing but the Light of Nature and Reason to guide them.

3. A Drunkard is an Universal Transgressor of the whole Law of God. James
says, Chap. 2. v. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. We cannot say concerning the Drunkard, that he
keeps the whole Law, or that he offends in one point only; but we must say,
that he is guily of all, even guilty of the breach of all the Commandments: and
that not only as he that breaks one link in a Chain may be said to break the
whole Chain, but he has broken every link, that is, every Precep^ of that
Divine Chain of the Royal Law. If the question be, Which of the Commandments is
Drunkenness a Transgression of? The answer must be, Not of one alone, but it is
a general Violation of the whole Law, and of every Precept therein. The
Drunkard is an Idolater, for he loves Drink as he should love God, that is,
above all, even above Wife and Children, and Name and Estate, and every thing
that he has in this world. And there is Robbery, Adultery, nay, Murder
enwrapped in the bowels of this sin, as afterward will appear. The Drunkard is
a Transgressor against the First Table of the Moral Law, in as much as by this
Sin he is rendered unfit to Worship God in any Religious Duty: for wine takes
away the Heart, Hos. 4.11. But the Heart must be given to God in every Duty: if
he Pray it must be with Understanding; and therefore when th^^ is taken away by
Drink, what work will he make of it? Should a Vile Sinner dare to appear before
God when he is in drink, he would but take the Lord's Name in Vain, and bring
Wrath and a Curse upon his own Soul. Some think that Nadab and Abi^u were
distempered with drink, when they offered strange Fire before the Lord; and
conceive that to be the reason of their so miscarrying, because presently after
the Story of their Sin and Death, the Lord says, Do not drink wine or strong
drink when ye go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, le^t ye die, Lev.
10.9. But though that conjecture be uncertain, yet it is certain, that excess in
Wine will unfi^ for any Religious service: and he that shall venture to worship
God when it is so with him, will offer strange Fire; and has more cause to
fear that he shall die before the Lord, than to expect any merciful Answer to
those polluted Prayers, which are but as corrupt breath, enough to stain the
Heavens. If his Breath stink, by his being overcome with Wine in the nostrils
of men, how do his Prayers stink in the Lord's nostrils? Moreover, The Drunkard
is a Transgressor of the Rule of Honesty as well as of Piety; therefore says
the Scripture, Let us walk honestly, not in drunkenness, Romans 13.13. So that
the Word of God will bear us out in calling those that deserve the Name of
Drunkards, Impious and Dishonest Persons.

4. Drunkenness is a wastful, destructive Evil, which is another thing which
shows the Wofulness of it. A Drunkard is a mere stroy-good. Wherefore the
Apostle says that in Wine there is Excess, Ephesians. 5.18. The Greek word (
Alotia,) which is there used, signifies wastful^ess and prodigality: It is the
same word which is used concerning the Prodigal, when it is said he wasted his
Substance with Riotous Living, Luke 15.13. There is much Prodigality, Riot,
Profuseness in this sin: For thereby the good Creatures of God are wasted,
which is contrary to the express charge of the Lord Jesus, who has said, Let
nothing be lost Joh 6.12. But all that is spent in Drunkenness is woefully lost.
And this Consideration proves that a Drunkard is a woeful guilty Creature
before the Lord, for so are they that take His Name in Vain. It is said in the
Third Commandment, that God will not hold him guiltless that takes His Name in
Vain; which does intimate that such Sinners are exceeding Guilty before the
Lord. Now to abuse any of His Creatures, is to take His Name in Vain: In this
respect, Drunkenness is a Breach of the Third Commandment. It is also a great
waster of Precious Time: Men have no need to be Prodigal of their Time; they
have not so much of it: For what is your Life? It is even a Vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. Nay, it is b^t
a M^ment comparatively that any one has to be in this world: In a moment they
go down into the Grave; and it is a thousand pities that any part of that
moment should be lost; yet all is lost that is spent in Rioting and
Drunkenness: For that time is lost, which a man cannot give a comfortable
account concerning the spending of it unto Jesus Christ at the Last Day. Most
certain it is, that all men shall be called to an account in that Solemn Great
Day which is at hand, as for all Talents which they have been trusted with, so
in special for that great and precious Talent of Time: But what answer can be
given for the Time that has been consumed in Lewd and Drunken Practices? When
it shall be said to such sinners in the hearing of Heaven and Earth, You had
such a space of Time allowed to you in the world, you Lived so many Years upon
Earth, but how did you spend that Time? And when Conscience shall bring in a
black Bill of Indictment, and say, There were so many days and nights spent in
rioting and drunkenness, what answer can you give for this, when we shall all
stand before the Son of God in that day? Yet more, Drunkenness is a great
waster of a man's Estate. How common is it for those that are given to this
Vice, if they gain any thing when they are Sober, to lose it again when they
are in Drink? Yea, it may be to lose more in one drunken Day or Night, than
they gain in many Days, Weeks, Months, Ye^rs perhaps? The Scripture says, That
the drunkard shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall (...) be a man w^^b
rags, Prove. 23.21. And does not Experience testify that this Word of God is
Truth? How many have you known that once had considerable Estates, they were
very well to pass in the world, but when once they have fallen in with idle
Company, and followed drunken Courses and Consorts, their Estates have soon
been consumed, and they clothed with Rags, nay, have scarce had Rags to cover
them? Often so it comes to pass, that he that lives a Drunkard, dies a
Beggar; but seldom is it seen, that a Drunkard keeps an Estate long:
Therefore the Holy Ghost has said by Solomon, That he that loves pleasure
shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine shall not be rich, Prove. 21.17. In
a Book, called the Theater of God's Judgments there is an amazing Story of a
most prodigiou^ Prodigal, who by Drunken and Debauched Courses' spent an Estate
of above Thirty Thousand Pounds in Three Years time, and died a Beggar at last.
In this respect, Drunkenness is a Breach of the Eighth Commandment. A Drunkard
is a Thief and a Robber, yea, the worst kind of Robber in the world; for he
Robs his own House, he Robs his Wife and Children, yea himself: And as
Self-murder is the most Horrid, so is Self-Robbery the greatest Villainy. Nay,
the Drunkard Robs GOD, for he makes himself incapable of honoring God with
his Substance. Go to a miserable Drunkard, and ask him for something to relieve
a Poor Body that is in want, or to promote some Public and Pious Wo^^, and he
has nothing to spare; The Cursed Ho^^^e in which he has spent his time in
drinking, has devoured his Substance, that he has nothing left thereof,
neither for God nor for himself. How wastful and how woeful then does this Evil
appear to be? Yea,

5. This woeful Vice is every way Prejudicial, Injurious and Destructive to him
that shall be subject to it. It is not so only in the respects which have been
mentioned, but in every other respect, that may be said or thought of. A little
further to instance under this Head;

(1.) It is injurious to, and brings Woe and Misery upon the Name o^ him that
shall be guilty of it. It ^^ a most disgraceful, infamous Vice: Though a man
should be but once guilty of this Sin in all his days, yet that is a biot and
dishonor upon his Name, and a matter of shame and humiliation to him, as long
as he has a day to live; how much more when he has been often and ordinarily
guilty of it? Hence it was that the Malicious and Lying Pharisees, to the
intent that they might be sure to disgrace Christ to purpose, said of Him, that
He was a Wine-bibber, Mat. 11.19. That they might make everybody think meanly
of Christ, they slanderously gave out, that He was a Drunken Companion. And of
old such were looked upon as the very Children of Belial: Thence when Eli
thought that Hannah had been Drunken, she said to him, No, my Lord, I have
drunk neither wine nor strong drink. Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of
Belial, 1 Samuel 1.13, -- For a Man to love to be Drunk, is horrible impiety; but
if this be true concerning a Woman, there is a Daughter of Belial indeed. Now
they were the Vilest of the Children of men who were so called: And hence it is
that no man almost is willing to be called a Drunkard. They that love the
practice, yet would not be thought to be as they are, because of the Disgrace
that is in it. The Drunkard's Credit is cracked, and lost amongst all Sober men;
and therefore Wise men carry it toward such, as they would do to a Person of
no Credit, whom they dare not trust. Trust a Drunkard with an Estate, and when
he is i^ his Cups he will send it going: Trust him with a Secret, and when he is
Drunken he will discover it: Trust him, -- and when he is Drunken he will undo
himself and his Friend too. I have read, That in some places in Spain, if a man
has been known to be Overcome with Drink, (though it were but once in all his
Life) his Testimony must never be received in any Case; but he must be looked
upon as a Person of no Fame, or Credit in the world. Thus does it undo the Name
of the Transgress^r.

(2.) Drunkenne^s is i^jurious to the Body of him that shall be su^j^ct to it.
It brings (...) upon the Body, and therefore is rightly called a woeful Evil.
Hence are many Bodily Distempers. It is said Hos. 7.5. In the day of our King,
the Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine. Whether i^ was their
King's Birthday, or his Coronationday, or whatever that Day of their King
might be, which was observed, they kept the Day after a very Profane manner;
there was much Drunkenness and Debauchery on that Day; and Sickness was the
Effect of that Intemperance. To this Truth also does Solomon bear witness,
Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has redness of eyes? They
that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Redness of Eyes
(Blindness, and the like) is one Disease which is mentioned instead of many
more, which fol^ow Drunkenness, and are amongst the Woes which attend it. Hence
I say are Diseases, Dropsies, Consumptions, Fevers, Gouts, Apoplexies, etc.
Not but that a man may have these Diseases and yet Live Temperately; but by
Intemperance he shall be sure to have them, or some of them. Many a man has
not Lived ou^ half his days, but has Died before his Time, because he has
been Wicked overmuch in respect of this Iniquity. It has been Averred, That
Drunkenness has Killed more than ever the Sword did. Many have been cast down
Wounded, many have been Slain by it, yea Millions of Millions that have been
Slain, and cast down into the Pit for ever, by the hands of this one Woeful Evil.

(3.) It is injurious to the Souls of men. How woeful is that Evil, which will
bring not only Temporal Woe upon the Bodies, but Everlasting Woe upon the
immortal Souls of all that shall die under the Guilt of it? And that
Drunkenness is injurious and woefully Prejudicial as to the Soul, is Evident;

[1.] In that it darkneth the Light of Reason. That Noble Faculty of the Soul
is as it were overwhelmed and drowned by this Vice: Hence in ver. 7. of this
Chapter it is said, concerning those wicked and shameless Ministers that would
be Drunk sometimes, They are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way
through strong drink they err in vision, they stumble in judgment. Whilst a
man is under the actual power of this Evil, he is like a Reasonless Creature,
devoid of all Judgment and Understanding: Therefore the Prophet speaking
concerning Drunkards, says, they have no knowledge, Isa. 5.13. Q.D. They are
like a Company of Bruits. Nay, Drunkenness is worse than a Brutish Sin; for a
Beast will drink no more than shall do him good; and therefore a Drunkard is
worse than a Beast. Reason is that whereby a man Excels a Beast; but this Sin
depriveth him of his Excellency. How woeful is that Evil which shall deprive a
man of the Image of God, and debase him below a Beast? It makes one more like
a Madman (that is berest of his Reason) than any thing else. A Philosopher
being asked, What is Dru^kenness? Answered well and truly, It is a voluntar^
Madness. And to the same purpose does the Scripture speak, Jer. 51.7. The
Nations have drunken of her wine, therefore the Nations are mad. If Drunkards
were not Mad, they would never do as they do. Was it not madness in Esau, when
he Sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage? How much more madness is it to
part with all Good for a draught of strong Drink? The Drunkard will lose his
Friends, and lose his Estate, and lose his Name, and lose Heaven, and lose his
Soul for ever, and all for a little Drink. Oh! What horrible Madness is this?
Drunkenness is a Besotting Sin: we say commonly, A Drunken Sot; it turns men
into mere Sots. Some that have been of Excellent Parts, by means of excessive
drinking have lost their Parts; and although they were once men of rare
Understanding, have been Besotted so as that they have been beneath the
ordinary sor^ of men.

[2.] Drunkenness brings woe upon the Conscience. There are some Sins which make
deep and fearful wounds in the Conscie^^e, and this is one of them: If the
Sinner have any Conscience in him, this will wound it. Indeed there are some
that feel not, these wounds for the present, because they have drunk Conscience
i^to a deep Sleep for a while, but when their Souls shall awake in the midst of
Eternal Flames, all the wounds received by this Sin, will be felt with a
witness. You know a man may be wounded sorely, and yet not feel it at first;
but afterward he will be sensible of Pain and Misery enough. So it is, as to
the wounds which Sin does give to the Souls of men; at present the sinner feels
nothing perhaps, but, At the Last! At the Last! At the Last! Sin will wound him
terribly: Therefore is it said concerning this sin of Drunkenness, At the Last
it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23.32. Some write
that there is a Serpent, that when a man is first Stung therewith, the Poison
of it tickleth him, so as that he cannot forbear Laughter; but when the venom
is got to his Heart, it does torment him most intolerably: So it is with Sin;
and especially the Sin of Drunkenness; while it is in commiting there is Foolish
Pleasure in it; but, At the Last the Venom of it will reach to the Heart, and
then the Bitterness will be a Thousand times greater than ever the Pleasure was.

[3.] Without Repentance, this Sin alone will Ruin the Soul for ever. Now what
a woeful Evil is that, which is the Poison and Bane of an Immortal Soul?
Drunkards, think of this. If you knew that there were Poison in your Cups, you
would be loath to drink them off: Did you see a Spider or other Poisonful
Creature in the Pot, you would be loath to drink it down. I have Read of a
Drunkard, that when he was drinking there happened to be a Spider in the Pot,
which he not observing, was Poisoned, and died immediately. Believe it so it
is, there is Soul-poison in your Cups, there are Spiders in your Pots, though you
know it not: As sometimes they said to the Man of God, O there is Death in the
Pot; so I say to you that are Pot-Companions, O there is Poison, there is
eternal Death in your Pots, drink, and your Souls will Dye. Now what a woeful
Evil is this, that has slain Millions of immortal Souls, one whereof is more
worth than all the World? If a Soul be shut out of Heaven, then it is Undone:
But so shall the Soul of the Drunkard be for ever, without true Repentance. If
I bring not Scripture to Prove what I say, believe me not. See then, Gal. 5.21.
Where the Apostle speaking concerning those that live in Drunkenness and
Revellings, and such like Evils, I tell you (says Paul) as I have told you in
times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. Hearken Drunkards, hearken; in the Name of God be it spoken to you, You
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Remember what is said of the evil drunken
Servant, Mat. 24.49. with Luke 12.45. If the Evil-servant shall smite his
Fellow Servants, and eat and drink with the drunken: What if he do drink with
the Drunken? What then? Then read the following Verses, where it is said, The
Lord of that Servant shall come in a Day when he looks not for Him, and in an
Hour that he is not ware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his
portion with the Hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Will
you go on still in this Trespass? Will you live and die in it? Then as sure as
this Bible is the Word of God, when Death shall come and cut thee asunder, when
Death shall make a separation between thy Soul and thy Body, thou shall have
thy Portion appointed thee in that Place, where there is weeping and gnashing
of Teeth for evermore! Thus concerning the fifth Particular, demonstrating that
Drunkenness is a woeful Evil.

6. This Sin seldom goes alone, but is the unhappy Parent of many other
Iniquities like it self. Hence are many wicked Words uttered. When Drunkards
are in their Cups, they care not what they s^y, nor of whom: They will Lie,
Swear, Revile, Scoff, Blaspheme, so as some of them, when in a Sober Mood would
be loath to do. Therefore David complained, saying, I was the Song of the
drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. When drink is got into the brain, then out come filthy
Songs, and Scoffing at the best Men, yea at Godliness it self in the Power of
it. Hence are many wicked Deeds, as well as Words: Contentions arise from this.
Look again into that Text, which some have not unfitly termed, The Drunkards
Looking-glass, viz. Prove. 23.^9 Who has woe? who has contentions? who has
habblings? who has wounds without cause? Drunkards have all these: When wine
or strong drink has raised their spirits, they will fall to Babbling, and
Quarrelling, they know not about what, and Words will bring on Blows, and these
will make Wounds when there is no just cause for it. That vile Sin of
Uncleanness, which he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall into, is the
fruit of Drunkenness; therefore ver. 33. says, Thine eyes shall behold strange
women. Where there is rioting and drunkenness, there is wont to be chambering
and wantonness, Romans 13.13 Yea, the most horrid and prodigious Wickednesses
that the Sun ever saw, or the Earth ever heard of, do many times follow upon
this Woeful Cursed Evil of Drunkenness. I remember Lonicerus mentions a sad
Example of a miserable man, who being under some disquietment of Mind, the
Devil suggested to him, that he must needs Commit one of these Three Sins,
Drunkenness, Adultery, or Murder: The man thought with himself, he had better
be guilty of Drunkenness, than of either of the other two. Now that was the
subtilty of the Devil, who knew that if he drew him into Drunkenness, he should
be likely to prevail with him to commit the other Abominations also: And so it
came to pass, for when he was Drunken, he went and Defiled his Neighbors Wife,
and after he had done that, he Murdered her Husband, left he should be
Revenged on him for that wicked Fact. This comes of Drunkenness.

7. It is a Sin that is rarely truly Repented of, and Turned from. Hence that
expression of adding drunkenness to thirst, is a Proverbial Speech, denoting
one that is obstinate and resolved in an evil course, that nothing can reclaim
him, Deuteronomy. 29.19. This made a Father despair concerning his drunken Son: When
he was told that One of his Sons was given to Gaming, he hoped for him; and
when he heard that Another of his Sons was given to Uncleanness, he hoped for
him also: but when he was told that a Third Son was addicted to Drunkenness,
Nay, then (says he) alas! I have no Hope concerning him: He supposed that for
those other Vices, Age and Experience might cure them, but this will grow with
Age, till the sinner drop down into the Grave, and into Hell. I will not say
with him* there is no Hope for such an one, for in and by Jesus Christ there is
Hope; There is Hope in Israel concerning this thing. Not the vilest drunkard in
all the Congregation, but t^ere is Help in Christ for him. There are some of
you that have lived in this Sin even to gray hairs; in the Name of the Lord I
speak it to you, The Spirit of Jesus Christ is able to Convert you, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ is able to Cleans^ and Sanctify you; but you will be
Miracles of Mercy, if it should be so: Such Examples are Exceeding Rare. Some
(in particular Ambrose) among the Ancients, have enquired into this matter, and
upon diligent search have found but an Example or two in an Age, amongst
Notorious Drunkards, who have been truly brought Home to God: We may say of
Drunkenness, as Solomon says of Adultery, Eccles. 7.28. That not One of a
Thousand of those that are Guilty of it, do Return from it again. It does so
bewitch and besot the Committers of it, as that though they know it has, and
will prove hurtful to them, yet they cannot be persuaded to leave it: Prove.
23^25. They have stricken me, shall the drunkard say, when I awake, I will seek
it yet again. Blows cannot beat him out of it; but he will to it yet again, and
that too the very next day after he has smarted for it. An old Drunkard being
persuaded to leave his drunkenness, because it was prejudicial to him in
respect of a disease in his Eyes, professed he had rather lose his Eyes, than
not be Drunken. Forlorn Wretch! Incorrigibleness does usually attend this Sin.
We see by what is written, Deu^. 21.18, -- That Instruction, Admonition,
Correction will not Reform and Reclaim an Obstinate Drunkard. By all this then
it appears, that this is a Woeful Evil: So that well might the Prophet say, Woe
to the Drunkards of Ephraim.

We come therefore to Infer some Uses from the Truth that has been thus far
Cleared and Proved.


SERMON, II.
USE, I. IF Drunkenness be such an Evil as has been expressed, then the
Contrary is to be affirmed, concerning that Christian Godly Sobriety which the
Scripture requires, that it is a very Necess^ry and Profitable Virtue. There
is a Moral Sobriety which is not Saving, and yet even that is Lovely and
Commendable: Therefore it is said concerning the Young man in the Gospel, who
having been put in mind of the Commandments by Christ, and told that he should
keep them, Replied; All these have I Observed from my Youth; it is said, that
then Jesus beholding him, loved him, Mark 10.20, 21. Which shows that
Morality is a lovely thing, and well consistent with Christianity. Some among
the Heathen have been Notable Moralists, such as Cato, Sene^^, Aristides, etc.
And although we must not say th^^ their Morality saved them, yet it was not
altogether unprofitable to them; for God did therefore reward them with many
Outward Blessings, and they did thereby escape many Temporal Judgments, which
otherwise would have befallen them: And they had more quietness in their own
spirits, than othe^^^se would have been, being freed from those i^^ging.
Accusations of Conscience, which more Profane Sinners, that usually have an
Hell in their Consciences, are daily tormented with. Moreover, Their Punishment
in another World will not be so great, as of those that have been of a Vicious
Conversation; for they shall Chiefly be Punished at the day of Judgment, who
have walked after the Flesh, 2 Pet. 2.10. And so have all Drunkards done: But
then there is a Christian Sobriety, even that Grace of Sobriety, which the
Scripture speaks of, and which differs as much from that Moral Sobriety that
some Heathen excelled in, as the Sun Painted on the Wall comes short of the
Real Sun in the Firmament; the one being only a common, the other a special
Grace of the Spirit. Christian Sobriety does proceed from such Principles, as
no mere Moralist was ever acquainted with, etc. From a Principle of Love to
Christ. When a man out of sincere Love to Christ, and desire to be like Him,
does endeavor to walk even as He walked, that is Christianity, that is an
Evidence of the Grace of Sobriety: See Gal. 5.22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance. So that amongst the Fruits of the Spirit, Love is mentioned first,
and Temperance, which implies Sobriety, or that Virtue which is contrary to
Gluttony and Drunkenness, is last mentioned, as flowing from that Mother-grace
of Love, which has many Daughters, whereof Temperance or Sobriety is one. Also
true Christian Sobriety is from Faith. Hence Peter faith concerning the
Gentiles, That their Hearts were Purified by Faith, Act. 15.9. The Gentiles
were much given to that defiling sin of Drunkenness, as the same Apostle
elsewhere shows, 1 Pet. 4.3. But by Faith they were taught to see the Evil of
that, as well as of other Iniquities, and to Live Soberly as becomes the
Gospel. Again, Christian Sobriety is from that Grace of Hope: A Believer has
Good Hope through Grace, that he shall be with Christ for ever in Heaven: this
hope has that blessed Effect upon his Heart and Life, as that it causes him
to abstain from all those Practices which are displeasing to the Lord, and to
Purify himself, as He is Pure. Here now is Christian Sobriety. All this may be
intimated to us in that Scripture, 1 These. 58. Let us who are of the day be
sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope
of salvation. Now this Christian Sobriety is that which is especially
necessary. So it is as to the necessity of the Precept: The Moral Law r^quireth
Sobriety, and this Law is confirmed by the Gospel, Romans 3.31. Do we then make
void the Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea, we establish the Law. The Gospel,
which is the Word of Faith, does establish, though not the Ceremonial, yet the
Moral Law: Wherefore it is said, that the Grace of God, i. e. the Gospel, which
is a very Gracious Doctrine and Dispensation, which brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and wordly Lusts, we
should live [Soberly,] Righteously, and Godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11,
12. Men under the Gospel are taught Piety toward God, Righteousness toward
Men, and Sobriety in respect of Themselves. This Sobriety is also nece^^^ry, in
ord^^ to attaining Eternal Life; 1 Cor 9 25, -- And every man that striveth for
the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible
Crown, but was an incorruptible; I therefore so run: I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection; l^st that by any means when I have Preached to
others, I ^^y self should be a Castaway. The Apostle we see was very
Abstemious, even Temperate in all things, le^t notwithstanding all his
knowledge, and gifts and service done for God, he should miss of Heaven at
last. They that run a race must be very Temperate; if they be not Sober, they
will never obtain the Reward: So must they that are engaged in a Christian
Course, that desire to run that Race of Christianity, live Temperately, or else
they will fall short of that Crown of Eternal Life. Moreover, Sobriety is
necessary, that so a man may be fit for Death and Judgment. When Paul reasoned
before Felix of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled, Act. 24.25. Well he might, for having lived Intemperately, his
Conscience must needs tell him, that it would be Woe with him at the Judgment to
come. It is a vain thing for any one to hope for Mercy from Christ at the Day
of Judgment, that does not live Soberly now. Wherefore the Apostle says, Be
sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unt^ you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Then it is not Hope, but Presumption
and vain Confidence in the man that shall think Christ will be Gracious to him
in the Day when he shall be Revealed from Heaven, though Sobriety be not regarded
by him: And therefore this Grace is very Beneficial as well as Needful; for the
Christian that has and does exercise the Grace of Sobriety, is thereby
capacitated to withstand the Temptations of Satan. Therefore is that, 1 Pet.
5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring
Lion, walks about feeling whom he may devour. Men that are Drunken, are not
capable of defending themselves against their Enemies, that watch to destroy
them. Were not the Assyrians undone by this? N^h. 1.10. While they are drunken
as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. A few m^^ may rout
and ruin thousands of their Enemies being overcome with Drink. Was not the
huge Host of Benhadad, wherein there were above Thirty Kings, Vanquished* by a
few of the Israelites? And how came that to pass, but because Benhadad was
drinking himself drunk, he and the thirty and two Kings that helped him, and
thereby was incapacitated to make resistance against his Enemies? 1 King.
20.16. So it is Godly Sobriety that does render Christians fit to Encounter
with Spiritual Adversaries. And (not to Enlarge further here) by means of this
Sobriety I am speaking of, Christians are fitted to attend the Duties of their
Callings, not only Particular and Civil, but General and Heavenly. Hence is
that, 1 Pet. 4.7. Be ye Sober, and watch unto Prayer. Insobriety, Drunkenness
unfits for Prayer, and for every other Good Work (as was showed in the
Demonstration of the Truth before us) even so where the Grace of Sobriety is
always Exercised, a Soul is fit to have to do with God in any Duty, being
always Prepared to have Blessed Communion with Him; than which, what can there
be more Beneficial or Desirable?

USE, II: If Drunkenness be such a Woeful Evil, as has been Proved; then they
that have been kept from Falling into this Sin, and much more they in whom it
is Mortified, have abundant cause of Thankfulness unto God, because of His
Preventing and Sanctifying Grace in this respect Vouchsa^ed. If we ought to
Pray (as Christ in that Platform of Prayer given to His Disciples has Taught
us) that God would not lead us into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, then
when the Lord does so, we ought to Praise Him: And if Deliverance from Outward
Temptations be matter of Praise and Thanksgiving to the Lord, how much more is
this true concerning Deliverance from Sinful Temptations? For a man had better
see many Afflictions, than one Sin: Yea, there is more evil in the least Sin,
than in any Affliction; Nay, than in all the Everlasting Burnings of the
Bottomless Pit. Therefore they who have been preserved from falling into Sin,
have the greatest cause of Thankfulness that may be. I doubt not but that there
are many here this Day, that were never guilty of this Sin (at leastwise not
in sight of men) in all their Lives: But unto whom are you Beholden for this
Preservation, but unto the Preventing Grace of GOD? Will you say that there is
a Principle of Inherent Grace within you, whereby you have been kept from this,
and other the like Enormities? Suppose so, yet that Principle of Grace is from
God: Neither will Inherent, without Upholding, Preserving, Preventing Grace
keep from this, or any other Evil. Though its impossible to live in this Sin,
where there is true Grace: He that has the least spark of true Grace in his
Heart, it is not possible that he should live in this Sin, yet there may be a
falling into it. Therefore Christ has Charged even His own Disciples to take
heed of this Sin, Luke 21.34 Which shows that a true Christian may possibly
be overtaken with it. And we read in Scripture of Godly men that have been
stained with this Iniquity; As Noah, Lot, Vriah, etc. Yea, there is not a Godly
man on the Earth, but has that in his own Heart, which would soon lead him to
the Commission of this and all other Abominations, if God should but leave him
a little to himself: Wherefore it was that the Holy Martyr Bradford, when he
heard of any one that was Guilty of Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or the vilest
Wickedness, would smite upon his Breast, and say, In this Heart of mine is that
which would have made me commit the same Evil, if the Grace of God had not
prevented. Oh! Therefore be humbly Thankful to the God of all Grace. But much
more have they cause to be for ever Thankful, who are Mortified unto this Sin:
For a man may possibly never Commit this Evil outwardly, and yet the Sin not
Mortified in him; it may be he may not have an Opportunity to practice this
Iniquity; or fear of Punishment, or Shame may deter him, and yet he is not
Mortified to it. This Sin is Mortified, when a man does forsake and abhor it
more than Death or Hell, because God is thereby Offended, and Dishonored; they
that do so shall not Dye, but Live; Romans 8.13. If ye live after the Flesh, ye
shall a^e: but if you through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live. Drunkenness is one of the deeds of the Body and of the Flesh; I do
not say that he that does not Commit that Sin shall Live, but he that does
Mortify it shall Live: For as he that Repents truly of One Sin, Repents of
All; so he that indeed is Mortified to One Sin, is so to All: Such then shall
Live, and therefore have abundant cause of Rejoicing and Thankfulness before
the Lord.

USE, III. This Text and Doctrine is like a Thunderbolt, enough to shake the
Soul, and split the Heart of every Drunkard under Heaven. I could be glad if
there were no need to speak by way of Terror and Awakening to such Sinners. And
time was, when there was not need for Ministers to Preach much against this Sin
in New England: Oh! that it were so now. But we may say, as sometimes the
Prophet Oded spoke in another case to the Host of Israel, You have (says he)
Slain your Brethren with arage that reaches up to Heaven: But are there not
with you, even with you, Sins against the Lord your God? 2 Chronicles. 28.9, 10. So
I say, This Sin is amongst us, even amongst us also; Yea, and the Rage of it
begins to reach up to Heaven; it cries for Judgment. It is sad, that ever this
Serpent should creep over into this Wilderness, where Threescore Years ago he
never had had any footing, but now it is come, and I fear will hardly ever out
again, although it has already devoured many. If we speak of that which God and
Scripture calls Drunkenness, Namely, when there is a drinking of Wine or Strong
Drink to any Excess, how many are there who have cause to lay their hands upon
their mouths, and to Cry Guilty before the Lord? I have heard some say, That
there is more Wine and Strong Drink drunk in this Town, than in most Towns not
greater than this in the Christian World. We may then fear that there has been
much Excess herein, that any should have cause so to speak or think. And how
many are there that must be reckoned amongst woeful Drunkards, that nevertheless
do not believe any such thing of themselves? There are that flatter themselves
in their Iniquity, and think that they are hardly guilty of this sin, because
they are not wont to be subject to such, worse than Beastly Drunkenness, as not
to be able to understand what they do or say; when as it may be the reason of
it is, because by using themselves to Excess in Drinking, they are able to bear
a great deal. Now that is worse than to be merely Drunken; for it is to be a
Drunkard: One may be Drunken, that is not a Drunkard; and one may be a
Drunkard, that is seldom Drunken. He that abhors the Sin of Drunkenness, yet
may be overtaken with it, and so Drunken; But that one Act is not enough to
denominate him a Drunkard: And he that loves to drink Wine to Excess, though he
should seldom be Overcome thereby, is one of those Drunkards upon whom the Woe
in the Text does directly fall. Isa. 5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink. Again, There are that
will make others Drunk: Some have done this out of horrid Profaneness of
spirit, and therefore its a delight to them to draw those into this Sin that
make any Profession of Religion. If they can but make a Churchmember Drunk,
then they are glad; which argues a strange degree of Impiety. Others have done
this out of Covetousness. There has been an horrible thing done in this
respect: Some amongst us (who they are the Lord knows) out of Covetousness
have Sold intoxicating Liquors to these poor Indians, whose Land we Posses, and
have made them Drunk therewith. What a fearful Sin is that! The first Fathers
in this Colony, who are now the most of them in Heaven, began this Plantation,
in part out of respect to the Conversion and Salvation of the Natives amongst
whom we Live; but what woeful Degeneracy is this, that some should rise up
amongst us, that out of love to a little filthy Lucre, shall teach them such
Wickedness as before they were never acquainted with? The Indians are of
themselves the saddest Spectacles of Misery, and the most woeful Remembrance of
the Ruins of the Righteous and Glorious Image of God, that ever mortal Eye
beheld; but therefore their Sin is not a little aggravated, that shall make
such Poor Creatures more the Children of Hell than they were before. If there
be any in the Congregation (as I doubt there is) whose Conscience does accuse
him of making others Drunk, let him hear the Word of the Lord which is written,
Hab. 2.15, 16. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy
bottle to him, and make him drunken also: The cup of the Lord's right hand
shall be turned unto thee. By these things then it is sadly Evident, that there
is cause enough to bear Witness against this Evil.

Now to speak something further, and more particularly by way of Conviction and
Awakening to those ^^at love and live in this Sin of Drunkenness, Know and
Believe;

1. That woeful Judgments have ever followed this Sin. The Text says it, and
woeful Experience proves it. What has been formerly said concerning the
wofulness of the Sin of Pride, may here be applied to this of Drunkenness.
Personal Miseries come from hence upon the Estates, Names, Bodies and Souls of
Guilty ones, as has been more fully showed. And this Sin brings
Family-Judgments: Thousands of Families have been bro't to Ruin thereby.
Drunkards bring a Curse upon their Children, and poor Posterity after them:
Nay, it may be one act of Drunkenness, and that committed by a Good man, shall
bring a Curse upon some of his Children to the worlds End. Do we not see it in
Noah? He was a Righteous man, and was Drunken but once in all his Life, that we
read of; and much might be said to Excuse him, in that probably he knew not
that there was an inebriating Quality in Wine, Nevertheless, that Drunkenness
bro't a Curse upon one of his Children, which continues to this Day, although it
be Four Thousand Years since that Sin was Committed. Whose Heart then is it
that does not Tremble to live in such an Evil? Yea, and this Sin is the woeful
procuring Cause of many Public Calamities in the world. Was not this one
principal Cause of the Babylonian Captivity? See also, Isa. 56.9. All the
Beasts of the Field come to devour, yea all the Beasts of the Forest. Here now
the Ravenous Babylonians are called upon to make a Prey of the Jews: And the
reason of it we may see, ver. 12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink. So that the Luxury and Drunkenness
which abounded amongst the Jews, especially considering that their Watchmen,
their Ministers. who should have been Examples of Sobriety and Mortification to
all round about them, were some of them given to this Iniquity, was one
principal Cause of their Enemies coming to devour them. The like we may see,
Chap. 5. v. 11 We unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them. Now
mind what follows, Ver. 13. Therefore my People are gone into Captivity. And
this Sin also was in a special manner the procuring cause of that Assyrian
Captivity, wherein the Ten Tribes were carried away, and never restored to this
day, although it be now above Two Thousand Years since that Judgment ^^^el them:
Therefore is it said to the Drunkards of Ephraim, in the next words to the
Text, Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one. They boasted, and were
confident in their Outward Strength and Fortifications, etc. Well, but says
the Lord, be not Proud of your Strength, for I will bring a Strong one upon
you, as a tempest of hail and destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters
overflowing, shall cast down to the Earth with the hand. The meaning is, that
the Assyrians should break in upon them, and fall upon them as thick as
hailstones, and destroy them, because of their Drunkenness and other Sins they
Lived in. And has not the Christian World drunk deep of the Cup of Divine
Judgments for this Sin? What Woes has it bro't upon Christendom, so called?
Some have observed, that it has been in special for this Sin, that God has
let loose the Barbarous Nations upon those that call themselves Christians, to
scourge them, and to destroy them. The Turks (who are meant by the Second of
those Woes in the Revelation, when it is said, Woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabiters of
the Earth, Rev. 8.13.) Providence has raised them up, and sent them like a
storm of hail upon the European Nations, not only (though principally) to Punish
them for their Idolatry and Superstition, in worshipping Graven Images, but
also to Plague the Nations, even the Christian Nations, for all their
Profaneness, Luxuries, Drunkennesses. Poor Miserable Germany has Bled for this
Sin! Has not God made the Sword Drunk with Blood? Yea, at this Day, is not the
Sword made Drunk with Christian, and with Protestant Blood for This Sin? My
Text says, Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim: Even so, Woe to the Drunkards of
England; and, Woe to the Drunkards of Holland. Is not Salmanasser at this Day
coming against the Fat Valleys for this Sin? And if we look nearer Home; What
sad Harvests have we in New England had of late Years? And doubtless the
prevailing of this Iniquity has been One Cause of it: The good Creatures of
God have been greatly Abused by many amongst us, unto much Sensuality and
Intemperance, therefore does the Lord take away Creature Comforts from us. This
last Summer, what Excessive Rains have there been? Since that Drunkards are to
be seen up and down in almost every Town; no wonder that the Lord in Judgment
makes the Earth Drunk. Nay, come yet nearer Home, and look upon this great
Town, How has God Threatened us for This, as well as Other Sins? Remember the
sad Fire that was here in this Part of the Town about Three Years ago* And
where did that Fire break forth? Began it not at the Alehouse? As if the Lord
should from Heaven Point with the Finger, and say, Behold, I am Displeased with
you, because of your mispending your Precious Time in such Houses. Boston!
Boston! Take heed of this Sin, lest thou become Desolate.

2. Know, that this Sin will certainly be Bitterness in the Latter End. Suppose
the best that can be supposed; Suppose the Lord should give you Repentance, and
so forgive this Iniquity, yet then it will cost you much Bitterness of Soul.
Extraordinary cases must always be excepted; but otherwise, God is not wont to
Pardon great Sins, without bringing first to great Sorrows, and heavy Breakings
of Heart for them. Now, Drunkenness is a great Sin, and therefore conclude thou
may, that if ever the Lord Pardon it to thee, He will first break all thy
Bones and Heart for it: Or if the Sin be not Mourned for, and Turned from, then
bitter Destruction will be the End of it. The Scripture says of those whose
God is their Belly, that their End will be Destruction, Phil. 3.19. Now, the
Drunkards Belly is his God, unto which he offers a Drink Offering. What bitter
and lamentable Ends have many Drunkards come to? Has not the Lord been wont to
make such Persons awful Examples of Divine Vengeance at last? What a sad End
did Nabal come to, after he had been very Drunken? 1 Samuel 25.36. And what a
lamentable End did Amnon come to at last, who was Murdered by his own Brother
at that very instant when his Heart was merry with Wine? 2 Samuel 13.28. And yet
he was the Child of a Godly Father, who no doubt had Wept and Prayed for the
Salvation of his Children full many a time. And what a lamentable End did Elah
come to at last? Whose Servant Zimri conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah
drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, and smote him and killed him, 1
King. 16.9, 10. It may be because thou art given to this Sin, God will suffer
thee to Dye Drunken at last* and to go down into Eternal Darkness in that
Condition: Or it may be, God will leave thee to that which is worse than any
Death; it may be, some time when thou art Drunk, thou will be left to fall into
some horrid Sin, for which the Sword of Justice shall Cut thee off at last. I
could produce many direful Instances to this purpose: But I will only mind you
of one dismal Example, which Austin mentions, who says. That in Hippo (the
Town where he was Minister) there was a Citizen whose Name was Cyril, who had
but one only Son, to whom he was extremely Indulgent; and as Austin says,
Loved him above God Himself: This Son, as he grew up, fell in with Bad Company,
and became a Drunkard, and once coming Home much Distempered with Drink, he
attempted to Ravish one of his own Sisters and Killed two other of his own
Sisters, and Murdered his own Father that begat him, and his own Mother that
bare him, who was then great with Child: For which Monstrous Impie^ies he was
Condemned and Executed. Now say, Was not this Young man's Drunkenness Bitterness
in the Latter End? For the present, this Iniquity may be Sweet to you; but what
will it be upon a Deathbed, think you? It may be Conscience will Roar for it
then. Some Notorious Drunkards, when they have been upon Death beds, have cried
out in Hellish horror of heart, Alehouses are Hell-houses: The Alehouse has
bro't my Soul down to the house of Hell for Ever. Shall I tell you what I am
able upon my own personal Knowledge to testify? I will tell you, that there
have been some in this very Congregation, who upon Sick-beds and Deathbeds
have sent for me, desiring that I would Cry to the Lord for them, and give them
the best Advice I could for their Souls: Seeing them in miserable distress of
Conscience, I have said to them; Tell me now, what is that Sin that does most
of all torment and perplex your Conscience? O my Company-keeping, and my
Drunkenness, says one; and, O my Company-keeping, and my Drunkenness, says
another. These have been the lamentable Cries of poor dying Sinners in this
Place, when they have seen themselves upon the borders of Eternity. And after
Death this Sin will be bitter indeed: Then (as one speaks) the Drunkard for
every Cup of pleasure, will receive a Gallon of woe. Yea, for every Drop of
pleasure which he enjoyed whilst living and sinning, he shall have a Tun of woe.
After Death comes Judgment, and then the truth of this will be felt and
believed. For,

3. Know for certain, that who ever lives and dies in this Sin, shall Perish
to Eternity. It will be a folly for any such Sinner to expect Salvation. Can
you be Saved without an Interest in Christ? This Lust alone, if loved or lived
in, will keep Christ out of the Soul. It is reported, that a great man once
said to Luther, Sir, we would all willingly be Christians, but we cannot find
in our hearts to leave that custom of drinking to Excess. But a man must leave
that Custom, or Die and Perish a Christless Sinner for ever. It was partly
showed the last time, That Drunkenness is such an Evil as will assuredly
Exclude the Sinner out of Heaven: Therefore the Lord has commanded Churches to
Exclude such out of their Communion; 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a
Brother, be a Drunkard, with such an one, no, not to eat. What, a
Churchmember, and a Drunkard? Ah! Vile: Ah! Vile. Woe to that Church that shall
know such amongst them, as make a practice of this Iniquity, and yet not make
them to know the Terror of a Censure. How plain and peremptory is that
Expression, Chap. 6. ver. 10. Where it is said in so many words, Drunkards
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And if not, it must needs follow, that
Hell and Destruction will be the Eternal Portion of every Drunkard, so living,
so dying. Wherefore the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, speaking of Drunkards, yet
says, Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, Isa.
5.14. Drunkards, Tremble at this! Do you not see Hell gaping for you, and
opening her mouth wide to receive your Souls, when once they are out of your
Bodies? Yea, verily, though a man should reform his Life in many things very
much; though he should be swept and garnished never so, having attained to great
Gifs, practicing many Duties, forsaking many Sins, yet if there be but this one
Lust of Drunkenness, which still his Heart has a secret love and liking to,
there is no remedy, but Dying in his present Estate, he must be a Damned Wretch
to all Eternity. Oh! That you would think sadly between God and your own Souls,
on the words of the Lord Jesus, Mat. 5.29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee,
pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into
hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for
it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that
thy whole body should be cast into hell. Though this Sin of Drunkenness may be as
dear to thee as Life and Limbs; though it may be as hard to part with, as to
pluck out a Right Eye, or to cut off a Right Hand, yet away with it, away with
it, as ever thou would Escape Hellfire.

4. Know, that if any of You that are here before the Lord this day, shall
continue under the Guilt of this Sin, Your Iniquity will be hainously
Aggravated: For you call your selves Christians. If an Indian be Drunk, that is
bad; but for a Christian to be a Drunkard, is a thousand times worse. If
Ephraimites (that is to say, such as Profess that they are the Lord's People)
be Drunkards, surely the Lord will Judge them as those that break Wedlock, that
break Covenant with Him are Judged. Yea, and you Sin in the Day, that is
against Gospel Light. What says the Scripture? 1 These. 5.7, 8. They that be
drunken, are drunken in the night: but let us who are of the day, be sober. For
men that live in Gospel-Days, and under Gospel Ordinances, to practice deeds of
Darkness, is shameful and horrible. And this Sin is aggravated from the Place
where you. Live: What? To be a Drunkard in New England, where there are severe
and wholesome Laws to Punish this Iniquity, and some are put to Sh^me f^ it!
Time was, when it was a strange thing to see or hear of a man Overcome with
^^^ong drink in New England; and is this Sin now become Common in New England?
The Lord Help! Will you be Sinners in Zion? Will you be Fools in Israel! You
have moreover been told of the Judgments following this Transgression; You have
been sadly and solemnly Warned against this Evil, and that not in a Word or
two; but by Sermon after Sermon. I remember I had occasion to Preach a whole
Sermon, that I might Testify against the Sin of Drunkenness in this Place, it
is now above Nine Years ago. I am grieved at my Heart, that there should be
Cause for me now to Preach more Sermons than One, further to bear Witness
against the same Evil, whereby the Eyes of God's Glory are Provoked, and His
Blessed Name is highly Dishonored amongst us. Take heed how you resist the
Spirit of God. I might tell you; that an Author worthy of Credit, Relates that
a Minister having Preached a Sermon against Drunkenness, a Profane Drunkard
that was in the Congregation, went out and Scoffed and Mocked at what he had
heard; and God smote him by a strange Providence, that he Died forthwith, even
whilst he was deriding at the Sermon which he had newly heard. Will you
Provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are you stronger than He? But if there be any
Drunkards in the Congregation so desperate, as to go on still in the Commission
of this Trespass against the Lord, be it known to you, That your Blood shall be
upon your own Heads. I remember what God said to His Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 33.
ver. 7, 8. Son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel;
therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I
say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely die; if thou do not
speak, to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. O Lord, I Tremble to
think of that! That the Blood of any Poor Soul shall be Required of me: I trust
in Christ that it shall not be so. I trust that none amongst you shall be able
to say to me, when we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Had
you that Taught us the word of God, told us the evil of our ways, had you
faithfully warned us of our danger, we would not have gone on therein. I
remember also what the Lord further says, Ver. 9. Nevertheless, if thou warn
the wicked of his way, to turn from it: if he do not turn from his way, he
shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Now then, I call
Heaven and Earth to Record against you this Day, that I have Warned you of this
Sin to turn from it: Let Men and Angels that are here present, bear me witness
at the Last Day, that I have not shunned nor spared to declare unto you the
Woes that will certainly follow upon continuance in this Evil. Therefore if
there be any Drunkard that will be a Drunkard still, he shall die in his
Iniquity; but I have delivered my Soul.

USE, IV. Let it be of EXHORTATION; and that in Three words.

1. Let every one Endeavor the Suppression and Extirpation of this Evil. This
we should do, by Laboring to Pray it down. When we are taught to Pray that the
Name of God may be Hallowed, therein is implied, That we must Pray that this
and such like other Evils, whereby His Glorious Name is much dishonored, may
be suppressed. And there are some that ought to do more than merely to Pray
against it; Ministers must bear Witness against it in their way: And it
concerns those that have any Civil Power in their Hands, to bear Witness
against it in their way. If there were Magistrates in this Assembly, I would
speak to them in His Name by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, and
all the Judges of the Earth, and Exhort them to draw forth the Sword of Justice
against this Evil.

The^^ are sundry of you that stand in some Public Capacity, Townsmen,
Constables, Grand-Iury-men, etc. Behold the Word of the Lord is unto you in
Particular this Day; I lay the Solemn Charge of GOD upon you, that you do your
Utmost toward the Suppression of this Abounding Iniquity: Kill this Serpent
before it be grown too Big for you. And therefore take heed that there be not
through your Means, or through your Neglect, that which is the Fountain of this
Evil; I mean, that there be not a Multiplication of Taverns, and Ale houses, or
the like, more than there is Need for. I know, that in such a great Town as
this, there is Need of such Houses, and no Sober Minister will speak against
the Licensing of them; but I wish there be not more of them than there is any
Need of* Especially, see that you keep a Vigilant Eye over these Private, Dark
Houses, where wicked Persons Sell Drink and Destroy Souls to get a little
Money; and which do more Mischief, than all the Public Houses do Good, as
being the very Sinks of Sin, whereby Youth is woefully Corrupted among^ us. And
if you find out any that have made a Trade of this Iniquity, and that have got
part of their Living by the Blood and Destruction of Precious Souls, see that
you bring them forth to Condign Punishment; and as they have been Exemplary in
Sinning, so let them be brought under Exemplary Punishment, that All Israel may
Hear, and Fear, and do no more so Wickedly.

2. Much more, Let every one be Exhorted to beware of being Subject to, or
coming any way under the Dominion of this Iniquity. For Motives, Remember what
was said in the last Use, as also formerly concerning the Wofulness of this
Evil. By way of Direction here, I shall only say Two things.

(1.) Take heed of the Occasions and Temptations leading unto this Evil. Some
there are that will Pray against this Sin, and yet they will cast themselves
upon Temptations to it, which is to take God's Name in Vain; Even as if a man
should put his hand into the Fire, and then Pray that he might not be Burnt:
Would you not say that such a one did Mock the Lord? And what do they do less,
who Pray that they may not be Drunk, and yet will not avoid Temptations that
lead unto it. As now, Idleness is a Temptation leading unto Drunkenness: When
Vile Persons have nothing else to do, then they must go to the Tavern, and
drink till they be Drunken. Idleness and fullness of Bread; so Idleness and
fullness of Drink are wont to go together, Ezekiel. 16.49. Therefore take heed of
Idleness, If you would escape Drunkenness. And take heed of Company-keeping
with those that would draw you unto this Evil: My Son, if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not: walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from
their path. Take the Counsel which the Holy Ghost gives by Solomon, Prove.
23.20. Be not amongst wi^e-bibbers. Avoid familiar Fellowship with Drunkards:
Avoid them as you would do men that have the Plague upon them; yea, a Plague
that will Infect, and be the Death of your precious and immortal Souls.
Remember that Scripture, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be
wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. And take heed of being more,
than you have any just Cause or Call to be, in Places where a Temptation unto
this Sin is set before you: Go not to, Tarry not in Taverns or Ordinary's, or
in Houses where Strong Drink is Sold, without sufficient reason to bear you out
in such a Practice. It is a sad thing, that Professors and Church Members
should many of them be guilty of Scandalizing the world in this respect. A
Carnal Creature Excuses himself, saying, Why should not I go frequently to the
Tavern? Such an one is a Churchmember, and I see him there often; such an one
is esteemed a Godly Man, and yet I have seen him sit for Hours together there;
and why should not I do so as well as be? Thus does the abuse of your Lawful
Liberty become a Snare, and Ruin to many a poor Soul. Does not the Scripture
say, Look not upon the wine? Prove. 23.31. The meaning of which is, that men
must avoid all Temptations unto Drunkenness, as much as possibly may be.
Drunkenness is like the Basilisk, of whom they say, That if a man do but look
upon it, he is thereby Infected, and mortally Poisoned. Therefore it will be
your wisdom to keep out of the sight of this Evil, and far away from what ever
shall tend, and tempt unto it. One thing more I shall mention, as a great
Occasion and Cause of this Sin, which therefore you ought to avoid, Namely,
that Heathenish Custom of Health-drinking. It is an Heathenish, nay an
Idolatrous Rite; witness those Ceremonies of putting off the Hat, yea, of
Kneeling, (a gesture of Adoration) which are Customary amongst profane
Health-drinkers. But the Word of God says, Learn not the way of the Heathen;
for the Custom of the [Heathen] People are Vain, Jer. 10.2, 3. And that
Christians are Redeemed from their vain Conversation received by Tradition from
forefathers, 1 Pet. 1.18. What should Christians do with the Mysteries and
Ceremonies of Bacchus? Do not think that only a few Puritan^ or Precisians,
have been against this Custom of drinking Healths: For though Papists indeed
Plead for the Lawfulness of it, yet Protestants generally Condemn it: And the
Ancient Doctors in the Church have Thundered against this Practice; and that
because it is (as they were wont to Express it) A Shoe-ing-horn to draw on
Drunkenness: It is a Bacchean Artifice, which Satan has devised for that end.
The Scripture likewise does plainly enough Reprove it, when Banquettings are
Condemned, 1 Pet. 4.3. The Greek word ( Potois,) which is there used, properly
notes a drinking by Number and Measure, as is usual amongst Health-drinkers.
But especially when any shall be so Vile, as not only to drink Healths
themselves, but to force others to do the like, their Practice is very Sinful
and Abominable. Is there any in this Congregation that has done thus, that
has compelled others to drink Healths, and will you go on to do so still? I
testify from the Lord against that man, whoever he be, that an Heathen shall
rise up in Judgment against him, and Condemn him at the Last Day: Witness else
what is Written, Est. 1.8. It is there said, That the drinking was according to
the law, none did compel; for the king h^d appointed to all the officers of his
house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure. So that those
Heathens would not force any man to drink more than he had a mind to. Therefore
beware of that Evil Practice.

(2.) There is another Rule, which if it be observed, you shall never be under
the Dominion of this Iniquity, and if it be neglected, all other Precepts will
be in Vain: It is this, Make sure of an Interest in JESUS CHRIST, by Faith
unfeigned in His Name. There are some, that in giving Directions tending to the
Mortification of this Sin of Drunkenness, say to those that are guilty of it,
That they must Pray, and add Fastings to their Prayers, and Vows to their
Fastings; all which things are good, and see that you attend them in their due
Order. But alas! The main thing of all is left out, if an Interest in Christ be
not sought after, and made sure of. All Prayers, Tears, Resolutions, Fastings,
and Vows against this Sin, will never subdue it without CHRIST. Go to Jesus
Christ for Power against this, and all Corruptions: If thou art once in Christ,
thou may by Faith obtain Power from the Blood of Christ, for the Killing of
this Sin: If thou art in Christ, His Spirit also will Mortify it. Therefore the
Scripture says, That if you through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body,
Rom 8, 13. Make sure then of an Interest in Jesus Christ, and His Spirit will
Subdue and Mortify every Lust in thy Heart.

3. The last Word of Exhortation shall be unto those that have been Guilty of
this Woeful Sin of Drunkenness; Be this day Excited and Persuaded to Repent and
Turn from this Transgression. Some of you have through Temptation been drawn
into this Evil. How many Guilty, Accusing Consciences are there here before the
Lord? Oh! Repent of what you have done, if ever you have given way to
Temptation, so as to be overtaken with this so Vile an Abomination. Others (and
many too) live in this Sin; in their ordinary Course they Commit it, and
therefore are Servants to it: Oh! Repent, Repent, before it be too Late.
Remember, that ere long Repentance for it will be too late. Did not Dives
Repent when it was too late? When his Soul was dropped down into the Place of
Torment, and he was Crying for one drop of Water to cool his Tongue, then he
bitterly Repented of all the Drunken Merry-meetings, which in his Life time he
had seen; but then Repentance was too Late. Think seriously on that Scripture,
Romans 13.11, 12, 13. Now it is high time to wake out of sleep, the night is far
spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, --
Let us walk honestly, not in rioting and d^unkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness. Do not delay your Repentance, but NOW Practice it. Austin I
remember Confesses, That he Lived in scandalous Impieties, in his Vain
Youthful Days, before his Conversion, and he had many secret Convictions upon
his Conscience, thinking with himself that Tomorrow, or some time Hereafter, he
would Repent of, and Turn from those Vanities: But on a certaim Time it seemed
to him as if he heard a Voice from Heaven, saying to him, Toll and Lege, Take
up and Read; a Bible being by him, he takes it up, and goes to reading in it,
and the First place which his Eyes fixed on, was this Scripure last mentioned,
and the Lord set in with it upon his Heart, so as that he Cried out, And why
not Now, Lord? I have said, That Hereafter I would leave my Chambering and
Wantonness, but let me do it Now, Lord. Do you that are Drunkards, say and do
the like; Resolve upon Present Repentance, without delaying one Day or one Hour
longer. And know for your Encouragement, That in case you do truly Repent of
this Iniquity, God will forgive you. Do not think that I love to Scare you,
with the dark Visions of that Eternal Night which is hastening upon your Souls.
Do not think, My Brethren, That I delight in Terrifying you, with the sad
Tidings of Hell and Death. Indeed sometimes I am forced to it. Knowing the
Terror of the Lord. I seek to Pe^swade you by those Arguments; Nevertheless, I
take no Pleasure to Tell you thereof. But now that I am speaking to you of the
Pardoning Grace of GOD, Methinks I could be glad to stay and dwell here, and
enlarge my self much to you, would Time and Strength permit me. But I can only
say thus much. We read in Scripture of those that have been grievously Guilty
of this Sin, many and many a time; of such as have Walked in it, yet when they
have truly Repented of it, the Gracious Blessed GOD has freely Forgiven them;
and in Jesus Christ looked upon them as if they had never Committed this Sin.
To Encourage to Repentance, and to break the Heart of the Vilest Drunkard, I Will
put you in mind of Two Scriptures: The one is that, 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past
of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we
walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquettings, etc.
So that those Christians had before their Conversion been woefully Guilty of this
Iniquity, but upon true Repentance they were sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus
Christ; as the beginning of the Epistle shows: That is to s^y, The Blood of
Jesus Christ Cleansed them from the Guilt of this Sin, and obtained Pardoning
Mercy for them. Another Scripture to Encourage you to Repentance is that, 1
Cor. 6.11. Where the Apostle having said to the Co^i^thian, that no Drunkard
(that is, so Living and Dying without Repentance) shall inherit the Kingdom of
God; he adds withal, Such were some of you: But ye are Washed, you are
Sanctified, you are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God. Know therefore, that although, thou have been Guilty of this great
Sin, it may be an Hundred and an Hundred times, yet thou may be Justified
from it in the Name of the Lord Jesus, if indeed thou do Repent of it. But
then your Repentance must be thus Qualified;

(1.) You must Mourn before the Lord, that ever you Dishonored His Name by
this Transgression. Let me speak to you in the words of the Prophet Joel, Joel
1.5. Awake ye drunkards, and weep and howl, all ye drinkers of wine. O thou
Drunkard, Now let Tears be thy drink; Go Home, and appear before the Lord in
Secret, and there Lament with a sorrowful Heart, that ever thou have thus
Sinned against Him. Do as David did, who says, Psalm. 38.18. I will declare
mine Iniquity, I will be sorry for my Sin. What Sin was that? Truly, his Sin in
making Vria^ Drunk. So do thou be sorry that ever thou have made thy self Drunk.

(2) You must also Forsake this Sin: That Is implied in true Repentance. And I
speak this the rather, because I know there have been some Drunkards that would
Bewail their Sin with many Tears, and yet it may be, go and be Drunk again the
next Week: That Is no true Repentance. Thy Heart must be so broken For this Sin,
as to be broken From it; Otherwise though a man should Confess his Sin till his
Tongue be worn to the stumps, though he should Pray against it till Heaven and
Earth shake; though he should Weep Seas of Tears for it, yet if he will not
Forsake it, all his Confessions, Prayers, and Tears shall never Save him. Yea,
he must Forsake it not only as to his Conversation, or Outwardly; but Inwardly,
so as to have no Affection, or secret Love and Liking to this Abomination. O
therefore say as once Ephraim did; What have I to do any more with Idols? So
sa^ thou, What have I to do any more with my wicked Companions in Sin? What
have I to ^o do any more with Drunkenness; or any other Iniquity that I have in
Times past Loved and Lived in? And then thou may hope to (...) Pardoning
Mercy from the Lord; according to that Gracious Word, Prove. 28.13. Whose
Confesses and Forsakes shall have Mercy.

FINIS.
These BOOK's written by the Reverend Author of the Two foregoing SERMONS, are
to be Sold by Timothy Green, at the Lower End of Middle-Street, Boston.
A Discourse concerning Faith and Fervency in Prayer; and the Glorious Kingdom
of the Lord Jesus Christ on Earth approaching. From that Text, Psalm. 72.19.

A Discourse concerning the Death of the Righteous. From that Text, Isa. 57.1.

BVrnings Bewailed. Occasioned by the Lamentable Fire which was in Boston,
October. 2. 1711. From that Text, Lev. 10.6.

MEditations on the Glory of the Heavenly World. (1.) On the Happiness of the
Souls of Believers, at the instant of their separation from their Bodies. (2.)
On the Glory of the Bodies of God's Children, in the Resurrection World, when
they shall be as the Angels of Heaven. (3.) On the Glory of both Soul and Body
in Heaven to all Eternity. From four Texts, viz. Ephesians. 1.18. Heb. 12.23. Luke 20
36. and Col. 1.5.

SOlemn Advice to Young Men, Not to walk in the ways of their Heart, and sight
of their Eyes; but to remember the Day of Judgment From that Text, Eccl. 11.9.
Whe^^to is added, ^ Discourse concerning the Hateful Evil of Sl^^ From that
Text, Psalm. 36.2.


