THE Portsmouth Disputation EXAMINED, BEING A brief Answer to the Arguments
used by the Anti-Poedo-Baptists in Dr. Russels Narrative of the Disputation
held at Portsmouth, between some Baptists and Presbyterian Ministers.

By Joseph Morgan.

Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart, Try me, and know my
Thoughts, and see if there be any Wicked Way in me, and lead me in the Way
Everlasting. Dan. 12.4. Many shall Run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be
increased. Printed, and Sold by William Bradford in New York, 1713.

TO His Excellency Robert Hunter, Esquire; Capt. General and Governor of Her
Majesty's Provinces of New Jersey, New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, etc.
May it Please Your Excellency;
THe Examination of the Portsmouth Dispute does not pretend to Elegancy of
Style, nor accurateness of Method, nor to please the learned Critic (the
Author having this dozen years labored under the disadvantage of a small
Maintenance and a great Family, whereby those few Notions of Learning which he
had, have almost slipped his Memory) He only consults the Edification of the
Reader, by plainly laying open the Falacies of false Argument, and honestly
Teaching and proving the Truth from holy Scripture. It does not expect to go
free from the Carps of Momus, nor to be without Fault; but it hopes to have so
much Virtue, by having the Truth on its side, as to induce the Virtuous to
overlook its Infirmities. It does not seek to findout all the Faults of those
it Opposes, but only to answer what makes against the Truth: Neither does it
spare Friends nor Enemies, where it thinks them materially out of the way. The
Book which it undertakes to oppose being chiefly spread in that part of the
Country where the Author dwells, and there being no opportunity that he was
sure of, to employ an abler hand with so much speed as the Truth of the Gospel
of Christ, the true Worship of God, and the good of Men's Souls (and, as he is
persuaded, the Reputation of Gentlemen abused) requires, he thought it his Duty
to God to do what he has done herein.

And he thinks it his Duty to Her Majesty (under whose Government (according to
the Gospel of Peace and common Privilege of Mankind) Religious Controversies
are handled by the Pen of the Scribe, and not by the Sword of the Magistrate)
and to your Excellency, her Governor, to acknowledge your Excellency herein.

Wherefore, this Examination of the Portsmouth Dispute (such as it is) is
humbly offered and submitted to your Excellency, hoping to enjoy your
Protection, and the Pardon of its Infirmities, And that You may be blessed with
Grace from above, and Prosperity here, and be a Blessing to the People under
your Government, is the Prayer of

Your Excellency's Humble Servant, Joseph Morgan.

Christian Reader;
IT is a very Awful thing for a Person to be deceived in his Faith; and it is
an inexcusable Evil, when a person, through sloth or prejudice, will not love
the Truth, so as to submit to the Evidence of it, when it is laid before him.

Some Errors are such, that he that believes them will be Damned, 2 These. 2.11,
12. but others are such, that except a person wilfully hold them, against the
evidence of his Conscience, they may be ranked among the Infirmities even of
Believers.

Of this latter kind, I take the ensuing Controversy to be, and therefore have
been always loath to meddle with it. Not but that I believe it is well worth
the labor, and is in it self a great Duty; but lest by so doing I should do
the less in things, which more immediately concern Judgment, Mercy and Faith,
and lest by striving to mend Faults in the Practice of the Outside part of
Religon, I should stir up strife and cause people to neglect the inward part of
Religion, and break the bands of Love to one another, and so make a greater
Fault than I mend; believing, that Christians, who hold and live according to
the essential part of Religion, ought to Love one another, and bear with one
another Infirmities, and prudently to avoid those things, which otherwise
might be very needful, rather than make a Rent and Schism (and so hinder mutual
Edification) in the more vital part of Religion. For a person may be baptized
and yet be a very wicked Man; but a Man cannot exercise sound Repentance, a
lively Faith, true Humility, unfeigned Love, and a holy Life, and yet be a
wicked Man.

Wherefore I always avoided these Controversies, yet carefully practiced that
which I believe the Right, and never refused to give my Reasons for what I
held, when I was asked.

But now I am called to speak, and dare no longer keep silence, because of a
Book, which I have formerly read (hoping, if I was in an Error, to be
Convinced, but if in the Truth, Confirmed) and returned it to the Owner, but
made no stir about it, because it was not very public.

But of late this Book is Reprinted, and spread among us, and given among the
People under my Charge, as well as among others; and many people, who hold with
it, glory in it abundantly.

Wherefore, I knowing the false Arguments and other unsufferable Evils in it,
do account it would be sinful Silence in me to be silent, when I see not only
Gentlemen, not here to speak for themselves (I think) slandered, but also the
Truth run down, Falsehood believed, and the Weak deceived, and, it may be, some
seduced from the right Way of Worship, whom it is my Charge to defend, I may
not wait till it can be done by an abler hand, nor take much time about it my
self; but it is so easy to answer that there is little need of either.

If my writing increase Anger, and hinder Love in some, I cannot help it; I
shall endeavor to treat the erroncous Narrator with as easy Language as the
Truth will bear.

But the chief design of this Epistle is to entreat the Reader, for Gods sake,
and for his Souls fake, to take heed and lay aside all Prejudice when he comes
to read this, and compare with that, what it undertakes to answer.

I advise him (if he be a Christian) to make his earnest Request at the Throne
of Grace, before he read it, That God would (in his infinite Mercy in Jesus
Christ) cause him to see and believe the Truth, and save him from believing
Error, or rejecting the Evidence of Truth, whether it be on the One part or the
Other. For which end, that he take away all prevailing Prejudice, or desire of
believing the one or the other, lest he be like those who did not receive the
love of the Truth, and so God gave them up to strong Delusions to believe a
Lie, that they might be Damned. Know, that all your Will and Reason and Means
will neither bring you TO nor keep you IN the Truth, without Gods blessing,
which is not promised, except you seek aright, James 4.3, 4.

Pray do not make the Reading of this a hindrance to your Exercise in the
spiritual part of Religion, but while you are informing your self in the
Doctrine of the Administration of Baptism, let your chief care be to be made
Partaker of the Grace represented in Baptism, otherwise you will have the Shell
without the Kirnell.

This is the Advice of him, that desires no other but to be

Your Soul's Friend, Joseph Morgan.
New Jersey, Oct. 28. 1712.
THE Portsmouth Dispute EXAMINED.
CHAP. I. On the Narrative in general.
I have several Reasons to question the Truth of the Narrative of the
Portsmuoth Dispute, as it is related by Dr. Russel.

First, I take Notice in the Dedication, that he composed it from several
Letters compared together, and the help of his own Memory. Mr. Williams sent
him the ^^^uments which he used, and what else he could remember; whereas if
those that writ could have taken it all, he had not needed all this; but in
this way it was impossible that he should collect a true Narrative of a near
eight hours Disputation.

His own Arguments he might in part remember, and Mr. Williams his; but who
sent him the Arguments of their Antagonists? Therefore I think h^re are,
comparatively, but few of them, and those that are delivered, in such a way
that they may easily, be answered; nor can it thus hardly possibly be otherwise.

2dly. In the Dedication they tell, that Mr. Robinson gave one of them the Lie,
but I do not find it in the Narrative, which, since they have published it
here, I conclude, it would not have been wanting there, if their Memory would
have served to know where to place it; which shows that there is much wanting.

3dly. In six or eight hours Discourse without Intermission, would have made a
much larger Volumn than the Whole Book, whereas a great part of the Book is
made up of other matter, as the Dedication, etc. and many remarks of Dr.
Russels after the Dispute, and his Quotations in the end of the Book.

4thly, I find several times that he tells us of a long Discourse of one of
their Antagonists about such or such a thing, but relates little of it, and
sometimes says it was not worth Writing.

5thly. I have heard several ways, and from such as know not each other, that
this is a false Narrative, and that it has occasioned the true (really taken
from the Town-Clerks) Notes to be also printed.

6thly. Another Reason, which confirms me in it, is, that according to this
Narrative the Presbyterians have acted as if their very design was to give away
their Cause, by calling a multitude together to hear, and then purposely
pretending to dispute, but always making sure to leave room to be answered, and
giving their Opponents opportunity to frame their Arguments, and pretending to
answer them, but always making sure to leave them them unanswered. It can
hardly be that they were serious if this Narrative be True.

7thly. I find much said by him, but little by his Antagonists through the
Book, etc.

My 8th Reason I leave till afterward. But is not this very unfair, (not to
call it worse) if they not only to detract from Men's Reputation, but also
deceive people (by a false Narrative) in things concerning their Salvation;
(making people believe, this is the strength of what is alleged against their
way, when indeed it is not the tenth part, yea, I may say, not the hundredth
part of it, as to solid Arguments) For the telling a part of the truth, and
leaving out a part, is many times as pernicious Lying, as uttering downright
falsehood, and many times does more harm, because it is more easily believed.
And if I may say it, without Comparing the Narrator to him, the Devil, the
Father of Lies does, for the most part, exercise his most hurtful falsehood this
way. However, I will hope that the Narrator (having so light an esteem of the
Arguments which he thinks are against the truth) did set down all the Arguments
brought against him, which he thought had any weight in them so far as they
came to his knowledge.

Yet I must, as a Friend, advise the Antipaedo-Baptists to disown this
Narrative, (under these circumstances) left they make people think they
resemble the Kingdom of the Devil, which is built up by Lies, and lest people
think they are conscious, that their Cause is so weak that truth alone is not
sufficient to defend it, and left People think it is not for Conscience sake
that they hold their way, but from some ambitious Contentions and uncharitable
Disposition; For any one may know, that he, that holds any Tenet for
Conscience Sake, will desire nothing but the Truth to defend it, and his
Conscience will oblige him as soon to believe the contrary, when he sees good
Evidence for it. But whether this Narrative be true or false, the Truth is the
Truth, if those men could not defend it. And it not being defended in this
Narrative, is the reason of my writing this Reply.

I take Notice also of ( I think) a contradiction; in the Title Page it is
said, It was taken from two Copies taken at the Dispute; And in the Dedication
he tells us of other Letters, his Memory, etc. If part of it was taken from
those Copies, yet it is not true to say, the Narrative was, except it was all.

I also observe in the Dedication, That Dr. Russel seems to be concerned for
his own honor, by publishing to the world, That his Preaching was approved,
and how he deserves the Title of Doctor, and being concerned left his partner,
Mr. Williams, should have the greatest share of the Honor of their Days works,
saying, What he spoke was far short of what Dr. Russel spoke. But it may be he
had good cause for all this.

So I proceed to their Arguements, wherein I shall always repeat the Medium,
and so much more, that the Argument composed, shall be clearly understood, and
I hope to leave none of their Arguments unanswered, either directly, or by
answering other Arguments; and such as question it may have recourse to the
Narrative it self, which is now plentiful in the Country.

In the General, I find not one Argument used by them, but what is either a
Fallacy or improved into a Fallacy. And never did I before see so much
Sophistry put together and approved by a learned Man. If it had been one that
knew not the Rules of Argument, he might be better excused. I am sorry to
offend his Friends, by saying it, but I dare not mince the Truth when I am
called to speak; He has often said worse of his Antagonists, both in his
Dedication and Narrative, and that without cause. But I must proceed to show
that I have cause to say this.

CHAP. II On Dr. Russel's first Argument.
THe first Question in the Dispute was (as he relates it,)

Whether, according to the Commission of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Adult believers are only the proper Subjects of Baptism, and not Infants?

Dr. Russel takes it in the Affirmative, and his first Argument is,

If Christ has no where required any of his Ministers to Baptize Infants, then
the Baptism of Infants is not according to the Commission of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

But Christ has no where required any of his Ministers to Baptize Infants.

Ergo.

This Argument is well enough according to the Rule, but his fallacy is in
proving it, as we shall see by his insisting to have them expressed in the
Commission, saying, That some are expressly Commanded to be Baptized in the
Commission. The fallacy lies here, [Expressed] is a Word that may be taken
several ways, and so have one signification in the Major, and another in the
Minor, which will necessarily make a false conclusion, as every Logician well
knows. For thus it is, Some are expressed in the Commission, viz. Believers and
Disciples, but the Commission does not tell us, whether they be Adult or
Infants, it may be either or both, or neither, if a third sort could be found,
notwithstanding those Words; But under the Name of Believers and Disciples are
expressed the persons that are so, whether Adult or Infants.

But to show his fallacy, and prove the contrary to his Minor,

First. By his way of arguing, and their way of Answering (as here related) he
would have been as hard put to it to prove Adult persons included in the
Commission; for they are no more expressed than Infants; But by as good
Consequence as express Words, some Adult persons are excluded and others
included; and I hope by Gods Grace to make the same appear of Infants.

Yea, by his arguing, how will he prove himself a Minister, seeing he is not
experssed in the Commission?

2dly. The Quakers argue the very same against Baptism with Watter, because
Water is not expressed in the Commission, or any Command; and in truth, they
have equal Reason for it, and I know not one of his Arguments to prove his
first by, but what the Quakers use.

3dly. That Infants are as much expressed in the Commission as the Adulte I
prove thus,

All that are Believers in Christ are included in the Commission.

But There are Infants who are Believers in Christ.

Ergo, There are Infants included in the Commssion.

The Major will not be disputed. The Minor I Prove thus,

All that are saved by Christ are Believers in Christ.

But there are Infants saved by Christ.

Ergo, There are Infants who are Believers in Christ.

The Minor I think will be granted: The Major I shall prove. But first, to feed
the Antipedobaptists with a little of their own meat, I cite Mark 16.16. He
that Believes not shall be damned. The foregoing Words, He that Believes and
is Baptized, is improved by them with that Acts 8.37. to prove that a
profession of faith is pre-requisite to baptism.

I argue, either these texts concern only the Adult, or it concerns Adult and
Infants both. If it concern only the Adult, then Infants are not concerned in
it, and if Infants are not concerned in it, then here is nothing to be proved
for or against Infants Baptism by it. Yea, suppose Infants have not Faith,
these Scriptures speaking nothing of them, but only of Adult, that Faith is a
necessary pre-requisit to Baptism in them which Believe and practice. These
Texts do not prove but that Infants may be Baptized without Faith, though Adult
may not, as well as be saved without Faith, as the Antipedobaptists believe
they are. Therefore if these and such like Texts concern not Infants, let them
not plead any more Believe and be baptized, against Infants Baptism.

They must take some other Arguments to deny them Baptism, if they will do it.

But if such Texts do concern Adult and Infants both, then it must follow of
Infants so well as Adult They either are Believers, or else they are Damned.
But there are Infants, who dye in Infancy, are saved and not damned. Therefore
they are Believers, and therefore so well or as much expressed in the
Commission as adult Believers.

But take it either way, and it is as rational to infer from such Scriptures,
that Infants are damned, as that they are not the Subjects of Baptism. But they
say, Infants cannot have Faith for want of the Act of Understanding and Will.
page 54.

I Reply,

First. A Man has not the exercise or act of his Understanding when he is a
sleep, and few men have it when they dye, shall we from thence infer that they
dye Unbelievers, and are damned, or that Unbelievers are saved?

2dly. This which is the foundation of denying Infants Baptism, is wholly
Unscriptural, and against express Scripture, and is the very same Argument used
by the Pelagians to deny Original sin; and if the one may be denied by it, the
other may also. Or does God require more to constitute a good Act than he
imputes to be an evil Act? But hence many Antipedobaptists deny original Sin
with Pelagius their Father. Therefore I advise such of them as believe Original
Sin, to reject this Argument, lest they bring in that Old Heresy, and overthrow
all sound Repentance.

3dly. It matters not to us in what sense they may be said to believe, so long
as God owns them for Believers, by giving them the Privilege of Believers,
which is Salvation. I argue thus:

Those that God does own for Believers, by giving them the Privilege of
Believers, we ought to own for Believers included in the Commission.

But God does own Infants for Believers, by giving them the Privilege of
Believers.

Ergo, we ought to own them for Believers included in the Commission.

If they deny the Major, let then show us by what Rule they can show us, that
God requires us to make a diffrence, where he makes none.

If they deny the Minor, they must deny that Infants are saved by Faith, and so
bring in a new way of Salvation, never heard of in the Gospel.

I will not here plead for the Acts of Faith, nor undertake to prove a Habit of
Faith in infants; It matters not, whether I know what it is or no, so long as I
know it is that which God accepts of for Faith, and therefore that His
Ministers ought to do it also, and that God does give them the Privilege of
Believers by saving them, and therefore that his Ministers ought to do it by
Baptizing them.

But to prove that Infants are saved by Faith, whatever that Faith be, I argue,

All that are saved, are in this World sanctified, Hebr. 12.14. Holiness
without which no man (or as the prime Signification of the Word oudeis is no
one) shall see the Lord. Eccl. 11.3.

But there are Infants that are saved.

Ergo, there are Infants in this World sanctified.

I hope they will not say that this Text also speaks only of the Adult, and so
that Infants may be saved without Holiness, and so make God unholy, which they
must do, or grant my Argument, or else deny Original Sin, as Pelagius a
Heretic about four hunderd Years after Christ, denied Infant Baptism, and with
some reason, according to his principle; For he denied Original Sin, and so
believing they had no Sin nor pollution by Sin, be believed they needed no
cleansing nor Sign of cleansing.

So denying Infants Baptism, and denying Original Sin agree excellent well
together, as has been shown before, and may be showed again.

But because some Antipedobaptists will deny any thing rather than yield, I
digress one word for that.

All that Christ came to save are sinners,

But Christ came to save Infants,

Ergo, Infants are Sinners.

The Major is evident, the Miner I prove thus:

If none under Heaven among men can be saved but by Christ, then Infants cannot
be saved but by Christ.

But none under Heaven among men can be saved but by Christ. Ergo.

See Acts 4 12. The Greek word here [anthropes] as here used, signifies, All
Men, Women and Children, not one excepted. Therefore Infants are Sinners.

As the Faith of Infants, so their Sin is that which I do not undertake to
describe: But thus far I think, no man of reason can deny to follow of
consequence, That as our Savior, so Adam being a public Person, to act in
some things for his Posterity, Adam by sin having lost that which is greatest
of all, viz. his Right and Title to Joy and Delight, in the enjoyment of the
light of Gods Countenance, could not leave it to his Posterity, and so they are
born without a Title to it, and cannot recover it but by that which God accepts
of for Faith in Christ. And that he, having lost his Privilege of ever being
received into Glory, by keeping the Law, could not leave that Privilege to his
Children, and so they are born without it, and now cannot be received into
Glory but by Faith in Christ. And Adam having his whole nature corrupted with
an aversion from God and Holiness, could not beget Children of another nature,
and therefore they cannot be received into Glory, till they are sanctified. So
I argue,

If Sanctification cannot be without Faith, then all that are Sanctified have
Faith.

But sanctification cannot be without Faith.

Therefore all that are sanctified, have Faith.

The sequel of the Major is self evident. The Proof of the Minor we shall hear
more afterward. So I argue,

If Infants are Sanctified, Infants have Faith.

But Infants are Sanctified.

Ergo, Infants have Faith.

2dly. Gods Love to Man is distinguished into a Love of Benevolence, or willing
them Good, a Love of Beneficence, or doing them Good; and a Love of
Complacency, or being pleased with them. With a Love of Benevolence God Loves
his Elect from Eternity; and before their Conversion or Sanctification, with a
Love of Beneficence when he does them good; and with a Love of Complacency,
when they are sanctified, and not before.

So I argue,

All that are fit to be saved, God loves with a Love of Complacency, i. e. they
please God.

But there are Infants fit to be saved, i. e. sanctified.

Therefore there are Infants that please God.

I think neither part will or can be denied by any.

Hence I argue,

None can please God but such as have Faith, Heb. 11.6.

But there are Infants that please God.

Ergo, there are Infants that have Faith.

If any object and say, it is after their death that they are sanctified and
please God.

I answer;

It must be a true work, if not a perfect work before death, except we bring in
a new Gospel of Regeneration after Death.

It matters Not to us what this Regeneration and Faith in Infants is, so long
as it is something real, and God accepts it.

3dly. I having from two undeniable arguments proved Infants Faith, proceed to
express Scripture, Mat. 18.6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that
believe in me.

That this is spoken properly of a little Child or Infant (whatever some
Annotators may say) appears from these Reasons.

1st. If it were not literally a little child or Infant, the end of our
Saviors calling or setting him before his disciples was lost. For a Child of
some Years is angry, contentious, deceitful, proud, etc. which evils this was
to convince them of. It must have been a child who by reason of his tender age
had none of these faults. I think it must have been a very young Infant; And if
it had been one called a child, because of his child-like Humility, etc. this
was no sign to those that knew not his heart, and they would have thought
themselves as good as he.

2dly. If this be admitted, we know not when the Scripture speaks properly, nor
where parables.

3dly. Let him that can, produce any Scripture relating matter of fact, that
relates it in Parables.

4thly. It is ever a Rule, for the right understanding of Scripture, to take it
literally, where there is no necessity to understand it otherwise, to take the
plain obvious Signification; and here can be no pretense for taking it
otherwise, except

1st. He called him. Whether it was the Child or h^^ Nurse that was called to
bring him, is not certain, for such as were brought, were said to come. Chap.
19.13, 14. But a Child that is a perfect Infant in understanding may go alone,
and understand to be called.

2. Such a child may be offended. I answer;

If offending be taken for Afflicting or making sorrowful, this may be done to
a young sucking Child.

If offending be taken for Dishonor, Reproach and Scandal, this may be done to
an Infant new born, by denying him to be a member of Christ's Church, and so
ranking him among the Heathen.

If it be taken for a Stumbling Block and hinderance of his Edification, this
may be done by putting them to be brought up where he shall not learn to know
his Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifyer, or by setting evil examples before him when
he begins to come to understanding, and while he is yet an Infant, as to his
being capable of any knowledge.

3dly. A third pretense is, that such a Child is said to believe in Christ. And
the fear of believing this, is it that makes some so loath to believe this
place literally; For some men will bend Gods Holy Word any way rather then
bend themselves to that. But to say, they have that which God owns for Faith,
and is as sufficient for them as the Faith of adult persons is for them, takes
away this objection. Now seeing all the other objections are taken away, I have
not only incontestable proofs from Scripture Consequence, but express Scripture
Testimony, that there are little Children or Infants which do believe in Christ.

And from the Text and Context I do infer and aver, that there are little
Children, who are so young and small, that no evil example can be found in
them, because they are incapable of it, by reason of their tender age, of whom
it may be said, They do believe in Christ.

Hence I argue,

All that are Believers are included in the Commission for Baptism.

But some Infants are Believers.

Ergo, Some Infants are included in the Commission for Baptism.

Hence to answer Dr. Russels first argument, I say,

The Commission for Baptism includes infants.

Christ has required his Ministers to baptize all such as the Commission
includes.

Ergo, Christ has required his Ministers to Baptize infants.

And it must be the same way that we prove any Adult person to be included in
the Commission.

Thus far in answer to Dr. Russels first Argument, and his saying, That neither
Mr. Chandler nor any other person whatsoever could show, that it is recorded in
holy Scripture, that Christ has required any of his Ministers to Baptize
infants.

But if by Recorded he mean in express words, I challenge him to show that he
has required the baptizing of Adult persons in express words; But if the
expressing such as believe, be to express some Adult, ^hen the same does
express some infants: And if he deny that an infant can believe, let him know
that I will believe God before I will believe Dr. Russel and all his Sophistry.

If any enquire what infants we shall look upon as Believers, let him look for
that in the next Chapter: I need not trace all his words, having as I think
fully answered all his allegations. Yet I must take notice again how he would
be seen to allow of good consequence, and yet from time to time presses so hard
for express words.

CHAP. III. On Dr. Russel' s second Argument.
His Second Argument is,

If Infants are not capable to be made Disciples of Christ by the Ministry of
Men, then they cannot possibly be the subject of Baptism intended in Christ's
Commission.

But Infants are not capable to be made Disciples of Christ by the Ministry of
Men. Ergo.

I deny his Minor, and affirm the contrary. For their Parents being brought
into the School of Christ, to be learners of the Word, and that by the Ministry
of Men; this brings the Children also in, and they no sooner begin to
understand, but they begin to learn, and that by virtue of their Parents
Discipleship, without any further work of the Ministry than what was improved
on their Parents. So the Ministry of Men is the cause effectually of their
being learners of the Gospel of Christ, and a Disciple is nothing but a
Learner. It matters not whether the Ministry be immediately the cause of their
discipleship, or mediately by their Parents, so it be the cause in Gods hand.
We see by experience that the Children of true Disciples are always thus
discipled; and they were entered in the School the day that their Parents were
either Converted or brought to acknowledge the Truth' and seriously to Learn
it, and if they are born afterward, they are born in the School, and devoted
to be learners of Christ. But it is not so with the Children of Heathen or
other Profane Persons, who teach not their children as Disciples ought to be
taught in Word and Example.

And Mr. Chandler answered well, by distinguishing between complete and
incomplete Disciples; But this Dr. Russel could not bear, nor be found to
understand it.

The truth is, it was too hard for him, and so he blames such Distinctions as
Equivocable Expressions. Surely Dr. Russel must know that Distinctions are
absolutely necessary for the right understanding of the Truth, whether in
Divinity or Philosophy, and what else is intended by those Words, 2. Tim. 2.15.
Rightly dividing the word of Truth. And in Disputations, one special use of
Distinctions is to avoid the Fallacy of Equivocable Expressions. It is a
general Rule Qui been distinguit, been docet. He that Distinguishes well,
Teaches well. But this was one of the Doctors Remarks after the Dispute was
over, which might take with the ignorant Reader, and, it may be, help prevail
with him to be plunged before he should hear it answered, I think he knew that
we use this Distinction, and it was his bufiness to make appear that there is
no such distinction, if he did not believe it.

An infant is an in complete Subject of the King. He is a real Subject, and the
King defends him for a subject, and yet he cannot perform one action of
Subjection.

As God does not expect that of any Creature, which he never made him capable
of, so we do not expect that the Faith or discipleship is the same with that of
Adult persons, who are capable of more, yet we believe it as acceptable with
God, who has no need of our Service, and that what God has affixed his promise
to in them, is as effectual a means for them as hearing and learning is for
grown persons. So I argue,

If God own the infants of believing Parents, giving them the Blessings that
belong to Disciples, obliging himself to them by his Covenant promise, owning
them as nigh and not afar off, and giving to some of them sanctifying Grace,
which implies all that he does for grown Disciples, and that on the account of
their Parents discipleship, then he owns them as Disciples, and we ought to own
them as Disciples

But all this God does for them, and that on the account of their Parents
Diseipleship.

Ergo.

Now all that are brough into the School of Christ, or born in the School, they
and their Children, so continuing, are under Gods Covenant promise, and
therefore he gives to them all saving Grace, except they transgress the
Condition after, which we do not know that infants can do.

And Heathens also after they are called and brought in, are under this Promise.

But what God does with the Infants of Unbelievers, he has not told us, and so
it is none of our business to enquire; Nor has he told us what he does with any
infants that are not devoted to be learners of Christ.

Now that saving Grace is the thing promised, appears Isai. 44.3.5. and that
this promise is made to grown Disciples and their Children, appears Acts 2.38,
39. I argue.

Either the Children of those new Believers were of the number of those afar
off, or they were not.

If they were, then their Parents were also; for it may be either three sorts,
or but one sort that are spoken of. If but one sort, then the Parents,
Children, and strangers were all the same persons, which is the greatest
Nonsense; But the Scripture speaks of them as three sorts, whereof Two are
nigh, and One afar off.

But if they were not afar off, then they were nigh, that is, of the Church de
Jure, and so under the Covenant-Promise; for there are but those afar off, and
those that are nigh, i. e. the World and the Church. See more Ephesians. 2.12. to 18.
where also we find, that those afar off were strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, and this being a property of their unhappiness, it must be, that those
that were nigh, were not strangers to it. Therefore the Children of believing
Parents being not afar off, out nigh, are not stranger to it, but fellows
citizens under the Priveledge of Disciples contained in the promise.

So it follows,

That the Children of grown Disciples are believers, who are made so by the
Ministry of Men, have the same Privileges of Gods Covenant-Promise with their
Parents, and the Ministry is the cause of both, by one Act. Now as Dr Russel
says, That which God has joined, let no man put asunder. Let him show us a
Rule to shut out such as God has received, and by what Rule God has required or
allowed us to receive Parents without their Children, when we read not of any
Person baptized who had a Household, but his Household was also baptized, that I
remember.

Discipleship is nothing but that which brings us under the advantage of
obtaining saving Grace, or making a greater progress and growth therein, by
bringing us into that state, which has Gods Promise annexed to it, which in
grown persons is, The Diligent use of the Means God has appointed, as Hearing,
Learning, etc. and in Infants it is the being the Children of such Parents
devoted by Baptism, till they are grown big enough to learn, and then by the
learning they have from them.

I do not say but that God does usually defer the giving affectual saving Grace
to such as live to grow up, till they make choice for themselves, wherein they
have the Promise of saving Grace, and consequently Salvation, upon condition,
that they improve well the means which they now enjoy, which Promise the
Heathen have not, and this is to be a Disciple, or else those that left our
Savior, Joh. 6.66. were no Disciples; but if they be not sufficiently Taught,
that is their Parents breach of Vow. etc.

I further argue, from Acts 2.39.

Either those Words, As many as the Lord your God shall call, have reference to
those Children of Believers, or they have not. If they have, then those
Children were not yet called, but some of them were to be called, yet those
Children were not reckoned among those afar off, i. e. the World, and therefore
must be reckoned among those that were nigh, i. e. the Church. They were under
Gods ordinary appointed means for Salvation, and so Disciples. Hence I infer,
That Infants of Believers are to be looked upon as Members of the Church before
they are called; Therefore nigh, and under the Covenant-Promise, which is the
Ground for Baptism, viz. the Promise of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.38. But if those
Words have not reference to those Children of Believers, then they are expressly
under the Promise by being the Children of Believers, without respect to any
other call.

Choose which you will.

Now the reason here given for Baptism is the Promise; And if Dr. Russel can
give a Reason to cut off the Apostles Reason, and show us why the Apostles
Reason is not sufficient for one, so well as another, let him do it: In the
mean time, till Scripture teach us to make a diffrence, we dare make none.

Now if Dr. Russel's Argument be true, That none may be Baptized but Disciples,
made so by the Ministry of Men,

I argue,

All that are under the Covenant promise must be baptized, according to the
Commission (if the Apostles knew the Commission and acted by it.)

But Infants are under the Covenant promise.

Ergo, Infants are to be baptized, according to the Commission,

Whence, All that are to be Baptized, according to the Commission, are made
Disciples by the Ministry of Men.

Infants are to be baptized, according to the Commission;

Ergo Infants are made Disciples by the Ministry of Men; and therefore are
capable to be made so. And I will believe the Apostles of our Lord and Savior,
sooner than I will believe Dr. Russel, who has but his own Reason, helped by
many sophisms, for what he says.

His Error is grounded in the meaning of the Word Disciple; For the Question
is, What is intended by it in holy Scripture? Whether it signify one that is
actually taught, or whether it intend one that is devoted to be a Learner,
either by himself or by another? Dr. Russel takes it in the former sense; But
the Apostles of Christ took it in the Latter, as appears, and I believe they
knew best. However, it is a poor case when men will build their Faith upon the
acceptance of a Word, which in use commonly varys from the prime
Signification; but that [ Mathetes] Disciple, need not do, to be taken after
one devoted to be a Learner, although not yet taught.

But the Antipoedo Baptists object, That this we bring Unregenerate Persons
into the Church.

I answer;

1st. A Persons bring a Disciple does not infer his Regeneration, compare John
6.66. and 1 John 2, 19.

2dly. I think they will not pretend that all whom they baptize are regenerate,
yea, doubtless in many Congregations the biggest part are not.

3dly. What the Ministry can do, is, to bring them into the School of Christ,
and instruct them there; But it is the Spirit of God that sanctifies them
there, (and has not promised to do it any where else) which he does some Adult
and some Infants; But neither we, nor such as baptize only Adult Persons, know
certainly who they are; But we must judge charitably of all that we find in the
School, till their Works prove them otherwise, which if they do, before they
are baptized, they ought to be refused, and if after it, to be disowned, etc.
Once more,

Seeing they will have none baptized but such as are made Disciples by the
Ministry of Men, yea, and by teaching too, I would know, how Annanias drust
baptize Paul, who was not made a Disciple by the Ministry of Men? If they say
he had a special Commission, let them show it, or the account of it, seeing
they vaunt so much that they have express Scripture for all they do.

Thus far against Dr. Russel's second Argument, and to prove the contrary viz,
that infants of Believers are so well Disciples of Christ as their Parents.

But now comes the work which I do not love, which is, to answer his Argument
by which he undertakes to prove this Argument, Though I have but one Reason not
to Love it, and that is, he has used so much Sophistry, that it is necessary to
expose him in the Answering it, which, I fear, will exasperate his Friends, and
Anger works no Edification. But why should they be angry at the discovery of
false reasons, for so they will seem to love them

Page 23. Dr. Russel turns his Making Disciples into Teaching. Of which more
anon.

In the next page he commits a Fallacy, called, Petitio principii, drawing a
Conclusion from a Principle never allowed, viz. That Disciples can be made no
other way than by being actually Taught. Which is more commonly the Effect of
being Disciples, than the Cause.

Page 25. He shows his skill in expounding of Scripture, telling us, That the
Apostles were commanded, Mark 16.15, 16. To baptize such as they had made
Disciples by their Preaching. Whereas there is not a word of Disciples there. I
grant that our Lord commanded it, as he commanded the baptizing of Infants or
Adult Persons, viz. by Consequence. But seeing Dr. Russel will not acknowledge
the one, though from as good Consequence, why does he affirm the other, when
there is not such a word in the Text?

Come Dr. Russel (to use his own way) I beg of you, show me the word [
Disciple] there; you say it, if you do not show it, the People will think you
cannot.

He next tells us, That in Mat. 28.19. They were commanded to Baptize such as
they had made Disciples by Teaching.

But this is worse, for Consequence will hardly help you here, Doctor. Here he
allows Teaching and Making Disciples to be two things; for the one may be done
by the other. And seeing they are Two Things, whereof the one at least may be
without the other, how can he infer from hence That the word signifies both?
For if Matheteusate here signifies Teach ye, that is all, and [ Make Disciples]
is not here; for an Old Disciple may be Taught, who was not made one by this
Teaching; but if it signify Make Disciples, that is all, and Teach is not
here; and if they can be made Disciples by other means, they are to Baptize
them according to this Commission, and that although they were never Taught,
notwithstanding this Text, but only they were made Disciples, in order to be
Taught.

One word may signify several things, but not at one time, but according to
what it is used for at several times. You might better have said, Make
Disciples by Baptizing them; for both these words are in the Text, and Baptism
is an Obligation to be a Disciple; and if it be done by Baptism it is also done
by the Ministry of Men.

[ Matheteusate] Make Disciples, is a Verb, and [ Baptizontes] Baptizing, is a
Particle, which are usually used together in the Greek Tongue, to express one
act; as, [ Apocritheis Eipen] Answering, said. So, Make Disciples, Baptizing,
may refer to one only act. But where is your Make Disciples, Teaching, when
there is but one of the words?

Thus he will have [ Matheteusate] signify Make Disciples, when he thinks that
will help him (to shut out those that God has received.) Then again, it must
signify Teach, when he can improve it best so. And then he will have it both
together, whereas if That be True, it is not in the Commission that Christ's
Ministers shall preach at all, except there be some Unbelievers to hear, and be
made Disciples by it.

Doctor, do you expound Scripture thus, when you preach to your People?

In the next page, he has another Fallacy, for want of the word Only in line
23. For it would not be true to say, The Ministration of the Gospel does only
inform what is good, and what is evil, and does nothing else; and if he say not
this, he had as good say nothing, except to amuse the ignorant: for there are
other things wherein Infants may partake of the Ministration of the Gospel.

I think any one may see the Fallacy of such arguing, and learn to avoid such a
Teacher. The Lord pity such as build their Faith on such Consequences.

I have not Room to enlarge upon his shufling off Mr Chandlers Distinction
which so hurt him, and several other things. It seems his surest way of
answering, to come off with honor, was, to evade it, and so he, as it were,
forcibly proceeds to another Argument, leaving this, with that which is well if
some do not say is a Lie; for he says, That Mr. Chandler had granted every
part of his Argument, when his own Narrative does not tell us (that I can find)
any more that was granted than That Infants cannot be complete Disciples,
because they know not good and evil, which I know not that ever any denied.

I suppose his word will be taken by those of his own party: But what shall we
say to it? Is this Religon and Conscience? I must forbear to Remark more upon
it.

CHAP. IV. On Dr. Russel 's Third and Fourth Arguments, page 29.
HIs Third Aargument is, That the Apostle Paul did declare all the Counsel of
God, etc. and yet did never declare Infants Baptism.

This were something, if he could prove it, but which way can that be done,
except we had all the Apostle Paul's Sermons, that ever he taught? Therefore
his bringing this is Ridiculous, and the design of it is altogether a Sophism,
as appears by his way of proving it.

However, his argument is not true, and I prove the contrary of it, thus.

All the Counsel of God, with respect to our Faith and Practice, was taught by
the Apostle Paul.

But all the Commission for Baptism, is a part of of the Counsel of God in that
respect.

Ergo, all the Commission for Baptism was taught by the Apostle Paul. Hence,

If the Commission for Baptism includes Infants, the Apostle Paul taught
Infants Baptism,

But the Commission for Baptism includes infants.

Ergo, The Apostle Paul taught Infant Baptism.

The Minor, which only can be objected against, I have proved before.

But to return to Dr. Russel, p. 30.

His next arguement to prove his Third by, is both false in it self, and the
Fallacy, called, The begging of a Principle, except all Paul's Sermons were
written in the New Testament; But he is still a good help to the Quakers, for
by the same Argument Baptism with Water may be denied, if it be not written in
the New Testament, that the Apostle Paul taught it, and I think it was for such
Reasons that a Palagian Quaker here was so forward to have it Reprinted. And
by the same Rule we may deny that Buggery is a Sin, or for a Man to marry his
Sister or his Daughter, if it be not written in the New Testament that Paul
taught that it is.

In page 23. he very Uncivilly Scoffs at Mr. Leigh's Simile, and yet seems as
if he were in Sober Earnest.

The following pages are almost full with his words, but I cannot see with what
design, except to amuse the ignorant who judge of a Dispute only by the many
Words, Scoffs and Triumphs used by the Disputant. And I fear too many of his
Proselytes are won by no other means.

As for instance. In the end of the page 33, to prove that all that Paul taught
is recorded in the Scripture, he cites Acts 20.27. I have not shunned to
declare to you all the Counsel of God. Admirable Interpreter of Scripture! What
is this at all to the purpose? If it had been, I have not shunned to write in
my Epistles all the Counsel of God, it had been something to his purpose. All
the rest of his discourse on this Argument is of the same Stamp. But I preceive
his admirers think he has proved all he said effectually. The Lord pity them
and all that are taught by such as can own such Arguments! if they apply
Scripture thus also, when they teach the spiritual part of Religion.

Page 58. Dr. Russel in his remark since the Dispute, tells us a ridiculous
story of a Presbyterian Minister preaching about the Eunuchs Wife and Children.
Though I do not believe so ignorant a Creature was ever approved by a
Presbytrey to be a Minister, nor has he recited all Mr. Leigh's words there.
But I hope now that this party will not be angry if I tell them I have heard of
an Antipedo-Baptist preacher, of a great Name among some of them, who,
preaching, how Christ being rich, became Poor for our sakes, among other
things, said, That he parted with his Eternity. Some call it Blasphemy: And
that some well approved Ministers of the Antipedobaptists interpret that in
Luke 10.33. etc. the Samaritan to be our Savior, the Host to be the Holy
Ghost, the Two Pence to be Grace and Glory, etc. And that Dr. Russel (if he
speak sense, and it were an affront to say he does not) infers from Acts 20.27.
That the Scripture contains a Record of all that Paul taught, that is, that all
Paul 's Sermons are at large recorded in the New Testament, if he speaks to the
purpose. I think this is as bad as the Eunuchs Wife and Children; and if this
be not enough, we shall have more before the Dispute closes the first Question.
and I think this may the better be remembered of Dr. Russel because of what he
says in plain words from a saying of Mr. Leighs, viz.

In page 36. Dr. Russel tells his Reader, That these Men have the confidence to
affirm before so great an Auditory that is written in the Commission that Paul
did declare the Baptism of Infants to be a Gospel Institution. What shall we
call this? Let the Reader view Dr. Russels own Narrative, and see if he can
find such a word, or any thing more that Mr. Leigh said, I will say it is in
the Commission, ALL NATIONS, which is as much to as say, As Paul taught all the
Counsel of God, so he taught Infant Baptism, which is in the Commission employed
in these words, ALL NATIONS, although there be no other account of it. I will
not plead the sufficiency of that argument; But what is this to affirming that
it is written in the Commission that Paul taught it? Dr. Russel can make such
long Consequences on a Man's words, and say the Man affirmed so. It is strange
that he cannot take up with a necessary Consequence, that the Commission
implies Infants; Yea, with the Hundredth part of the Consequence, that there is
for it, he may as well say Infants are expressed in the Commission, as to say,
that Mr. Leigh thus affirmed; But he ascribes it to them all, saying These Men.
But in Truth Mr. Leigh did not say, it was written there, much less affirm it,
except to say All Nations, be to say, Paul taught, etc. I must not remark upon
it!

I observe, from one Argument to another, he has the last word, without being
contradicted, That his Argument stands good.

These things considered, with Mr. Chandler's granting every part of his second
Argument, and what he tells his Reader here, and some other things, do serve me
for an eight Reason mentioned in my first Chapter.

And I cannot but take Notice, how he that in his Dedication, tells, how ready
he is to suffer for Christ, does join with it so much Conscience of speaking
the Truth, and using no Fallacious Arguments, nor striving for Mastery, but
only sincerely for the Truth, without striving to hide his Respondents
Arguments, which things the love of Christ obliges, so well as to suffer.

His Fourth Argument, page 39. is, Christ's Commission does show who are to be
Baptized,

But it does not show, that Infants are to be Baptized. Ergo.

This is a Fallacy all over, which he used in other words, on his first
Argument, and I have answered it in the beginning of my second Chapter.

And by this Argument I can as well prove, that Dr. Russel has no power to
Baptize. Thus,

Christ's Commission does show us who are to Baptize,

But it does not show us that Dr. Russel is to baptize any,

Ergo, Dr. Russel is not to Baptize, according to Christ's Commission.

If he say, The Commission shows it by Consequence, he must then acknowledge
his Argument a Fallacy. For if the Commission shows it by Consequence, it shows
it. And let him know, that the Commission expresses Believers, and that the
Scripture calls some Infants Believers; but it does not call Dr. Russel a
Minister.

Now, I having already answered all he says on this Argument, need not trouble
the Reader further, only it is worth Noticing again, how strenuously he presses
for Infants to be Expressed, or not baptized, although he allowed, or pretended
to allow of Consequence, at first. And seeing he presses so hard for Express
Scripture, I Challenge him to bring Express Scripture for Making Disciples by
Teaching, which is his ground Work here.

Come, Doctor, You make a great Triumph, when you demand of your Respondents
Express Scripture for that which they do not pretend to prove, but by
Consequence, Where is your Express Scripture that says, Make Disciples by
Teaching? seeing you pretend to have Express Scripture for all you do. And
where is it written, That they cannot be made any other way?

If what I have said be not enough, I add, If the Anti-Paedo-Baptists, to prove
making Disciples by Teaching, plead Mat 28.20. Teaching them, etc. I will, for
once, allow it; but then let them remember, That by the same Rule they are
first to be made Disciples by Baptizing, v. 19. And if I should undertake to
prove, that in Scripture account, None are regularly Disciples till baptized,
and that all such are, except by their Works they cut themselves off again; and
that to be visibly a Disciple, or visibly a Churchmember, or to live under the
ordinary appointed Means for Salvation, or to be (...), in Covenant with God,
is all one thing; I think they would not easily find it Confuted.

And hence, the Faith, that in the Commission, is a Qualification for Baptism
(if believing be there named as a Qualification) is joined with the Promise of
Salvation; and if I affirm, that all that are visibly Subjects of that Promise,
and no other, are the Subjects of Baptism, according to the Commission, I think
they will not easily find it Confuted.

I further add, If the Apostles had left out Infants, the Judaizing Christians
would have more strenuously Opposed them for that, than they did for leaving
out Circmucision, the Ceremonial Law, the yearly Feast-days, and Change of the
Sabbath Day.

But the Judaizing Christians did not Oppose them for leaving out Infants,
Ergo, The Apostles did not leave out Infants.

The Jews, who took such great Satisfaction in having their Children in
Covenant, with themselves, and in their receiving the Ordinance of being
received into the Covenant, would not have silently left out their Children,
and set them upon equal Terms with the Children of the Heathen, and make no
Opposition.

Now, from time to time, as we have the account of their Opposing the Apostles
for leaving out Circumcision, etc. and of the Apostles vindication of their so
doing, there is never one title of the leaving out of infants, or of the
Judaizing Christians pleading for their being in the Covenant, or the Apostles
pleading against it.

And when the scripture gives us the Account of the Opposition of these
Judaizing Christians, so often and full, it is not rational to think it would
have been silent in this, which would have been the greatest part of their
Opposition, if Infants had not been still partakers of the Sign of entering into
the Church or Covenant, so well as formerly.

The only Objection the Anti-Pedo-Baptists make, that has the color of reason
in it, is, That thus People are brought into the Church by natural Generation,
and not by Regeneration. To which I answer:

1st. the baptizing them, is an acknowledgment, that they cannot be saved
without Regeneration; but such as deny them baptism, have no such sign, and yet
believe they are saved.

2dly, It is not their natural Generation, but their being under the care of
such Parents or Masters as will bring them up under the ordinary appointed
means for Salvation, which entitles them to Baptism; for so was the Covenant
with Father Abraham; And to be under the ordinary appointed means, is to be
under a Conditional Promise, and so in Covenant, which is to be a Churchmember
or Disciple. So this Objection is false.

CHAP. V. On Mr. Williams his Arguments, and the Rest of their Dispute on this
Question.
Page 54. I find nothing, but what is answered already till we come to what the
Doctor helps after the Dispute. It is his perverting that Scripture, Romans
10.14. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard, etc. which
Text refers only to such as can actually Call upon the Name of the Lord. But if
this Text concerns Infants, we may as well infer, that they cannot be saved,
because they call not on the Name of the Lord, as that they cannot believe,
because they cannot hear with understanding.

His next Argument, That a Minister must have an account of a persons Faith,
before he baptize him, is answered already. I now add, that we have no way to
know an Adult Persons Faith, but by his Profession and Practice; But the Faith
of Infants is known from a better Testimony, viz. of the Holy Scripture, as has
been showed.

And his next following page 60. Of Self-denial being necessary to make a
Disciple is of the same nature. The real design of that Scripture, Luke 14.27.
and other like, is, to show us that false Disciples cannot be saved; although they
be visible Disciples they shall not be accepted as true Disciples, even all
such as will not deny themselves for Christ. In the same sense we read Romans 2.
leter end, That is not Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh, etc. So Romans
9.6. They are not all Israel who are of Israel. So, if it be rational to apply
this Scripture to Infants, the inference must be, That they are all Damned who
dye in Infancy. Judas was a Disciple, if the Scripture say true, and yet this
Curse came upon him, because he had not the Grace of Self-denial, but loved the
Reward of Unrighteousness. But how Unreasonable is it to apply to Infants the
Curses which belong only to grown Hypocrites, who for want of Self-denial
follow their Lusts, which Infants do not! That this is the design of such
Scriptures, deny if you can. And for what Reason must they be kept out of the
Church, for that which will not keep them out of Heaven? Assign a Reason from
Scripture he that can. And why, seeing they own that Infants have the blessing
of Disciples in their Salvation, how Unreasonable is it to apply to them the
Curses that are intended only for Hypocrites! How these People understand the
Scripture! If they understand it thus in all things, it is time for all such as
love their Souls to be weary of them. I know they would take it very heniously
if one should say of them, when the blind lead the blind, both fall into the
Ditch. But I hope Gods Mercy does prevail above some of their ignorance, for I
think I know some good men of their Profession, at least of one fort of them.

But I must observe, how readily they turn it off, as not to concern Infants,
when such Scriptures, as, He that believes not shall be damned, is alleged
for Infants Faith; but how they take all that they can pervert against it,
although never so foreign to the purpose. I would know, by what Rule they do
it, except it be that of Resolving to see with but one Eye, although God has
given them two? And by what Rule these scriptures concern Infants more than
that?

Next comes in Dr. Russel again, with his old and common Sophism, Denying that
ever the Apostles baptized any Infant, demanding an Instance that they did.

But if that be a Rule, we may deny that ever they gave the Lords supper to
Women, or Prayed, when they met on the Lords Day, to Preach, etc. and many
other things; for all their Acts are not Recorded; It is enough that they had
Commission so to do.

But here lies the strength of his fallacy, In stead of arguing, If they did,
there is some account of it in scripture, he leaps over that to prove there is
no account of it, and so might easily ground his Respondent, and blind the
ignorant, and yet has proved nothing.

Page. 64. Mr. Leigh answers him well, by demanding an Instance of one born of
a believing Parent that was baptized at age. But he omitting to insert ( after
Baptism was instituted) Mr. Williams p 66. takes the advantage of it, to
Instance our Savior; Which proves as much as to Instance, Ishmael circumcised
at thirteen years old, would prove that Infants were not to be circumcised at
eight days old, when Circumcision was not instituted before he came to that
age. And the Reverend Dr. Russel approves it as a pertinent Answer, and so do
his friends, as one of the greatest Exploits they had performed; and Dr. Russel
is so pleased with that Opinion, as to publish it in his Dedication. Indeed, it
will serve a Sophister very well, who has no regard to Truth nor Conscience,
but only to carry the Cause right or wrong.

Me thinks this should make Conscientious People weary of them, I could not
have believed it of them, if I had not seen it in their own works, so much
admired by their Party here. If I hadbeen half persuaded to be of their
Opinion, I think such things would have made me Sick of them; For if their
Opinion could be true, it is as clear as the shining of the Sun, that they are
satisfied in it by false Arguments; and I know not of one true Argument they
use, having also read and well perused Mr. Keache's Rector rectified.

A Child may know, that neither Adult nor Infants should be baptized before
Baptism was instituted, be they whose Children they will. And I do say, that,
till they give an Instance, as the Question should be stated, Mr. Leigh's
Argument is as good against them, as theirs against him, and a little better,
because we read of several households baptized, though Infants be not expressed
in them.

Dr. Russel's Instances, p. 65, of Constantine and others, are not scriptural,
and therefore not to the Question, neither were these baptized by the Apostles,
but long after.

But we must remember, that many Christians in those times had a fancy that
Baptism cleansed them from all Sins past, but from none that were committed
after, and therefore many inclined to have their Baptism deferred till just
before their Death. And as for Constantine, his Father was a Pagan till
Constantine was considerably grown, and being a Great Prince, and his Wife of
the Nation of the Tributary Britains, it is rational to conclude, that he would
not suffer him to be baptized in his Infancy. And moreover (if I mistake not)
Constantine had a great desire to be baptized over the sepulcher of our
Savior, and so deferred it long, but how that could be done by plunging, I
cannot tell.

Next, follows Mr. Leigh's Opponency, page 67. where Dr. Russel mannages his
skill again into Sophistry, by not considering the Distinction between Church
Members de jure, of right, and de facto, in fact. Baptized persons, till
excommunicated, are Church Members, and disciples de facto. But its only
sanctified Believers (baptized or not baptized) are so de Jure.

His answer to Mr. Leighs Induction, is also like the rest. I pass by his
Language, though as good a Gentleman as himself, and observe his addition since
the dispute, when there was none to answer him, where he makes his Reader
believe that which Mr. Leigh never said; For Mr. Leigh denies that Infants are
the Graces of the Kingdom or the Glory of the Kingdom of Heaven; and Dr. Russel
will seem to understand it, That they have no Interest in them; whereas a Child
may know, that, to be a thing, and to have a right in a thing, are so far from
being the same, that they are quite Opposite. And so he casts a scoff upon Mr.
Leigh, for what he did not say, and seems to deny, but does not deny Mr. Leighs
Argument. Indeed it will do to amuse the Ignorant, and help to lead the blind
Captive. I am weary of this, and sorry that I must expose Men that profess
Religon, to defend the Truth that suffers, and to defend those that they
unjustly exposed. If I could but find fair Arguments modestly managed, to
answer, it were a more grateful work. And if these Men that quietly answered
him, must be so represented, how shall I escape, who expose their unfair
dealing, etc.? I would not do it, if I durst omit it, for fear of the Lash of
their Tongues, especially when they find that they cannot answer me any other
way, though I encourage my self, that such of them as are good men, will not
reproach me for my love to them; for if I could have found a way to clear the
Truth from false arguments, without accusing them of Sophistry, etc. they
should not have found that, nor any other word to gall them. And I comfort my
self, that if I suffer Reproach for doing that, which I am bound in Conscience
to do, it will not turn to my loss. However, I hope that the fence of my Duty
to my Maker will keep me from fearing them, so as to desist, and I am willing
to leave it to wise indifferent men to judge; and if I have wronged them, they
shall have satisfaction.

The (...) of Mr. Williams his Oppsiote Argument, I deny. For if Infants are
not members of the Universal Church, I know not how they can be fit for Heaven
when they dye.

And his reply to Mr. Robinsons demand of an express Prohibition of Infants
Church Membership, will not do in this case. For, first, we insist upon
Scripture-Consequence for it, which if it be overthrown it must be by express
Scripture, or overturning our Consequence; But the Papists do not pretend
Scripture (that I know of) for using Cream and Spittle in Baptism. 2 dly, We
have express Scripture that has taken Infants into the Church, and we expect
that they may not be turned out again, without express Scripture. If the
Anti-Pedo-Baptists have the power, we would be very glad to see their
Commission, and to know what Offense the poor Infants have committed that they
must be cast out of the Church, when they were Promised to have a right in it
to all Generations.

It seems strange, that Mr. Leigh could not produce Scripture for turning
Wicked persons out of the Church, p. 73. but they say it.

Page 74. Dr. Russel, unasked, acknowledges, That Infants have a Title to Grace
here. I would know how this can be reconciled, with their having no Faith, and
which way their Grace shall be exercised without Faith? Or, if it can be in
Habit only, why Faith may not also? But to have other Graces, and no Faith,
seems to me like a Tree growing up and standing without Roots. I think all
Christians call Faith the Radical Grace. How can one love, or fear, or hope in,
or desire that which he believes nothing of, etc? If there be the Habit of one,
I think of the other necessarily; But let Dr. Russel with his express
Scripture, show, why a Root of Faith may not as well be in them bernard
villanueva as of other Graces? Yea, let him do it by Consequence, and in the
mean time, I beg of him and his friends, to consider it well and
Conscientiously, lest they be found such as resist the evidence of Truth,
against their own Conscience. Or does he mean Grace after Death? No, for it is
Grace here and Glory hereafter; beside, that must infer Regeneration after
Death, which I cannot think he believes. Or by Grace does he mean only Temporal
Comfort, such Grace as the Beasts have?

He says, this is by Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, and when he brings
Scripture to prove. that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to such as have no
Faith, we will bring Scripture to Baptize them. I may not enlarge to show how
he interprets Acts 15. (p. 75.) nor how he pleads that the Manner of
Circumcission was the thing there in debate, and says, The Manner of Moses was
to cut off the foreskin, etc, as if the Christians had used Circumcission, but
in another manner, and many more such things. However I will not undertake to
prove infants Discipleship from that Scripture, till I can do it by a
Syllogism, which (according to Rule) shall have no Fallacy in it.

He says they (his Opponents) know, that the Churches in those times consisted
of Adult persons. If he had said, Only Adult, I would have said something to
him. He also vertuosly denis Infants, such as (he says) have the Righteousness
of Christ imputed to them, and have a Title to Grace and Glory, to be Brethren,
so well as Believers. So they may have a Title to Glory in Heaven, and be the
Brethren of our Lord and Savior, who calls such Brethren, and yet (it seems)
not good enough to be Dr. Russels Brethren.

Further on, page 77. Mr. Williams vertually denis their having received the
Ho'y Ghost. But how this will agree with his Brother Russel, who says, They
have a Title to Grace here (Or are they cheated of their Title, and never have
the thing) or with his own assertion, That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
them, and not his Spirit given, I cannot understand, especially seeing the
Apostle Paul whom I have a greater esteem of, says, ( Romans 8.9.) If any Man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. The Greek [ 'Tis] any Man, is
as applicable to Infants, as men. If they have Grace without the Spirit, I
think it is not of Gods making, and so they had better be without it. However,
I believe they cannot go to Heaven till they have received the Holy Spirit here
in this Life, and I believe the Apostle Peter understood himself very well,
when he said, Who can forbid Watter, that these may be baptized who have
received the Holy Ghost so well as we. And I pray these People to consider it,
and I pray God to give them a heart to do it. They have need to believe
something that will consist together.

Soon after, how sincerely does Mr. Williams beg of them for an instance of
infants Baptism? Poor Man! how he longed for, it when he knew they did not
pretend to prove it that way. But could they have found, and had the Conscience
to bring a like Instance to theirs, for a Child of a Believer baptized at age,
I wonder if they would not have made a great cry of the Fallacy.

Next follows, after a few more of Dr. Russels Remarks and Syllogisms, a great
bluster about making Disciples of Beasts, which is about as reasonable as many
other of their arguing. For.

1. Infants have immortal Souls, Beasts have not.

2. Infants are coming on to the use of Reason, Beasts not.

3. If we may believe Dr. Russel, infants have a Title of Grace here, i. e.
Grace while Infants, Beasts have not.

4. Infants have a fair advantage for their Salvation by the instruction they
shall have merely by virtue of their Parents Discipleship, Beasts have not.

5. The Lord adds to the Church such as shall be saved, Acts 2.47. Infants are
such as shall be saved, Beasts are not.

6. Infants of believing Parents, brought under the Covenant-Promise, have this
Promise as effectual a means for them, as Deligent hearing is for their
Parents, who have no other Title by it but Gods promise, Beasts have not.

7. Infants have Faith, Beasts have not.

8. Infants have the Spirit of Christ, else they are none of his, Beasts have
not.

9. Infants have Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, which I think infers
that he owns them for Disciples, but Beasts have not.

10. Infants are devoted to be Learners of Christ, which is to be his
Disciples, Beasts are not.

But perhaps Dr. Russel will here (as he often does) plead, That these things
are not according to his Argument, for he says, Made Disciplis by Teaching.

(...);

1st. If his Argument be not true, what then? For though I acknowledge grown
Disciples are made and edified by Teaching, and not without, yet I deny that
the Commission for Baptism obliges only such to be baptized who are so made, as
I have sufficiently shown; and his Argument is wholly a begging of a Principle:
And so long as our Savior owns them for Disciples, I am not so much concerned
how Dr. Rus accounts them; But I desire him to show me the Rule by which our
Savior has required the Baptism of some Disciples, and not others.

2. But I will not be concerned much to deny the Medium of this his Argument.
Let it be. that Disciples can be made no other way than by Teaching; It is
Teaching that makes infants Disciples by making their Parents Disciples.

Dr. Russel in one of his Remarks, made after the Dispute, the better to help
his cause, page 79 does give infants Baptism a title of an unscriptural
Practice, not to call it worse; which indeed were enough to fright a person of
a tender Conscience. But the best of it is, that his calling it so is a
Reproachful Slander, not only on those that do it in obedience to Gods
Ordinance, but on the Ordinance it self, as I have made appear, and hope by
Gods blessing, further to make appear, and find him in Unscriptural Practice,
not to call it worse.

In page 84. He would insinuate as if St. Augustine was against Infant Baptism,
who wrote so much in defense of it, if I mistake not; for in his days lived the
Heretic Pelagius, who denied it, with Original sin, which must be a proper
Consequence of it, or else the Damnation of all that dye in Infancy.

CHAP. VI. Containing some further Arguments for Infant Baptism.
FIrst, Baptism is the sign of the blessing of the Covenant of Grace.

To all those to whom the Grace signified belongs, the sign belongs.

But to Infants the Grace signified belongs.

Ergo, To Infants the sign belongs.

We find Baptism given as a sign of the blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
such as the Remission of fins, Cleansing from sin, the Gift of the Holy Ghost,
etc. Now if Infants be in the Covenant of Grace, they have these and such like
blessings, so well as the Adult. And if they can give a Reason, from Scripture,
to give the sign to some, and not to others, who have as good a right in the
things signified, let us see it, lest we accuse them of an Unscriptural
Practice in making a difference, where God has made none. But if they deny
Infants to have these Blessings represented in Baptism, then Away with their
pretended belief of Infants Grace here, and Glory hereafter, etc.

Arg. 2. A Law made, stands good till repealed.

Those taken into Covenant by a Law unrepealed, are in Covenant still.

But Infants are taken into Covenant by a Law unrepealed.

Ergo, Infants are in Covenant still.

I know they object, That the Circumcision Law of Moses is Repealed. But the
Covenant with Abraham was a Gospel Covenant, and I hope they will not say that
is repealed, though Circumcision, the sign, be repealed, because the Blood of
the Redeemer, promised in the Covenant, has been shed; for, what is performed,
is no longer a Promise, yet the Covenant in the remaining part is the same
still, see Romans 4. v. 11. to 16. This was not a Covenant of the Law to Abraham
and his seed, but it was through the Righteousness of Faith, v. 13. therefore a
Gospel Covenant. It was not only the Promise of the Land of Canaan,
notwithstanding what Mr. Keach says, for that was only to the Circumcised seed
of Abraham; but this Promise was to the Uncircumcised also, v. 11. i. e. it was
to remain, when Circumcision is abolished. Abraham was to be Heir of the World,
v.13. The Uncircumcised Gentile Church, and not the Jewish only, were to come
into his Covenant; Yea, it is express, v.16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace, to the end the Promise might be sure to all the seed, not to
that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of
Abraham, who is the Father of us all, Thus it was a Gospel Covenant, to remain
forever. And because we are brought into it, he is called, The Father of us
all, not our spiritual Father, except he were the Instrument of our Conversion,
but the Man with whom a formal Covenant was made, not only for himself, but for
all that should come into it; and this Covenant includes the Covenanter and his
seed, and it contains the whole Gospel of Salvation by Faith in Christ, who was
promised in it. Now this Covenant was a Covenant of Faith with Abraham, and his
Infant seed included in it, had no more Faith than ours have. His seed that
lived to grow up might loose the Blessings of it by transgressing the
Conditions before they had obtained the covenanted saving Grace, and so may
ours, and so may an Adult person, received in by Discipleship, but not yet
fully regenerate. Now this Covenant being the Constitution of the visible
Gospel Church, all that are included in it, are Church Members and Disciples.
Now that which was legal, as Circumcision, is expressly repealed, but the same
Covenant is still of as good force after that is repealed. This covenant made
with Abraham was not repealed in St. Paul's time, and we believe it never was
since. If the [ Antipedobapsists] say, it is, they would do well to show it,
for they have not done it yet. And if they say, Infants are also taken out of
it, let them produce Scripture for it, and it will suffice; and they, who plead
so hard for Express Scripture, I think, are obliged to do it, or yield. And in
the mean time, we believe, that if Infants, or Children, or Seed, were never
once mentioned in the New Testament, they have as good a Title as they had in
Abraham's days, to all the Signs of the Covenant of Grace, and that it belongs
not to us to prove them a New to be in the Covenant, whom we find once in the
Covenant now in being, but that it belongs to such as deny it to prove them
turned out. And we think that to be so far beyond any warrant they can find in
Sripture, that we believe Infants or Children, on the account of their Parents,
are expressly included still, Acts 2.29. And that this Covenant or promise is
the ground for Baptism. v. 28. Hence I argue,

If being in the Covenant, be the Ground for Baptism, then all in the Covenant
ought to be baptized,

But being in the Covenant, is the Ground for Baptism.

Ergo, All in the Covenant ought to be baptized.

And now, Dr. Russel, for your Unscriptural Practice, which you so vaunt with,
If any still deny Infants being included in the Promise, contrary to Scripture,
I would know of them, by what Warrant they believe GOD will do that which he
has never promised? Or else I shall believe it an Unscriptural Practice in Dr.
Russel to believe so uncharitably of Infants; They may be every soul of them
damned, for any thing he knows, if they are not included in the promise; Ay,
but he has proved by Scripture, that they have a right to the Kingdom of Glory
in Heaven, see page 69. Very well, They are not in the Kingdom of Glory yet,
Therefore it must be a Promise, and I know of no Gospel Promise but what is
either Absolutely or Conditionally, and either mediately or immediately the
Promise of eternal Life; and I know of no such Promises to any of the Children
of Men, but what are Gospel promises; and I know no distinction in such
revealed Promises, with respect to Baptism.

Arg.3. If nothing without the promise be a Rule for Baptism, then the Promise
is our Rule to know whom to Baptize.

But nothing without the Promise is a Rule for Baptism.

Ergo, The Promise is our Rule to know whom to baptize.

Discipleship, Faith, Repentance, and the Profession of Faith, are to the
Ministers only Rules to know who are under the Promise, and thereby Rules for
Baptism. So any other Mark of being under the promise, as to be the Child of a
believing Parent, is a Rule for Baptism. I wonder what good Discipleship or
Faith would do us, in order to Salvation, if neither absolute nor conditional
Promises were annexed, and therefore are they expressed in the Commission. I
conclude, that when an account of the Eunuchs Faith were demanded, it was to
know whether he had an Interest in the Covenant Promise; For other Marks are
required in the Adult, than in infants. I argue a pari,

If the Promise be our Rule to know whom to baptize, then infants under the
Promise, so well as their Parents, are to be baptized, so well as the Parents.

But the Promise is our Rule to know whom to Baptize,

Ergo, infants under the Promise, so well as their Parents, are to be baptized
so well as their Parents.

The Adult have no other Title to it but the Promise, and if Dr Russel say
true, that Infants have a right to the Kingdom of Glory before they are in it,
they have their (...) by the Promise, and so ought to be baptized, so well as
Adult.

Again, I argue,

If Baptism signify that which Circumcision did ( viz. an Entrance into the
Church) then Baptism is (in that) come in the room of Circumcision. But this
Baptism does (The Antipedobaptists use it as such a sign) Ergo, Baptism is come
in the room of Circumcision.

Whence I argue,

If Baptism be come in the room of Circumcision, then all that were to be
Circumcised, are to be baptized, except some new order to the contrary.

But Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision, and no new order to prohibit
any, but to add the Females.

Ergo, All that were to be circumcised, are to be baptized, and the Females
added.

Arg.4. A causa finali.

Only that Baptism which represents every Article of Faith, is the right
Baptism.

But the Baptism only of Infants, so well as Adult, represents every Article of
Faith.

Ergo, The Baptism only of Infants, so well as Adult, is the light Baptism.

Again,

That Baptism which represents only some Articles of Faith, is not the right
Baptism.

But the Baptism of only Adult, represents only some Articles of Faith,

Ergo, The Baptism of only Adult, is not the right Baptism.

Now, I dare Challenge any one to name one Article of Faith, with respect to
our Redemption, that so not represented in the Baptism of Infants; But the
Baptism of only Adult persons, does not represent our belief of Original Sin,
nor imply a Confession of it, which to be cleansed from, is the ground Work of
our Regeneration, which has its name from thence, because our first Generation
does not qualify us for Heaven.

Arg.5. A Majori.

All that are fitted for Heaven are fit for the Church;

But Infants are fitted for Heaven,

Ergo, Infants are fit for the Church.

Again,

If the Church consist of Matter prepared for Heaven, and contain of right all
the matter in this world prepared for Heaven, Then the Church does of right
contain Infants,

But the former is true, Ergo, the latter.

Now if Baptism be the Sign or badge of Church Membership, all that are
Church Members, of right should have it,

But Baptism is the sign or badge of Church Membership,

Ergo, All that are of right Church Members, should have it.

Of whom are Infants.

Arg.6.

Those that have received, or have the Promise of the Holy Ghost, may not be
forbidden Baptism, Acts. 10.47. and 2.47.

But Infants of Believers have either received or have the Promise of the Holy
Ghost. Ergo,

Again, If Baptism belcome in the room of Circumcision, then the Threatenings to
the neglect of Circumcision are to be applied to the neglect of Baptism, etc.

Now the Uncircumcised Child was threatened with something like damnation, Genesis
17.14 He was to be Cut off from his People. Make the least of it, it was to be
cut off from the Covenant Promise, and so is out of the Church, and the New
Testament promises no Salvation to the Unbaptized, Mark. 16.16. Therefore let
these People allow their Infants the Covenant-sign, or lay aside their
confidence of their Salvation, when they dye in Infancy; For they have no
promise of their Salvation, it is but guess-work, as appears, thus, If they are
in Covenant, they are in the Church, and the sign belongs to them; But if there
be no Covenant, there is no Promise belonging to them. And I think it is a
sinful Presumption, to believe and rely upon that which God has not promised,
especially when we thereby neglect that which he has annexed his Promise unto.

They ask express Scripture, Baptize Infants; But there is no express
Scripture, Baptize Grown Persons, or give the Lords Supper to Women, or the
like. But I think I have made appear, that there is in all things the same Rule
for the one as the other. I might add much more, but I think it is needless,
except there should need a few explanations to stop the Mouth of Momus but that
may be best done when Momus has acted his part.

NB. Some of these Argumental have occasionally used before and proved them, I
therefore only here name them in order, lest the Reader overlook them in
reading the former; some are New, and some I have used several times upon
diverse occasions, and to conclude several Arguments.

Now if I have committed any Fallacy in all that I have done, it is more than I
know of, and I account, that such as do it knowingly, in things that concern
the Worship of God and Men's immortal Souls, are the worst of men, and next to
Devils.

In some lesser Arguments, that were not binding, I have not taken so much
pains to find out, if there were any Fallacy in them, as I have done in the
greater, such as surely carry the Cause, if they be true; But if any Fallacy be
found in greater or lesser Arguments, I will retract them.

Perhaps our Opposers will object, That I have committed their Fault in
applying some scriptures to Infants, which do not belong to them, etc. To which
I say, I hope it will not be such scriptures as express them, nor such as mean
the Universality of Mankind, nor such as are as applicable to Infants as to
grown Persons, if they have the pollution of Original sin; and if they find any
other, and can give as good a Reason against its concerning Infants, as I gave
against those they bring and apply to infants, I will retract its Quotation.

With respect to what is said, I desire the Reader to use this point of good
Consideration, that if he find one Argument in the Book that is undeniably
binding, to know that that Argument does carry it, although all the rest were
nothing worth, and that he again pray God for wisdom.

A Word on this first Question.

I do not undertake to tell the reason why such as wickedly give themselves up
to the Devil to serve him, can never finish their Covenant with him, till they
Renounce their Baptism (which for the most part was performed by sprinkling in
their Infancy) But we may remember, that Baptism is the signing of our Covenant
which GOD has made with us.

CHAP. VII. On the Second Question.
The Second Question was,

WHether the Ordinance of Baptism, as appointed by Christ, is to be administered
by Dipping, Plunging or Overwhelming only, and not otherwise?

Dr. Russel takes it in the Affirmative. His first Argument is.

The Holy Scripture shows us the right way of Baptizing, etc.

But it does not show us that it ought to be done by sprinkling.

Ergo, Sprinkling is not the right way of Baptizing.

First, I deny his Minor, and shall anon prove the contrary. Secondly, By the
same argument I can prove that Plunging is not the right way; for the Scripture
does not show us that is ought to be done so, as I shall show.

His next Argument is, That Sprinkling does signify that which ought to be
represented in Baptism, etc. which I also deny, and shall prove the contrary;
and I say, and shall prove the same of Plunging.

To prove this, he undertakes to show from Romans 6.4. and Col 2.12. That Baptism
represents the Burial and Resurrection of our Savior, and ours by him, which
if true, does not prove his Argument, except it represent nothing else, if it
do then. But the design of these Scriptures is only to press to a Holy Life,
and one Argument is taken from Baptism, because that it is an obligation to a
holy Life, which is called a dying to Sin and a being crucified to the World,
Gal. 6.14, etc. But if he will have the manner of Baptism represent Christ's
Death or Burial, because it obliges to Duties of Mortification that resemble
it, and are the effect of it, he would do well to bring some clearer Scripture
for it. But if his Argument be true, our Baptism must resemble more, for it is
said To. 6.3. are Baptized into his Death. Now that was by hanging on the Cross
and sheding his blood; Therefore Baptism must also resemble that; But if the
manner of Baptism must answer the Signification, the truth is, it signifies the
washing away of Sin by the blood of Christ, Acts 22.16. Arise and be Baptized,
and wash away thy Sins. 1 John 1.7. And the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin. Now the way which represents the application of the
Blood of Christ, Is sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1.2. Through Sanctification of the
Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of JESUS CHRIST.

Again, Baptism represents and is an engagement to the answer of a good
Conscience 1 Pet. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto even baptism does now save
us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience, etc. Now this is represented by sprinkling. Heb. 10.22. Having our
Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. Now if the next words, And your
Bodies washed with pure Water, signify the same with the former, then the
washing thereis Sprinkling, which doubtless it is; but if it be another, it is
not that which represents cleansing the Conscience, and therefore is not
Baptism. But Baptism signifies Cleansing the Conscience, and that is done by
sprinkling. Now this signification of Baptism and Sprinkling I have from
express Scripture.

But where is his signification of Plunging from express Scripture, which they
so much boast of? Therefore I must turn upon Dr. Russel a little of that which
he lays so confidently upon others, with Triumph.

The way which does not signify that which ought to be represented in Baptism,
according to Christ's appointment, is not the right way of baptizing.

But Plunging does not signify that which ought to be represented in Baptism,
according to Christ's appointment.

Ergo, Plunging is not the right way of Baptizing.

The Major is Dr. Russels own. The Minor they will deny; Therefore I must use
his own Argument.

If plunging do signify that which ought to be represented in Baptism,
according to Christ's appointment, then it is some where so recorded in Holy
Scripture.

But it is nowhere so recorded in Holy Scripture.

Ergo, Plunging does not signify that which ought to be represented in baptism
according to Christ's appointment.

The Major is his own Argument, and the Minor I must prove by his Argument.

If it be any where so recorded in Holy Scripture, Dr. Russel, or some other
person, is able to show it.

But neither Dr Russel nor any other person whatsoever is able to show it,

Ergo, It is no where so recorded.

Now if they cannot show us by Scripture that Christ has appointed Plunging to
signify that which ought to be represented in Baptism, they must not blame us
if we, after their Example, accuse them of an Unscriptural Practice, not to
call it worse, viz. a superstitious binding that which God has not bound, or
laying a Command on Men in Gods Worship, which God has not commanded.

I have produced express scripture, that sprinkling does signify the
Application of the Blood of Christ, and cleansing from an evil Conscience, and
that these ought to be represented in Baptism; But they, without any true
Consequence, much less express scripture, say, that Plunging represents a
Burial, and that that ought to be represented in Baptism. However I will not
contend about the latter, let Baptism represent a Burial, The ordinary way of
burying is by throwing the Earth on to the Body, And hereafter we shall hear
how it represents a Resurrection also.

Having tried Plunging by some of Dr. Russels Arguments, I proceed to try
Sprinkling by the same Rule, and say,

The way which does signify that which ought to be represented in Baptism,
according to Christ's appointment, is the right way of baptizing.

But sprinkling does signify that which ought to be represented in Baptism,
according to Christ's appointment.

Ergo, Sprinkling is the right way of Baptizing.

The Major is his own; the Minor I have proved by express Scripture.

Now by the same Rule, I say, That manner which signifies Cleansing from sin,
must be used in Baptism. But sprinkling is that manner which signifies
Cleansing from sin, Ergo, Sprinkling must be used in Baptism. Again,

That which is a sufficient sign of cleansing from sin, is a sufficient sign to
be used in Baptism.

But sprinkling is a sufficient sign of cleansing from sin, Ezekiel. 36, 25. Then
will I sprinkle Clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean, etc. Ergo
Sprinkling is a sufficient sign to be used in Baptism.

Now that Plunging does Not signify that which ought to be represented in
Baptism, appears thus,

The principal thing represented in Baptism is our cleansing from sin by the
Blood of Christ.

But the Blood of Christ was not a River or Pond great enough to cover a Man,
but some streams, enough to sprinkle with; and this agrees with scripture,
which never describes our cleansing from sin by any other Figure than
Sprinkling, that I remember.

Again, Baptism represents the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Mark. 1.8. This is
expressed by Pouring, and not by plunging, that ever I remember. See Isai.
44.3. And I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, etc. See also Joel 2.28.

Thus name what Representation in Baptism you will, and sprinkling signifies
it, As, sanct fication, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Cleansing from sin or
Justification, a good Conscience or holy Life, the Application of the Blood of
Christ, The Death of Christ, (by the sign of Sprinkling his Blood) a Burial,
and also the Resurrection of the Body. But where is the scripture that Plunging
signifies any one of these things, but most of them are expressed of Sprinkling
or Pouring, which is much the same. Hence the Blood of Christ wherewith we are
cleansed, is called The Blood of Sprinkling, Hebr. 12, 14.

So when the Conversion of the Gentiles was foretold, it was said, so shall he
Sprinkle many Nations, Isa. 52, 15. which must needs allude to something, and
what more properly than their Baptism, at their Conversion, which was the Token
of it.

And now, where is Dr. Russels Argument, that Rhantisma is never used where the
Ordinance of Baptism is spoken of? Now let them, if they can, produce any
scripture that says, I will Plunge them in clean Water, and they shall be
clean; Or of the Conversion of the Gentiles. So shall he Plunge many Nations;
Or (...) says, Planged from an evil Conscience; or calls the Blood of Christ
The Blood of Plunging, or any thing equivolent to these?

His next Argument is, That there is no account in scripture that ever the
Apostles, or any other Ministers in those times and baptize any other way than
by dipping, p. 89. Whereas by the same Medium, I can as well prove Sprinkling
to be the only right way, and say, there is no account that ever they baptized
any other way than by Springling. And till they produce an Instance of another
way, my Argument is as good as his.

But they suppose they have plentiful proof for Dipping, of which we shall hear
more anon.

The next Debate is upon the Etymology of the word Baptizo, p. 90. It is
derived from Bapto which signifies To Dip. Now Baptizo being also a Verb, so
well as Bapto, and being derived from it, must according to the ordinary and
usual way have some difference of signification; and there is no better way to
know what it is, than by seeing in what sense it is used in the New Testament,
where the Ordinance of Baptism is not spoken of, to know how to understand it
where the Ordinance is spoken of.

Mark. 7. We read of the Pharisees who wash their hands before they eat, verse.
4. When they come from the Market, except they wash, they do not eat. In the
Greek Original it is [ ei me Baptizontai] Except they are Baptized, which was
but the washing of their hands, Then follows the Washing of Cups and Pots and
brazen Vessels, and Tables. In the Greek it is [ Baptismous] the Baptisms of
Cups, etc. Now Tho smaller things they might easily Dip all over, but I
conceive that in a Country where there was but little Water, sew had
convenience to dip their Tables all over under water. Luke 11.38. The Pharisees
marvelled that (our Savior) had not first Washed before dinner; In the Greek
it is [ e baptisthe] that he was not Baptized. Again, Heb. 9, 10. diverse
Washings; in the Greek it is diverse Baptisms; but those Baptisms (as after
described) were nothing but Sprinklings. Hence Baptism and Sprinkling are words
so near of like signification, that they are used for the same thing. Now let
them, if they can, produce one place where Baptizo, or its derivatives, are
used for Dipping or Plunging. Bapto indeed is often used for Lipping, and I
think in no other sense; but Baptizo is another word. It matters not so much
how it is used in Authors, because several places and several Ages apply the
same word to diverse Uses, as may be seen in the several shires in England, (not
to look into other Countries or Tongues) as I can perceive by such as come from
thence; Therefore the New Testament Dialect is the only best Rule, and there we
find that on all other occasions Baptizo signifies either Washing or
Sprinkling, and not Dipping.

He next argues upon the Preposition [ into] in the Greek [ eis] and says, that
when it is joined with an Accusative it signifies Into, which is not a Rule,
and therefore not sufficient to rely ones Faith upon. Matthew. 18.15, [ean
amartese eis se Ad^lphos] If thy Brother trespass against thee. Here [eis] with
an Accusative, is Against, and not into. Some times it signifies Unto. John 13,
2 [eis telos] Unto that end. John. 7. often [eis ten eorten] Unto the Feast
Acts 25 often Unto Jerusalem. (and verse. 10. it is Of or About, Doubting of
such Questions. I might add a multitude of Examples. So it is not certain that
Phillip and the Eunuch went more than Unto the water. John 12, 17. [eis ten he
meran] Against the day, Not Into it, for she spent her Ointment before the day
came. Matthew. 26, 10. [eis eme] Upon me. All these, and hundreds more, with an
Accusative; Yea, [Into] in our Language sometimes signifies but On to or Upon,
as when the Tempter took our Savior up Into an high Mountain, it was but On to
it, otherwise he could not have showed him much. So the Particle [eis] cannot
help them, nor can Into the Water (as it is translated.) They also plead the
coming Out of the Water, which will help them no more. Our Savior came [apo
tou hudatos] From the Water, is the true Translation, if Matthew. 19, 8. [ap'
archis] From the beginning, be true, and many more such, as Matt. 1.17, etc.
All with a Genitive, The Eunuch came [ec tou hudatos] and the same also with a
Genitive. Matthew. 19.20. [ecneotetos meu] From my Mouth, etc. I need not add;
But see how they build their separation from other Christians on a false
Foundation.

He brings the opinion of a multitude of Authors, which still is no Proof, if
his Quotations be never so true; and tho they all had baptized by Dipping or
Plunging.

We read Nehem. 8.17. of sitting under Booths, which was commanded in the Law
of Moses, but had not been done since the days of Joshua the Son of Nun. Now if
so many good Men, wise Men, and Kings and Prophets, such as David, Solomon,
etc. did not see to amend this, it is no wonder now, if so many miss the
signification of the word Baptizo, and take the Original signification in stead
of that which was in use by the Apostles; and if they fall into a mistake,
because we read sometimes of their going down Unto the Water, etc. to Baptize,
when they were in the woods, and had no other way.

In the next place he pleads from the places of Much Water spoken of, as Enon,
which in the Hebrew signifies Springs, and Travelers tell us, it is only a
place of Many Springs, but no place for plunging, and I think they would not
have looked cold spring Water for that use; and the Greek word is Many Waters,
which agrees with this Report; and it was therefore a convenient place that
People might also have Water to drink.

His next Argument is from Acts 8.38. of Phillip and the Eunuch going down Into
the Water. But does it say that he plunged or dipped him all over there? for
the word Baptized does not prove that, as we have seen; nor is it certain that
they went more than to the Water, so far as to dip a handful, as has been
evidenced; nay, if they went but half way over Shoes, they went into the water.
But he says, they could have sent for a little Water, But how does he know they
had any empty vessel?

And what is the reason, (when we read of so many Persons, baptized in Houses
and Cities) that there is never any mention of their going Unto nor into that
Water, but only in the woods (as John) and on the Road, as Phillip with the
Eunuch.

Also, we read Acts 10.47. Who can forbid Water? which has as fair a show for
its being brought, as going to the water, (when they had no other way to get
it) has of their Plunging, and I think a little fairer.

And the baptizing in Jordan, does no more Prove their Plunging all over in it,
than the man washing his Eyes in the Pool of S^loam does prove that he was
plunged all over, seeing [baptizo] proves no more but Sprinkling, and [eis] is
so well used there as in the other.

Thus it appears, their Arguments from the word Baptizo, and from going to or
Into, and Out of or From the Water, and of baptizing in Jordan, and where there
was Much Water, carry no Proof in them, and are but Probabilities at the best;
and so is en hudati, see Heb. 1.2. [en huio,] by his Son. And these are all the
Proofs they have; For their Arguments from what should be represented in
baptism, are wholly for us; for we have plentiful Express-Scripture that
Sprinkling signifies every thing that the scripture speaks of as represented in
Baptism, but there is no scripture that speaks of Dipping, as signifying any
such thing; And I hope, they will own, that it belongs to God, and not to Man,
to appoint what sign shall represent the thing signified.

Come now Dr. Russel, Who are guilty of Unscriptural Practice? Under the
Ceremonial Law Typical Ordinances were commanded, in what manner they were to
be used, unto a Circumstance; but under the Gospel Administration, the
spiritual Improvement is principally looked upon. Baptism must be with Water,
but it is not said How; and I believe, if it had been tied to any set Form, it
had been written in the Scripture; Therefore let us not Bind what God has left
Unbound; but if the scripture have given us any Rule for the Manner, it must be
Sprinkling; And it is most evident from scripture (as has been shown) that
Sprinkling is fully sufficient, and has the Promise annexed to that Sign, And
they shall be Clean, but no such promise annexed to Plunging.

Wherefore, it must be none of the smallest of those Sins, that are committed
under the color of Gods Worship, when People deny the Baptism which they have
received according to Gods appointment, by receiving another.

But God does not always show visible signs of his displeasure at evil Actions
and profaning his Ordinances, seeing we have the scripture to testify.

I find the Anabaptists (for they are worthily so called) often Challenge
People to give an Instance of any one that ever got any harm by being plunged
in cold Water, as if it were rational to expect that GOD had commanded a Duty,
and that only in matter of sacrifice, which did many times require a Miracle to
preserve us above the ordinary course of Nature in performing it; Though I
believe it would be presumption for a person to run himself into imminent
danger, under this imagination, if not a breach of the sixth Commandment, and a
Tempting of God. Yet I know not but God may in his Mercy forgive the Ignorance,
and accept the Zeal of some, and not let them suffer for it, especially such as
have not been baptized before, whose duty it is to be baptized some way; And I
think, that People are so begotted to their Error, that if some get cold and
dye of it, they would not believe that to be the cause.

But to answer that challenge, I can tell them of a more awful thing than
getting Cold. I will not relate it as a thing of my own knowledge, for it was
done before I was born, or not long after; but such as would be satisfied, may
enquire at Dorchester in New England, where dwelt one Betts, a Member of the
Congregational Church there, who turned Anabaptist, and was dipped, and (as I
am told) came out of the water distracted, and so remained; And his Children
whom he, by this, did what was in him to throw out of the Church, became also
Distracted: Two of his Sons I have seen, who are both Distracted Men; but his
Grand Children are as other People; they all live now far from that place, and
are as far from that Opinion, who have so much reason as to know of Religion.

Page 102. (If it be worth troubling the Reader with it) I find Dr. Russel
complaining of a needless trouble put upon him in searching the Hebrew in
Daniel 4.33 It was needless indeed to look Hebrew there; for the fourth Chapter
of Daniel is not written in the Hebrew, but in the Chaldean Tongue. He tells
us, that [Tabal] was not there; But why does he not tell us the word that was
there, To signify Nebucadnezars being Wet with the dew; For it is Tsabaa (or as
it is usually read Tsabang) which in the Caldean Tongue signifies To Dip, or to
Paint or Dye, as Tabal in the Hebrew signifies. It is here used ^itstabbaa in
the third Person Aor prim, Passive, and he Wet himself. And the Translators of
the septuagent, (so long before the coming of our Savior) who no doubt
understood Greek so well as any now do, accounted Bapto (or Ebaphe in the third
Person praetor imperfect Tense) a proper word to signify such a wetting as is
only with the Dew; And Baptizo signifies a less wetting than Bapto, according
to the manner of such derived words.

The Hebrew word Tabal is used 2. Kings 5.14. it is not 'Vajithtabel, and he
Dipped himself, but only 'vajitbol, and he dipped. Whether he dipped the
leprose part of his body, or dipped water with his hand (or some other thing)
seven times, and washed the leprose part; or whether he dipped himself all
over, or only Wet himself or the leprose part seven times, is not certain,
seeing the command was only to Wash.

Toward the winding up of the Dispute, Dr. Russel would have All doubtful
words reduced to their Roots. This is fine indeed! and the excellentest way to
be deceived that can be devised! For derived words seldom have the same
signification with their Roots, and many times no relation to their
signification.

Then he tells, there followed a Confused Jangling not worth taking, as he (the
Amanuensis) judged.

Next he tells us of his Offer to Mr. Williams, the Presbyterian Minister, to
dispute all over again with him, and tacitly glories in the refusal. But I must
excuse Mr. Williams, who had then the Consumption, and dyed of it not long
after, as I am informed.

I think I have not mist one Argument, but what I have answered, either
directly or by answering other Arguments; but I have passed over his
Expressions applied to his Antagonists, in great part, such as that They Bawl,
speak Nonsense, etc.

CHAP. VIII. The Conclusion.
I Advise the Reader, First, Do not put away all Charity toward such as differ
from you in this Doctrine, Provided you see in them the other Marks of the Fear
of GOD; for great Faults in things not essentially necessary to salvation, when
they proceed from mere Ignorance, do not hinder the salvation of such as are in
the essential part sound and sincere, and therefore ought not to hinder our
love to them, for his sake that accepts and loves them, and forgives their
Ignorance.

2dly, Do not think your salvation secure, merely because you are satisfied,
that you are purely right in this Doctrine; for Baptism, not improved, will do
you no more good than knowledge not improved.

To help you herein, consider That the Baptismal words represent the Faith of
the Holy Trinity. Improve it in the saving knowledge of God our Maker,
Redeemer, and Sanctifyer, and perform your Engagements to him, etc.

The Application of Clean Water implies a Confession that we are Polinted by
Sin; For that which is clean, needs no Washing. Therefore be humble and
penitent, and judge and condemn your self from the sense of it, and so find
your need of a Savior, etc.

The Water applied, represents, That our help comes from without our selves,
namely, by the Blood of Christ that takes away our Guilt, and procures Pardon,
etc. and by his spirit that applies it in our Sanctification. There seek it.

Again, the Water, applied by the hands of another, (who is Gods Officer)
implies, That it is not in our own power to apply these things, etc. Therefore
seek to him that can do it.

There being also Our Act in receiving Baptism on our selves or Children,
implies, That we are not to expect the Blessings represented in Baptism, as
Promises to us, except we be found seeking in Gods appointed way, as his Word,
Meditations, Prayer, Practice, etc.

Again the Applying Clean Water, implies our Obligations and Engagements to a
holy Life, etc. which cannot be without self-denial.

And in the Baptismal words, Gods Name being put upon us, implies. That we are
wholly his, and devoted to give up our selves to serve Him Only forever, and
deny all that is against him.

Our bodies being the part that the Elementary part is applied to, represents
the Resurrection of the Body to enjoy these blessings.

These are some of the Chief things represented in our Baptisms; so improve it,
and it will be your happiness, otherwise it is a Mockery, and taking Gods Name
in vain.

3dly, I advise such as have not been baptized, or have not got their Children
baptized, not to delay it, lest the Curse written, Genesis 17.14. come upon them;
Nor to delay performing that which is represented as our Duty in Baptism, that
they may have the Grace represented in it; Otherwise the same Curse will
nevertheless come upon them; Jer. 9.25, 26.

I am not of their mind, who would have the Unbaptized deprived of any of the
Privileges common to Mankind, to force them; for Christ, our Redeemer, needs
no forced subjects. It were a dishonor to think he did, or that his Grace were
not lovely enough it self for a Motive; Neither do they come to him in Truth,
who come against their will; and to administer his Ordinance to such, were
greatly to profane it, and take Gods Name in vain; I mean, to such as are come
of Age to choose, and in their heart do refuse.

But I would have no other force or motive used than Gods Word. For though
Baptism is not so essentially Necessary, but that he, that has not the
opportunity, may be saved without it, if he have the Grace represented, yet it
is not so with him that knows his duty, and has the Opportunity, and will not
do it; For any wilful sin, though never so small, persisted in, brings
Damnation, Jam. 2.10. because it is not want of Ability, but willful Rebellion.
Hence salvation is promised to him that believes and is Baptized, but not to
the Unbaptized, to him it is silent. And when some were pricked to the heart,
and cried, What shall we do? The reply was, Repent, and be Baptized, Acts 2.37,
38. and upon that condition the Holy Ghost was promised.

4thly, Let such, as have got their Children baptized, remember, you have in a
most solemn manner declared them to be Disciples. Now, how came they to be
Disciples, but by being the Children of one who will surely Teach them
ailigently, and set them all Examples of Piety. They are not Disciples by being
under your care, if you do not do it so soon as they are capable. Now you have
declared to God and his Church, That they are such, and that in a solemn
manner, by having Gods sacred Name named over them, as his Disciples; so that,
if you neglect, you are guilty in a high degree of Lying unto God, and of
taking his holy Name in vain! beside many more evils. Oh tremble to think upon
it! Therefore Teach, Persuade, and Pray for them, till you see the blessings of
Discipleship in them.

5thly, I advise the Reader, that, if he see ground of Conviction by this
Doctrinal, or this latter Practical Discourse on Baptism, that he remember, It
is GOD, and not Man, with whom we have to do! Take heed, lest ye Resist the
Holy Ghost, in refusing the evidence of Truth. It will not help you in the Day
of Judgment, that you have been wont to believe or practice otherwise; for if
GOD wincked at your Ignorance before, now he calls you to Repent, and you have
no Excuse for the time to come. Therefore think upon it, as you expect to
appear before the Judge of Quick and Dead.

The Sum of the Matter.
Dr. Russel proposes a good Rule page 50. where he says, He had rather walk
exactly by the Commission than by such Consequences wherein he may be deceived.
Now the Commission expresses Believers, and our savior calls some Infants
Believers; The Apostles, who walked by the Commission, express the Promise as
the ground for Baptism, and express the Children of Believers, as being now
under this promise; And much more, as has been shown.

Again, the Scripture expresses almost (if not) all that is to be represented
in Baptism, by the word Sprinkle, etc but none of them by Dipping. Nor is there
one express Scripture, nor necessary Consequence, that ever the Apostles or
John Baptized by Dipping. This I averr, and dare challenge any
Anti-pedo-baptist that goes on the ground, to deny any one of these
Propositions.

Now, if I am in an Error, I pray GOD that I may see it! and that this Book may
not prosper if it defend Error! for I would not for a thousand Worlds be
instrumental to pervert Gods Truth or mislead any Person. But if it be the
Truth, I pray God defend and prosper it against all the Powers of Hell, and
make it a means to convince such as err from the Truth, and to confirm me and
others in it, and in the good use of it. AMEN.

Postscript.
IF it be worth while to trouble the Reader with it (which I had not intended
to have done, but I understand the Anabaptists sadly blame Mr. Chandler for
questioning Dr. Russels skill in the Hebrew) Page 102. Dr. Russel complains of
a needless Trouble put upon him to look the Hebrew, Dan. 4.33. It was indeed a
needless Trouble to look for Hebrew there; for he that understands Hebrew when
he reads it, will see, that the fourth Chapter of Daniel is not written in the
Hebrew, but in the Caldean Tongue. I do not blame him for being ignorant of
Hebrew or Greek (if he be ignorant) if he be not a vain glorious Pretender to
what he has not, and consequently an ambitious willful Deceiver (I do not say
he is such an one) And I the rather insert this, because I have lately heard,
that he has put out a book to render Mr. Chandler, etc. as vile as may be, on
purpose to invalidate his Narrative of the Portsmouth Dispute (for I hear he
has given out one.) I am not acquainted with either of them, and know not their
honesty; But this, and many things more (some of which I mentioned before) look
to me dubious on Dr. Russels part.

A bare Ignorance may be born with in them, if they do not pretend above their
sphere; but such an Ignorance as I have heard of in one of their Preachers, who
preaching how Christ being Rich, became Poor for our sakes, among other things,
said, He parted with his Eternity for a time; I think this is too gross for a
Communicant, and much more for a Teacher; some call it Blasphemy.

I speak not this to vilify them, as Dr. Russel did the Presbyterians, in his
story of the Eunuchs Wife and Children, but to warn them to take better care to
examine their Preachers, and to advise them to hear such as can give a better
reason for their Faith, and be less conceited of their own knowledge; For the
man I speak of has a great name among many of them. But if Dr. Russel had not
told that Story, I had not told this; and I have as good Authority for my story
as he for his, I heard so, and that from a credible Person, that heard it.

Well, Mr. Russel looked for Tabal, Dan. 4. 33. but it was not there. And how
should it, it being properly an Hebrew Word, and the place Chaldee? But why
does he not tell us what he found there, and what the advantage was to his
Argument? For it is Tsabaa (or as it is commonly read Tsahang) there used [
Jitstabbaa] and in the Caldean Tongue signifies to Dip, as Tabal does in the
Hebrew, but may be applied also to Sprinkling or Weting with the Dew, and so
does Bapto, if Dr. Russel say true, that the Greek here in the Translation
called the Septuagent, is Ebaphe, which differs from Bapto, just as much as He
was wet, differs from I wet; For we must believe, whoever did it, they were
such as understood the use of Greek words in that Age (some time before Christ)
so well or better then any do now.

Tabal is used, 2 Kings 5.14. Of Naaman's Diping; it is not [ iithtabel] He
dipped himself, but only [ Vajitbol], and he Dipped. Whether he dip^^^ the
Leprose part into the River, or dipped up Water, and so washed seven times, or
dipped his whole Body under, or whether he only wet himself seven times, is not
certain.

I desire the Reader to understand me, when I speak of the Privilege of
Infants, by their being the Children of believing Parents, I understand their
privilege to arise from being by them devoted to be Disciples, and afterward
from the Instruction they receive on that account.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce the fore going Examination of the Portsmouth Dispute was sent to the
Press, I got a sight of the Narrative of the same dispute given out by Mr.
Chandler, Mr. Leigh and Mr. Robinson. They do not pretend to relate all that
was spoken, but only so much as the Writers took down, whereby most of the
Arguments are given in short; and where they found a necessity to add something
by their Memory, to make the sense, they gave it in other Characters, that it
might be known. There are many Arguments which are not in Dr. Russels, and they
accuse him of adding what was not spoken, etc. They have their Narrative
attested by Mr. Smith, one of the writers, that it agrees exactly with his and
Mr. Malthy's Notes.

Dr. Russel and his Friends have set out a Reply, (entitled) Truth prevailing
against the the fiercest Opposition (which I saw with it) wherein they accuse
Mr. Chandler of the same faults. I am not capable to say which of them speaks
the Truth; Though I was satisfied when I had seen only Dr. Russels, that it was
not a true Relation (and that by the contents of it) I know not what theirs is.
But in Dr. Russels Reply, I am sure he is wrong in some things.

As for Instance. Mr. Chandler to show his Reasons why he thinks Dr. Russel
beholding to others for his Greek and Hebrew, tells of a Book which has false
Greek, prefixed to the Title, and supposes it done by Dr. Russel, because he
gave it a New Edition, etc. The words are Baptismon didaches; It should have
been didache, and then it had been proper, The Doctrine of Baptisms; But
didaches is Of the Doctrine, and always has relation to some other word
foregoing, and so it is used, Heb. 6.2. very properly, which Mr. Chandler
signifies, and supposes that Title taken thence by one that knew not the
Nominative Case from the Genitive. This he does to show the vanity of a man who
would be thought to be more than he is.

This Dr. Russel spends many lines upon, and has it over in two places in his
book, and infers that Mr. Chandler accuses the Apostle Paul of false Greek, and
improves it, That thus the Apostle must be whipped (by Mr. Chandler) to learn him
better, etc. By this I cannot but have the less esteem of his Reports and
Judgment in other things, seeing him so severely condemn a man for that which
he is not guilty of.

They both use Expressions which I think tend more to exasperate than to Edify.

Dr. Russel and his Friends blame them much for such Expressions, and see the
evil of it so much themselves, that they use no worse than they can invent. For
Instance, Because they were accused of Lying, they call them Ill bred
Unmannerly Presbyters, and are themselves so well bred that they call them
Liars, no plainer than it can be written, with many like Expressions; and
toward the end of the Book, they call Mr. Chandler, A wicked man, and one of
them desires not his Prayers, because the Prayers of the wicked is an
Abomination.

Where Mr. Leigh had said that Bapto was used for the Dipping in the Dish,
spoken of Judas, Dr. Rus. says, It is utterly false. (Whereas it is certainly
true.) It is not another verb, nor a word derived, more than He that Dippeth or
Dipped, is a differing word from dip. (It is used in a Participle, and Dipped
is a Participle, from Dip, and so is Dipping.) It is indeed sometimes
compounded with a Preposition, to add to the signification [ in] It is single,
John. 13.26. Bapsas, and also compound Emba^sas, Mat. 28. Embapsas, and Mark
14. Embaptomenos; all Bapto decliend; for when it is not declined, it only
signifies [ I dip.]

They blame Mr. Chandler for saying Doop in Dutch signifies other washing. But
the Dutch, who best understand it, use it, and so understand it for Sprinkling,
as in Baptism, and many Dutch Anabaptists for Pouring on water.

Indeed Doopen signifies also Dipping some part of a thing, to wet it, but when
they speak of Dipping all over, they say Dompelen, and indompelen, not Doopen.

But to what is of more value.

They argue much upon John's denying Baptism, to some who were Church Members.

Ans. 1st. Let them show where it is written that he denied them.

2dly. I think the Anabaptists will deny Church Privileges to their disorderly
Members, and John threatened them that they should be cut down, i. e. cast out,
if they did not bring forth good Fruits.

3dly, I think they will also warn their Church Members not to trust to their
Church Membership alone; as John did these.

4thly, I think it was the Pharisees themselves that refused to be baptized.

Mr. Williams has a sermon in said Book full of erring reasons.

He denies those to whom the promise was, Acts 2.39. to have been believers,
Page 153. and in page 156. He says, That to have an Interest in the Covenant,
an Interest in the Promise, and to be ferderally holy, is the same thing. [
True.] He also denies that those had an interest in the Promise, and says, It
was only offered to them. But the words in the scripture are The Promise is to
you, and not It may be. And I will believe the scripture first. And if they
were not Believers, then I infer, That Unbelievers may be in Covenant with God,
viz. in the Gospel Covenant; (For there is no other now) and so be
Church Members, de jure. And I hope he that is a Gospel Churchmember (of
right) is a subject of Baptism, and therefore (ad hominem) Infants whom they
account Unbelievers may be subjects of Baptism.

If they object, it is also to those afar off, then I answ. The verb esti, is,
cannot be in the present and future Tense both, but it is suited to the
nearest, it is to them, and will be to the other when they are called, and made
nigh, as those were; For those afar off are strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, having no Hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. But it could not
be so with these who were not of those afar off. ( See more in my Third Chap.)
He also denies that Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision, because they
were both in force at once, viz. in the time of John's Ministry.

Answ. I know of none that say it is in all things come in the room of
Circumcision. (Circumcision signified something which Baptism does not, and so
must remain after Baptism began, till the Blood of Christ was shed.) And when a
new Ministry, of a more spiritual Administration of the Covenant began (As in
John and the Apostles) then Baptism, the sign of this spiritual Administration,
began. Baptism is the sign of giving the Holy Spirit, and so of worshipping not
at Jerusalem, but in spirit and Truth, which was began before the Jerusalem
Worship ended, which it came in the room of, John. 4.23. The time comes and
now is, etc. Circumcision was the Token of the Covenant with God, and Baptism
is the Token of giving the Holy Ghost, and that is Gods Covenant with us, Isai.
59.21. This is my Covenant, my spirit, etc. So Baptism is Now what Circumcision
then was, viz. the Token of the Covenant, and Children are in the Covenant, on
their Parents account, without respect of another Call, if to have an Interest
in the Covenant or in the Promise, be the same thing [ see more in my sixth
Chap. Arg. 8]

Also, Mr. Sharp in that Book (for it has many Authors, and all approved by Dr.
Russel) says, page 38 very well, that Infants are made meet for Glory by the
work of the spirit, which (to us) is altogether secret. Now this must be by
Sanctification (I hope) And he Sanctifies them thro'-out (I hope) And if so,
they must have a habit of every Grace, and if so, of Faith too (and I think
they cannot be meet for Heaven while their natural unbelief remains full, and
they in that part no way Sanctified) and if so, they are Subjects of Baptism.

This is to us secret, and so a Faith to us unseen. And why will they not
believe it then, except they see it?

However, these Infants have the Spirit; And who can forbid them Baptism? see
more in my fifth Chapter, and also Chap. 6. Arg. 6. and Acts 10.

And Now, Mr. Sharp, where is your Arguments, That Infants Baptism has neither
Precept nor Precedent in the Word of God? When the Apostle Peter Challenged any
one that dare deny it them? If you say True, That the Spirit makes them meet
for Glory; The Spirit is Promised in the Covenant; Baptism is the Sign of it,
and Peter argues well, that such as God has taken into his Covenant, by giving
what it Promises should have the Sign.

The Promise is at least Conditional to all that are Called, and their
Children; These we know, and these are visible Members.

The Promise is absolute to all that are Chosen; These we know not, but by
their Calling.

Thus I have given a taste of the good that may be gotten out of their Book,
but I forbear to enlarge, except they Re-print that also.

J. Morgan.

FINIS.
AN Additional Appendix TO THE Examination of the Portsmouth Dispute,
CONTAINING Some further Arguments for Infant Baptism Taken out of some Books of
the Anabaptists.
SINCE I sent my Examination of the Portsmouth Dispute to the Press, I have
seen a Book written against Poedo-Baptism, by one Phillip Carry, Prefaced and
highly approved by Will. K^ffin, Job. Harris, Rich. Adams, Rob. Sleed, Benj
Keach and M.E. wherein is this Passage, p 65. Now it cannot be supposed that
the Infants of Believers Indifferently or Universally have actually the thing
signified by Baptism, that is, The holy Ghost, Union with Christ, Adoption,
Forgiveness of Sins, Regeneration and Eternal Life; for then they are all
Sanctified, and all Believers; and if that could be proved, there would be no
question about Poedo-Baptism; Those Texts, Acts 8.37. chap. 10.47 and 11.17
would undenyably prove it. And there is no Anti-Poedo-baptist but will grant,
that all those concerning whom there is any Tolerable Evidence given that they
are Regenerated Persons, united to Christ, whose Sins are forgiven, and that
they have received the Holy Ghost, are to be baptized. Now to affirm that all
infants of Believers, either actually or Imputatively are Sanctified,
Regenerated, Justified, is quite contrary to Romans 9.6 etc. as also to daily
experience.

This they bring as an Argument against Infant Baptism, viz. We cannot Prove
that they all have the thing signified by Baptism, Yea, that it is evident that
some have not.

I Reply. 1st. By the same Rule, no Adult person must be Baptized; for we
cannot prove that all who profess Faith, and visibly appear to have it, are
believers with all their Heart; Yea, it is evident, that many have not.

2dly. By this Rule, Where there is any tolerable Evidence given, that an
Infant is Regenerated, United to Christ etc. that Infant is to be Baptized. Now
to know whether there be or no, let us Year what they say page 57. We do not
exclude Infants from the great Work of Regeneration. And Page 59. We do not
exclude Infants of Believers from the Ordinary way of Salvation; and they may
be sanctified by the Spirit of God. Thus, if we may believe them, There is a
tolerable Evidence given of the Infants of believers, that they are
Regenerated, United to Christ (for that is the Ordinary way of Salvation) that
their Sins are forgiven, and that they have received the Holy Ghost. But we are
not Sure they all are Regenerate, etc. No more are we of any Adult Person
professing it. It is not an Assurance but a tolerable Evidence that is
required unto Baptism; we know that some Infants of Believers are united to
Christ, and while we have no more reason to doubt of this Infant more than of
that, we have a tolerable Evidence for both, and this is as much as can be said
of Adult persons professing Faith

3dly. By this Rule, if Infants are saved in the ordinary way, then they are
Sanctified, and are Believers. And now ye Anti-Poedo-Baptists, where is your
Argument That an infant cannot be a Believer? For by your own words, some
Infants are Believers, and are to be Baptized. Get this off if you can, and if
your Conscience will allow you to oppose the Truth, which is so evident as to
force a confession from those who do their utmost to oppose it.

And I would know why some Infants may not have a Principle of Faith without
exercise, so well as all Infants have a Principle of Reason without exercise.

If there need a further Testimony, I add a fourth Argument to my second
Chapter, Romans 4.11. And he received the Sign of Circumcision, the Seal of the
Faith, which he had. etc. Hence

If Circumcision was a Seal of Faith, then all that were to be circumcised,
were such of whom there was a visible or tolerable Evidence that they were
believers. The Infants of visible believer were to be circumcised. Again,

If Circumcision was a sign or Seal of Faith then it was of the same use that
Baptism is now, and Baptism is come in the room of it, and Circumcision was a
Token of the Covenant of Grace.

But the principal design of their Book is to shut Infants out of the Covenant
of Grace, by answering the Arguments that prove them in it, so they deny that
circumcision was appointed as a Seal or sign of Faith in all, though it was so in
Abraham, Beause he was circumcised to be the Father of al them that believe,
etc. which others were not.

Ans. Then it was a Covenant of Faith, to which he was circumcised; and as the
believing Father, so the believing Children were to be circumcised. If he had
been circumcised to be the Father of the Legally righteous, it had been to
their purpose.

Again, they object He was to be Heir of the World, Romans 4.13.

Ans. An answerable Heirship belongs to his believing Children, verse. 14.

Again, they say, Some were circumcised who were not true believers.

Ans. The same Rule may deny Baptism to be used as a sign of Faith; For many
are Baptized who are not true believers, and even false Brethren in the
Apostles days.

Again, they deny That the circumcision Covenant required Regeneration, etc.
contrary to Jer. 9.26. and many other Scriptures in both Testaments, also
contrary to express Sripture, which calls circumcision the Token of the
Covenant, and as a Token required Ishmael and Abraham's Servants to be
circumcised. They deny that these were included in Abraham's Covenant, Because
God would establish his Covenant with Isaac.

Ans. 1st. Even at this day the Covenant is not established with all visible
believers, but only with true Believers 2dly. The Covenant so to be established
with Isaac, and not with the rest, was the Heirship of the Land of Canaan, etc.

Again, they object Gal. 5. If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you
nothing, etc.

Ans. that was after Circumcision was abolished, because Christ's blood (which
it Typified) was now already shed. Now to be circumcised did vertually deny any
benefit by the Sufferings of Christ, which were past, and consequently any
benefit at all; but if it had been so before, Then Abraham and the Propkets and
all Israel had no profit by Christ. In this Sense it is that Circumcision and
the Levitical Priesthood and Ceremonies annexed were legal; They were only
significant of Christ and his sufferings to come (and so in the time of them
were purely Evangelical) But when the Antitype was come, the use of them did,
by signifying that it was yet to come, signify a denial of him, and so bound
men to the Law for Salvation: and thus became purely Legal. And the abolishing
of this Law by the coming of Christ, typifies our being freed from the Covenant
of Works and Curse of the Low by Faith in Christ. These signifying only things
to come, expired of Course, when they were come, and yet were expressly
repealed, much more would Infants (...) Right to the sign of the Covenant of
Grace, (if that had expired also) After circumcision was abolished, the use of
it tending to deny that Christ had already paid the price of our Redemption,
left men under the Covenant of the Law, which we are all by nature under, till
redeemed from it by Christ. In a word, circumcision was the sign of the
Circumcision of the Heart, which is Regeneration or a New Creature, and cannot
be without the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and is the self-same which is now
signified by Baptism, and belongs wholly to the Covenant of Grace; And this the
Apostle sufficiently declares to have been the use of circumcision before it
was abolished, and makes that an Argument against it, now it obliges to the
Covenant of works.

But they object, That Baptism is not a Seal (as Circumcision was) Because It
is by the Holy Spirit that we are Sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

Ans. 1st. The Spirit is not there spoken of, as the matter and form of the
Seal, but as the Efficient or Author of the Sanctification signified by it,
which is a Sure Pledge of Salvation; deny this he that can.

2dly. A Seal is an appointed visible sign for confirmation, which Circumcision
was and Baptism is, of the Covenant of Grace, and Sanctification, so far as it
is visible of Eternal life, (...) Baptism is a visible Sign of the Faith of
(...) Believer.

Again, they say page 42 that strangers bought with Money were admitted to
circumcision, whether proselyted to the Jewish Religion or no, and cite Genesis 17.

Ans. That Scripture says no such thing, nor any other, but many show the
contrary. 2dly. Think they contradict Genesis 18. v. 19

Also, they deny the covenant made with Parents and their Infants, Deuteronomy. (...)
29 to be a Gospel Covenant, Because there were Threatenings to the Rejecters of
it,

Ans. 1st. By the same Rule they may deny the New Testament to be a Gospel,
Because it contains many Threatenings. 2dly. It is expressed to be a covenant
beside the covenant made in Horeb, i. e. when they came out of the land of
Egypt. Now beside, is as much as another, and so not the same, Yet they say it
was the same, and so they contradict express Scripture. What must men do to
uphold Error? 3dly. This does as much express another Covenant, and not that
when they came out of Egypt, as that in Jer. 31. and Heb 8. and does as well
Promise Gospel Blessings, in the next Chapter which treats of the same
Covenant, and never tells of another, and is a continuation of the matter
contained in the twenty ninth. 4thly. It is called a Gospel Covenant, Romans
10.8. where the words, Chap. 30. v. 14. are called the Word of Faith, in
opposition to the Covenant of Works. 5thly. It were strange that God should
make a Covenant with Infants to bring them under condemnation, and none to
deliever them, except they all perish.

Page 14. They say Abraham's Church State is at an End. Wherein they contradict
the Apostle, Romans 4. and something else. These are their principal Arguments in
the Book. I return to the proof of Infants being in the Covenant of Grace.

Page 25. They say, Now it is true, that in respect of the Substance of the
Covenant, we have the same graffting into the Olive, the Church of the
Faithful, of which Abraham is the root.

Page 30 They say, The Interest which a Child had in the Everlasting Covenant
under the former Administration, it still retains.

Hence it follows, that Infants were in the Covenant of Grace under the former
Administration, and are still.

And if it was under an Administration, there must have been something
administered to them, by virtue of their Interest in the everlasting Covenant,
or Covenant of Grace The difference between that and this Administration, was
in visible Ordinances; so there must have been a Gospel Covenant Ordinance
administered then to Infants. Tell me he that can what this was, except
Circumcision.

And from the Quotations p. 25. it seems Abraham's Church is still in being, and
is a Gospel Church, and we are in it. Tell us where our Infants are turned out,
before they turn themselves out by unbelief and Disobedience? (as the Jews did
in our Saviors time, and as many evil deeds did (by Gods Command from Abraham's
time) require a cuting off from their People, notwithstanding they had Abraham
to their Father, which the proud Pharisees did not consider, till John told
them of it) seeing a Child still retains the Interest it had then.

Page 62 They tell us In Christ and a right to the Promises Out of Christ, and
strangers to the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12.

Hence it follows, seeing Infants are saved in the Ordinary way, which is by
being United to Christ, and there is no Salvation out of Christ) some Infants
are in Christ, and therefore have a right in the Promises.

The Qestion is, where those promises are recorded? If it be the Promises to
believers, then some Infants are believers (but that is already granted, p 65.
For if all Infants of believers are United to Christ, etc. then they are al
Believers; So seeing only some are, there are some Infants Believers. I admire
the Impudence of some men to forbid them Baptism, seeing all agree that the
Commission requires the Baptism of all Believers, Yea, and that a tolerable
Evidence is sufficient, even where there is ground in Charity to hope it). But
if the Promise to Infants be where little Children were brought to Christ, then
the promise is only to such as are brought, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven; I mean we know not that it is to more. Now these must be brought by
order of believing Parents or Masters; for unbelievers will not bring theirs.

If it be the Promises to Believers, and their Children, we also know what
Infants they are, whom we are to account in the Covenant. One would think now
that we had done, seeing they own Abraham's Church to be a Gospel Church, and
still in being, and we in it, and that our Infants still retain their right in
that Everlasting Covenant, etc.

But they are not so willing to be convinced themselves or to leave gaining
Proselites (wherein the Children commonly are proselyted and made their
Disciples by virtue of their Parents being proselited) But seeing it will not
do after spending so many Sheets of Paper: but infants will be in the Covenant
of Grace and under the Promise still, They even conclude to do as well another
way, and deny the Covenant or Promise to be the Ground of Baptism.

Now if by the Ground or Rule they mean the Commission or Command, we will
agree with them, that the Promise is not the Command.

But if they deny that the Commission requires the baptizing of all that are
visibly in the Covenant, or under the promise, and no others, we must try to
confute them. We must remember they tell us Out of Christ and strangers to the
Covenant of promise, Therefore if a right in the Promise, then in Christ, and
if in Christ, that is, United to him, Then they are Sanctified, and are
believers, and then those Texts Acts 8.37. Acts 10.47. Acts 11.17. do
undeniably prove their right to Baptism. All this they say, and therefore
nothing without the promise is a Rule for Baptism (as I once said) That is,
nothing but by virtue of the Promise.

If any reject their Testimony, as Humane (though sufficiently grounded on the
Scripture (understood with the distinctions between really and conditionally,
and visibly) The Gift or promise of the Holy Ghost, is the reason for Baptism,
Mark. 1.8. Acts 2.38.

The Covenant is the Gift or promise of the Holy Ghost, Jsai. 56 ult. And till
some in the revealed Covenant are excepted, we take this for a Rule.

I pray God to give them a Heart willing to believe the Truth. I was told by
one of their considerable Preachers, in the presence of several of their
people, That if my Book contain matters of Faith (i. e. Arguments against their
Practice) I might be Sure it would be answered. Which implies they are resolved
not to believe it, and that before they know what it is. To what purpose shall
Arguments be used with such men! I hope they will consider better. But if an
Answer come out against my Book, we have cause to fear from what principle it
comes. The Lord make us all willing to believe the Truth!

Thus I have given an account of the principal Arguments in this Book, so
highly commended by several of their Chief Writers, as the excelling all that
went before it.

The latter part of the Book is chiefly concerning the two Covenants, wherein I
take him to be partly right, but it does not much concern the controversy. He
often flies to their common refuge, of crying out against using that in Gods
Worship which he has not commanded. Whenas he owns that to be an undeniable
proof for Baptism if it were in Infants; which he owns to be in Infants (as I
have shown).

I add yet, which might end the controversy, We need some humane means to
understand the Holy Scriptures, as to learn to speak and read, so we need
History to understand the Prophesies in Daniel, and the Revelations, so we need
to search Antiquity to know in what sense any doubtful word in the Scripture
was used in the Nation and Age wherein it was written; and some have proved
that the name of Proselyte or Disciple was given to Infants with their Parents,
in the age when our Savior lived on Earth, and is so by the Jews still; And
that the Apostle and such as first followed them understood the commission no
other way.

I desire the Reader to excuse me, having had no opportunity this twenty years
to read Ancient History; if I mistook about Pelagius, setting him a hundred
Years too late, and saying, he denied Infants baptism, which was only judged
the Consequence of his Doctrine, But he being charged with it, said, He never
heard that ever any man denied it, etc. And this was sufficient ground for
Augustine to write in Defense of Infant Baptism, not to prove the thing (which
was not denied) but to prove it necessray as a sign of Remission of sins, so
well as for other reasons. Also, I am not sure whether Constantine did not
defer his Baptism to be baptized in Jordan. These things I have lately met with
in Quotations, and will not trust my memory.

But finding that Pelag us made this reply, after he had traveled many
Countries I infer, that Denying Infants Baptism was so little thought of, two
or three hundred years after the Apostles days, that he whose Doctrine led
directly to it, did not then once think of bringing such a new unknown thing
into the Church, and it was impossible that men of his parts and learning and
Travel should not have known it, if ever it had been denied in the space of two
or three hundred Years before.

But the Anabaptists do by the Books of the Fathers, as they do by many Authors
now, particularly the Church Catechism, out of which they may as well make
those that know not the Church of England, believe, that they deny Infant
Baptism, as they do now make, such as know no better, believe, the Fathers
denied it.

Indeed Tertullian, by himself, was against Baptizing Infants or young persons,
except they were in danger of Death, lest they should not live answerably. This
was no denying the thing, but accounted by him a point of prudence.

I have also to advertise the Reader, that in the beginning of my second
Chapter, in Answer to Dr. Russel's first Argument, I had also Referrence to his
fourth Argument, where he insists upon the same Fallacy in many pages together,
though he pretends not to insist upon it, and pretends to be content with any
proof, and yet nothing will serve him but an Instance. This I answered (proving
it a Fallacy) where I first found it; and indeed all his arguments, and all the
Arguments they use against Infant Baptism depend upon that one Fallacy, as he
that observes will find.

Hence the ground of their Faith in separation from all other Christians,
depends on a false Argument, and so we see the Ground they have to rend the
Church of Christ to pieces, and tear his members one from another, and cause
the Wounds and Pains of Strife, Anger and Sorrow, and hinder Love (so earnestly
recomended by our Lord and Savior, as his delight, and the Glory of his
Kingdom, and the way for our Edification) and cause, in stead thereof,
Contention, Mis-spending of Time, Lying, Revenge and every evil Work.

One Word more, because some excuse their Re-baptizing, from Acts 19.5.

That verse is only a continuation of Paul's words, wherein be tells what John
said to such as came to him, and that when they heard it, they were baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus ( i. e. by John) And when Paul had told them this,
he laid his hands upon them, etc. But Suppose it were doubtful whether it was
thus, or whether they were baptized again, who that fears God would venture
upon a doubtful Interpretation of Scripture, to deny his Baptism, the sign of
his Covenant with God, and thereby use the sign of casting himself out of the
Covenant of Grace, as they that were circumcised (after Circumcision was
abolished) did, to be taken in anew? For there is but one Covenant of Grace
and one Baptism, the sign of it, Ephesians. 4.5. and he that is cast out, cannot take
himself in again, and has no other shelter to fly to. There is help in the
Gospel for such as have broke the Law Covenant, but no more help for such as
are cast out of the Gospel Covenant Therefore take heed of using the sign of
it! because that resembles the thing it self! and there is no Covenant but the
Gospel to be saved by, since the Fall.

I find some of their Authors tell us, that Gods Word has limited Baptism to
Actual Believers. I desire them to show the Scripture for it; They despise the
distinction of Complete and Incomplete Disciples, as unscriptural. But where is
the Scripture for Actual Believers, in distinction from another sort. A
distinction may be made without Scripture, but then we may not apply that to
the one which we deny to the other without Scripture. Now if they find the
Scripture that tells us what Believers must be baptized, and which not, and the
like of Disciples, we will hear them.

Thus they fly from Church Membership, the Covenant of Grace, Yea, and some
Faith, being the ground of Baptism, when these are proved in Infants, rather
then yield, and that after they have so long strove to keep them out of all,
and that after they have owned, that if these things could be proved, they
ought to be baptized; Lord what shall be done with such Men, who are resolved
not to see.

The other day occasionally opening the Greek Testament, I hit upon John 20.4,
5. And the other Disciple out-ran Peter, and came first [eis to Menemeon] to
the Sepulcher, v. 5 -- but he went not in. This alone is enough to cut off all
their pretense from the Baptized going into the water. and for their coming out
of the water, it is as much as those, Acts 10.12 coma out of Cornelius and [ en
^udat^] is in the Water, as much as [ en M^^aira] is in the Sword, Mat, 26.52.

By further reading of Mr. Chandlers Narrative, I find that the Anabaptists
having the Opponency, first took up so much time, that the Presbyterians had
time to use but two head Arguments of Seven which they had intended, in both of
which they put the Anabaptists to Silence, that they stood a considerable time
without speaking, till stood the Moderator asked them, whether they had no more
to say?

I would also add to the end of my sixth Chap. to avoid mistakes, these Words,
viz. So far as this will go for an Argument, it proves the Validity of Infant
Baptism, and also sprinkling, that it is as powerful against the Devil as Adult
Batism and Plunging.

Also above page 55 lin 1. for On the first Question read by the by.

ERRATA.
PAge 8 line 5 after which read all. p. 19 l. 18 for may, r. must, p. 20 l. 2
f. are r. or, p. 22. l. 28 f. after r. for, p. 24 l. 6 f. it r. them, p. 29 l.
14 f. has r. that, p. 33 l. 11 read all that and the next page at p. 53 Arg 7,
p. 39 l. 23 for though r. to, p. 40. l. 30 f. manner r. minor, p. 49 l. 19 f
uncharitably r. charitably, p. 50 l. 18 f. were r. wa^, p 5 ^ l. 2 read 17
lines at page 53 Arg. 8. p. 67 last line after Iitstabaa blot out the line, an^
^asive in the next, and p. 68 l. 5 blot out preter Imperfect Tense. The
Postscript p. 74, 75, 76. leave wholly out. There are few more of less value.

FINIS

