TREATISE I. Of FAITH. II. Twelve Fundamental Articles OF Christian Religion.
III. A Doctrinal Conclusion. IV. Questions and Answers upon Church Government.


Taken from Written Copies long since delivered by the late Reverend Mr. John
Cotton, Teacher of the First Church in Boston, in New England.

Printed in the Year 1713.

OF FAITH.
Quest. WHAT is Faith?

Answ. It is a work of God's Almighty Quickening Power, wrought by the Ministry
of the Word and Spirit of God, whereby the Heart is weaned from all Confidence
in the Flesh, and believes in God and the Lord Jesus Christ to Righteousness.

Q. Whether does Faith or Repentance go before, in the Work of Conversion?

A. You may discern in the Counsel Peter gives, and works upon those, Acts
2.38. Peter calls them to Repentance. Is that the first work? It is the first,
after they were pricked in heart; but that they were pricked in heart, does
presuppose that they did believe, that it was Jesus whom they had Crucified,
and so Zach. 12.10. they saw it was Christ whom they had thus abused, and
mourned for him, and it was not a mere legal mourning, for then they would not
have come to the Apostle to know what to do, there is so much Faith as to see
their own Wickedness against Christ, and which is more, here is an act of
Reverence, Men and Brethren; their scoffing spirits are made low, to come to
him, that wounds them: which is an act of Faith. There is a threefold act of
Faith, and so a threefold act of Repentance; first which is an assent by which
a man knows the Will of God, and assents to it, this is the Will of God, but I
have walked contrary to it, and this now pierces the heart, and so is humbled,
which is an act of Repentance; but then there is another act of Faith, and that
is adhearence, cleaving to God, and from thence springs another work of
Repentance, to turn to him in humble Confession, in humble Supplication, in
earnest desires after Grace and Covenant: After this there springs another act
of Faith, God Revealing his Covenant; then springs another act of Repentance,
that we should Sin against so good a God, and thereupon turns with all his
heart to God, and labors to turn others? Come and see what God has done for
my Soul.

Mr. John Cotton, of Boston in New England, his twelve Fundamental Articles of
Christian Religion? The denial whereof after once or twice Admonition [he
conceives] makes a man an Heretic.
1. THE first is touching the Persons in the Trinity; that there be Three
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and all but One God, this is a known
Principle of our Christian Faith, and held forth in every Creed: and that it is
of the Foundation, appears by this, 1 John 2 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the
same has not the Father; therefore when a man upon pretense there is but one
God, will have no more Persons but One, and the Son he will not have to be as
he is, God, this man overthrows the Foundation of Christian Religion, as
Arius did, and others after him; the Holy Ghost is joined together with the
rest in our Baptism; I Baptize thee into the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; this is a Profession of part of our Christianity,
and a great part of it too, Mat. 28.19, 20.

2. It is another Article, and Fundamental Article of Christian Religion, that
the Lord has Made, and does Govern all the World, and is a Rewarder of Good
and Evil. That he is a Rewarder with Blessing of that which is Good, and takes
Vengeance on every one that does Evil, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Genesis 1.1. He must know this, he that comes to God must believe this, if he
believe not this, there is no hope of Salvation for such an one, Heb. 1.3. Ephesians.
1.11. Romans 2.6.10.

3. This is another Fundamental Article of our Christian Faith? That this God
alone is to be Worshipped, with Religious Worship, Mat. 4.10. Thou shall
Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: If a man Worship any
other God, besides the Lord, or if a man Worship any other God, the Lord will
cut off them that Swear by the Lord, and that Swear by Malcham. If a man
Worship Angels, he holds not the Head: Get thee behind me Satan in such a Case.
Avante.

4. This is the Fourth. That this Worship of God is to be offered to him
according to his Written Word. I say, this Worship that is acceptable to him,
is written in his Word; if any man shall worship God by the Precepts of men, it
is not acaccording to the Will of God: To the Law and to the Testimony? If any
man speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them,
2 Timothy 2.16, 17. the whole Scripture (the written Word of God, is of Divine
Inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, etc. The Scripture is
a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners, that is a Foundation of Christian Religion.

5. A Fifth Article is, That for our own part, we have not so Worshipped God,
from the Fall of our First Parents. We and our Fathers before us, we have all
Sinned, and were Born in Sin from our Mothers Womb. If any man say, he has no
Sin (says the Apostle) there is no truth in him. We have not kept the
Ordinances and Statutes of the Lord, and so have deceived our selves of that
Reward which the Lord has promised to them that diligently seek him, Romans
3.10, 11, 23 And instead of being under a Reward of Blessing, we are under the
Curse.

6. The Sixth Article which a man must know; or he cannot be saved, (and if he
hold against it, and know what he holds, it is impossible there should be any
true Grace in him) is, that we of our selves are utterly unable to rescue our
selves from this Misery, by any strength of our own; but we are utterly unable
to help our selves; It Is that which the Prophet Hosea speaks to, Hos. 13.9. O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help And as we have
fallen in our First Parents, so in falling, we are only fit to fall: Where is
then our help? It is in God. We were Born not of Blood, nor of the will of the
Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God; not of Blood, that is, our
Conversion to God, comes not by the Blood of our Ancestors* Nor by the Will of
the Flesh, not the Will of Corrupt Nature; Nor by the Will of man, that is, of
our most holy Parents, or Ministers, or other Good men.

7. A Seventh Article is, That Jesus Christ, the Son of the Eternal Father, in
fullness of time took upon him our Nature, and became man, and has Redeemed his
Church (by his perfect Obedience to his Father) from Sin and Misery: The Word
that was from the Beginning was made flesh, and we saw his glory, as the glory
of the only Begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14.
This is a Foundation of Christian Religion. Every Spirit that confesses not
Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, is not of God, etc. Christ has Redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, Gal 3.13.

8. A Eighth Article is, This Salvation and Redemption of Christ is freely
given in the Gospel, unto every Soul that believes in his Name; and Faith is
also freely given, that we may believe. I say, this Christ that works this
Salvation and Redemption, is given only to such as believe in his Name. For God
so loved the World, etc. Joh. 3.16. And if you believe not in me, (says he)
you have no life in you, no Salvation by me, Joh. 8.24. If ye believe not that
I am he, you shall die in your Sins, and the Lord in giving you his Son, gives
you Faith to believe in his Son, Ephesians. 3.17. and both at the same instant, that
if you have not Christ you have not Faith, and if you have not Faith, you have
not Christ, Christ dwells in your heart by Faith; As many as received him, to
them he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his
Name, Joh. 1.12. No man can come to Jesus Christ, that is, believe on him,
except the Father draw him: No man can come, there is an impossibility of
reaching him, (...) the Lord put forth his Almighty Power.

9. Those whom the Lord draws by his Word and Spirit to believe on Christ, them
he Justifies freely by his Grace in Christ: I say, those whom the Lord draws to
Christ by Faith, he justifies freely by his rich Grace in Christ, Romans 3.23,
24. This is a Foundation of our Christian Faith also. By the deeds of the Law,
shall no Flesh be justified in his sight: So then Christ is God and man, he is
come, and has Redeemed us, this Redemption is given to the Faith of his
People, this Faith is wrought by the Word and Spirit of God, it is the power of
God to Salvation to them that believe. Where this Faith is, there is
Justification.

10. Where the Soul is Justified, it is also Regenerated. Joh. 3.3. For except
ye be born anew, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Except ye Repent, ye
shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.5.

11. This Regeneration in us is imperfect, by reason we consist partly of
Flesh, and partly of Spirit. 1 Cor. 13.9. Gal. 5.17. Therefore gifts of Grace
to be given, and Sins to be mortified, it is a fundamental point of Religion.
Therefore the Apostle cries out of his own Misery, that he was not able to
wrestle against his own Corruptions.

12. All men shall Rise again at the Last Day, both such as are Regenerated,
and such as are not Regenerate; and both shall be judged according to their
works, the Righteous to Everlasting Salvation, the Wicked to Everlasting
Damnation. So then put all these things together, and you have all the
necessary Points of Christian Religion; which whosoever obstinately opposes, or is
ignorant of, he cannot be found in a State of Grace that Accompanies Salvation,
this is the Sum of the Articles; and he that overthrows any one of these, and
obstinately persisteth therein, brings himself to Eternal Damnation.

Q. If any man ask, Why we should look at any Fundamental Articles of Christian
Religion, besides them that are in the Creed of the twelve Apostles.

A. I answer, There be some things there that are not Fundamental Articles, and
there are some Fundamental Articles that are left out; as that Christ descended
into Hell, it is no Fundamental Article of Christian Religion, though it be
taken for his Descending into the Grave; nor do I think this Creed was made by
the Apostles, much less that Article; and there are other Fundamental Articles
which are not there, as the Word to be a Rule of Faith and Manners; little also
is said in the Creed of Justification or Regeneration.

A Doctrinal Conclusion.
THat there is in all such that are Effectually Called and United unto Christ,
In-dwelling Spiritual Gifts of Grace, wrought and created in us by the Holy
Ghost, that is, by the begetting whereof, we are begotten and renewed to a
Spiritual Life unto God.

The Opening of the Terms of this Doctrine.
By Gifts and Grace, I mean Holy Qualities, the same which Philosophers call
Virtues, Habits, or good Dispositions, whereby the faculties and affections of
the Soul, which by Corrupt Nature are set upon a man's self and Earthly Things,
and cannot savor the things of God (and so are said to be dead) are hereby
sanctified and lifted up to God, and set upon him, and Heavenly Things; and so
are said to be quickened and made alive unto God; whence we are said to be
begotten again to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. And the Faith of the Righteous is
opposed to the dead Faith of vain men. Jam. 2.20. These Gifts (we say) are
wrought or created by the Holy Ghost, because they are the fruits or the
effects of the Spirit of God in us. Gal. 5.22, 23. Wrought by his Almighty
Creating Power (out of nothing) Col. 2.12. Psalm. 51.10. and thereby making us
Spiritual men, 1 Cor. 2.15. Living Stones, and fit instruments for Gods
Spiritual Service, 1 Pet. 2.5. and therefore every one of those gifts and
graces whereby any faculty or affection of the Soul is sanctified; it is called
the Spirit of such a faculty or affection, as the sanctified disposition of the
mind, is called the Spirit of a Sound Mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. The spirit of faith is
the gift of faith; the Spirit of Love, or of the fear of the Lord, are the
Gifts of Holy Love and Fear, sanctifying such affections. 2 Timothy 1.7. Isa.
11.2. Further, We say these Gifts of Grace, are in-dwelling and abiding in
every Child of God effectually called and united unto Christ, inasmuch as they
are neither mortified and extinguished in us (as some would have it) by our
Union with Christ; for Mortification is of corrupt Lusts, or of the body of Sin
in us, Col. 3.5. Romans 6.6. Not of the Gifts of Grace, neither are the Gifts of
Grace transient and passing away, as they would be if they were mo^^ actions of
the Spirit proceeding and passing from us; nor are they abiding in the Holy
Ghost (though he abides in us) because no created gifts of qualities abide in
him, (whatsoever is in him is himself) but they are preserved in us by the Holy
Ghost (as they were wrought by him) and are also by him acted, increased and
perfected in us against the day of our dissolution; where we shall be presented
blameless, without spot or wrinkle before the presence of his Glory.

Reason I.
The first Reason is taken from the express testimony of Scripture, speaking of
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as being in us, and fruitful in us. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6,
7, 7, 8. add moreover (says he) to your faith virtue, and to your virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness love; for if these things be in you and abound, they make you, that
you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ; from whence the reason is concluded thus, faith, virtue, knowledge,
temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, love, they are all in us,
and makes us fruitful in Christ. The Text is plain. But all these are neither
the Holy Ghost himself (for then one Holy Ghost should be added to another) or
one part of the Holy Ghost should be added to another) nor are the actions of
the Holy Ghost proceeding from us; for these things are in us, and abounding in
us, and consequently abiding in us, and they cause us to bring forth actions
meet for Christian profession, for they are said to make us fruitful in the
knowledge of Christ, ver. 8. Therefore they are the gifts of Grace abiding in
us.

Reason II.
The second Reason is taken from such places of Scripture, as put an express
difference between the Holy Ghost, and his gifts in us, and the exercise of
these gifts by us. 2 Timothy 1.6.14. Stir up says Paul to Timothy the gift of God
which is in thee and us, ver. 14. that good treasure (or thing) which was
committed to thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us; where there is
a plain difference, between the gift of God, and the stirring up of the gift,
which is the exercise of it; and the Holy Ghost which helps him to keep it,
and to use it.

Obj. But he speaks of Ministerial Gifts, not of Gifts accompanying Salvation.

A. He speaks of both, for in the verse next before (ver. 5.) he puts
Timothy in mind of the unfeigned faith which (says he) is in thee, and which
dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and in thy Mother Eunice, and now in thee
also: Whence the Reason is plain, if unfeigned faith, and other such like Gifts
of God dwelt in Timothy, and in his Mother, and in his Grandmother, then there
be Gifts and Graces accompanying Salvation, that dwells in such as are
Effectually Called.

But the former is plain out of the Text, and therefore so is the latter, in 2
Cor. 6.6. The Apostle says, He with other Apostles approved themselves as the
Ministers of Christ, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness,
by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned.

Obj. But by these Paul and the rest approved themselves as the Ministers of
Christ, and therefore he speaks of Ministerial Gifts, not as Gifts
accompanying Salvation?

A. The Inference is naught, for a man cannot approve himself as a Minister of
Christ by Ministerial Gifts, without such Gifts as do accompany Salvation; and
therefore the Apostle does plainly instance, not only in Ministerial Gifts, but
such as also do accompany Salvation, as pureness, long-suffering, love
unfeigned; in 1 Cor. 12.4, 6. The Apostle says, there be diversities of gifts
and graces, which he distinguishes from operations, ver 6

Obj. He speaks of Ministerial Gifts, not of Gifts accompanying Salvation?

A. He speaks not only of Ministerial Gifts, but of all gifts of Grace, by
which we are Knit to Christ, and one to another, as head and members of one
body; and in respect of which, the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee; nor the head to the fect, I have no need of you, ver. 21.

Reason III.
The third Reason is taken from the estate of the person united to Christ,
which being united, is not a natural, but a spiritual man; the reason stands
thus, if there be no spiritual gifts of grace wrought and created in the Soul,
then Christ is united by the Spirit of God to the natural man; for without
spiritual gifts, there is nothing but nature in us, to which Christ by his
Spirit is united: But Christ is not united by the Spirit to the natural man;
proof of this from 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man does not receive the things of
God, nor of the Spirit of God, and therefore does not receive Christ united to
him.

Obj. A man is not a natural man (...) a Spiritual man, when the Spirit of God
dwells in him?

A. 1. True, Because the Spirit of God, where he dwells in a man, works
gifts of spiritual grace, but if he should not, the Soul would be still
natural, as the Temple of Solomon was still a natural Temple, not a Spiritual
Temple as we are. 1 Pet 2.3. though God dwell in it, because he wrought no
gifts of Spritual Grace in the Temple, whereby it might live unto God.

2 In all Union, the things united are distinct from the Bond by which they are
united; Christ is one thing, the Soul is another, the Spirit of God that
uniteth them, is distinct from both; now take the Spirit of God as a distinct
thing from the Soul, and what is the Soul but a natural Soul, and so Christ by
his Spirit being united to the natural Soul, is united to the natural man.

Reason IV.
The fourth Reason is taken from the nature and kind of that life which the
Members of Christ do live; thus if the Members of Christ's Body be living
Members, and living Stones, then they live either by some gifts of spiritual
grace created in them, or else they live the uncreated life of the Holy Ghost,
communicated to them; but they do not live the uncreated life of the Holy Ghost
communicated to them; and therefore they live by the gifts of the spiritual
grace created in them. The former Proposition or Major is plain, because the
distinction is immediate, there is no middle way can be given, but either we
must live a created life, by some gifts of spiritual grace created in us; or
else we must live the uncreated life of the Holy Ghost communicated to us. The
latter Proposition (or Minor) is as plain; for no Creature (it being finite)
can live an increated life which is Infinite. But we are Creatures, and finite;
and the Life of the Holy Ghost, is increated, and infinite; and therefore we
cannot live his life.

Obj. The life of the Head and Members, Root and Branches is the same?

A. The Life of Christ's Humane Nature is not the infinite and uncreated life
of the Holy Ghost, which may serve for another proof of the latter Proposition,
that we do not live the uncreated life of the Holy Ghost communicated to us,
for we cannot live a higher or greater spiritual life, than the Humane Nature
of Christ lived.

But the Humane Nature of Christ lived, not the infinite and uncreated life of
the Holy Ghost; for the Humane Nature of Christ was not capable of the Infinite
Attributes of the Divine Nature, against which when Eutiches taught otherwise,
he was Condemned for an Heretic in the General Council of Chalcedon.

A. 1. The Comparison must be stretched no fureher than Christ intended, to
show the near Conjunction between Christ and us, so far, as that we derive and
receive continual nourishment, and supply of all Grace and Fruitfulness thereof
from him, but not to imply the same individual life in him, in us, as is in the
Root and in the Branches, Head and Members, for Root and Branches make but one
Tree, and Head and Members make but one Person: But we are not the same person
with Christ, and therefore we have a life not the very self same with his, but
conformable to his, and fashioned after his Image, the same with his in
proportion and resemblance (as is the Image of the Seal and the Wax) the same
in proportion, not the same in number; and this must needs be so, because the
Fathers before Christ had as truly the same Spiritual Life of Christ as we; the
Life of his Divine Nature, neither of us have; the Life of his Humane Nature
was not then in being; and therefore they had only proportion and resemblance
of his Life before his Coming, as we have after his Coming.

Reason V.
The fifth Reason is taken from the Change of the Heart in Conversion, it
stands thus? if in Conversion there be something anew created and begotten
in us, which was not created nor begotten before, then there be new Spiritual
Gifts, of grace begotetn and created in us. For the substance of the Soul and
Body is not anew created and begotten; it is the same it was before, and the
Holy Ghost cannot be said to be created or begotten in us at all. But in
Conversion the Lord does Create a new heart in us, Psalm. 51.10. and does
Regenerate or Renew a right spirit in us: Besides the Holy Ghost, of which he
says in verse 11. Take not thy Spirit from me: The Holy Ghost cannot be said
to be Created or Renewed, for he is no Creature, nor was he ever old; and in
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. He promises to put a new Spirit in us, v. 26. and besides
promises to put his own Spirit in us, ver. 27. and this Spirit and our Spirit
are made two distinct witnesses, Romans 8.16.

Reason VI.
The Sixth Reason is taken from the Law written in our hearts under the
Covenant of Grace; thus if there be a Law written in our hearts under the
New Covenant; then, either this is the Holy Ghost himself, or Spiritual gifts
of Grace, wrought in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, whereby we are fitted and
enabled (through his leading) to walk in the Law of God, and to keep it. But
there is a Law written in our hearts under the New Covenant Jer. 31.33. And
this Law is not the Holy Ghost himself, for it is the effect and work of the
Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 3.3. where it is said to be written by him. A Law or an
Epistle written by any man, cannot be the man himself that wrote it; nor is
this Law the acts of Holiness, for it is the power and authority that inwardly
commands them, and powerfully (as a Law) inclines them.

Reason VII.
The Seventh Reason is taken from the voluntary concourse of every Child of
God, with the Holy Ghost in every Spiritual Work: The Reason is framed thus? If
there be no Spiritual Gifts of Grace in the Soul united to Christ, then in
every good action, the Holy Ghost acts immediately in natural faculties and
affections to supernatural effects; as suppose he then acts by natural love,
to the Supernatural Love of God But in every good action, the Holy Ghost does
not act immediately the natural faculties and effect of Supernatural Effects.
Proofs of this,

If the Holy Ghost in every good action, do act immediately by natural faculty
or affection, to a Supernatural Effect; then in every good action, he turns
the course of my natural faculty or affection against his proper and voluntary
bent. For my natural faculty or affection, has no proper or voluntary bent to
spiritual good effects, but lusts against them, Romans 8.5. Gal. 5.17. But the
Holy Ghost in every good action does not turn the course of my faculty and
affection against their proper and voluntary bent: For then we should not do
good actions voluntarily, and then they would be unwelcome, and grievous to us,
contrary to 1 John 5.3. and then we should lose our reward, 1 Cor. 9.17.

Obj. But God himself is said to be our Gifts and Graces, and therefore they
are nothing but his Spirit in us; as God is said to be our confidence (which is
all one with Faith) Psalm. 65.5. So he is said to be our hope, Jer. 14.8. Psalm.
71.5. our love, or love it self. 1 John 4.16.

A. 1. God is said to be our confidence and hope, because he is the Object of
our Faith and Hope; and therefore we are said to put our confidence, or to
believe on him, 1 Pet. 2.6. Now if it were meant, God is the very Grace of
Faith, or Confidence which is in us, then when we believe or put our Confidence
on God, we should put God upon God, which were absurd; and if some things were
lacking in our Faith (as there is, 1 These. 3.10.) then some things were lacking
in God. And if it were meant that God is the grace of that Hope which is in us;
then, when David prayed he might not be ashamed of his hope; he meant that he
might not be ashamed of his God.

A. 2. God may also be said to be our Confidence or Hope, because he is the
Author and Giver of those Gifts to his People, Psalm. 119.49.

A. 3. God is said to be love, because whatsoever is good in the Creature, is
in God Eminently and Infinitely, and so is God himself; but if God were that
grace of love (which is said to abide in us. 1 Cor. 13.13. then God were a
fruit of the Spirit, for that love which dwells in us, is a fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

The good Lord scatter our darkness, and lead us by his Spirit of Light and
Truth, into all Truth through Christ.
Questions and Answers upon CHURCH GOVERNMENT: By Mr. John Cotton. Begun 25.11
m. 1634.
Q. WHat is the Church of God Ordained and Established in the New Testament?


A. The Church of God is a Mystical Body, whereof Christ is the Head; and the
Members be Saints, united together, in one Congregation, by an Holy Covenant,
to worship the Lord, and to Edify one another, in all his Holy Ordinances. Ephesians.
1.22, 23. Ephesians. 5.23. Romans 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.27, 28 Ephesians 1.18 1 Cor 1.2 Acts
2.47 1 Cor. 14.23 1 Cor 11.18, 20 1 Cor. 14.26, 31 Acts 7.38 Deuteronomy 5.2, 8 Exodus
24.3, 7 and Deuteronomy 29 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, to 13 2 Chronicles 15.12 2 Chronicles 23.16 and 29.9,
10 and 34.31, 32 Acts 2.42 Acts 9.26 and 7.38. Zach 11.10, 14 Phil 4.16, 17, 18
Heb 13.16, 17, 18


Q. What sorts of Members has God set in his Church?


A. Some of them are Ministers and Officers of the Church; others of them are
commonly called by the general name of Brethren and Saints. 1 Cor 4 1 1 Timothy
1.12 Col 4.17 Rom 12.8 1 Timothy 3.9, 10 Rom 11.13 Acts 15.22, 23 Romans 16.23 Col
1.2 Phil 1.1


Q. What sorts of Ministers, or Officers, has God set in his Church?


A. The Ministers, and Officers of the Church, are some of them Extraordinary,
as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists; some Ordinary, as Bishops and Deacons, Ephesians
4 21 1 Cor 12.28 Mark 10.15, 16 2 Cor 11.28 Acts 14 23 and 11.28, 29 and 21.8,
9 10, 11 Rom 12.6, 7, 8 Ephesians 4.11 2 Timothy 4, 5 Acts 15.37, 38 1 Timothy 3.4 Titus 1.5
Acts 21 Phil 1.1 1 Timothy 3.1, 2 Acts 20.17 compared with 28 Acts 6 34 1 Timothy 3.13,
14 compared with 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.


Q. What sorts of Bishops, has God Ordained in his Church?


A. There are three sorts of them, according as there be three sorts of Elders
in the Church, though under two heads; some Pastors, some Teachers, some Ruling
Elders; that is to say, such Elders as labor in Word and Doctrine; and such as
Rule the Church of God, 1 Timothy 1 13 1 Cor 12.28 Rom 12.7, 8 1 Timothy 5.17


Q. What manner of persons has God appointed to be called to the Office of a
Bishop, or Elders, in the Church?


A. A Bishop, or Elder, in the Church, must be to himself blameless for
Holiness and Righteousness, and of a clean heart from passions and lusts; or at
least blameless for passions and lust; also a vigilant man, and of good
behavior; also in his Family of good government, and of good hospitality; in
his Name of good report, of them that are without; in his Profession, not a
young Plant, a young Christian; but holding forth the word of truth, apt to
teach it, and to maintain it, 1 Timothy 3.2, to 7 Titus 1.6. to 9.


Q. What is the Work and Office of Pastors and Teachers?


A. The Office of a Pastor, is to attend to Exhortation, and therein to
Dispense a word of Wisdom. The Teacher is to attend unto Doctrine, and therein
to attend to a word of Knowledge. Ephesians 4.11 Rom 12.7, 8 Ezekiel 3.18, 19 Heb 13.17.


Q. What is the Office or Work of the Ruling Elder?


A. Seeing the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World, but Heavenly and
Spiritual; and the Government of his Kingdom is not Lordly, but Stewardly and
Ministerial, and to labor in Administration of Exhortation and Doctrine, is
the proper work of Pastor and Teacher: It remains to be the Office of the
Ruling Elder, to assist the Pastor and Teacher, in all other Acts of Rule
besides, as becomes good Stewards of the Household of God. And therefore to put
Instances: As, First, To open and shut the Poors of God's House, by Admission
of Members, by Ordination of Officers, by Excommunication of notorious and
obstinate Offenders. Secondly, To see none in the Church live inordinately,
without a Calling, or idly in their Calling. Thirdly, To prevent or heal
Offenses, either in Life or Doctrine, that might corrupt their own Church, or
other Churches also, if their Counsel be required. Fourthly, To prepare Matters
for the Church Consideration, and to moderate the carriage of all things in the
Church Assemblies; as to propound Matters to the Church, and order the season
of Speech and Silence. Fifthly, To feed the Flock of God with a word of
Admonition; and as they shall be called, to Visit and Pray over their Sick
Brethren, Rom 12.8 1 Timothy 5.17. Math 20.25, 26 Luke 12.42 Mat 16.19, 20 Acts
17.28, 29 Acts 14.23 Mat 18.17, 18 Rev 2.14, 15, 20 2 These. 3.10.11, 12 and
5.14 Acts 14.15 1 These 5.12, 13


Q What manner of men has God appointed to the Deacons Office?


A. Men of Gravity, and of good Report; not given to dissimulation, not to
Wine, nor to Coveteousness; Men full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, and holding
the Mystery of the Faith in a good Conscience, keeping their Household in a good
Rule; and injoyning, or having such Wives, as may neither dishonor, nor
corrupt their Callings; no slanderers, but grave and sober, and faithful in all
things, 1 Timothy 3.8, to 12


Q. What is the Office of the Deacons?


A. To Receive the Offerings of the Church, which are brought unto them, and
laid down before them, and therewith to serve Tables, to distribute with
simplicity, not only to the Ministers of the Church, but to any other of the
Brethren, as they shall have use or need, Acts 6.3, 6 Rom 12 8 1 Timothy 5.17, 18
(...) Cor 1^


Q. But is it not also the Deacons Office to (...) mercy with cheerfulness?


A. Yes verily, to their Brethren in Misery; but that part of their Office,
they chiefly perform by the hand of the Widows, which are Chosen into their
number, who are therefore called Deaconess, or Servant of the Church, Rom 12.8
Mic 7.18


Q. What manner of Widows has God allowed to be Chosen into this number?


A. Ancient Women, of Sixty Years of Age, well reported of for good works, for
nursing their Children, lodging Strangers, washing the Saints Feet, for
Relieving the Afflicted, and following diligently every good work, 1 Timothy 5.9,
10 Rom 6.


Q What manner of men are they whom God has appointed to be received as
Brethren and Members of the Church?


A. Such as are Called of God out of the World, unto the Fellowship of Jesus
Christ; and do willingly offer and join themselves, first to the Lord, and then
to the Church, by Confession of their Sins, by profession of their Faith, and
by laying hold of his Covenant, 1 Cor 1.2, 9 Isa 56.6 Psalm 110.2, 3 Acts 2.41,
47 and 9.26, 27, 28 Mat 3.6, 8 Acts 8.36, 37, 38 Psalm 50.5 Isa 56.6


Q. What is the Office of the Members or Brethren of the Church one toward
another: Or, What is the Office or Duty God calls Brethren unto, the Members of
the Church, as he is a Member which God calls all the Brethren unto?


A. Brotherly Love, and the fruits thereof, Brotherly Unity, and Brotherly
Equality; and Brotherly Communion.


Q Wherein stands that Brotherly Unity which the Members are to hold one with
another?


A. To be perfectly joined together in one mind and one Judgment, and one
speech, in one Truth; and when we cannot be of one Judgment, yet still to be of
one heart, not provoking nor envying one another, but forbearing, and
forgiving, not judging or despising one another, in differences of weakness;
but so far as we are come to walk together, by the same Rule, and to teach and
learn one another, the way of God more perfectly, till we all grow up in the
unity of the faith, unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 3.8. and 2.17 1
These 4.9 Heb 13.1 Ephesians 4.3, 4 Psalm 133.1 Col 3.15 Joh 17.20, 21 Deuteronomy 17.20 Mat
23.8 2 Cor 8.14 Acts 2 42, 46 and 4.32 and 2.1 1 Cor 1.10 1 John 5.20 Phil 2.1,
2 Ephesians 4.2.32 Rom 14.3, 22 Phil 3.16 Gal 6 16 Acts 18.26 Ephesians 4.13


Q. Wherein stands that Brotherly Equality we are to hold one with another?


A. In submitting our selves alike to all the Ordinances of God? and in
Enjoying alike all Christian Liberties, in preferring others above our selves,
and in seeking one another welfare, and feeling their Estate, as our own, in
bearing one another burdens in equal proportion; the sum is, Brotherly
Equality stands in equal submission to all Gods Ordinances; in equal fruition
of all Christian Liberties, in giving mutual honor alike, in seeking one
another welfare, equally in feeling one another Estate as our own; and
finally in applying our selves to one another burdens as our own, Gal 3.25
Deuteronomy 17.20 Ezekiel 46.10 Psalm 113.8 and 122 two last verses; and 42.4 Rom 12.10
Phil 2.3.1 Cor 10.20 Gal 5.13 Heb 13.3 Gal 6.2.


Q. Wherein stands the Brotherly Communion the Members are to hold one with
another?


A. In being steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and Worship and Ministration,
and for this end to dwell together, to watch over one another, to Resort
together, to the Public Assemblies, and there to join together in Holy Duties
with one accord, and as God has prospered them to lay up in store every
Lord's Day, for the Supply of the Saints. Acts 2.42 Psalm 133.1 Gen 14.13 Isa 5.8
1 These 5.14 Acts 18 26 1 Samuel 22.21, 22, 23 1 Samuel 9.22 Exodus 12.4 Psalm 122.1 2
Cor 9* 12 1 These 4.11, 12.


Q. What Worship and what part of it is first to be Administered when the Church
is Assembled?


A. The Apostle exhorts first of all, All manner of Prayers be made for all
men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all Godliness, and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2 1, 2. and 4.4, 5.


Q. Whether are Forms of Public Prayer Devised and Ordained by men, an
acceptable Service unto God?


A. If such Forms of Prayer had been an Ordinance of the Lord, and an
acceptable Service to him, doubtless Paul himself, or some of the Apostles
would not have held back that part of God's Worship from the Church. Again,
Public Prayer is a part of Public Ministry, as well as Prophesying, and the
Form of the one, no more to be taught by the Precepts of men, than the other;
and besides, both of them are alike, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, to whom it
belongs as well to teach us what to Pray, as how to Pray: Nor will it well
stand with the holy gesture of Prayer, which is to lift up the Eyes to Heaven,
to cast down the Eyes in Prayer upon a Book. 1 Cor. 4.15, 16. Romans 8.26 Joh
17.1 Joh 11.41 Psalm 123.1.


Q. What part of Gods Worship is next to be Administered after Prayer?


A. Before Prophesying, it will be necessary to Sing a Psalm, and then by some
of the Teaching Elders to read the Word, and with all Preaching to give the
sense, and applying the use, in dispensing whereof the Ministers were wont to
stand above all the people in a Pulpit of Wood, and the Elders on both sides,
while the people hearkened to them with Reverence and Attention, and they may
Prophecy by two or three, and let the other Judge. Also the Elders may call
upon any of their Brethren, whether of their own or other Churches to speak a
word of Exhortation to the People; and for the better Edifying a man's self or
others, it may be lawful for any young or old, save only for women to ask
questions at the mouth of the Minister. 2 Kings 3.15 Col 3.16 Neh 8.8 Luke
4.21.16 Neh 8 7, 8 1 Cor. 14 29, 34, 35 Luke 2.40.


Q. After the Ministry of the Word; what other part of God's Worship is next to
be Administered?


A. After the Word, which is the Covenant of God, the Seals of the Covenant are
next to be administered; and as for Baptism, it is to be dispensed by a Minister
of the Gospel, unto a Believer professing his Repentance and his Faith, being a
Member of the same Church-Body, and likewise to his Seed, presented by the
Parent, unto the Lord and his Church. At which time the Minister in God's room
calls upon the Parent, to Renew his Covenant with God, for himself and his
Seed, and calls upon God as the nature of the Ordinance requires, for the
pardon of Original Sin, and the Sin of the Parent, and likewise for a Blessing
upon the Sacrament, and the Infant, and then calling the Child by that name the
Parents has given it, for their own Edification and the Child's; he baptizeth
it, whether by dipping or sprinkling, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.38 Acts 16.31, 32, 36, 37, 38 1 Cor 10.16,
17 Acts 16.14, 15 1 Cor 7.14. Mat 3.11 1 Timothy 4.5 Luke 1.63 Mat 28.19.


Q. In what manner the Supper of the LORD is to be Administered?


A. The Lord's Supper is to be Dispensed by a Minister of the Word, unto the
Faithful of the same Body; or commended to them from a like Body; having
examined and judged themselves and sitting down with them at the Lord's Table,
before whom the Minister breaks the Bread, and blesses it, takes it, and
gives it to all the Brethren, with this Command, once for all, to take it, and
eat it as the Body of Christ broken for them* and this do in remembrance of
Christ: In like manner, he takes the Cup, and having given thanks, he pours
it forth, and gives it to them once for all, to take and drink it, as the
Blood of Christ shed for them, and this do in Remembrance of Christ; after all
he ends his Thanksgiving with Singing a Psalm. 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor 12.13, 14
Romans 10, 1, 2 2 Cor 3.1, 2 1 Cor. 11.28 Mat 26.26, 27, 28 1 Cor 11.24 Mat 26.30.


Q. How is the Collection for the Saints to be Administered?


A. The Collection for the Saints is is by the Apostles, ordered to be made for
the time, every Lord's Day, for the measure as God has prospered every one, for
manner not of Constraint, but willingly bro't as an Offering to God, and laid
down as at first before the Apostles; so afterward before the Deacons: And to
be laid up as in a Common Treasury, and by them to be Distributed to the supply
of the Ministers and poor Saints, according to their need, and all the Outward
Service of the Church. 1 Cor 16.1, 2 Deuteronomy 16.16.2 Cor 9.5, 7. Luke 21.1, 2, 3.
Acts 4.34, 35. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.18.


Q. What Duty of God's Worship is to be Administered in the dismissing of the
Assembly?


A. After all the parts of God's Public Worship have been Administered, the
Minister, or any of the Prophets is to Dismiss the Assembly with a word of
Blessing, offering Blessing unto the Lord, and putting a Blessing upon his
People. Numb. 6.23, 24* 2 Cor. 13, 14. 2 Samuel 6.18. 1 King. 8 66. 2 These. 3.17,
18.


Q. In what manner are the Public Duties of God's Worship to be Administered in
the Assemblies of the Saints in the Church?


A. In Spiritual Simplicity, without affectation of Legal Shadows, or Worldly
Pomp, or Carnal Excellency, decently and in order, and to Edification. Joh.
4.23, 24. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2. 1 Cor. 14.40.30.26. Col. 2.20.


FINIS.

