Select Essays, With some few Miscellaneous Copies of VERSES Drawn by Ingenious
Hands.

C^^^tis qui volvent, haec, haec mea Carmina Sancio.

Printed in the Year 1714.

A LETTER To a certain Gentleman that was (for no Reason) prejudiced against
the Author; making it his Business wherever he came to slander him. The Author
at a certain Time accidentally Over-hearing of him, the next Day sent him the
following Epistle -- Written 1712. Which (by your leave) shall serve for a
Preface to the READER.
HOLD! What would you be at Sir? Hold! -- Flankonade, Terce or Cart? A little
Time to draw in Kindness Brother. -- But why in such a Passion? -- Don't be so
hot.

Have patience and I Will tell you Who and What I am, you shall know some of my
Qualities, and then you may judge whether I Am a clean Beast.

Know then,

I Am an Indian, a freeborn Son of the Earth -- I Am a Gentleman by my Education.

I AM a very Generous, Good Humored, Honest Fellow. I Am seldom without a Penny
in my Pocket, never without Credit.

I AM no Churl, I Will eat and drink with any man, provided I think I Am welcome --
I Am such a loving Fellow there is scarce any like me; I love every Pretty Woman
I see, None comes amiss: The Tall, the Short, the Brown, the White;
Each one to me yields equally Delight.


I can kiss every thing that is Young and Clean, but yet (don't mistake me Sir)
I Have as nice a Taste as (Mr. --) any man.

I AM so far from being Quarrelsom that I can put by more Affronts than any
Block-head can throw at me: but yet, Good Sir, by the way assure your self,
I Have Courage enough to fight.

I HAVE a perfect, external, apprehensive Faculty; (as for the internal noli
tangere) Viz.

Imprimis, I can feel where a Shoe pinche's presently.

2. I CAN smell a Rat ( when he stink's) as well as another.

3. I CAN hear People whisper at a great Distance (Bed-room for that -- But
Mum.) I can likewise hear a great Noise when I open my Throat and hallow.

4. I HAVE such an exquisite Taste, that I can distinguish Good Nants Brandy from
Pump-water with my Eyes shut -- Therefore Joan's not as good as my Lady.

5. IN a clear Night when the Full Moon is at its Height above our Horizon, or
in a clear Day when the Sun is in our Meridian, I can then see either of 'em (
If my Eyes are open) without the Use of a Telescope.

THERE are five Senses for you certain, and now for my sixth Sense. -- Prithee
what d'y'e stare at? -- My sixth Sense I tell you, and why not? Why may n't I
have Scaliger's sixth Sense of Titillation as well as another?

Believe me Sir your Actions have tickled me sufficiently; your nibling at,
your undermining of me so prettily (and all by the way of Advice too) has given
me as much Cause of Laughter, as ever the sottish, Thistle-eating Ass gave the
Philosopher. -- Upon my word Sr. I Have laughed at you very heartily.

AND now to Conclude.

SEVENTHLY and Lastly then, I Would have you know that I Am not that Mighty Colossus
of Debauchery as you imagined; I Am so far from it, that I Am quite Antartic to
the Idea which you have of me. Therefore since you're mistaken in the Person,
Good Sir sheathe your Rapier and Whiniard; and assure your self that to All
Those who are my Superiors I pay due Reverence, my Equals I treat with all the
Courtesy and Good Manners that I am Master of; and I (...) toward my
Inferiors with as much Generosity.

I do to All Men (to the utmost of my Power) as I would be done by.

And though mean as I am in your Eyes, yet let me tell y'e I^m very well beloved
by Those that know me perfectly; and though You and many Others are pleas^d to
look upon me as a very dissolute Fellow, a RAKE of the first Rank and
Magnitude, a Mere --; yet notwithstanding (believe me Sir) I dare maintain this
Paradox, that I Have far better Principles, (and I dare say Morals) yea, better
than Thousands that censure me.

Dixi.

PS.

Sir, This comes from One, who in reality wishes you more innocent Pleasure and
solid Happiness in this World, than ever was desired by the unbounded Appetite
of the most voluptuous Epicure; and Eternal Happiness hereafter.

I take my Leave. -- And had I now as many Hands as Briareus, I Would employ 'em
all in writing my self ('spite of your Incivility)

Sir, Your Friend and most humble Servant.

To the Reverend Mr. Peter Thacher, Pastor of the Church of Milton.
WHat Method shall I take, O Reverend SIRE,
To praise YOUR Merit?
My fainting Muse want's Power to strike her Lyre.
Were but my Muse as Great as You are Good,
My Verses should not march the common Road,
But tower aloft;
In highest Harmony should speak your FAME,
And mounting rise like Pyramids of Flame;
So high!
That Nothing but the famed Maeonian Flight
The immortal Iliads should reach their Height:
I Would make them in harmonious Numbers move,
And lead them on with Reverence and Love;
My ravished Soul should breathe pathetic Lays,
Lofty as Those
Which Virgil sung to great Augustus' Praise
But ah, alas!
My Tr^^ MUSE disconsolate (...),
And cannot reach such high heroic strains:
My Muse scarce fledged, yet spreads her callow Wings,
And comes abroad and as She can She Sings.
Since then her Will is good, You cannot (...)
TO accept the Presents of an humble Muse.
But humble as She is, She Would fain aspire
"To write good Sense, with true Britannic Fire.
And now.
Though BICKERSTAFF does Imitators hate,
I hope these Lines will not make me share their Fate,
Since it is Great Him alone I imitate.
HE praises Merit only where it is due,
And I don't deviate in praising you.
But let me tell you,
That it is not Gratitude that moves my Pen,
(I owe you nothing more than other Men)
Nor is it foolish OSTENTATION,
But it is your Merit, Sir, that urges on
My willing Pen:
Therefore believe me now, could I but find
One more deserving,
Of all the Sacred Tribe that is left behind,
,Among the remaining, meritorious Few,
It Is He alone should have my Praise, not You.
Yet I Am not prejudiced but strictly bear
Due Reverence to Christ's Ambassador.
Therefore all-hail! Hail venerable Sage,
Arrayed with Piety, and good Old Age!
Go on my Muse.
I would, but I despair, and cannot paint
The awful Virtues of so great a Saint,
Who Inaccessible soars far above
All but our Admiration and our Love;
And cannot be described: Therefore like Him
I Am forced to make use of Stratagem,
Who, at the Painting of a Funeral,
Its sable, melancholy Weeds and all
Its black Array,
With exquisite and Artful Strokes
Portrayed each fashionable Mourner's Looks;
Their sad Grimace and counterfeited Grief,
O wing to kind Magnetic Handkerchief:
But when the Painter came to represent
The Face of real Grief,
Each Feature bid Defiance to his Paint.
He stopped, --
And fearing in the great Attempt to fail,
Over the afflicted Father drew a Vail:
Teaching the Lookers on by that dumb Show,
To form Abstract-Ideas of his Woe.
Thus, and for this alone, these Lines came forth,
Only to point at your Meridian Worth.
To His Excellency FRANCIS NICHOLSON.
ROme had her Scipio. Carthage her Hannibal:
Every Age boasts some brave GENERAL.
Those God-like Heroes that have gained a Name,
And stand recorded in the Lists of Fame;
Those whom the World do Great and Glorious call,
They 're all complete in our brave General:
We have Scipio and Hannibal in ONE,
They both survive in our Great NICHOLSON.
Written in the Inimitable PARADISE Lost.
GReat Milton in this Book has told us more,
Than ever Man or Angel did before:
His wondrous Vision do 's Admiration claim
From All who 've heard the Trumpet of its fame.
Inspired he does in mighty Numbers tell,
How the accursed Apostate Angels fell
Through dismal CHAOS headlong into Hell.
His Daring Muse came down from Blessed Abodes,
To sing Great Battles of the Warring Gods.
His Muse on fire with an Immortal Flight
"Leads out the Warring S^^^^^ims to fight.
Of Love and War in high harmonious Lays
He treats, and sings his great Creator's Praise.
He tells how the ALMIGHTY did create
Adam and Eve, and sings their happy State;
How placed in Eden, in those Blessed Abodes,
And were but little inferior to (Angels)
Gods:
How Monarch Adam before 's unhappy Fall
Triumphantly did Lord it over all,
Made Happy and Immortal, Free from Harms,
And crowned by Heaven, with the all-sacred Charms,
Of his fair Consort Eve.
Ten thousand Things, all inexpressible
He sings besides,
Which Milton's Self can only speak and tell.
In Praise of Woman. A Copy of Verses sent, to Cynthia, from Passamaquoddy (an
Indian Harbor in the Bay of BUNDY.
RIse mighty Seraph, breathe Seraphic Lays,
Rise Heavenly Muse, and sing fair Woman's Praise.
I ought to have an Angel's Muse and Mind,
To sing and speak of charming Womankind:
Would Heaven that I could sing like one of Those,
(And had such Laurel wreathed around my Brows)
Like Those who live above in the Blessed Abode,
And in full Choire praise their Almighty God;
Archangels, Angels, Seraphs and Cherubims
To their Creator chant harmonious Hymns,
And sacred Hallelujahs.
Inspired begin, begin my Muse and treat
Of Womankind, your Subject's Good and Great.
When God Almighty his great Work had done,
And all Things made excepting Eve alone,
Except fair Eve, except that charming Fair,
Whose Make alone was God's peculiar Care,
Then our Great God our Father Adam placed
In Paradise, which was with all things graced;
He gave him Paradise, fair Eden's Land,
All the Creation was at his COMMAND:
Beast, Fish and Fowl they did await his Call,
And he triumphant LORDED over all.
Yet Adam's not content: -- he is alone;
He begs of his Great God to give him one
That Is like himself: -- God hearkens to his Prayer,
And gives him one to Admiration fair,
A charming Woman! which he no sooner spie's
But he is led Captive by her conquering Eyes:
Sraitway he bow's, kneel's down, and does adore
Her sacred Charms; -- all Eden's Joys before
Scarcely could please; -- Eve was his only Bliss,
It Was Eve alone was all his PARADISE.
The Author's Friends persuading bim to marry a rich young Lady, he sends the
following Verses to CYNTHIA.
FEar not my Dear, I am and will be yours,
And you are mine in spite of all their Powers,
Who strive, but all in vain, who strive to move
"The settled Base of my Immortal LOVE.
Chloe 's your Rival, She Is chaste and fair withal,
Modest, and armed with Gold which conquers all.
This is the Person chosen by my FRIENDS,
Who bid me love, and think they 've gained their Ends:
And really I could love, if so 't had been
That I my charming Cynthia never had seen;
But since I Have been so happy as to know
The Place, where Happiness dwells here below,
Since I have known my Cynthia, her I Will hold,
And scorn fair Chloe and her powerful Gold.
Let Friends preach on, and cant of That and This,
Teaching that Riches is the ONLY BLISS:
I better know, for higher is my Aim,
My Soul's on Wing and fly's at nobler Game
Than paltry Wealth; her Theme 's almighty Love,
Image of those Seraphic JOYS above.
I Will never believe there is any Gold in Heaven,
Nor will I think the unbounded Soul was given
To Monarch Man to Idolize such Pelf:
The Soul's Delight consists in Love It self.
What is the Soul?
Zeno the Stoic held the Soul was FLAME,
Others a Something -- which yet want's a Name:
Xenocrates would have the Soul confined
To NUMBER only; -- thus he formed the Mind:
But Aristoxenus would have it be
(And right enough) transcendent Harmony.
Heaven's all Harmony, and down from Thence
The Soul first came to MAN; from whence
I argue this same, mighty Soul to be
(With Aristoxenus) all HARMONY.
Now further then --
True Love is Harmony, from whence I prove,
The Soul being Harmony it is also Love.
The Penitent: Written in 1712.
I Have Sinned too long to hope for Mercy, yet
There is a God as Merciful as Great.
My Sins are great and numerous as those
Numerous Atoms which do the World compose.
Help me dear JESU!
Look down upon me from thy blessed Abode,
Dear JESU help, help dear Incarnate God!
Were I again to retrograde my Days,
And tread once more the World's mysterious Maze,
The Subject of my Thoughts should always be
On my Great God, and Deep Eternity:
I Would live not to my self but unto HIM;
And whatsoever I said, my God should be the Theme.
For such a Life as this,
I might be sure of Endless Bliss,
And boldly claim my promised Paradise.
Grim Death with all his Terrors should not frighten me,,
I would not ask to live, I Would sooner court to be
Free from the Chains of dull Mortality.
Then should I wish for that once blessed Day
For my Great God to call me hence away;
To hear my Heavenly Redeemer call,
Come Thou Blessed -- thy Sins are pardoned all.
Then, then
I Would bless my Fate, that 'twas my Fate to die,
With Joy unspeakable I would receive my Doom,
And Glorious I,
Winged by my Faith, would mount Elysium.
Lucifer in Chains.
OF Night and Erebus ye gloomy (Angels)
Gods
Who live in Acherusian, dark Abodes!
Tell me ye Fiends, had it not better been
For you Cocytus' Waves to have never seen?
How ye came there I need not ask, I know
'Twas Pride that damned ye to the Shades below:
Pride forged the Plot, Ambition led ye on
(Presumptuous Rebels) your Maker to dethrone.
With Rebel Troops ye faced the Eternal God,
Hoping to drive him from his Blessed Abode:
Headed by Lucifer ye scaled the Throne
Of your Great Maker, the Almighty One.
Archangels soon marched out in God's Defense,
And Rebels as ye were, they drove ye thence.
Ah! cursed Fiends! whom Lust of Power sent
From the highest Heav'en to utter Banishment:
'Twas then ye all,
With Lucifer, that ARCH-APOSTATE, fell,
By Micha'el driven from Seats of Bliss to Hell:
Cursing your God, and filled with black Despair,
Headlong ye tumbled through the liquid Air;
To Hell ye went and there must ever live,
Infinite Years will not bring ye a Reprieve;
When Myriads of Ages there y' 'ave been,
Nay Millions of Myriads, ye 'll but begin
To feel the Almighty's Wrath, that is justly due
To Lucifer and all his Rebel-Crew:
Ye must tormented lie to endless Time:
A Punishment as Infi'nite as your Crime.
Soon as the great and dread Assise shall come,
This Rebel-Lucifer, will be your Doom,
To gloomy Flames to be chained down for ever,
Never to be reprieved, no, never, NEVER:
Doomed to Hell Flames, to endless Misery,
Always dying, yet want the Power to die;
Sunk to the Center of PERDITION, there to be
To unconceivable ETERNITY,
In horrid Chains, groaning beneath the Load
Of Vengeance thundered from an angry God.
ESSAYS. Of the Great and Little World.
I Adventure Danger, when about the Ides of January, I will Endymion-like go
gaze the Moon, or in her Silence hear the Language of the Stars; for I am fixed
as if Medusa'd to a Statue; my Soul does lascivire inter stellas, and forgets
it is espoused to Flesh and Blood; Injurable by Frost-biting, choosing (it
seems) rather to be Unbodied, than Unheavened; it leans so far without my
Window, that an other Blast will puff it out, and freeze up the Casements; I
stand here as if Nero had befriended me, and sent me my Choice of Death, and I
would need's die in this Vein; Oh! the Nectar of Contemplation, the Return of
it is superlatively gainful, and wins a man to make a Voyage in the greatest
Difficulties: Though a Friar, yet it is Truth when he tells you, that in
Contemplatione Men's illuminatur, Cor Amore inflammatur, Mundus contemnitur,
etc. and, from the Coryphaeus of Philosophers in his Ethics, look's upon
Contemplation as the Queen Regent of all sublunary Bliss, and Inthrones her in
a triumphant Chariot. Doubtless the Thoughts that are whistled this way are
very well flown; they are as so many Bees that come home Crura Thymo plena,
laden with Meditation. When I view the whirling Heavens, and revolve their
Motions, when I observe those called Errantes Stellae not fail to accomplish a
certain Course, to keep such Exactness in their Irregularities, that a
Prognosticator will give you a Prediction of the most shadowed Eclipses, in the
clearest Sunshine; when I see the nimble Spheres dancing their unerring
Rounds, I readily assent to their Harmony, so much disputed. While mine Eye is
terminated with the Firmament, I admire without a Limit; when I see Born Azure
Fretted, or cold Arctophylax, Volant Pegasus a Croissant, and the other,
Asteris^^^, and the POLES, as a Bend-sinister, and when deflecting mine Eye I
behold a Field Vert, charged with such Variety of Blossoms, so many Rampant and
Couchant, and my self a poor Creature Passant, and yet in Chief to the Rest,
ere now I have wondered to Ecstasy, and conclude my Tongue was made for nothing
more, than to dwell on the Praises of that Glory and Excellency that owns this
Coat Armor. When I behold the Radiant Sun, and find him roll in the Zodiac as
in a Wheel, when I note how he forms his Course in the Ecliptic, how well he
knows his regress having touched either Tropic, I assure ^^e there is a Hand
which is STRENGTH' in Abstracto, that wields this useful Instrument, and also
as much that trims this Lamp unto the World. When I consider too the Circuit of
the Earth, more than twenty three thousand Miles, yet of no Moment in Respect
of the Heavens, this constrains me to acknowledge the Great Immensity of the
Aetherial Orbs; if I should doubtfully query their Vastness, I should cloud the
Sun again, and inscribe my Understanding with a Beam; for when without
Mathematical Assistance, I can see it much bigger than the Earth, nay, when I
have more than probable Conjectures from its Parallax, and the Earth's
Pyramidal Shadow, that it exceeds it in Magnitude many hundreds of times, that
Sol Apogens is distant from us, or rather that the Planet Earth in its Aphelion
is distant from the Sun, more than twenty two thousand Semi-diameters of the
Terrestrial Globe, yet no higher, nay scarce so high as the Midst of the
Planets, and when I see what small Proportion even this Great Orbit bear's to
the expanded Skies, I am lost in the Wideness of the Eighth Sphere; and will
say, certainly if a (...) ^^eature would fill our capacious Spirit I had found
it. Were I merely Ethnic, surely this curious Piece would drive me to a
Metaphysical Search; the Power* and Glory evident in that, would lead me to
this, and for ever and ever might well serve me to proclaim an Atheist the most
admired Fool in Rerum Natura, to be one that denies the Light, who upon first
Assent to his Irrational Thoughts, ipso facto, runs himself into a Praemunire,
forfeits all his Senses, and deserves to suffer a Confiscation of all enjoyed
Good, without a two Months Liberty to Recant. -- I Will esteem him a Furioso,
that does not lucidis gaudero Intervallis; his Heart is the only empty Cask in
Nature, for take what you will besides, and say with the Poet, Jovis omnia
plena. Sometimes I conceive the World a Building, the Earth a Floor, palliated
with a green Carpet-Covering, the Heavens a Roof, bespangled with exquisite
Ornaments, and revere the Wisdom of a Mighty Architect. When I see such
Magnificence in Vestibulo, in the Vault, in communi Atri^, surely the Sanctum
Sanctorum is beyond Description. We live here in the very Bottom of Nature, and
think full little Who and What are on the Top of the Context. Oh! methinks I
have something of it in Intellectu, by fleeting Glances, that never was in
Sensu. Sometimes I call the World a Table spread, and observe Satisfaction for
every Sense, dished out in proper Objects; What Orient Colors are brought in
to please the Eye, to delight the Ear, what Melody is enclosed in the Breasts
of Birds, so well instructed in Song, that every Grove becomes a Quire? What
silken Softness have we for the Touch, what Cates and Tastful Viands for the
daintiest Palate; what Odoriferous Scents, what perfumed Airs do we meet with
to feast our other Sense? What Abundance of Sweetness is bound up in the small
Volume of a Flower? I read no less than a Deity in the few Folio's of a Damask
Rose; and hence I conclude that Nature has not left my Soul Objectless, but
that there is somewhere a Truth for my Understanding, and Goodness for my Will.
Again, my Heart is elated above the ordinary Level of Admiration, when I
perceive this Sublunary World, top full of Things, as contrary as Fire and
Water, Earth and Air, yet to subsist by one another, nay, which is more, when I
see them made In-mates in one Mansion, and how peaceably they co-habit in the
same Subject, in Gradu remisso, I cannot but attribute their Accord to a
Soverain Arm and Guidance. When on a Promontory I fix my Foot on firm Earth,
while mine Eyes launch out into the Main, and see the Billows come wallowing
one in on the Neck of another, as if they mutually encouraged themselves to an
Universal Deluge; yet when they some and make a Noise as unkennelled, I may
soon observe them at the End of their Chain. While the Ocean swells it self
into Alps of Water, and the Brow of it is so furrowed with Rage, that every
Wave threatens to write me among the Dead, suddenly all is cut off with a Dash.
When I behold this diffusive Element stand upon an Heap, sure there is some
hitherto and no further that it hears in its loudest Roarings, and that is
Gates and Bars to it. When I look on the Reciprocation of the Waters, I feel a
Spring of Thoughts at the highest Flow within me, and go beyond the Moon to
find a Cause. Sometimes I look upon the Use of a Sea, and conceive great Mercy
and Wisdom in placing of it; those heavenly Buckets that pour out refreshing
Showers on the parched Soil are dipped in this Cistern, and it is as the Liver to
the Body, fills the Earth with irriguous Veins. Again, when I see the Earth
once every Day muffle it self in its own Shadow, and that the Dark may not be
irksome to us, our busy Eyes are as often closed by a Law of Rest, which upon
pain of Death, we may not long infringe with a watchful Disobedience, for, quod
caret alterna Requie durabile non est. Now while we sleep the Night steed's us
for a Curtain, the half of the Term of our Life runs out in a sleepy Vacation
of Senses, and is most pleasurable, though least lightsom; in this I adore a
Supreme Wisdom. The withering Grass likewise is no less beholden to the Night,
than our heavy Heads, for now the heavenly Limbecs do distill their rared
Influence; and that there may be a Growth in Vegetables, a nightly Moisture
mingles it self with the Heats by Day. But while I stand admiring thus, here is
one within tells me I need not go fish for Wonders in the Deep, or climb the
Height of Heaven for Heaven, for my self am one. -- Indeed when I reflect on
the Structure of my Body, I see it is not ordinary; my Stature is Erect when
other Creatures grovle. I have a Privilege of looking up, when other Creatures
stand Mottoed with a pro-naque com spectant. Is there a more exact Work than
our Head, here all the Senses keep their Rendezvous, lie Ledger to give
Intelligence: If an Object that carries any Color with it comes, the Eye
note's it immediately, if it make a Noise the Ear catches it, and so of the
Rest. But when I remember (that) whereby I work all this and more, I am arrived
at an Height of Admiration; If you demand me of it, I will say it is some
strange Divine Thing, but what I know not; it is called a Soul, a most active
Being I Am sure it is: It is ever grinding, if you rake it up in the Ashes of a
Sleep, it will glow in a Dream. It is fixed in a Microcosm, but yet not to be
contained by the immense Macrocosm; it is placed in the Orb of a minute Body,
but raises it self further than the Sun, will pierce the most solid Substance,
rest not in a few Objects, though a single one may sometimes like a Glass collect
its Beams into a Flame -- Oh! the Soul that can drag the past and future Time
to the Bar of present Consideration, that will in my most retiredness discourse
to me of various Matters; this Cosmographical Spirit, that can show me the
Heavens and the Earth as in Land-skip in the darkest Room, oh! the Swiftness of
its Motion, 'twill beat against East and West like a Bean in a Bladder, with
less Noise and more Nimbleness; Lightning to it is Leaden-heeled, and the Wink
of an Eye the Consumer of too much Time to stand in Compare. Sometimes I look
on my Sway in the World, and observe all the visible Creation bow down to me,
the Sun, Moon and Stars wait upon me, but, what shall all this fill my Life
with Pride as my Mind with Marvail? No. If I see nothing greater than my self
to arrogate my Service, yet I cannot deem me absolute, or that I am mine own
Man, for my Hands and Shoulders, and other Parts are a Lecture to me for the
Labor of my Body; my Station here mind's me I must be busied in Contemplation;
for I look on the Earth as a green Bank, recovered from the Waters for me to
stand unmovedly, while I behold the tossing Seas, and turning Spheres, and all
Things else in Agitation; now to be thus tasked, denotes my Condition to be
that of a Servant. I further know my Subjection by mine Ignorance, -- that
Being I have, when I received it, I was merely patient, how I was brought
hither, I have it not in mine own Knowledge; if those about me had conspired,
it had been more easy to have made me believe the Eternity of my self, a part
ante, than the Atheist a part post. That I had a Beginning is delivered me by
Tradition, confirmed by the Motions of Accretion and Diminution in my self and
others; for I was lighted I know not how, or when. Again, in the Administration
of Things, their Order is not from any Law of mine, -- and I might well be
called Aesop's foolish Fly, should I think my self able, to make the very Dust
that made me. Now while I ruminate these and a thousand more, as I pass by in
the World, I look for something greater than it: It seems to me unreasonable,
that a Work so absolute and uniform should want ^n Efficient, that I should
with the Peripatetics suppose it to be Eternal, seeing it is an ENS ex
Participatione, or with Empedocles sit shuffling in a dusty Cell 'till I have a
World out of Atoms. No, but I Will resolutely say, such Wise Position, and
Administration of Things was never casual. But I search and wonder, and
tremble, for I find my self not far from an Immense Being, that I thus grope
after, and say if a Light were brought into the Room, I should find my self in
the Everlasting Arms of a Father or an Enemy. These Things I read by the
Hieroglyphica of the Creatures, in the A, B, C of Nature, without the Help of
the WORD: for as to the Book of WORKS, I will call it, compared with that of
the WORD, of later Edition, of more Perfection; This is the unmasking of the
Other's Frontispiece, this lead's me, and refers them to an Almighty God, here
manifested in his several Subsistances, and Attributes. I have it here in plain
Words, what was but pointed at in the other: But I will not undertake to unfold
its Excellencies in words of Praise, for I should extend my self further than
the Length of an Essay, and should certainly as one has it Magna Modis
atteruare parvis. He that question's its Worth, instead of an Answer, shall be
deservedly blamed as neglectful of reading Holy Scripture, and vehemently
suspected for a profane Absenter from Divine Assemblies, where this Subject is
often inculcated by Oratory of the Church. When I have weighed the Premises, I
am troubled, that I have so truanted formerly, and cannot now but resolve to
quit my self with more Diligence in this Spiritual Literature; here a Man may
be Librorum Helluo, without Offense. I trust now, when I have mentioned
Characters of Sun, Moon, Heaven and Earth, and the other Creatures, I shall be
able to put them together, and make them spell Infinite Wisdom, and Power, etc.
From the Earth I learn to contemplate, from the Heavens I learn to add Motion
and Practice to my Speculat^^^. When I see how the dead Earth water's and
serves the vegetable, they the Sensitive, and they the Rational Creatures and
when I see how this Subordination keeps every Thing entire, let me hence also
learn Duty; let me remember though I am exalted quite above all these, yet
there is a Higher than the Highest, to whom I am in all Humbleness to stoop, as
they to me. -- If I would have Things go well, and if my Ox knows his Owner,
and my Ass his Master 's Crib, let them teach me to know him from whom I have
received all, and to whom I owe all. When I see the Largeness and Capacity of
my Soul, I will learn betimes to decline the small and narrow Creature, and
search an Object able to better it, able to fill it. And that I may be more
skilled in God's Sacred Oracles, I shall desire to meditate in it Day and
Night, to use it on all Occasions as a Medicine for every Disease: If I am in
doubt, I Will make it my Counselor; if in Affliction. I Will make this sure and
stayed Word my Support; if I am in Darkness and see no Light, here I will stay
my self; when I see mine Ignorance, I Will esteem this able to give Understanding
to the Simple; When I would lance my Soul, I will make Use of this two edged
Sword; when it is fit to be healed again, why this is Balm from Gilead. If I am
poor, I will take pains for this Treasure, more Worth than much fine Gold;
Pearls and Rubies are not to be compared to it: By this I may learn Godliness,
which is great Gain --.If I am rich, this Book will teach me that a Man 's
Health does not consist in the Abundance he possesses, and that Riches have
Wings --.If Sorrow take hold of me, the sweet Consolations here, are as Health
to the Navel, and as Marrow to the Bones --.If the Trouble be General, I have
here Direction where to rest at Noon. In a Word, If I would lean off from that
I feel slipping away and perishing, and repose my self upon what is firm and
lasting, let me relinquish each Worldly Confidence, and rest upon this WORD,
which shall be the Superstes of all Changes, and stand unshaken upon the Ruins
of Heaven and Earth.

Of the Goods of Fortune.
TO he a Husband, a Father, a Master, to be decked with many pendulous and gaudy
Additions; to soar with the Wings of Honor, to abound in Coin and Cattle, to
possess sumptuous Buildings, and large Territories I will not be ambitious; for
I see what Inconveniences attend the Flow of Temporals. This Abundance, and
these Titles, I cannot call them (as some) Privileges from, but rather Sluices
and immediate Inlets to, Trouble and Danger. To have Wife and many Children, is
but to extend a Man's Body to larger Dimensions, and to expose it to more
Inevitable Aim. The greatest Master is (no question) the veriest Servant to
Employment, and the richest Man finds the most Care and Work, to keep and
dispense that that gives him that Denomination. Has a Man a Plurality of
pleasing Accommodations, they are but as so many Places made bare, where he is
sensible of the least Lash of Fortune; he is an Instrument of many Strings, one
or other always fails or is out of Time, which spoil's his Symphony; these are
all to him as superfluous Members, which are a Burden, have Sense and so fit
to suffer in, but want Motion to stand a man in Stead; the Use and Employment
of them is nothing else but a vain Expense of vital Spirits, when a Condition
of Want preserve's them per Antiperistasin, and commonly number's more Years:
The highest Places are most obnozious to Variation, the Sun never so near a
Declension as in the vertical Meridian. May I not say many, nay most that have
sceptered in the World, have been rapt out of it violently, as if they perished
by Fascination, from the many malevolent Eyes that dart upon them --. Julius
Caesar that he may be woefully miserable, his Chair of State shall be his
Deathbed, where he feels no sewer than twenty three Wounds, and sees Brutus,
even Brutus' self among the Conspirators; Crassus for all his Bags shall be
slain, and so shall valiant Pompey, surnamed the Great, who though he got an
old Shirt for a Winding Sheet, yet he could not be supplied with Funeral Fire
enough to consume his Body: Lamentable was the End of Mark Anthony, and many
other Emperors and noble Personages among the Romans. In the Carlovignian Race
of France, when Charlemain their first western Emperor was once gone, we may
behold many tragical Catastrophe's after glorious Scenes; Lewis the Gentle
afflicted with three Rebel Sons grieves to death, Charles the Gross without
Love and Honor, yea House and Bread at his End. If you peruse Turkey a little,
you shall find the mighty Amurath the Inlarger of the Empire, thrown down from
the Top of Victory; you may see the renowned Bajazeth, who had hovered aloft
like a royal Eagle, and preyed upon much rich Booty, mewed up in an Iron Cage,
and Way to go out of the World being so blockt up, that he was forced to knock
out his Brains against the Grate to invent a Death. I abound too much in
Examples of this Kind, and yet I must not pass by the great Monarchs of the
World without their due Observance. Their Estate I warrant is higher than
Olympus, above the middle Region, and freed from all Storms of Disquiet? Surely
no, even they may join in the Chorus, and say with the Rest, Quanti Casus
humana rotant,
Minus in parvis Fortuna furit
Levinsque etc.
Blind Chance is ever on the Stage,
Yet adverse Fortune least does rage
In smallest Things, and what below
Escapes ever with the lightest Blow;
Obscurity enjoys most Rest,
In Cottages Men sleep the best.


Darius and Alexander Heads of the second and third Monarchies, see how they
knock one against another, both snatched away unnaturally, and how many of the
Caesar's in the fourth Kingdom were early cropped? I might in Infinitum multiply
Instances in this Kind, for each Page of History is stufft with such; the Life
of a Great-One is a Song of an imperfect Mood, in triple Tune, where the Hand
stay's up but little; and though a Man must be beholden to the Figure
Antonomasia, if he meant to flatter him, and run fine Divisions upon his Glory,
yet his very Name, and the Individeum Demonstrativum that point's him out is (
miserable) such as they are; and as they are higher by Head and Shoulders than
others, so the massy Weight of governing an untoward World presses them down,
when a Dwarf shall feel no Burden: like proud Atlas that shall bear the
Heavens, when the little Hills nothing but Fruit and Flowers and what
delights. And Vrsa Minor shall always keep above the Horizon, when the great
Orion is once a day lower than the Antipodes. A mean Condition is farthest
distant from the Zodiac of Danger, therefore well sung the Poet, Saepius ventis
agitatur ingens
Pinus; and celsae graviore casu
Decidunt turres; feriuntque summos
Fulmina montes.
Winds oftnest shake the Pine Tree tall,
The loftiest Towers have the greatest Fall,
And Thunder strikes the Top of all the Mountains.


The French Proverb is very little different.

The Cottage last's a Sanctuary to the Clown,
When Dint of Thunder throw's high Turrets down.
The low Estate is PLINY's Lauri Frutex, that is privileged from Thunderbolts,
from terrible Blows, when Pinnacles, when Heights of Dignities cannot escape
them: and as Honor and high Places, so Riches (which they call Goods) have a
Train of many Evils. A Naboth for his Vineyard shall be accused of Blasphemy
and Treason, the rich Brutian in Plutarch shall be made an Outlaw for his
Wealth, when a poor Man though a Delinquent shall be reckoned amongst the
innocent Subjects. It was not for Nothing therefore that the wise Phocion, the
learned Seneca, and the just Aristides made choice of Poverty as the best
Estate; such have commonly Safety and Contentment, when a CAIUS MARIUS a
seven-times Consul and Coacervatior of golden Mountains, through Ambition of
more Wealth and Honor fret's to death. Some instead of using, they serve their
Gold; the Great-One in the Tragedian was no other.

Ille superbos adiens Regum,
Durasque fores expers Somni
Colit, ac nullo fine beatas
Componit Opes, Gazis inhians;
Et congesto pauper in Auro est.
His waking Thoughts contrive a way
The royal Scepter how to sway;
Mean while he hoard's up endless Store
Of Treasures, thirsting still for more,
Amidst huge Heaps of Gold is poor.
Besides, all this Greatness and Plenty does not only more certainly and
speedily procure Calamities, but renders a Man less able to bear them when they
come. Prosperity is such a Hypocaustum, such a hot Bath, and does so open the
Pores, that every the least Breath of Air enters and turn's to a Disease. Every
Cross has its Operation on a Minion of Fortune (for the most part) like a
Fever on a full Body; touch him either in his Chair or in his Chest, and you
have pricked his Venam Arterialem, and whatever issue's forth is from his Heart;
he is a Vessel of pure Glass, the least Dash will violate him, when a Clod of
Earth will endure a second Assault. A Man that beyls in Pleasure, he like the
Water so spends himself in Evaporation, that thereby being made thinner and
hotter, he is the more unable to resist a violent Congelation. Admit the same
Affliction befall the unregarded Underling and the admired Hero, I am certain
the other had this Benefit, that it warned him before it came, afforded him a
Preparation-time to fit him self for a Victory, either by Doing or Suffering,
when this is as one taken by an Ambushment, a Man Iulled asleep that gives his
Enemy leave to shoot first, which is commonly mortal; it is no ordinary
Disadvantage to be wallowing in Delights, and so in strong Expectation of Good,
and then to be overtaken with an Evil, nil liberata Morte ferocius. While I
remember these Things, let me go away contented proprie forte, and say it is
sufficient I have Food and Raiment, Quod sufficit me frui paratis; non Cithara
carentem, (as in the Ode) that I enjoy, and find a Taste in what I meet with,
possess a Viol, and if Heaven should hereafter distill a golden Shower into my
Lap, let it not swell me, but let me rather tremble to receive such Extatics,
not knowing what their Effects may be, and may I so practice their moderate
Use, that when I am called to account I may not be afraid to show my Bill of
Expenses; or if I meet now and then with hard Occurrences, let me remember that
it is the Lot of more noble Conditions than mine own, therefore let it not much
move me, for it is a heavy Weight that lie's on all Mortality, while we play the
Pilgrims here below; The Italians have it well, n^ caldo, ne gielo, vasta maj.
in cielo, not to be too hot, or too cold, too full or too empty, not to be
pincht with some Exigency or other is reserved for Heaven only: Instead of
being dejected let me learn by rote, that levius fit Patientia quicquid
corrigere est Nofas, and superanda est omnis Fortuna ferendo. And may I persist
in this Tenet even to Stubbornness, that to have the shortest Train, to be most
compact, to live upon the fewest Relations, is an Estate least open to the
Inrodes of Vexation and Mutability.

Of Ignorance and Mistake.
IF He alone is the Wiseman, qui sicut Res sunt illas sapit, I am excluded,
for I mistake every Thing; I feel a Mountain of Ignorance upon mine
Understanding, which I struggle under, but cannot remove: I dwell in the
Outside of Things do what I can, and Circumstances do always so uneven the
Scales, that I cannot balance Things aright. When I weigh the Conditions of
Men, if I come near them I am within the Circle, and am straightway conjured
from giving a true Verdict; These Things are best seen at a Distance. When I
have sometimes given a right Sentence, a new Relation, or some other Event has
stepped in and violently blind-folded me again: When I have beheld a Worldling as
full of Earth as a Worm, one that load's himself with thick Clay, that walk's
in the Sunshine daily, and never enquires who has lighted him that glorious
Candle, that goes rooting as if he were a Mole in humane Shape, and
Canibal-like devours poor Men's Flesh; when I had clearly seen and confidently
affirmed his Gold to be Dross, and himself beautified with all his Pomp to be
but a Jade in Trappings, when I had made use of him as an Occasion of admiring
divine Providence, for sparing such a monstrous Hog, yea! when I had outlawed
him as one altogether unworthy of Protection; yet, how has the Tender of some
few Courtesies, or other Things been ready to make me reverse it, has not only
stopped my Mouth, but muddied my sounder Judgment of him, and have been almost
disposed to an Entertainment of his (before detested) Principles, and a
Prosecution of Prosperity; and the Notion of a Possibility of arriving at his
Height, has been such a Powder-Mine, that I have been well nigh blown up; my
Affections have been like a Navy in a Storm at Sea, hardly kept together: I say
therefore as before, that the best Perspective to see the World in its genuin
and proper State is a great Distance from it. A man must play the cunning
Astronomer, who when he would gaze a Star, gets not on the Top of a Pyramid,
but descend some deep Pit, for so the visual Spirits are kept together.
Earthly Things are a very Mist, before a Man comes at it he may see the
Dimensions of the Fog, may perhaps look over it, but when once invelopt and
clouded within it, his sight is limited to a small Extent; surely Temporals
bear about them those Pastilli of Pliny confected of the Chameteon's left Foot,
which make those that carry them not discernible. When I have sometimes made
the German Evil the Object of my Consideration, thinking of it abstractedly; my
Heart has suddenly swelled at it with indignation, I could no Doubt have put
down twenty Periprases of it, containing so many Arguments against it; and have
admired his strange Madness, who (when Man naturally does with impatient
Eagerness search after an Increase of Knowledge, for the Repair of his Soul,
and aim's at the Preservation of Health, as a main Good of the Body) (...) ex
Industri^ cast Lime in his own Eyes, and seek to quench the only Lamp that
illuminates him: Oh! strange Philosophy, that to judge physically of a Beast, a
Man should lay aside the soverain Life of Reason to descend to that of Sense
only! And when I had pronounced (as well I may) that such a One is not the
Physician but the Fool, that will avoid the best Medicin (or rather the
Preventive of Medicin) Temperance I mean, to embrace and fofter Drunkenness,
the Spawn of many noisome Maladies. In these Thoughts I say, and when I have
been confirming in me (as I shall for ever) a Detestation of that beastly Vice,
it has approached me in him whose Parts I have admired, or whose Person I have
loved, and has sufficiently evidenced it self by a gross Traulismus, (for when
in his Fit he has been a plain Titubo, and his Tongue has pronounced
Titititubo) but ah! then I have had enough to do to see the Fault through my
Friend; my very judging Faculty has been somewhat bribed to spare the Sin,
lest I fall too foul on the Subject of it; and how have I found out a weak
Brain, or strong Temptation, something or other to extenuate the Offense. --
When I would look upon mine own Condition as I am a Man, and would seriously
weigh the End I came hither for, and my Departure from hence, and would in
Contemplation draw near unto him in whom all my Happiness depends, and to help
my Thoughts I look upon the round World and my self, and turn over History and
record Examples; and yet alas! I may as well see mine own Eyes, or a visible
Object without a Medium of Light as discern what I desire. Sometimes I would
fain sit aloft and look on the Earth as a Theater, and us Men acting a
Tragi-Comedy, while the Almighty, blessed for ever, (who has appointed to each
Man his Part) and the glorious Angels are Spectators; and I consider how every
one enters, and then has his Exit; how grossly some are mistaken, that when
they are charged to act as Men, they play the Beast and are hissed off the
Stage; and others though they come on with Fear and Trembling, yet they depart
with Applause. Sometimes again I would consider my self and all others as
Workers in a Vineyard; a Sort laboring with some Diligence expecting Pay at
Night, others sitting idle, guzling out their Wages, laying hold on the present
only; and then I look up to Heaven for a Master: Thus, though we know Things but
discursive, I have sometimes talked with my self; but alas when all is done, I
can but glance at Things, consider them under imperfect Notions, nor can I at
all keep on foot a Meditation of any Worth, but intervenent Matters soon take
me off and blind me, put my Head under Water again; Relations of Parents and
Friends, Vicissitude of Things, Day and Night, Winter and Summer, Peace and
War, Sickness and Health, etc. Affections, Desires, Fears and Duties of my
Place as I am of such a Calling, as I am a Subject, a Son, a Husband, etc. Oh
these pull me down again into the middle Region, wherein Light is infested with
Vapors, and I am eclipsed with I know not what Interpositions. Nay, when I do
more than thus discourse with my self alone, when I set my self where I may be
spoken to from Heaven, and hear perfect Directions for the right esteem of
Things, where I may partake of such blessed Ordinances as would clear my
Understanding to conceive aright; order my Affections, and form my whole Soul;
here alas I find my self a narrow mouthed Bottle, unfit to receive what is
instilled, the precious Liquor runs beside, and I am so taken up and terminated
in the Ceremony, Objects of these corporeal Eyes, or in the Opero operato, that
I cannot without much Difficulty in the least arrive at that Worship which is
in Spirit and Truth; and I am so much troubled with a vagrant Soul that will be
traversing the World in the Tract perhaps of one of Purchase his in grims almost
Infidels, when my Body is enclosed in a Christian Congregation, that I would as
much wonder at my self if I could hoc agere in a Spiritual Exercise, as ever I
did at Caesar and others, that could Aliud and Aliud agere together. But if
this be my Case, I determine what to do; I Will not take Things on Trust as
formerly, if the Persons of Men have such an Influence, and are so powerful on
my Judgment that my Censure does often savor of Partiality, I Will pray with the
Italian and say, Tragli Amici, etc. Defend me from my Friend, for I
Observe enough mine Enemy.


I Will be so cunning an Alchymist that I Will learn to extract Men's Failings from
their Persons, that their Presence and Respect may not amaze and interrupt my
Censure; and because we use to say Amare simul et sapere ipsi Jovi non datur,
when I am to deal with a loving Friend, I Will artificially forget that I am his
Relative, I Will handle his Cause, and let himself alone for the present: When my
Opinion of ought is demanded, I Will do with my self as the Athenians with their
Picture of Justice, who used to draw a Veil over her Face, not that she should
not see to strike, but that she might not see to spare a Friend when he came
within her Reach. And because proximus egomet mihi, and no Cousening like
self-deceit for Amor sui caecus) I Will call in Question some Actions of my own
that hitherto I have not doubted of, I Will be suspecting of every Desire, every
Pleasure, every Reward that I am so willing to embrace, I Will measure all now by
the Standard, I Will not suppose any Work of mine to be good, nor call it Gold
'till I have brought it to the Touchstone, (the Word I mean, one Jot or Tittle
whereof shall never fail, but remain fair and firm when Heaven and Earth are
wrapped up as an Escroll) to that Word that is no Lestian Rule, but like the
Author of it ever the same, and no Respectour of Persons.

When I would gather whether I am increased or wained, I examine how near I am
to a Conjunction with It per Synodon, when I would know my Stature I reckon my
Longitude, and begin from this Book, from these Azores, for here the Compass
has no North-eastling or Westling no Variation at all, no swerving to the right
Hand or to the left; this shall be my Sea-chart while I am embarked in the
troubled Ocean of this World, where I meet with more than thirty two Winds, and
Rocks and Shelves wherever I walk. Seeing I am so apt to err, may this Word
ever be a Light to my Feet, and a Lanthorn unto my Paths; let me embrace this
as the only Cure of my Ignorance, that will give good Understanding to all
those that follow it, that will teach me That Fear that is the Beginning of
Wisdom, that will show me Mysteries and deep Things. In my want of Wisdom here
I am directed of whom to ask it, even of Him who gives liberally to all and
upbraideth none; who is able to anoint me with such Eye Salve, that is far more
soverain ad Oculorum Aciem excitandum than all the Oteum* Balsaminum or
Sysybubrium Sylvestre in the World. Let this Word therefore ever dwell in me
plenteously in all Wisdom; let me follow its Prescriptions, and though for Remedy
of my Stupidity it bids me be a Fool that I may become Wise, yet let me know
that That Is the very Salve; and that there is no Receipt it commends to our Use,
but as many as have tried it, have put down their probatum est upon it. This
Word I prefer to all Axioms and Rules in Physics, Ethics, etc. And after all my
rolling to and fro, and fluttering abroad in the empty World, here I fix my
Foot, make this my Wisdom's Pillar, and inscribe it with a Nil ultra.

Of Undermining Policy.
THere is a sort of cunning Men whom the World stile's Politicians, though
somewhat improperly, for they labor of the Disease called the Fever of
Policy, or the Distemper of Prudence; and though they make fair as if endued with
this noble Virtue, (if I may call it a Virtue, and not rather aliarum Virtutum
Retrix) yet I rather term it in them Calliditas, Astutia, Dolus, or some one of
those which indeed does somewhat resemble and emblemish Prudence; and though the
same Hands attend this Vice which wait upon the other Virtue, as Memory,
Understanding, Providence, Circumspection and Caution, yet as old Ennius says
of the Ape, Simia quam similis turpissima
Bestia nobis?
See how the Ape resembles thee,
And yet a filthy Beast is he.


So I Will say of this, that it is a Counterfeit of Virtue, does not at all add
to it, but makes it more odious, for the Truth is so glorious, and we stand so
much upon the Esteem of our Understanding and Judgment, that we hate
Legerdemain, and reckon it the greatest Disparagement to have been gulled.

But to difference it from the Virtue mentioned, that Shadow may not cosen us,
the Philosopher tells us of another Retinue of Prudence which are no Followers
of that Vice, Prudentia (says he) ubicuncque vere est ibi sunt omnes Virtutes,
et ibi est omnis Probitas, and here we have out-stripped the crafty Politician;
and besides, we know that Prudentia est agendi Habitus, and that if a Man would
act prudently, it is not only necessary that the Matter and the Manner of the
Action should be Good, but the End also suitable; but our Politician fails in
some of these, and though his Way and Proceed in a Design seem never so candid
and without Exception, yet in the Close of it he sometimes appears in his
Colors, and you may then perceive his Aim was to catch, to circumvent, to go
beyond another, and his Principium movendi is discovered to be some base Desire
of Pleasure or Profit. If he be Master of his Trade, his Understanding only
travels into the World, and his Affections are terminated in himself, he fear's
his own Mischief, love's not for worth of the Object, but as it makes to his
own Advantage; his Passions are bound in Chains, he can overpower his Anger at
pleasure, and can cover Envy with a Smile: Fronti nulla fides was never better
applied than to him, there 's no grosser Hypocrite than he, he 's not guilty of
any Virtue but that of Temperance, whereby he curb 's every irregular Motion;
and he befools the Ghost of a Man that turned Non nobis nati sumus into a
Proverb, for his Rules are out of the Tragedian Scelere velandum est Scelus,
and per Scelera semper Sceleribus tutum est Iter. Two sorts of Men tend this
Way, the first of these are they that do not only conceal their wicked Plot
while in Fieri, but so palliate the Matter having obtained their End, that the
Issue shall be attributed to Virtue, or at least to Chance: These are indeed
the very Firstborn of Machiavel, and as dangerous as dishonest. The other are
they whom the World counts Men of Policy, and call 's shrewd Men; but this
Esteem they have, arises from their Weakness more than any thing else; these
are they that would fain be reputed Men of Brains, and you may easily know
them, for their Discourse runs generally upon the Censure of another's
Headpiece; you shall hear them bless themselves in their Arrival at some happy
Achievement, and you cannot want Information, how they had surely perished in
the Charybdis or Scylla of many Interruptions, had not their Prudence as a
Pilot unerringly steered them: but these Men if they gain the Credit they hunt
after, they lose the Opportunity of perfecting a second Project, and are
avoided as a perilous Quick-fand, and it is their usual Lot that when they
verily suppose themselves to walk in Nubibus, they in truth dance in a Net to
every Eye that is not blind. When a Man discovers his drawn Weapon he is not
like to do much Mischief; a wise Man would out of Choice deal with one of
these, rather than a dull Fellow that has no Spring, for he will know how far
his Byas will lead him, and easily serve himself of him. But shall I say what I
think? Why, truly my Judgment is wrapped up in that old (but golden) Saying,
Plain Dealing is a Jewel. If we'll but read the Creatures, we shall see the
most noble are the freest from Wiles, as the royal and magnanimous Lion* the
iron-sinewed Elephant, of whose Wisdom and Sagacity we may hear to Wonderment,
and for his Valor it is set forth in History sufficiently in his pugna cum
Draconibus et Rhinocerote; and what more common than to read de Elephantorum
Clementia, Pudore, Amore, etc. (Qualities too precious to be found in the base,
unworthy Spirit of a subtle Politician. It Is the vermin Fox and paltry Ape that
excel in Craft. Read the best Book I am sure Vprightness and Sincerity of
Heart, Pureness and Simplicity of Spirit bear the Bell away; and the Israelite
in whom there is no Guile, he, he is the plurimarum Palmarum Homo. If we are
admitted to be wise as Serpents, we are likewise commanded to be innocent as
Doves; and is this serpentine Wisdom seasonable at any other Time than when we
are as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. Mat. 10.16. Prudentes sicut Serpents (as
one says) ad intelligendas et cavendas Frauds et Insidias, et simplices sicut
Columbae ad sustinendas et ignoscendas Laesiones et Injurias, make this
Prudence here only defensive. I shall never conceive that mysterious Way of
Fowling for Men, no, nor wisl I ever be reconciled to such a Devil-like Trade,
though the World call 's it but taking a Wood-cock in a Glade. Let those rejoice
that have by a Train led others to their Lime-bush and deplumed them, or by
their Syren-Songs cast them upon irrecoverable Rocks, to the Shipwreck of
Estate or Name, etc. Let them Nera-like be Spectatours without Sorrow while
Rome's consumed, while I cry swell O Heart against such Practices! My Head was
never given me for a Shop to anvil out such cursed Projects in. No, I had
rather die a Fool in the World's Esteem than sin for Reputation of Wisdom,
rather feed on Roots and go clad in a mean Outside, than waft my self to a
great Estate by a Gale of wicked Devices. I reckon my Affections given me to
trade with in the World; and my Words to be a Comment to the Thoughts of my
Heart; when I profess to love it is so indeed, some as Men, others as Christian
Men. But to kiss and stab with Joab, to fawn when Treason is in the Heart, I
detest it for ever.

Of Desire.
I mean not here an exact Philosophical Discourse of the Appetite, nor shall I
need branch it otherwise than into Natural, Vegetable, Sensitive and Rational;
these are known Distinctions and embraced with Approbation: I shall confine my
self only to the two last.

THE first of these when widowed from the latter proves an Arch-boutefeu, and
the veriest Incendiary in Nature. Desire I know of it self deserves no bad
Epithet, but may very justly be styled the Principium movendi of all our
Actions; it is the main Spring and Plummet of the Soul, the Wheel and Oil to
that we turn upon. He Is becalmed in every Action that want's a still Gale of
Desires to waft him: And they are so our own, so natural, that we expire them
not before our Breath. Is it not Scripture when Desires fail, Man goes to his
long Home? They run Parallel with the Line of Life, reach to the West of our
Days. And alas, how inordinate and incorrigible, for the most part are our
Headstrong Desires! But when Reason Alexander-like, back's this Bucephalus,
then it is rendered serviceable, when the Understanding is Pilot, then it is
stirred without Danger, but when some sudden Blast shall unstern this Palinure
and Opinion and Fancy start up in his Room, then take the Lyric's Advice, Tu,
nisi ventis debes Ludibrium, cave. Then appears the Frenzy in Concupiscibili
et Irascibili; the Heat is now no more Natural, but a Focus Febrilis, and the
Party is affected with an intermitting Synocha, that will afford him no
respiring Time.

Inordinate Desire is a Fire blown off from the Hearth, or an Elementum extra
Locum, the Fidiculae Fidicularum where Men suffer exquisite Torments. It Is
every Evil or their Cause; for what is Ambition but nimia Honoris Cupiditas,
what Iracundiae but fervens Vindicta Appetitus, what Covetousness but Auri
Fames; whence Homicides, Rapine, Luxury, Treacheries, Tyrannies, Factions but
from this? -- Seneca has something to it; Desire of Gain betrayed the Trust,
And Bedlam rage with every Lust
Attends the Mind, then Thirst of Sway;
The Less is made the Greater's Prey
While Power is Law.


I could call it the Powder Plot, the Underminer of all Good; it has made more
Batteries upon the Minds, Bodies, Names and Estates of Men, than ever
Bartholdus the Franciscan Friar occasioned by his Invention. The Mystery of it
is wall set forth in a French Quatrain.

Proud Cruelty, cursed Avarice,
Intemperance and Love of Vice,
Neglect of Justice and of Right
Ruin's each Man and City quite.
Unbounded Appetite is a Centiceps Hydra; it is this Ingredient that poisons
the Tranquillity of the Soul, and the Content of every Condition.

Hence, hence it comes, that no Man with the State
That Reason tenders, or is set by Fate,
Contented rests.
The poor Man it is not so much his Poverty, as the immoderate Thirst of more
Wealth that racks him; The Ergastulum would be no Goal did not vehement Desire
of Liberty derive it self into the Prisoner; what is Captivity, were but a Man
Master of his own Thoughts? Look upon King Dionysius Syracusius at Corinth, he
stoops not under the Burden, qualified only with a little Philosophy: Why did
Cicero's little more than Year's Banishment seem long, what wrought him so sad
amidst such Entertainments and Fame of Greece? Doubtless 'twas the Lust to
return to Haly, (which was then the Paradise of the World) and not any
Sufferings attending his Proscription; which pronounced him more Orator than
Philosopher, though he desired that Denomination too: Privative Mercies Humor! I
have seen an Estate (a Man would think) without Wrinkle, which has been the
Eyesore, and Matter of Maceration to every Adversary, that might have
engrossed as much Joy in it himself, as it moved Emulation in others; you would
have deemed the Owner Sanctuari'd from every Gust, and yet this Man seemed as
if Thunder-stricken; if you enquire the Reason in promptu* you will have it in
a vagrant Desire of his lately arrested by some unworthy Object. I can example
it to you in overflowing Wealth and Greatness, Charles the Great nothing would
satisfy but the Enjoyment of his Beloved, a very Dowdy, in Birth and Parts
more than mean, for her he mourns, exposes himself to Censure, carries about
with him her dead embalmed Body, as possessing no Treasure but that. We see
that the whole Empire would not keep alive Cocceius Nerva, but the Desire of
Revenge destroyed him: Marius his Ambition imbittered all his Wealth and
Honors: This was the Fly in Haman 's Ointment that caused him to live
discontentedly, and die ignominiously. Some are so infested with two contrary
Appetites, Desire of Profit and Desire of Pleasure, Desire of a pitchy,
polluted Vice, and a radiant and undefiled Name, that their Soul becomes a very
Gladiatory, and they remain in that Danger the Harlot supposed her Child after
Solomon 's Sentence: Virgil depaints the Turbulency of their Spirit in letting
loose his Winds, Vna Eurusque Notu^que ruunt, creberque procellis
Affricus, et vastos, volvunt ad Litera fluctus.
Winds East and South, and stormy Western roar,
Whilst proudest Waves are dashed against the Shore.


SOME there are, who if Darius his three Questions should be proposed, whether
the King, or Wine, or Women were strongest, their Ambition would pronounce a
Panegyric for Pre-eminence and Authority in the Morning; by Noon they would be
fit to expatiate in the Praise of the Grapes of Caecubum, and discourse to you
de Agro Falerno as the best piece of Husbandry; and be overcome by the third at
Night; so that were Bacchus a Planet as well as Jupiter and Venus, I should
have blamed the Heavens with this their Inconstancy; but I find the Cause
within their own Sphere of Force sufficient, without celestial Influence, even
various Desires that act by Turn to make a Tragedy: For a Proof I bring Nero to
the Stage, (that loved it so well) Biberius Caligula, etc. It Is not certain
whether Pride or Avarice, or base Lust, or Thirst of Blood swayed most in them.
-- You shall sometimes have a Fantastic who through Desire of Laurel, has screwed
his slender, mimical Wit to so high a Key, that you will confidently say it is
more than cracked, it is clear from his limping Iambics, which though they sweat
over, yet a chemical Brain can extract no Mercury from them: -- And even the
Bodies of some Sort of Men are so little beholden to a vicious Appetite and
Constitution as to their Decrease and Diminution, that it may be attributed
wholly to their Rhyming; you shall have one so impaired by it, that when his
Soul 's gone, his Body 's but a mere Skeleton in a Case, and for a funeral
Elegy the Worms may complain with the Poet, Nil ultra Nervos atque cutem morti
concesserat atra, for alas he had most prodigally and profanely spent the Rest
before. I have known a Name as glorious as the Sunshine that has, by the
Interposition of a base Desire and the Fruit of it, been eclipsed with an
almost irreparable Deliquium. The Bounty and Justice of Domitian, when first
enthroned, dwelled upon his Name sweeter than Mirrh, but drinking the Blood,
and devouring the Revenues of his Subjects, soon made it unsavory. Whence come
Decays, Cachexies on Estates, but from hence? You may see one bolting into a
Gaming-house, or Brothel (but why put I this into the Catalogue) laden with
Coin like a Cashier, but the Word is varied into the Preterfect Tense at his
Exit; he returns every way too light but in Heart, you may judge him
Thunder-stricken, but sure it was Ictus Falminis terebrantis, for the
Destruction was upon his Gold, and he is escaped Salvus tantum Loculis. How many
have been wounded and exhausted by a Lust they were not sensible of, and how
have they feasted, 'till at length Poverty comes upon them unawares like an
Armed-Man. Untamed Desire is likewise as Wildfire in the Societies of Men; at
a Feast you may soon meet with one who is inamored on the highest Room; if you
place him in his Rank (which perhaps is many Degrees lower) he finds no Relish
in the daintiest Viands, though perhaps a near Neighbor to the seasoning Salt:
Or if in the Battle of Words (a Vanity now too common in Banquets) he has
failed in some Expression, or if he encounters one that is more able to handle
his Word-weapon, or that in his Conceit most deserved the Palm, away he reels
homeward even drunk with Discontent. Oh! the Exorbitancies of Desire! This
Oceanus-Appetitus that swallow's all, and yet remain's an Appetite still; this
Asphaltites that will drink up Jordan without Satiety: The Eye is not satisfied
with Seeing, nor the Ear with Hearing; nunquam expletur Cupiditatis Sitis. Our
Hearts are like the restless, raging Sea; this sends forth Mire and Dirt, and
that hateful and violent Lusts continually. There are none who are wholly
exempt from them. I may salute and advise every one that first enters into the
World, as it is in the Ode, My little Pinnace shall thy Keel
Upon the boisterous Surges reel?
Take my Advice, possess the Shore,
Observe but how thou back'st thine Oar;
Or if thou look upon thy Mast,
It Is crazed with a Western Blast,


Now as Seneca says of Fears, qui pavet vanos Metus veros fatetur, so I Will say
of Desires, for from them I can gather that Man has not Happiness at Home; it
must be had somewhere out of himself, and because Desire is natural as to see
and hear, and the Axiom is Deus et Natura nil frustra, I am sure there is an
adequate Object, there is SOMETHING able to satisfy; and seeing all the finite
Creatures cannot do it, it must be the infinite God, blessed for ever, who
alone is alsufficient, who is able to fill every Dimension of the Soul.

Until we arrive at this Heaven, we are tossed and find no Rest, we are hurried
by our Passions, as by so many Waves and Cross-winds; one promising the
Felicity we look for in that, and another in this; and thus are most led aside
by those Syron-songs, 'till at length they are rockt asleep, dashed upon a
miserable Shipwreck, and do post omnia perdere Nautam.

'Till we are in the Way to this Summum Bonum, to this consummate Good, we
wander after Ignes fatuos, many foolish and noisome Lusts which drown Men in
Perdition: 'Till we return to this Ark, we find no Stay for the Sole of our
Foot. May my Resolutions and Endeavors always be to turn my Desires into a
right Channel, seeing they will perpetually boil up; and may I always dam up
the sensitive and make them rational and humane.

I must labor to be like one of those Inferiores Belgae curious in Surveying
the Banks, make daily use of my Commission of Sewers, and of my Reason, I must
take care to prevent an Inundation of those that these may run more unitedly;
and where Appetite is a Disease, I must take care that I do not venienti
occurrere Morbo; but where it is placed aright, when I can with Integrity say
non est Mortale quod opto, then I must hasten my Paoe, here it is Sin to be
slack: I am commanded to give all Diligence to make Election sure; the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers Violence; I am bid to love God with all my Heart, Soul and
Strength; do I not run in a Race; do I not work in a Vineyard; do I not try
Masteries, and fight for a Crown? Away then with Supiness here and idle
Curiosity, I have Sea-room enough, and I must put on all my Sails: And if
Augustine speak Truth, when he says there is Dulcedo Pietatis et Pulchritudo
Virtutis, let me taste, let me fall in love with them; if in the gracious
Presence of God there is Plenitude of Joy, and eternal Pleasures, I must show
that I believe it, by my Desire to remain always under the Shadow of the
Almighty.

AN EPITAPH ON Mr. Benjamin Thompson. A famous Poet and Grammarian In
NEW ENGLAND.
HE 's gone! -- He 's gone! -- (The great Decrees of God
Order it so)
He 's gone triumphant to the blessed Abode,
I saw him mount Elysium!
His all harmonious Soul is now set free,
And now enjoys a blessed Eternity:
There in soft Ease, with heavenly Laurels crowned,
((...) sweet Hallelujahs)
He (...) ^^iumph with the Saints enthroned.
A Copy of VERSES To a very Ingenious Young Gentleman in the Country. Written
May 24 th. 1714.
IN shady Groves, in dear, delightful Plains,
In silent Shades where peaceful Quiet reigns,
There in soft Ease, there happy Tityre
Thou liv'st from Care and noisie Tumults free.
Believe me Friend it is this is Happiness,
And should be looked upon as real Bliss.
But don't mistake me Sir,
Nor think I hold that there is nothing good
But what 's deducible from Solitude;
There is one Blessing more, which happy I
To the utmost Height of Happiness enjoy:
(Such Happiness I mean as is by Fate
Allowed unto our sublunary State.)
It is a soft, a dear, obliging Fair,
Who with her Charms dispels intruding Care:
Whose dear Enjoyment Softness does infuse
To all my Verse, and animates my Muse.
It Is She alone, believe me Sir, it is She
Raises my Numbers into Harmony.
But yet, when scarcely eighteen Years had ran
Over my Head,
And sprouting Down began to promise Man,
Then, then I Have heard, (I Have heard it with Delight)
I Have heard it whispered -- Corydon can write.
But ah! --
Since sacred Hymen's genial Taper shone,
And with its Brightness warmed young Corydon,
Fame I have heard with her loud Trumpet tell
(Oh may 't be true!) -- young Corydon writes well.
Thus (dearest Friend) you see I plainly show
That all my Joys from the Premises do flow.
And yet I would not have you think that I
Owe this great BLISS to Sensuality,
No, mine 's a noble Flame.
Our Consort-Souls harmoniously do move,
And Pilot-Reason dictates how to love.
These are the Pleasures I 've been treating of,
Which though I Am full, I have not yet enough.
Dear Youth,
May your caelebian Sun serenely set,
And may indulgent Heaven then see fit,
To crown the Residue of your remaining Life
With that great Happiness, a virtuous Wife,
And may You then with me
And Halcyon-Days, in that bright Orbit move,
Where Hymen dwells with all the Charms of Love.
FINIS.

