ANDROBOROS A Bographical Farce In Three Acts, VIZ. The SENATE, The CONSISTORY,
AND The APOTHEOSIS.


Printed at Mo^^ropolis since August, 1714.

Drammatis Personae.
Androboros, Keeper, Deputy, Speaker, Aesop, Doodlesack, Tom of Bedlam,
Babilard, Coxcomb, Mulligrub, Cobus, Solemn, Doorkeeper, Fizle, Flip,
Messenger.
SCENE Long Gallary in Moor-Fields.

The Dedication TO Don. Com. Fiz.
Right Dreadful SIR!
CErdo Gloucestriensis, an Author of the last Century, of great Sagacity,
observ^d well, That Runto Polimunto Plumpismenoi Raperpandico -- What do you
stare at? This is good Greek for ought you know, and contains a Mystery, which
shall continue so, unless you Reveal it; and so no more of that. The following
Elionophysalo Fizlical Farce having fallen into my Hands by a most surprising
Accident, it seems meet unto me that it should, with all due Reverence Kiss
yours. Here it lies at your Feet, take it up. Now read the first Act, -- Have
ye done? What Is the matter Man? Have ye got the Gripes? A Plague on your Sower
Faces. Bring him a Dram. What have have you to do, had you to do, or ought you
to have to do with the Senate? You smell a Rat, you say. Be it so. But compose
your self, and now Read the second Act, -- How do you like it, ha? O Hooo,
T'churrrrrrrrrtch, I can say that as Loud as you can do; and if you will but
leave out these Damnable R's and T's which make it so hard in Pronounciation,
and harder in Digestion, I like it better than you do. You don't believe me!
and I don't believe in you; and this is a perilous Article in a Man's Belief
too; For one who died a very good Christian, was sentenced by your Sanctity to
be buried a Pagan, only because he seemed to believe that you were somewhat
Thick of believing; yet you are a Christian, a very good Christian,

So was your Leader, Major Weere,
Burnt for Bu -- ry, God be here.
He had a good Gift of the Gob too: You were bred up in the same Accademy, the
same Principles, and the same way of Worship: All the Difference between you
lies in this nice point, He Worshiped the Devilish instead of God, and you worship
God as if he were the Devilish. Come to it again, first take two Turns cross the
Room, Cross-ways, I say, Wipe the Sweat from your Brows, and sit down. Now read
the Third Act, I Will sing the while,

It is an Old Maxim, et c'est Escrit,
Au trou de mon cul, look there you will sie't,
When the Head is Be -- ck't the Body's Beshit,
Which no Body dare Deny, Deny,
Which no Body dare Deny.
Read on, and be hanged, don't mind me, Man, I sing for my own Diversion.

But it is strange how Notions are changed of late,
For it is a New Maxim, but odd one, That
Ce que pend a nos culs doit nous garnir latete,
That I flatly and boldly Deny, Deny,
That I flatly and boldy Deny.
What is the Matter now? Is he Dead? or is it a Qualm? Holo, a Hay! Who waits
there? some burned Feathers, Sal Armoniack? No, No, Let him smell to the Skirt
of his own Garment. So, he Recovers Poor Fiz! who could have thought that you
were so quick of Smelling! Come, Man, take Courage; What have You or I to do
with it? Let the Galled Horse wince, our Withers are unwrung. But tell me, will
you be quiet for the Future? You shall be paid for it, nay, you have been paid
for it; and it is hard that Men must be Bribed for Not doing what they ought Not
to do. I remember an Odd Fellow upon Pont Neuf who got his Livelihood by as Odd
a Stratagem; He procured himself a Portable Forge and Bellows, which he carried
under his Cloak, and having heated a small Iron red hot, he would lug it out
and present it to the Gentlemen who passed that way, with this Complement, Good
Sir! Pray Sir! give me leave to run my hot Iron into your Arse. When the
Gentleman started at the Extravagance and Danger of the Motion, he continued,
Nay, Sir, if you don't like it, pay me but a Sol Marquee for the heating of my
Iron, and there is no harm d^ne. Now had he insisted upon the Performance of
the Operation aforesaid, after payment for the necessary Apparatus, he deserved
to have his Bones broke; but he was most commonly satisfied, and all the
Consequence was a fit of Laughter. Now, I know that it is not an easy matter
for you to get rid of your Forge and Bellows, but cannot you blow your Bellows
and heat your Iron at home, and quit that unaccountable Rage of Running it into
your honest quiet Neighbors Arses, who pay you amply, and merely for
Forbearance? But I have done. Peace be with ye, I mean such a one as he made
who made you a COM-

And it was a most Masterly stroke of Art
To give Fizle Room to Act his part;
For a Fizle Restrained will bounce like a F -- t,
Which no Body can Deny, Deny,
Which no Body can Deny.
But when it Escapes from Canonical Hose
And fly's in your Face, as it is odds it does,
That a Man should be hanged for stopping his Nose,
That I flatly and boldly Deny, Deny;
That I flatly and boldly Deny.
Long Kept under Hatches, 'twill force a Vent
In the Shape of a Turd, with its Size and Scent,
And perhaps in its way may beshit a Vestment,
Which no body can Deny, Deny,
Which no body can Deny.
But however it is Dignified or Disguised,
That it should be for that the higher Prized,
And either Don Commis'd or Canonized,
That I flatly and boldly Deny, Deny,
That I flatly and boldly Deny.
B'uey Fizle.

Androboros.
Scene First, Act First.
Keeper, Deputy and Tom. Deputy, I Hope, Sir, it is not your intention that
this same Senate, as they call it, should sit.


Keeper, What harm is there in it, if it does?


Deputy, No great harm, only 'twill please their Frenzy; They are big with
Expectation of some mighty Deliverance, toward which is to be brought about by
means of Androboros; I think they call him so; Whether there is or ever was
such a Person, I know not: but all their hopes are placed in him.


Tom. Sir, it is Old Nick-nack, who has Paganiz'd himself with that Name, which
interpreted, signifies a Man-Eater. He is now very far gone indeed, He talks of
nothing but Battles and Seiges, though he never saw one, and Conquests over
Nations, and Alliances with Princes who never had a being; and this Senate is
mainly intended for his Reception* I hope you will not forbid its Meeting, if
you do, I shall loose an Employment, having had the Honor to be appointed Clerk
of the Senate this Morning, after the Choice of the Speaker; so I beg you will
not Rob me of that Honor, and your self of some Diversion, and I shall take
care that their Session shall be harmless.


Keeper. I wish you Joy with all my heart; But Prithee, Tom, What Chance or
evil Fate conducted thee to this same Doleful Mansion? I am surpised to find
thee in such Company.


Tom. No Chance, I assure you, Sir, but free Choice. I found in my reading,
That Man was composed of three parts, Body, Soul and Spirit, and that the two
first were entirely engrossed by two Societys, so I Resolved to Exercize my
poor Talent upon the Infirmitys of the last, not with any hopes or intention to
Cure them, but as others do, merely to raise my self a Maintenance out of them,
here under your Honors happy Auspeces. But, Lo, here they come, Retire to a
Corner. If I am seen in your Company, my Project is spoiled.


Act First, Scene Second.
Enter Doodlesack, Babilard, Solemn, Aesop, etc. ^peaker, GEntlemen, The Honor
you have done me, how little soever I may deserve it, lays me under an
Obligation to Exert my self to the utmost for the interest of this House. I
humbly propose, That in the first place we concert and agree upon some
necessary Rules for preventing Confusion.


Deputy aside. Well spoke, Mr. Speaker, Though it is something strange that he who
has ever affirmed, That Laws and Liberty were things Incompatible, should now
propose to proceed by Rules.


Mulligr. I desire to be heard before you proceed to Rules, or any thing else;
I have a Speech ready.


Doodlesack. Laet onse hearken to Mr. Speaker, and begin with some Rules.


Mullig. I Will have my Speech first.


Coxcomb. D -- n your Speech, Let Us proceed to Rules.


Babilard. If Rules be necessary to the Speech, let us have the Speech first,
but if the Speech be necessary to the Rules, let us have the Rules.


Cox. I Am for neither Speech nor Rules, let us fall upon buss'ness.


Speaker. Gentlemen, The Question is not, as I take it, which you will be pleased
to have, but which shall have the Preference; for you may have both in their
Turns.


All Confusedly. Speech, Rules; Rules, Speech, etc.


Mulligrub. My Speech has carried it. Hum, Ha, Ough, Ough, Ough, Ough, etc.


Cox. Rot ye, it was not your Cough that Carried it; Let off your Speech.


Aesop. Mr. Speaker, I do not find that this matter is, as yet, determined to
the full satisfaction of this House, for which Cause I beg leave to offer an
Expedient, which will end the Debate, that is, That we may have both at a time;
whilst Mr. Mulligrub is Exonerating himself, we may employ our selves in
adjusting and forming the necessary Rules.


All. Agreed.


Speaker. Mr. Mulligrub, You may proceed.


Mull. Gentlemen, The ill Measures that have been taken, and the Foundation
that has been laid within this Tenement, to make the Tenants thereof, Tenants
therein, is the Cause which causes me to make this Speech. Our Grievances
being innumerable, I shall Enumerate them. The first I shall mention, is this,
That though the Tenement be large, the Mansions many, and the Inhabitants
Numerous, There is but One Kitchen, and one Cellar, by which means we are kept
from Eating and drinking What we please, When we please, and as Much as we
please, which is our Birthright Privilege by the Laws of God and Nature,
settled upon us by Act of Parliament; for which cause I humbly (...). Wheter it
may not be more Convenient that each Mansion have its proper Kitchen and Cellar
under the special Direction of the respective Tenants?

To clear up the Necessity of this Method, I Will tell you what happened to me
the other day; One of the Servants of this House, who brought me a Mess of Water
Gruel, being my special Friend, and knowing how eagerly my Stomach stood
toward what was forbidden me by the Physicians, conveys a Hand of Pork into
the Porrige, but being discovered he was punished, though he offered to take his
Corporal Oath, That the Hand of Pork was a bunch of Radishes. But of all
others, we of the East End of the Tenement suffer most, for by reason of our
distance from the Kitchen, our Porrige is cold before it comes to our Hands. To
Remedy this, we fell upon a private Intercourse with the Bethlemites on the
other side of Moor-fields, who by virtue of their Charter run at large, by
which we broke the Laws pretty Comfortably for a season; but these same subtle
Fellows of the Kitchen found it out, and put a stop to it, to the Great
Prejudice of the Freedom of the Subject, and the direct Discouragement of our
indirect Commerce. I Remember we once Addressed our Superiors, That we might
have a Servant of our own, independent of this Plaguey Keeper; They were
Graciously pleased to allow us such a one, with this Restriction only, That the
Servant aforesaid might have the Custody of our Straw and Water, but by no
means of our Meat and Drink; notwithstanding this, the Keeper will not permit
him to take the care and Custody of our Victuals and Drink. What! does* he
think us Non Corpus Mentlus, that we do not know the meaning of plain words!
But I shall Conclude at this time, with this Exhortation, That since it appears
plainly, that we of this Tenement, who are Tenants thereof, are in danger of
Being, by the Foundations laid, made Tenants therein, let us not lie Crying
thereat, but be Valiant Therefore, and Vindicate our Rights Therefrom, Our
Birthright Parliamentary Rights, settled upon us by the Ten Commandments.


Speaker. Gentlemen, Mr. Mulligrub has given you time to Concert the Rules of
the House, would you have them read by the Clerk, in the Order they have been
given to him by the several Members?


All. Ay, Ay.


Tom Reads. Mr. Speaker Proposes, That to prevent Confusion, not above Three or
Four at most be permitted to speak at Once, except in a Grand Committee, where
there is no occasion of Hearers.

Mr. Coxcomb humbly proposes, That no Body be allowed to speak but himself,
because for want of the Attentive Faculty, he is like to have no share in the
Hearing, and so ought to have Compensation in Speaking.

Doodlesack has given his in a Foreign Tongue, which when interpreted stands
thus, That He having but a small share of Elocution, but a very lively and
strong imagination, may have leave, as occasion shall Offer, to Express his
Thoughts by Staring, Grinning and Grimacing, of which he has so Exquisite a
Talent, that those who cannot be said to understand any thing else, perfectly
understand him in that Method of Utterance.

Babilard^^ Represents, That he is quite Dum-founded by the late fall of
Stocks, so in Order to the opening his Mouth, he proposes a Law for raising
Interest to Twelve per Cent.

Aesop has given his Rule in Rhyme, as follows,

The Rule that I would advise.
Is, Be quiet, and eat your Bread,
If it is good; To be Merry and Wise.
It Is the Devilish to be Sullen and Mad.

Coxcomb. Damn all Rules, Let us proceed to buss'ness.


Cobus. Laet onze erst come to some Revoluties.


Coxcom. Resolutions! Ay, begin with that, I like that Motion well enough* it
is the shortest way.


Speaker. Let one at a time Propose, and the rest Agree or Dissent, as they
think fit.


Coxcom. Resolved That neither this House, or they whom we Represent are bound
by any Laws, Rules or Customs, any Law, Rule or Custom to the Contrary
Notwithstanding.


All. Agreed.


Mullegr. That this House disclaims all Powers, Preheminencies or Authoritys,
except it is own.


All. Agreed.


Babilard. That this House has an Inherent and Undoubted Right to the Undoubted
Property of those we Represent.


Coxcomb. That this House is the only Undoubted Supreme Inferior and Infimus
Court of this Tenement, and that all others are a Nuisance.


All. Agreed.


Solemn. Mr. Speaker, being Resolved to enter my Dissent to these several
Resolves, I shall first give my Reasons for so doing. I believe it is needless
to put you in mind of our Origin, from whence we sprang, and how we came
hither. It is well known that we were of that Number of Public Spirited
Persons, distinguished from our Neighbors by an inward Light or Faculty, call
it what you Please. The Romans call it Aestrum, the French, Verve, our Northern
Nation has indeed given it a Courser Name, which gave us a strong Disposition
toward Reformations, Remonstrations, Resolutions, and other Acts of Zeal; in
the eager pursuit of which we were apt to throw our selves, sometimes our
Neighbors, into the Fire or Water. The Wisdom of the Times thought fit to
Erect this Tenement for our Intertainment, where the Exercize of the Faculty
aforesaid might be less Dangerous or hurtful to our selves, or others. Here we
are Maintained at their Charge with Food and Raiment suitable to our Condition,
and the Fabric kept in Repair at the no small Annual Expenses of our
Landlords. And what Returns do we make? Have not many of us from our private
Cells thrown our Filth and Ordure in their Faces? And now in a Collective Body
we are about to throw more filthy Resolves at them.


All. To the Bar, to the Bar.


All No, Withdraw, Withdraw.


Solemn. I desire to be heard.


All. Withdraw.


Speaker. Sir, It is the pleasure of this House that you Withdraw, in order to
your being heard. Exit Solemn.

Gentlemen, your have heard this man's Insolence. What shall be done with him?


Coxcomb. Hanged, Drawn and Quartered.


Aesop. Ay, but what is his Crime?


Coxcom. For affronting the Majesty of this House.


Aesop. In what? What has he done or said?


Cobus. Dat weet ick niet, but I agree with Coxcombs Propositie*


Speaker. I am for Inflicting no Punishment but what is in our power, that is,
to Expel him the House.


All. Expel, Expel.


Aesop. Hold a little. I suppose you intend to punish him, and not your selves;
I Will tell you a Story.


All. Expel, Expel, etc.


Aesop. I beg your patience, it is but a short one; it is a Tale of a Pack of
Hounds of my Acquantance,

Jowler, the stanchest Hound of the breed,
Had got the ill Will of all the rest;
Not for his Tongue, his Nose or Speed,
Though these were all by far the best;
Malice and Envy know no bounds
And Currs have ever barked at Hounds.
But that which most provoked their Spite
Was this, that when they run a Foil
Or Counter, Jowler led them right,
Which cost him many a bitter broil,
Snubbing the Rash and Rioters,
And lugging laizy Ones by the Ears.
So at a General Council held
For Grievances, or what you will,
Poor trusty Jowler was Expelled,
That freeborn Dogs might range their fill.
And so they did; but mark what came on it,
Henceforth they made but sorry Game on it*
The giddy Pack, their Guide b'ing gone,
Run Riot, and the Hunts-Man swore,
Strap't some, and some he whipped; but one
He hanged, a Noisy babbling Curr.
In short, the Pack was spoiled; Pray then,
Shall Jowler be Expelled again?

Coxcomb. A Pox on your Tale, let us proceed to the Vote.


Speaker. What is then your pleasure with relation to the Member who is to be
Expelled?


All. Expelled, Expelled.


Speaker. Call him to the Bar.

Enter Solemn. Sir,

For Reasons best known to our selves, you are Expelled.


Solemn. Sir, You do me too much honor. Exit.


Enter Messenger. Messenger. Mr. Speaker, The Lord Androboros with Two Men in
Black desires Admittance.


Speaker. Is it your pleasure he be admitted?


Omnes Ay, Ay.


Speaker. Let the Clerk go to him with the Compliments of the House, and
Conduct him in. Tom a going.


Keeper. St. St. St. Tom, a Word with you. Pray who are these same men in
Black, who accompany the General?


Tom. Two other special Friends of yours, viz. Fizle and Flip; The first was
heretofore a Muggletonian of the other side of Moore-fields, but having no
Butter to his Bread there, he Changed their Service for that of this House; He
sometime fancied himself to be the Pope, but his Brother not relishing that as
Derogatory to his Pretentions, he is now Contended to be Patriarch of the
Western Empire, of which Androboros is to be Sultan; The other, for a wonderful
Energy in the two most Unruly Members of the Body, has been followed of late by
the Women and Boys, but a late sinistrous Accident has Cracked his Voice, and
-- that now he is but little regarded. But I must be gone. Ex. Tom.


Keeper. The Rogue is a good Painter.


Deputy. He draws from the Life, I assure you.


Act First, Scene Third.
Enter Androboros and Tom, Flip and Fizle. Androb. MOst Venerable Gentlemen,
Upon my Rounds of Inspection, Prospection and Retrospection, I have understood
with Pleasure, that you have sequestered from your House that wandering Plague,
that Kibes in the Heels, and Piles in the posteriors of Mankind.


Aesop. Pardon me, Sir, your Name has not been mentioned here, that I know of.


Androb. I mean Solemn* which Act I approve and Commend. It is with no less
satisfaction that I now acquaint you, That upon the Earnest Application and
most humble Suit of the High and Potent Towrowmowyoughtough, Emperor of many
Nations, and my good Allies, the Kings of Agn^sagkimaghswoughsayk,
Savanagh^ipheugh, and Bowwougewouffe, I have undertaken an Expedition against
the Mulo Machiaus, your Inveterate Foes. Your Concurrence to enable me to carry
it on with Success, is what I demand and expect; and for your Encouragement, I
do Swear by this sacred Image, not to pare these Nails, wash this blew Visage,
or put off this speckled Shirt, Until I have made that Haughly Monarch Confess
himself, in all his Projects for Universal Dominion, my Inferior, and My
Delamya, fairer then the fairest Princess of his Blood or Empire. So leaving
this weighty Affair to your wise Counsels, We bid you heartily Farewell. Exit
Strutting.


Speaker. You have heard what this Man has proposed. What do you Resolve?


Coxcom. Let us Resolve to Support, Maintain and Defend the undoubted Tilte of
the Great Androboros to the Powers and Authoritys he has Graciously Assumed
over this and all other the like Tenements, against all Wardens, Directors,
Keepers, and their Abettors.


All. Agreed.


Doodlesack. Laet onze Dissolve, That a Sum not Exceeding Negen Skillingen and
Elleve Pence be raised for the Expeditie.


All. Agreed.


Speaker. Ay, and it is more then it is worth.


Bahilard. Let us Resolve, That He has behaved Himself on the said Expedition
with Courage, Conduct and Prudence.


S^eaker. What! before it is over!


Aesop. By all means, lest when it is over you should have less reason for this
Resolve. But if after all, we must go to War, I would be glad to be better
satisfied with the Choice of a Leader; For as to this Man's Prowess, we have
nothing but his own Word for it.


Coxcomb. The Choice is a good Choice, and he that doubts it, is a Son -- So
for that, amongst other weighty Reasons, I second Mr. Babilards Motion.


Doodlesack. Ick ock, because it may cast some Reflectie upon our Keeper.


Aesop. Before you proceed any further, I Will beg leave to tell you another
Tale, it is but a short one, and if it fails to Instruct, it may divert.

The Bees so famed for Feats of War,
And Arts of Peace, were once, of Sense
As void as other Insects are,
'Till time and late Experience,
The only Schoolmaster of Fools,
Taught them the use of Laws and Rules.
In that wild state they were Assailed
By the Wasps, often routed and Oppressed;
Not that their Hearts or Hands had failed,
But that their Head was none of the best,
The Drone being, by the Commons Voice,
Chose for the Greatness of his Noise.
Thus ill they sped in every Battle;
For though the Chief was in Request
At home, for's Fools Coat and his Rattle,
Abroad he was the Common Jest.
The Wasps in all Engagements, held --
His Folly more then half the Field.
Grown Wiser by repeated Woes,
The Bees thought fit to change their Chief,
It was a Humble Be they Chose,
Whose Conduct brought them quick Relief;
And ever since that Race has led 'em,
The Drones are Drums, as Nature made 'em.
But go on with your Resolves; you have mine.


Speaker. I like the last Choice of the Bees, for my part; for by the Law no
man can be allowed to be an Evidence for himself, especially when he happens to
be be a single one.


Doodlesack. Wishy Washy's; I agree to Mr. Babilards Propositie, for the
Reasons given, with this addition* That our Keeper is even Skellum.


Coxcomb. And ought to be dismiss't from having any further (...).


Act First, Scene Fourth.
Enter Keeper and Deputy. Keeper. TO your Kennels, ye Hounds. -- Exit Omnes.


Deputy. Now, Sir, I hope you are satisfied, and for the future you will keep 'em
to their Cells.


Keeper, No, let them enjoy their former Liberty, perhaps they will stand
Corrected.


Deputy. I much doubt it; but I shall Obey.


Keeper. Now, Mr. Tom. If I may be so bold* Favor me with a sight of the
Minutes of your House.


Tom. With all my heart, here they are.


Keeper. What Is here! A Castle, a Windmill, and Shepherd with a Ram at his
back?


Tom. Ay, Sir, a sort of Egyptian short Hand, containing the substance of
their Resolves. The (...) Renvers'd and in the Air, denotes the independency of
our House; The Windmill without Sails, an Expedition without Means or Leader;
and the Ram butting the Shepherd on the Breech, or in other words, dismissing
him from having any further Authority over him. --


Keeper. That wants no Explanation. You Will Watch them, Tom, and serve them in
the same Capacity, if they meet again.


Tom. To the best of my Skill.


Keeper. Let Us to Dinner. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Primi.
Act Second,
Scene First^
Enter Babilard, Fizle, Flip, Coxcomb. Babilard. YOu see what our wise Resolves
have brought upon us, we shall never do his buss'ness in this way, Muzled as we
are; I wish my Advice had been followed.


Fizle. Pray what was that?


Babilard. I was for proceeding in the way of secret Representations and
Remonstrances against him, which My Lord Oinobaros, his declared Enemy, might
have long ever this improved to his Ruin.


Fizle. That was my own Method, but that which discourages me is, that at
Parting my Lord assured me, That he would return in six Months, and Confirm me
in my Patriarchat; instead of that, he has himself taken up with the Wardenship
of a Spunging-house.


Cox^o^b No, that Method will never do. Have not I, and my Friends transmitted
to Mr. W^y Rump a Ream of Complaints, as big as the Bunch on his back, which
were Referred to the Consideration of the (...) sitting Mebmers of the little
House, and he was dismissed with a Kick of h' Breech. We must Accuse him of
something more Flagrant; Trifles will not do.


Fizle. (...), Then I have another Device for you. You see he can Dissolve our
Senate with a Crack of his Whip, so there is nothing to be done that way. Let
us incorporate our selves into a Consistory; That I believe He dare not touch,
without being Reputed an Enemy to the Consistory; and if he does, we may hunt
him down full Cry at present


Flip That I should like well enough, but I Am afraid the Cunning Rogue will not
meddle with us, as such.


Fizle. We'll say, and swear, That he did, and that is all one. I have a Plot in
my head, which I hope will do the buss'ness; in the mean time, go you and
acquaint the Rest, that they meet us here in full Consistory Immediately.


Exit Babilard, and Coxcom. Flip. Pray, Brother, Instruct me in your
Contrivance, I may help you out with my Advice.


Fizle. It is briefly this. This same Rogue was ever an Enemy to the short
Coats and Scanty Skirts of the Laity, and Consequently to the long Robes and
Pudding Sleeves of the others; I Will instantly have my long Coat Beskirted and
Besh --, and give out, That it is He, or some of his People, who has don't. If
any should be so Heterodox as to doubt the truth o'nt, I have some ready to
swear to the Size and Color of the T --.


Flip. I like this well; about it straight, I Will attend them here, Open the
Consistory in your Name, and Prepare 'em for what is to ensue.


Exit Fizle. Flip. This same Fizle is a Notable Fellow for the head of a
Consistory, if he had but a Competent Doze of Brains; but Th^se are so shallow
that a Louse may suck 'em up without surfeiting, which (...) that noble Portion
of Malice, with which he is Liberally (...) of little use to the Public.


Act Second, Scene Second.
Enter Mulligrub, Doodlesack, Babilard, Coxcomb, Tom, Aesop, etc. Flip IN the
Absence of My Brother Fizle whose occasions have called him away for a little
time, I am to acquaint you, That he has of his own free Will, mere Motion and
by virtue of the Plenitude of his Patriarchal Authority, chosen and elected you
for his Consistory-men and Counselors in all Cases and Causes Visible and
Invisible.


Coxcom. We are highly honored by his Choice, and Promise an Implicit Obedience
to his pleasure. Enter Fizle.


Fizle. O Horror! O Abomination! was ever the like seen, heard or read of!


Flip. What Is the Matter?


Fizle. As I went to Robe my self for the more decent Attendance on this
Consistory I found my Robes in this Pickle! That Vestment, so Reverenced by the
Ancient and Modern World, beskirted and Bedaub'd with what I must not name!


Aesop. Who has done this?


Fizle. Who has done it! Who but the known Enemies to Consistorys and Long
Skirts?


Aesop. But methinks your Discretion should have directed you to our Keeper
with this Complaint.


Fizle. Our Keeper! One of my Brethren told him of it but now, and he coldly
Replied, If Mr. Fizle from the Redundancy of (...) Zeal has beshit himself, the
Abundance of his Wisdom, methinks, should prevail with him to keep the Secret,
and make himself Clean.


Mulligr. A plain Proof the Keeper is the Man.


Coxcomb. Ay, Ay, There Needs No Other Proof; it must be the Keeper.


Fizle. I own, I thought so from the beginning; but what course shall we steer
for Redress?


Flip. If I may be thought worthy to advise in a matter of this Moment, we
shall immediately Address My Lord Oinobaros on this head, he being a Devotee to
Long Robes of both Gendres, must highly Resent this Affront, and with the
Assistance of Androboros, no less an Enemy to the Keeper, may Manage it to his
Ruin and our Satisfaction.


Babil. Let Mr. Fizle draw up an Address, and we'll all sign it.


Fizle. Gentlemen, If such is your pleasure, I Will retire with the Clerk,
prepare one, and submit it to your Approbation.


All. Pray go about it. Exit Fizle and Tom.


Aesop. I Resent this Affront to the Long Robe as much as any Man, but methinks
you proceed too hastily, and upon too slender Grounds against your Keeper. We
all know the Malice of Mr. Fizle's heart, and that it has Increased in
proportion to the Keepers good Nature. Had he been oftener Checked, he had been
less Troublesome to himself and us. Let us not provoke our Keeper; for my part,
I think he is a good one.


Coxcom. What! is he not an Enemy to the Consistory?


Aesop. No, he is an Enemy to their Folly, and can well distinguish between the
Function and the Person who abuses it. Pray give me leave to divert you, 'till
Fizle returns, with another Tale; It is harmless, and I hope will give no
Offense.

In the beginning God made Men,
And all was well, but in the End
Men made their Gods, and Fondly paid 'em.
The Worship due to him that made 'em,
And all was wrong; for they Increased,
And Multiplied like Man and Beast.
But none were bold in Reverence
So much as Phoebus, God of sense
And Nonsense, Patron, as occasion
Did serve, of Arts and Inspiration.
Once on a day as he was led
About to give a Cast of's Trade,
Whether to Dance, or Sing, or Fiddle,
Or as some say, to read a Riddle,
I know not; but what-e'er it was,
His Veh^cle was but an Ass,
And he none of the wisest neither;
For when the Crowd had got together
To pay due Homage to their God,
Strowing with Flowers the Path he rode,
And singing P^^ans, the vain Beast
Believed all this, to him Address't:
He Pranc'd, and Flung, and Frisk'd about,
Scattering much Dirt among the Rout,
And brayed as if h' had got a Pack
Of Dev'ls, and not a God on's back.
The Crowd essayed by gentle ways,
To Curb his Pride, and smooth Pace;
But all was talking to the Wind;
For Zeal is deaf, when-e'er it is blind.
Finding all other Methods fail,
They seized him by the Ears and Tail,
And took the Idol from his back,
With many a lusty Bang and Thwack.
They let him know, that Phoebus was
The God, and he was but an Ass.
How do you like it? It is an old Tale, but a true Eccum Ipsum; let him speak for
himself.


Act Secon^ Scene Third.
Enter Fizle and Tom. Fizle. GEntlemen, I have finished the Address Is it your
pleasure that the Clerk read it?


All. Ay, Ay.


Tom. reads. To the most Potent Lord Oinobaros, Court of Kynommati^, Baron of
Elaphokardia, The General Consistory of New (...) Humbly Represent, That we
your Excellencies ever (...) Subjects,


Fizle. Devoted Subjects.


Tom. Under a deep sense of the manifold Bastings we Enjoyed.


Fizle. Blessings, you Ouph you.


Tom. Blessings we Enjoyed under your Wild Administration.


Fizle. Mild Administration.


Tom. Mild Administration, find our selves at this time under a Nonsensical
Inclinat^on.


Fizle. What Is that? Let me see it, Non-sensical Inclination! It cannot be so, It
is Indispensible Obligation.


Tom. Ay, it should be so.


Fizle. Write it down so then.


Tom. It Is done. Finding our selves under an Incomprehensible Obstinat^on.


Flip. 'Owns'! That Is worse than the other.


Tom. Cry Mercy, That is a blunder, Indispensible Obligati^n to have Recourse
to your Excellencies known Condemnable Opposition to our Consistory, and all
Things Sacred.


Fizle. I think the Devilish is in the Fellow. It is Commendable Disposition.


Tom. You use so many Long Words, that a Clerk who is not a Scholar may easily
mistake one for another. Toward our Consistory, and all things Sacred, Take
leave humbly to Represent, That on the Evening which succeeded the following
Day.


Fizle. Thou Eternal Dunce! The Evening which preceded All-hallowday,


Tom. Which preceded All-hallowday some open or secret Enemies to this
Consistory broke into our Cupboard.


Fizle. Wardrobe.


Tom. Wardrobe, taking from thence some Lumber appertaining to the Chief of our
Rogues, I mean; some Robes appertaining to the Chief of our Number, which they
Inhumanely Tore to pieces and Bedaub'd with Odor.


Mulligrub. Hold! I make Exception to that, for there are sweet Odours as well
as sower.


Flip. 'Slid; it is Ordure, (and not Odor) which is but another Name for a T --
d.


Mulligr. Write it down so then, for a T -- is a T -- all the world over*


Aesop. And the more you stir it, the more 'twill stink. But go on.


Tom. Now though we cannot Possibly Prove, yet we Affirm Possitively, That it is
our Keeper.


Aesop. How Is that?


Fizle. He reads wrong; it is, Though we cannot Possitively Prove, yet we Affirm,
That possibly (...) our Keeper. Go on.


Tom Our Keeper, or some of his People, who is guilty of this Facetious Fact.


Fizle. Flagitious F^ct.


Tom. Flagitious Fact. We further beg leave to Represent, That this Morning in
a Collective Body, by a great Brutality of Noises.


Fizle. Plurality of Voices.


Tom. We had declared him a Raskal, but he had the Impudence to send us packing
to our Cells, though we had several Merduous Matters under the In^^ection of
our Hose.


Mulligrub Hold! I do not well understand that, Read it again.


Fizle. He cant read his own Hand; it is Several Arduous Matters under the
Inspection of our House. Go on.


Tom. Wherefore it is our humble and earnest Supplication, That we may be once
more put under your Wild Distraction.


Fizle. Mild Direction.


Tom. Or that of the Excrement Androboros.


Fizle. Excellent Androboros.


Tom. That so we may give a Loose to Our Knavery.


Fizle. I Am afraid, Sirrah, you are a Knave; Get loose from our Slavery.


Tom. I Am afraid, Sirrah, you are a Knave; Get loose from our Slavery, and fix
a stolid Security for our Nasty Foundations.


Fizle. Is the Devilish in thee! A solid Foundation for our lasting Security.


Tom, A solid Foundation for our lasting Security. And your Petitioners, like
Asses as they are, in a durty Pound, shall never cease to Bray.


Fizle. (Raskal! it should be) like as they are in Duty Bound, shall never
cease to pray. (I could swear he reads thus on purpose.)


Aesop. And not be For-sworn. But have you done?


Tom. Yes, an't please your Honors.


Fizle. Gentlemen, do you approve of this Draught?


Aesop. I like it as the Clerk read it.


Mulligrub. I approve of all, except the Ordure; I Will have it a T --:


Coxcom. You Will have it a T --, A T -- in your Teeth; it shall stand as it is
Ordure.


Mulligrub. T -- d.


Doodlesack (...) on the Cant van de T -- d.


Babilard Let us Compromise the Matter, and make it Turdure.


All. Ay, agreed.


Aesop. Gentlemen, you have agreed to the Draught of an Address; but what is to
be done with it?


Coxcom. Transmitted to Oinobaros.


Aesop. For what purpose?


Coxcomb. To ged Rid of our Keeper, and get Oinobaros in his room.


Aesop If you should, my mind Forbodes you would repent the Change.


Coxcomb. Why?


Aesop, Why! why because a man who could never yet Govern himself, will make
but a sorry Governor for others*


Coxcomb. Have a care what you say; That is Scandalum Magnatum.


Doodlesac. Pray, Mr. Tom. Wat is dat ^ating? Ick fore^t^e't ni^t*


Tom. He say, my Lord is in a very great Post, called, The Scandal^^ in
Magnatum.


Doodlesack Is it given him lately.


Tom. No, he has it by inheritance.


(...) Be advised by me; Lay your Address aside, and keep as you are; As for
your Keeper, none of you can say that he ^as done you any ha^m; and for my part
I am convinced, that he has done us much good. I must beg leave to tell you a
Story.


Coxcomb. Hang you and your Storys; we shall not mind 'em.


Aes^p. You may give it the same fair play you did to Mull^^^ub's Speech; hear
it, though you do not mind it. I pray your patience.

The Frogs, a Factious fickle Race,
With little Manners, and less Grace,
Croak'd for a King so loud,
That all the Host of Heaven sat mute
Nodding to Jove to grant their suit,
And give 'em what they would.
A King they had, of such a size
Who Is Entry too, made such a Noise,
That Every Neut and Frog
Affrighted, run to hide their heads;
Some in the Pool, some amongst the Reeds*
Like Fools, 'Twas but a Log.
At last, one bolder than the rest,
Approached, and the new Prince Address't,
No hurt from thence sustained,
He mocked his former Fears, and swore
'Twas the best stick of Wood that over
The Marshes ever Reigned.
Then all the Croaking Crew drew near,
And in his shade from the angry Air
Were sheltered safe, and eased,
Nay, more then that, they would frisk and play
Upon his back a live long day,
He Undisturbed and pleased.
The Pertest Frog of all the Pack,
A Toad, some say, his hue was Black;
It Is true; but that is no matter,
Upon the passive Monarch's head,
At times would Noxious Venom shed,
And both his sides bespatter.
'Twas That same Frog, the Legends tell,
Burst when he only meant to swell,
Soon after these Events.
Be that as 'twill, 'twas He that drew
That giddy Senseless Crowd to new
Sedition and Complaints.
Give us a bustling King, Dread Sir!
They cry^d, a King that makes a stir;
This is not to be moved.
Jove heard and gave 'm one, who is care
Was, that they should Obey and Fear,
No matter how they Loved.
It was a Sto^k, who is Law-less Rage
Spared neither Sex, Degree nor Age,
That came within his reach.
And that was great, for whilst his Claws
Ransack't the Deep, his Vulturs Jaws
Could wander over the Beach.
Then they Implored the God to send
From heaven a Plague, from Hell a Fiend,
Or any but this Curse.
Peace, cried the Monarch of the Gods,
Ye Worms; Keep him you have, it is odds
The Next may prove a Worse.
Now If you please, you may put the Question about your Address. I take it to
be Log or Stork.


Enter Doorkeeper. Doorkeeper. Here Is a Courier from Androboros, just
returned from the Expedition, who desires Admittance.


Aesop. It is the most Expeditious Expedition I ever heard of; let us adjourn
the Address, and receive the General's Message.


Fizle. Let him come in.


Enter Messenger. Messenger. The Renowned Androboros with a tender of his
hearty Zeal and Affection sends this to the Consistory, the Senate being
Discontinued.


Delivers a Letter. Fizle Reads. RIght Frightful and Formidable, We Greet you
Well, And by this Acquaint you, That for many Weighty Considerations Us
thereunto moving, We have thought fit to adjourn the Indended Expedition to a
more proper season, because we have, upon due and Mature Examination been fully
convinced, that the Mulomachians, our Reputed Enemies, are in very deed our
good and faithful Friends and Allies, who, to remove all Doubts and Scruples,
have freely offered to Consolidate Consistories with us, as also to divide with
us the Commerce of the World, generously resigning and yiedling to us that of
the two Poles, reserving to themselves only what may lie between them. They have
likewise Condescended that we shall keep some Forts and Holds, which by the
Fortune of the War they could not take from us, and have promised and engaged
to Raze and Demolish some Places in their Possession to our prejudice, so soon
as more Convenient are built in their ^oom and place. You are further to
understand, to your Great satisfaction, that this is a Treaty Litteral and
Spiritual* so that having two Handles it may be Executed with the greater
Facility, or if need be, the One may Execute the other, and so it may Execute
it self. Now these Concessions (though it be well known that I hate Boasting)
having been obtained, in a great measure, by the Terror of my Name and Arms, I
expect your Thanks. And so we bid you heartily Farewell.

Androboros.


Aesop. Buzzzzz, Hummmmm, Buzzzzz --


Fizle. What Return shall we give to this Civil and Obliging Message?


Aesop. Return him his Letter.


Coxcomb. No, let us vote him Thanks, a Statue and a Triumph!


Enter Keeper. Keeper. Be not surpised, I have heard what you are about, and
Cordially join with you in what you propose, in honor of the Valiant
Androboros, Having received instructions from my Superiors to use that mighty
Man according to his Deserts.


Aesop. What! Is our Keeper Mad too?


Keeper. In the Mean time, all Retire to your respective Apartments* until due
Dissposition be made for his Reception.


Exit manent Fizle and Aesop. Act Second, Scene Fourth.
WHat Man! In The Dumps, because our Keeper let fall a word or two about Orders
to use a certain great Man according to his deserts!

Aesop. I hope he has received the same Orders relating to you.


Fizle. There is more in this than you Imagine; I ever believed, that it would
come to this at last.


Aesop. Why? What Is the matter?


Fizle. The Keeper undoubtedly has received Orders to resign to Androboros.


Aesop. What then?


Fizle. What then! I Will tell you what then; Then My Brethren and I shall have
our due, and you with yours be proud to lick the Dust off our Feet.


Aesop. Ha'nt ye your Allowence?


Fizle. What of that? That Is no more then the Law gives us.


Aesop. And you would have more. Law or Custom make an Inch to an Ell very fair
allowance; you, it seems, want an Ell to an inch. I wish your Stint might be
some how ascertained; but that, I doubt, cannot easily be compassed. And
whosoever, by giving hopes to find an end of your Craving will find himself
deceived, I Will tell you a Tale to this

The Rats, a Tribe much better fed
Then taught, that mortally abhorred
To work, loved ease and eating, fled
For shelter to a Saxon Lord,
Who Is Barns and Paunch were ever full,
And nothing Emply but his Skull.
Here did they Revel at their ease,
Far from the watchful Pusses Eye;
For he had banished all that Race
For the Love they bore to liberty
And Cleanliness, Things to his Nature
As opposite as Fire to Water.
His steward put him often in mind,
That all his plenty only served
To Fatten Vermin, whilst the Hind
That Labored, and his Servants starved;
And what was worse, the Infirm and Por^
Unfed, unpitied, plied his Door.
To this, the Chu^le replied at length,
And they may all starve on for me,
The Rats eat not above a Tenth,
These would Consume me one in Three,
They are the Rats that would destroy me,
The others cannot much annoy me.
The pampered Tribe familiar grown
By this Indulgence, Lodged themselves
No more as heretofore they ad done,
In holes and Corners, and on Shelves,
But in his Robes, and in the upshot,
They ate his very Heart and Guts out.
God beyt't ye. Exit Esop.


Fizle. Rats! a Dog! I Will Rat ye, ye Whoreson Tale-Teller, you Vermin! a Son of
a Whore -- Exit Fizle.


Act Third,
Scene First.
Enter Keeper, Deputy, Tom and Servant. Deputy. WIth all due Submission, Sir,
give me leave to ask you what you mean by the splendid Reception you have
promised to give to that Odd Man?


Keeper. Very Little besides Diversion. My Superiors, as I am informed, have
Clothed him with Sham-Powers merely to get rid of his Noise and Trouble; and
since these must fall to my share, I Will humor him to keep him quiet.


Deputy. That is not to be hoped for whilst he lives.


Tom. Persuade him that he is dead then.


Keeper and Deputy. Ha, Ha* Ha,


Tom. It is far from Impossible, however Extravagant you may think the
Overture. If you will be ruled by me, I Will answer for the Success of what I
propose, under any Penalties you please. I Am sure he has had the Art to Dream
himself into Notions every whit as Absurd. His Imagination is very ductile when
it is heated, and by a Long Practice upon it, he has made it as susceptible of
Impressions from Without, as it has been of these from Within. Do you but when
he appears, behave your selves as if he were Invisible, and take no manner of
Notice of what he shall say or do, and I Will answer for the rest. Here he comes,
mind him not.


Enter Androboros. Tom. I was not present, Sir, when he Expired, but arrived a
few Minutes after.


Keeper, So suddenly too! I wish he may not have had foul play.


Androb. Your Servant* Gentlemen, I hope I do not Interrupt you; pray, who is
it you speak of?


Tom. No, Sir, he died of an uncommon Disease, The Physicians call it, a
Tympany in the Imagination, occasioned by a collection of much Indigested
Matter there, which for want of due Excretion, made a breach in the Pericrane,
at which that great Soul took its flight.


Keeper. Had he made his Will?


Androboros. Pray, Gentlemen, who is it that is Dead?


Tom. I have not heard of any.


Androb. Cry mercy, I thought --


Tom. Only about the time he Expired, he Cried, I leave This World, this
Worthless World to My Delamya, O Delamya!


Androb. You Impudent Dog you, dare but to Profane that sacred Name with thy
base breath, and I Will crush thee to Nothing.


Tom. Hark, did not you hear an odd Noise?


Deputy. Something like the Humming of a Be.


Tom. Me thinks it sounded rather like the Breath of the Bung of an Empty
Barrel.


Androb. You Saucy Knave, Take that. Strikes him a Box of the Ear


Tom. It was nothing but a Flea in my Ear. [Scratching his Ear.] And so, (as I
was saying*) with that Name in his Mouth he Expired.


Androb. Gentlemen, I am not to be made a May Game, your betters shall be
acquainted with your Conduct. Exit.


Keeper. Run Tom, and allay or baulk his Fury. Exit Tom.

What do you think of Tom's Project, is it Not an Odd One?


Deputy. I hardly believe Hell succeed, but if he does, what then!


Keeper. Then We shall live at ease, he will dream no more, when he thinks that
he is dead. It is amazing that this Man's Visions, like Yawning, should be
catching. The Inhabitants of this Tenement are not the only Dupes of his
Quixotism.


Deputy. That Indeed is matter of Wonder; and if the Countenance given to Folly
be not all Grimace, The World is as Mad as he.


Enter Tom. Tom. I have Instructed the Porter, and the other Servants, and have
proclaimed to all, the General remains Incognito, until he makes his Public
Entry, and that no notice is to be taken of him* more then if he were Absent,
under the Pain of his highest Displeasure.


Keeper. So far all goes well. But you must Entrust Solemn and Aesop with your
Plot.


Tom. I have already. The first is to be my Conjurer


Keeper. Conjurer!


Tom. Yes, my Conjurer; To him alone, and that too but some times, he shall be
visible, to all besides, a shadow, an Emply Name. Here they come.


Enter Solemn and Aesop. Keeper. Gentlemen, you have your Q.


Solemn. Do you but keep your Countenance, leave the rest to us.


Chairs and a Table, they sit down. Enter Androboros. Androb. Sure all the
World is Mad, or have a mind to make me so; I tried to get out, but the Porter
lean't his Staff against my Nose, and belch't full in my Chops; a Culverine
could not have done more sudden Execution than that Erruption of Barm and
Tobacco Smoke.


Solemn. When is he to be Interred?


Tom. This Evening, but is to lie in State here till then.


Androboros, I made a Shift to recover my self, and attempted the back passage;
but in the Door of the Kitchen I was saluted with a Pale of cold Water, which
had like to have been succeeded by a Shovel of burning Coals, but that I made a
speedy Retreat. Something's the matter, what ever it is; I Will listen here and
find it out.


Keeper. But* why so suddenly? It Is strange so Great a Man should be buried
with so little Ceremony.


Androb. Buried, said he!


Tom. It is done by the advice of Physicians, who have declared that his
Disease was such as makes a man stink vilely after he is dead.


Keeper. The fair Delamya! how does she bear the Loss?


Tom. She Is Inconsolable, ready to burst her sides.


Keeper. How! Tom? Yes, Sir, Excess of Joy makes some People Weep; Excess of
Grief makes her Laugh^^^ Inordinately, and Cry out Incessantly, Are these our
promised Joys, O Androboros! One Grave shall hold us. And then she laughs again.


Androb. Androboros, it seems then I Am dead; it is odd that I should not know
it. I Will try that. Takes a Chair.


Keeper* Poor Lady, she loved him well, I doubt she will be as good as her Word.


Aesop. Who set this Empty Chair by me?


Solemn. Save me, ye Kinder Powers, and guard my Senses!


Keeper. What Is the matter Man? What do you see?


Tom. It is but a Raving fit, the Effect of deep study* he is often taken so.


Solemn. No, my sense is temperate as yours. Look there, There


Aesop. There is a Chair, What then? Shoveing it with his Foot.


Solemn. Have ye no Eyes? Cannot you see?


Keeper. For my part I see nothing but what I use to see.


Solemn. Why there, in that Chair sits the Venerable Form of the deceased
Androboros, in nothing differing from that Awful Figure he once made, but that
you regard it not.


Keeper. Sure he Raves.


Aesop. That Chair. Why there is nothing in that Chair. There it lies.


Strikes down Androboros, Chair and all. Solemn. O! Offer it no Violence.


Androb. You Old Dog, I Will be Revenged. Goes off.


Solemn. See how it Stalks off! With what Majestic Air, and how Stern a Brow!
It Resents the Indignity offered. Ha, Ha, Ha.


All. Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha.


Tom. Now we have him; it begins to work, if I do not mistake his Looks.


Deputy. I had much ado to contain my self.


Keeper. What Is next to be done?


Tom. Trust that to me; but be sure not to mind him, even though he should be
Outrageous. To Solemn only he must be visible for some time. Have you got your
Conjuring Tackle ready?


Solemn. I have. that will serve the turn. O here he comes again in very
pensive Mood and doleful Dumps. All walk off, as if you saw him not; I Will
remain alone.


Exeunt Keeper, Deputy, Tom and Aesop, passing by Androboros without taking
Notice of him. Act Third, Scene Second.
Solemn at the Table with Books and Implements. Enter Androboros. Androb. It Is
Strange, Wondrous strange, I should take the whole to be a Trick, were it not
that my best, my firmest Friends, who never could be Induced to practice upon
me in this gross manner, behave themselves to my Face as if they saw me not.
Whilst I sat at that Table, That only Raskal, Solemn saw me, and started and
star'd as if he had seen a Ghost; The rest saw nothing. They were talking of my
Disease, Death, Burial and latter Will, as of things certain, and of public
knowledge. I think I Am pretty sure that I am Alive, though it seems, I am
singular in that belief. I See, I Feel, I Hear as I used to do, even now I hear
my own Voice as plain as can be; I have Thought and Reflection as usual. But,
Alas! departed Spirits if they think at all, must think that they do think,
that is, that they are not dead, -- It may be so -- Even that very Knave who
but now could see me, sits musing by himself as if if I were not here. I
Remember it was the Common Opinion that a Ghost that walks, could be seen but
by One of a Company. But why should he be blind now? Walks nearer.


Solemn. It must Portend some sudden Change in the State; For Ghosts of Note
never walk but upon these solemn Errands.


Androb. He does not see me yet; I remember I was on the other side when he saw
me last. Goes to the other side.


Solemn. If the poor Spirit is permitted once more to haunt these Walls, I Will
question it, if my Courage fail me not; he may, perhaps, have something of
Moment in Commission.


Androb. If you cannot see me, cannot you hear me, you old Devilish you? Bawling.


Solemn. How painful, yet unprofitable are all the deeper ways of Art? The
Vulgar undisturbed, Frequent the silent Shades, and quietly enjoy the pleasure
of soft Recess or Balmy Slumbers, whilst I whom Science has raised so far above
them, have not a peaceful hour. If at any time I would see into Futurity, I
must take my Talisman, and then all Ghosts or Specter which chance at that
time to crowd the Ambient Air, become visible to me, and to me alone. Not
dreaming of any search into the Intellectual World; but by mere Chance, I
grasped my Talisman thus, when straight --

Takes a Tobacco-stopper out of his Pocket. Starts up Wildly. Angels and all
the Ministers of Grace, Defend me. Be thou a Spirit of (...) or Goblin Damned!
Bring with thee Airs from Heaven, or Blasts from Hell, Thou Come in such a
Questionable Shape, I Will speak to Thee. Thanks Good Hamlet for this again, I Will
Softly call thee General. Valiant Androboros, O speak.


Androb. I tell you, ye Old Fool --


Solemn. O speak, if ought of dire Import.


Androb. Why, I Will tell you, Sirrah --


Solemn. (...) this our state disturbs thy sacred Shade, impart, O speak.


Androb. Let me speak then, and be hanged --


Solemn. For sure no common Cause could raise thee from thy silent Hearse.


Androb. 'Owns! Can your Talisman make you See, and not make you Hear, You Old
Conj'ring Dog, you?


Solemn. Its Lips Tremble, as if it would Speak, but this is not the time. Up,
Up, my Talisman, and give thy Master and the Perturbed Spirit Quiet for a
Season. -- Puts Up his Tobacco-stopper. Now all is well again. -- Sits Down.
Sure something is Amiss, what-e'er it is. Now he has lost Sight of Me again.


Androb. Take out your what d'ye-call't once more, and may be I may tell you
all.


Solemn. If I should impart this Odd Event to others, they will not Credit it,
and to show him in his Aerial Form, I dare not.


Androb. Can you show me to other Folks? I Am glad of that. You shall --


Solemn. Lest the Odious Name of Conjurer should be fixed upon me, and I (such
is the prevailing Ignorance and Envy of the Age) instead of being Reverenced
for my Science be hanged for a Wizzard.


And^ob. Look ye, I Will answer for you.


Solemn. Some other time I Will venture further, Mean while it is fit that I
retire and ruminate upon this odd Phoenomenon, and find out by my Talismanick
Art some means to unsear its Lips. Exit.


Androb Unsear your Ears, ye Old Buzzard, I can speak, but you, it seems, cannot
hear. He Is gone, a Pestilence go with him. I cannot tell what to think of it; Am
I bew'itch't, or am I really Dead, as they say? It cannot be. Why, is not that
a Hand as plain as a Pike Staff? Is not this a Nose? Don't I feel? Yes surely,
to my Cost; for my back Aches still with the bruise I got when that Villain
Aesop Over-set my Chair -- yet I remember to have heard the learned say, that
it is the Soul alone that Feels, the Body is but a Senseless Mass. If I did not
think, I should not feel; then Perhaps I only think I feel. Think! I know not
what to think, or whether I think at all, If I am Alive or Dead, or whether I
ever was alive or no. Sure all this cannot be a Dream; I wish it were, and that
I were fairly awake. O here come my good Friends, Fizle and Fl^p. Now I shall
know.


Enter Fizle and Flip. Fizle. You must take no Notice of him at all, before he
makes his Public Entry; He Will have it so, and you know his Humor. Poor Tom has
been Whipped almost to Death by his Orders, for barely Saluting him.


Flip. That is a little Whimsical, by the by; me thinks he might be visible to
his Friends.


Androb. What Is that? Pray Gentlemen, let me ask you one Question, because I
hear, That there is some Doubt my Visibility; Do You see me? Am I Alive or Dead?
What do you Think?


Fizle. I told you so, this he does to try our Obedience. Answer him Not.


Androb. Will neither of you Answer me?


Fizle. At six a Clock I Will meet you here again. Adue.


Exeunt severally, without Noticing him. Androb. They Are Gone, and saw me not!
Nay, then it is too True, I am Dead, as sure as I Am Alive; Dead, Dead as a
Herring, and something worse too; for I am Condemned to Converse with no Body,
but Old Solemn, who ever was a Hell upon Earth to me. Would I could change that
Doom for any other. Could I but have the Company of my fellow Ghosts, I should
be in some measure Happy, but that is not my Lot, it seems. If the Old Conjurer
can but unsear Lips, as he calls it, or uncork his own Ears, as I take it, I
might perhaps prevail with him to Conjure me a little better Conversation than
his own. It is Tormenting, that I must be obliged to him: but there is no
Remedy; I Will Wheedle him with a Story of the other World, of which I know as
little as he does; That may work upon him.


Enter Tom. with a Broom Sweeping the Gallary. Tom. What a Clutter is here
about the Earthing an Old Stinking Corpse, Would he had had lain in State in
some other place; but rest his Soul, such was his Will. Sings.

Whenas Old Nick-N^ck Ruled this Land,
A Doughty Blade he wore.
Four Dozen Hides he Tam^d,
Of Giants eke Four Score.

Androb. I wonder if the Ghosts of other Men hear all the Vile Things that are
said and Sung of them after their Death?


Tom sweeps the Dust on him. Tom. But now he is Dead, and laid in Clay. --

This Dust is most Abominably Salt, I must qualify 't a little.

Drinks, and spurts it upon him. What a Plaguey Earthy Taste this same small
Beer has got, all of a sudden. Sings.

But now he is Dead and laid in Clay, --


Androb. That Is a Lie, for I a'n't Buried yet, by his own Confession.


Tom. Alack, and Woe therefore,
The Giants they may go to play,
The Dragons sleep and snore.
What a Carrion stink here is; the more I sweep the more it stinks.


Androb. Solemn Can see me, but cannot hear me; This Fellow can neither see me
nor hear me; but he can smell me; I Will try if he can feel me.


Tom. The Dragons sleep and snore. -- The stink Comes that way. Buts him on the
Breast with the Broom.

I Will Perfume the Air a little. Besprinkles him with the Bottle.


Androb. Hold, Sirrah, hold. Well, if I were alive they durst not have used me
thus; This Usage convinces me more then any thing else. Exit.


Tom. He has it, he has it; I doubt it will be a hard matter to persuade him to
Life again.


Act Third, Scene Third.
Enter Fizle and Flip. Fizle. WE see, Tom, you are very busy. But if it be no
Interruption, pray give us leave to ask you, In what manner the General is to
make his Entry?


Tom. You have it.


Fizle. Nay, Answer us Directly.


Tom. I do, you have Leave.


Flip. Well then, In what manner is the General to make his Entry?


Tom. Ask him.


Fizle. Thank you for (...) him, and have our Curiosity answered as yours was.
But we know that it depends in ^ great measure on the Keeper, and you of late
are more (...) than we.


Tom. If it depends upon the Keeper, He Will make his Entry by way of Exit? If
upon himself, it is Problematical, and admits of several Solutions.


Flip. As how?


Tom. Either, Hurry-Durry, Hum-Drum, or Blud and 'Owns. Rest you Merry,
Gentlemen. Exit.


Fizle. We shall learn nothing from this Fellow; but so far we know, that the
Keeper must assist at it; And from a broad by hints we have understood, that if
he is destroyed any how, so the General be not seen in it, He Will take that Trust
upon himself; Then all will be Well. Now if we can but Contrive to have the
Chair over Loaded, placed Upon the Hatch over the Vault, and the Hatch
Unbolted, or so weakly Barred, that its weight may sink him Down, we shall get
Rid of him, and it will appear to the world to be the mere Effect of Chance.


Tom. Peeping. Are you there with your Bears? I shall be up with you. I Will go
find out Solemn, and try to build on this Foundation of their own Laying. Exit.


Flip This is Admirable, and cannot fail; Let Us loose no time, but go about it
straight; I Will get into the Vault, and Prepare the Bolt; do you take care to
place the Chair^ Here comes old Solemn; no more words, but Mumm. Exeunt.


Enter Solemn. and Tom. Solemn* Are you sure that you heard distinctly? The
Excess of the Villainy makes it incredible!


Tom. Am I sure that I live? But if you doubt it, the very Tampering with the
Chair will Convince you.


Solemn. Away then, acquaint the Keeper, and Aesop, leave the rest to me. One
thing you must take care be Punctually Observed, that is, That Androboros
Friends be planted next to the Chair, by way of Precedence. Quick, Quick, be
gone.


Tom. I fly. Exit.


Solemn. When Malice becomes a Moral Virtue, that Couple must be sainted; if
the Long Robes were made use of only to Cover the Personal Defects and
Blemishes of those who wear 'em, much might be said in their Defense; but when
they are worn or lent to Cover Daggers, and Poison prepared for the Innocent,
is there a Mortal so devoid of Humanity as to appear on their side? If, as the
Philosophers speak, the Corruption of the best Things produces the Worst, the
Abuse of Things Sacred must he Devilish. O! you are come in good time.

Enter Aesop. Pray get all in order for this same Entry; Neglect not that part
of the Ranking of them, which I, by Tom, recommended to you. I Will Equip the
General, and dispose him for his Triumph: In the mean while do you Intertain
'em with a Tale, or how you please, until he comes.


Aesop. Dispatch then, for they grow Impatient. Exit Aesop.


Enter Androboros. Androb. I hope he has by this time found a way to unsear my
Lips or his own Ears, no matter which.


Solemn. Here he comes pat. Nick-Nack, How dos't do? I Am glad to see thee Awake
with all my heart.


Androb Is the Devilish in the Fellow? He can see me now without the help of his
Gym^^^ck, not to mention your odd Familiarity. What do you mean by Awake? When
was I asleep?


Solemn. Asleep! You have been so ^^me out of mind. You have been Walking
asleep, Talking asleep, and Fighting asleep, I know not how long.


Androb. I Am glad it is no Worse; I Thought I was Dead, at least every body else
seemed to think so


Solemn. Dead! No, No; it is all a Jest.


Androb. Why, you old Rascal, you, Did not you but now start at the ^^^ght of
me, as if you had seen a Ghost?


Solemn. True; yet you are not actually Dead, but Invisible to all the World
besides, and must continue so, so long as I shall think fitting.


Androb. aside. I ever thought this Fellow had the black Art. [to him] I wish
thou would change that Curse for any other. Can thou not make thy self
invisible to me, as thou have done me to other Folks? so far I own I would be
obliged to thee, and thank thee.


Solemn. If that will oblige you, it is done, Look but into this Tellescope, and
in that instant I shall become invisible to you. Looks into a hollow Ca^e,
Solemn from the other End blows Snuff into his Eyes. It is done?


Androb. Villian, Dog, Raskal, I Am blind; Where are ye, ye Villian, Murderer?


Solemn. Here, This way, This way; You must see with your Ears, until I shall
think fit to Unsear your Eyes, General; That is the bargain, if I remember
right. Exit Solemn, Androb. Groping his way after him.


Act Third, Scene Fourth.
Curtain drawn, Discovers Keeper, Deputy, Tom, Aesop, Fizle, Flip, Coxcomb,
Babilard, Mullegrub, etc. Keeper. LEt the Black Gentlemen be Ranked as they
desire; I Will do all I can to please them.


Aesop. With all my Heart, Only I thought it bad Heraldry that these who are
supported by the Chair, should support it.


Keeper. Another time you shall have your way; I Will have it so now; let the
Rest observe their distance. Here they are rank's, Fizle and Flip next to the
Chair.


Aesop. I Will keep as distant as I can, that I may be at Ease; Fizle's Phiz
always gives me the Chollick. I know not why he should be suffered to walk at
Large, to the Detriment of his Majestys Liege People, whilst so many of his
Species up and down the World are Insty'd, Inkennel'd, Impounded or
Incloyster'd. Did you ever hear how that same about? I Will tell you, if you
please.


Keeper. Come on.


Aesop. And First of the First

Nature, which nothing leaves to Chance,
Had dealt to Creatures of each Kind,
Provision for their Sustenance,
To some her Bounty had Assigned
The Herb of the Fields, whilst others had
The Spoils of Trees, but All were Fed.
The Grunting Kind obtained the last,
A happy Lot; for every Wood
Afforded store of Nuts and Mast,
And Joves own Tree did Shower down Food
Enough for all, could all his Store
Have kept that Herd from Craving more.
But they with Sloth and Plenty Cloyed,
Waxed Wanton, and with Tusks Profane,
First, all the sacred Trees Destroyed,
Which fed 'em; Next invade the Plain,
Where harmless Flocks did graze, and Spo^^
With Ravenous Snouts the fertile Soil.
Jove hears the loud Complaints and Cry's
Of Suffering Flocks, and straight Ordains,
That henceforth Hogs be pen't in Sty's.
And fed with Wash, and Husks, and Grains,
Where ever since the Unhallowed Race
Wallows in Fat and Filthyness.
Secondly, Beloved --


Keeper. No, No, We have enough of the first. Noise within. What Noise is that?


Androb. within. I Will have the Villian Hanged; Dog, Raskal, Rogue, Scoundrel.


Aesop. By my Life, it is the General making his Entry; It seems he has got no
Herald for this Triumph, that he thus Proclaims his own Titles*


Enter Solemn, Androboros following him. Solemn. Make way there, Make way;
Room, Room for the General. This Way, -- This Way --


Solemn Steps aside, Androboros Runs blindly upon the Chair, Fizle and Flip
Endeavoring to Stop him, Sink with Him. Fizle and Flip. Hold, Hold; Help!
Help! Help!


Keeper. What Is the meaning of this?


Solemn. It Is but a Trap of their Own laid for you, Sir, in which They
Themselves are Caught.


Coxcomb. Let Us be gone! There is no Safety here.


Coxcom. Babi^ord, Mulligrub Sneaking off. Solemn, What! You are a making your
Retreat; you need not fear, you are a sort of Vermin not worth the Bait; The
others have their Deserts.

In former Ages virtuous Deeds
Raised Mortals to the blessed Abodes,
But Hero's of the Moden Breed
And Saints go downward to the Gods.

Exeunt. Curtain Falls. FINIS.

