Sacramental EXERCISES OR, THE Christian's Employment, Before, At, and After
THE Lords Supper.

BY JABEZ EARL.

BOSTON: Reprinted by T. Fleet. for Daniel Henchman, in King Street, 1715.

TO THE READER
IT is sad to consider how many Professed Christians live in the Utter Neglect
of the Lord's Supper, and how few Communicants are careful to Prepare duly, Eat
and Drink worthily, and Live answerably.

A great deal has been written upon this Occasion, to which I have added the
following Sheets, which I may be allowed, I hope, to Publish, without being
thought to pretend to any thing Extraordinary, or detract from the Excellent
Performances of others.

For while the Case requires and admits Help, there can be no Harm in making
further Trials; especially in those Circumstances where the most likely Means
are not ever the most Effectual: But Success more especially depends upon the
Divine Blessing, which is not always given in Regular Proportion to the Natural
Aptitude of the Means, but sometimes in a sovereign and unaccountable Manner;
That no Flesh should Glory in his Presence.

However, it is too plain to be denied, That the different Capacities and
Relishes of Men make a Variety useful, if not necessary; and that there may be
a Concurrence of many other Circumstances which shall give a meaner
Performance, the Advantage with some People, as to Usefulness, above others
that are more Spritely and Elaborate. Nay, it is no impossible Thing, that a
man may read a Book upon some fore in Consideration, which shall be blessed to
do Him that good which could never be expected from better Discourses not known
of, or not minded.

Upon these Accounts I have Published the ensuing Papers, hoping they may be
useful to some, whatever their General Entertainment be.

I will not detain you any longer than while I desire you to join your Prayers
with mine in recommending these Endeavors to the Blessing of Him who alone can
give the desired Increase.

J. E.
Dec. 22. 1707.
Sacramental EXERCISES.
CHAP. I. The Christian convinced, that its his Duty to come, to the
Lord's-Table.
DO (...) Remembrance of Me. 1 Cor. 11.25. It is the voice of my LORD; and
least I should think it was directed only to his Twelve Disciples, or the
Christians of the First Ages, St. Paul assures me, that this Ordinance is to
run Parallel with Time, and by it the Church is to show forth Christ's Death'
till he come. Consider, O my Soul! Is the Lord at hand? Will he surely come
quickly? How shall I answer it in that Day, that I have neglected so express a
Command? A Command not couched in Ambiguous and Uncertain Terms, but delivered
in as Plain and Positive Expressions as any in the Bible. Sure I am more
Brutish than any Man, and have not the Understanding of a Man! I have professed
a mighty Respect to the Authority of my Redeemer, and a vast Reverence for his
Laws, but how unaccountably have I managed! As though I were to choose what
Commands I would please to obey, and were vested with a dispensing Power,
superior to the Obligation of his Precepts, to whom all Power is given both in
Heaven and in Earth. Mat. 28.18.


Blush, O my Soul, and be ashamed at so inconsistent a Conduct! Either Christ
is thy Prince and Lawgiver, or He is not. If not, profess (...) self an
Infidel, and renounce thy Baptism. If He be, obey him in all that he requires,
and either believe, that he has not made it thy Duty to Remember Him, or yield
a Cheerful Subjection in this, as well as other Instances.

When He has said, Do this, either He does not mean what He says, or does not
speak to thee; or else thy Disobedience is at once inexcusable and
unaccountable.

Can the Words be wrested? Is any Sophistry capable of contesting their Sense?
What can Do this, signify less than a Positive Command? Or, how can the Will of
my Prince be ever signified, so as to oblige me, if so plain Terms are by any
Cavil to be eluded?

But does He speak to me? If I were a true Disciple, I were indeed within the
Compass of the Law, and must be either a Communicant or a Rebel.

Consider, O my Soul, and don't rashly dash thy Hopes, to escape thy Duty. It Is
true, I am not such a Christian as I should be: But am I willing to have my
Name missing in the Book of Life? Can I be content to resign my Birthright, and
own that I have neither Lot nor Portion in the Son of God? Would I be passed
by, when the Lord shall count, Psalm. 87.6.
and write up the People? Either I am a Christian, or I am not: If I am, This
Commandment is for me: If I am not, what am I? A Child of Wrath, and a Subject
of the Devil? And is such a Condition tolerable? Let me give up my self to
Christ immediately: Make no tarrying, O my Soul, lest the Avenger of Blood
overtake thee; and lest if thou trifle to Day, thou be lost to Morrow. If I
have been but almost persuaded to be a Christian hitherto, its high Time that I
make an absolute, unreserved Surrender of my self to Christ presently, without
any farther Delay; and then let what I have done here in Secret, be publicly
owned and avouch'd at the Lord's Table.

And now, Lord, All my Desire is before the: I am convinced of rimy Duty, and
dare no longer disobey. Oh forgive me, that I have rebelled so long! I have
been invited to thy Table, and foolishly neglected many an Opportunity of
strengthening and refreshing my Soul. I have been commanded to attend in
Remembrance of Him who deserves never to be forgotten, and by my Neglect have
at once poured Contempt upon thy Authority, and flighted his Love who loved me,
and gave Himself for me.

I bless thee, that I am in some Measure sensible of my Error, and am come to a
Resolution, that I will have Respect to this, as well as other Commands. The
Time past shall suffice me to have lived in the Omission of so plain a Duty,
and the Neglect of so glorious a Privilege. Oh! keep it upon the Imagination of
my Heart for ever, and let me be confirmed in those good Purposes, which thy
own Spirit has led me to form, and no less Power than His can help me to keep!

I am indeed unworthy, but acknowledge the Insufficiency of that Plea, against
a Positive Command. I am unworthy, but must not therefore refuse thy Kindness.
I hope I am in Christ, though the meanest Soul that relates to Him, and therefore
cannot any longer want an Ordinance; in the Use of which, I hope to grow in
Grace, and in the Knowledge of my Lord.

Or, if I have hitherto deceived my self and walked in a vain show, I now
desire to accept the Gospel-Offer, to own my Baptismal Covenant, to avouch
Thee, O Father, Son and Spirit, to be my God, my All, my Everlasting Portion.
Upon my bended Knees I now accept an Offered Savior, and call Heaven and Earth
to witness, that as far as I can Judge, I am sincere. And this I would declare
in the Presence of thy People, begging with some Hope and Confidence, that I
may be accepted now, and found in the Number of the Faithful at last. O direct
me in all the steps I am to take; and let me see my Way, and follow it, and
have Comfort in the Issue, through the Merits and Mediation of my Lord and
Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen,

CHAP. II. The Christian resolved to offer Himself to the Communion.
NOW, O my Soul, thou have opened thy Mouth to the Lord, and can not go back!
Thy next Duty is to apply thy self to the Minister, who is the Steward of these
Mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.1.
that if he judge thee meet, he may admit thee to the Holy Solemnity. Let me
not be foolishly bashful, much less act the Hypocrite; but use the utmost
Frankness with my Spiritual Guide: That he may be able to pass the better
Judgment upon my Case, let me state it fairly; neither pretend to what I have
not received, nor deny what I have. This would be Base Ingratitude; That
Impious Monkery. Freely open thy Breast, and un^osom thy Soul: Tell him thy
^^sires, and their Motives; Confess thy Fears, Doubts and Jealousies, beg his
Prayers, and reverence his Judgment. If he should think thee unfit, ben't
provoked nor discou^^g'd, but take his Counsel, and wait with Pa^ience, 'till
he. Judge thee sufficiently instructed, and duly qualified. If (...) press his
Satisfaction, don't dist^^st him, but believe him a more capable Judge of thy
Case than thou art thy se^^ Not that thou should esteem him infa^lible; It Is
his Master's Province to search Hearts: But sure his Judgment deserves the same
Regard as a Physician's about thy Body, or a Lawyer's concerning thy Estate. Be
faithful in the Account of thy self, and doubt not but he will be faithful in
delivering his Opinion. And with his Faithfulness thou may expect Tenderness,
Condescension and Compassion, in Imitation of the Chief Shepherd who is meek
and lowly in Heart, who will not quench the smoking Flax, Mat. 11.29.
nor break the bruised Reed.

Oh! that God who has convinced me of my Duty, and brought me to a Resolution,
would help me to be open and sincere. Let me not go about to impose upon thy
Minister; which would be justly interpreted as an Attempt to impose upon my
Lord himself, whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire; who cannot be deceived, as
knowing what is in Man; and will not be mocked, as being a Jealous (...). O
give me Freedom, that I may utter what I have felt. Give me Humility, that I
may not be ashamed to discover those Follies and Imperfections that may be at
the Bottom of my Doubts and Scruples. Give me a teachable Disposition, that I
may not despise Instruction. Help me to remember the Relation, in which these
Under-Shepherds stand to the Great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25.


Let me not despise his Judgment of my Case, nor yet lay too great a Stress
upon it, remembering that Ministers may accept where God may reject, and admit
those to the Sacrament, as qualified for Communion with the Church, who yet
shall be found unworthy Receivers, as not having a Wedding Garment.

Oh direct thy Servant, that he may deal prudently and tenderly, and yet
withal, faithfully. Let him be duly appriz'd of my Case, and pass such a
Verdict as the great Judge will ratify.

CHAP. III. After having been approved by the Minister, and allowed to
Communicate.
BE thankful, O my Soul, that God has heard the Voice of thy Supplication! His
Minister has dealt tenderly and faithfully with thee, has encouraged thy
Design, promised the Assistance of his Prayers, given thee Instruction, and
suitable Advice, and nothing more remains, but thy Actual Preparation for that
Holy Ordinance.

But, O see to it, that thy Heart be right. It Is a deceitful Heart thou have to
manage: Look to thy self, that thy Goodness be not as the Morning Cloud and
early Dew, that soon passes away. Remember the Warning the Minister gave thee,
that thou should not act in such a Case without serious Thought, and mature
Deliberation; lest rash Engagements should issue in broken Vows, and cursed
Apostasy.

Take heed, O my Soul, that I ben'^ another Instance to confirm the Truth of
that Awful Observation, of which he told me weeping, That many Hot Professors
have dwindled into Lukewarm Christians, and sometimes fell headlong into the
Gulf of Profaneness and Infidelity Tremble to think if this should be thy sad
Case, and let thy Fear quicken thy Application, that thou may not end in the
Flesh, after having begun in the Spirit.

Yet let me not be discouraged. It Is indeed a great Thing to be a Christian;
but great is the Grace and Mercy of God, Great is the Merit, and Prevalent the
Intercession of my Redeemer, who has prayed for his Disciples, that their Faith
fail not. Luke 22.32.
Great is the power of the Holy Ghost, who can preserve my Graces, to subdue my
Corruptions, help me to Crucify the World, and resist and vanquish the Devil.
Never forget the Encouragement he gave me to hope, that if my Heart don't
reproach me, as acting deceitfully in my Professions and Engagements; and if I
will keep close to God in the Way of his Appointments, I need not fear being
decepted of him now, and having the good Work begun, carried on to the Day of
Jesus.

But. O my Soul, see to it; and again, I say, see to it, that thou do with full
Purpose of Heart cleave to the Lord. That thy present Devotion don't prove a
sudden Flash; but having set thy Hand to the Plough, don't think of looking
back. Remember that awful Text, It had been better for them not to have known
the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21.
than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment. Let this
Word be a Spur to thy Diligence; but not revive thy Scruples. It were better
never to communicate, than afterward to Apostatize.

But will this be a Plea for thy Disobedience? Consider, O my Soul, at this
Rate, thou should never have been Baptized, never called thy self a
Christian, never joined thy self to a worshipping Assembly, never heard a
Semon, or put up a Prayer, never given an Al^^^, or performed a Duty of any
Sort; seeing all these will aggravate thy Misery, if thou prove a Hypocrite, or
Apostate, at last.

Therefore in the Strength of Christ, hold on thy Way: Don't decline thy Lord's
Table, but prepare for it; that being a worthy Communicant here, thou may at
last be a Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Ligh.

Attempt all this in a better Strength than thy own; ever remembering, that of
thy self thou can do nothing, and that, God's Grace is at once necessary and
sufficient for thee.

Now O my God, I adore and praise Thee, that I have been enabled to open my
Case to thy Minister; and that thou have inclined his Heart kindly' to
encourage me, wifely to instruct' me, and faithfully to warn me. O may thy good
Spirit make his Endeavours' effectual, that I may receive Instruction and take
Warning. I am sensible of the Treachery and Baseness of my own Heart; but I am
also acquainted with thy Power, and Mercy, and Faithfulness: Oh let me not
rashly take up a Profession which I shall as hastily ^^andon, or never live up
to.

Help me to understand the Engagements I am going under, that I may count the
Cost, and not prove a Foolish Builder: Help me to Consider the Difficulties and
Disadvantages that attend Religion, and the Troubles it may expose me to. May I
seriously consider, that I must deny my self, and take up my Cross, and follow
Christ, if I would be his Disciple.

Yet let none of these Things move me from my Resolution. O give me such near
and affecting Views of the Glory that is to be revealed, and of that Wrath and
fiery Indignation which awaits the Ungodly: So set Death and Judgment before
me, to impress me with a Sense of the Worth of my Soul, and the Emptiness of
this World; that I may be fully determined to accept a Christ, and adhere to
him with all his Disadvantages; that I my count all things but Loss, for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Him. Phil. 3.8.
And O may this be my unalterable unalterable Persuasion. Let me never turn
aside, nor go a Whoring from Thee. Oh let me not wander from thy Commandments!
Let me never, like an ungracious Prodigal, forsake my Father's House, or count
his Meat contemptible. O never let me deny or forget that Jesus, whom I am so
solemnly to remember and avouch for my Lord and my God. Let the unclean Devil
never re-enter, and take Possession of this Soul, which I Consecrate as a
Temple, to the Holy Ghost. I am full of Fears, and have Reason to be jealous of
my self; but yet I am not void of Hope; nor have any Reason to distrust my God.
Thy Grace is sufficient for me. O for thy Names sake, lead me and guide me: Put
thy Fear into my Heart, that I may never depart from Thee.

And O let not the Deceitfulness of my own Heart, the Encumbrances of the
World, or the Solicitations of the Devil, put me by the Design I have formed
of attending at thy Table; May a Sense of Duty outweigh a Thousand Excuses; and
Hopes of Gracious Assistance, and merciful Acceptance, silence all my Fears.

Yet let me not come unworthily: May I never eat and drink Judgment to my self.
Deliver me from the dreadful Guilt of Crucifying afresh and putting to open
Shame, Him whom I think my Soul loves, and I desire to rememben, avouch and
honor. Keep me from the great Unhappiness of being poisoned by the Richest
Food, and Highest Cordial; of coming for a Blessing, and carrying away a Curse.
Amen, for Jesus Sake.

CHAP. IV. The Christian preparing for the Lord's Supper.
SECT. I.
COnsider, O my Soul, the Day is near, in which I am to appear at the Table of
my Lord! It concerns me to prepare, that I may be a welcome Guest, and a worthy
Receiver. To prepare!. Though the Expression be short, its comprehensive; and I
shall find it implies more Work than can be crowded into a little Time, or done
with a little Pains. Let me therefore redeem some Time from my Business, at
least from my Pleasures, before the Week be far advanced; that unforeseen
Occurrences may not deprive me of an Opportunity to dress my Soul for the
Glorious Solemnity, and put me upon the unhapy Plunge of missing the Feast, or
wanting the Wedding Garment.

And, O my Soul, exert thy self, let all thy Powers be upon the Stretch. What
thou find to do, do it with all thy Might, that thou may not ridiculously
trifle away that Time, which thou seem conscientiously to redeem.

See to it, that in thy Retirements thou be really alone; that the World don't
follow thee into thy Closet; or thy Thoughts fly abroad into the World, and
leave a Heartless Carcass to entertain thy God. If thy Mind ben't fixed upon
the Work before thee, thy Retirements will be but solemn Idleness: Or if the
World be admitted to put thee by thy Duty, the Closet will be but a more
private Compting House.

SECT. II.
LET me now, O my Soul, prepare for my Preparations. Let me lay down the Plan
of my Design, that I may not be at a Loss how to manage, but may go regularly
on without that Confusion of Thought which will lessen the Pleasure and Profit
of my Work.

There appears to be several Branches of that Business, which is called by the
General Name of Preparation. But before I enter upon Particulars, I would first
be deeply possessed of the Necessity of the Duty in General; which will quicken
me to the greater Care and Seriousness in a Business that so well deserves it.

To this End consider closely, that an unprepared Communicant must necess^rily
be an unworthy one. And the Danger of eating and drinking unworthily is
represented by St. Paul in very Awful Terms; such a one eats and drinks
Damnation to himself!

Damnation! Tremble, O my Soul, at the Dismal Thought. Sure it should strike a
Chilness into my Blood, and (...) Horror into my Spirit! Can any Tongue
express, can any Mind conceive the direful Contents of that Expression? However
Interpreters may soften it, the Thro^tning can never be disarmed: The Thunder
of it must needs put a tender Spirit into Convulsions and Agonies, at least
affect him to a very high Degree.

To eat and drink Judgment to ones fel^ can signify no less than falling under
the Displeasure of the Living God. And who knows what it is to be the Object of
his angry Resentments, in whose Favor is Life, and whose Wrath is worse than
Death? If I eat and drink unworthily, the least I can expect is Temporal
Strokes; I am in Danger of Spiritual ones, and deserve Eternal Vengeance.
Indeed there is Forgiveness with God; but shall I sin because Grace abounds? At
that Rate, I may venture In Defiance of that Word, Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will Judge, etc. or commit the worst of Villainies, because God is good, and
plen^^^us in Mercy.

Nor yet shall this Thought deter me from my Duty; for upon the same Principle
I must abstain from Hearing, because that will aggravate my Condemnation if I
am found disobedient. The Prayer of the wicked is an Abomination: Yea, the
Plougbing of the Wicked is Sin; and shall I therefore forsake the Public
Worship of God, or neglect the Business of my particular Calling?

But, O my Soul, let this Thought affect thee, so as to quicken thy Endeavors,
that thou may be admitted to the Lord's Table, as a worthy Receiver, and
return rejoicing in the God of thy Salvation. Let the Hopes of this put Life
into thy Attempts. Think and think a gain, how vast will be the Advantage of
worthy Receiving. What Words can express the Blessed Consequences of a Regular
Attendance at the Lord's Table?

I may expect to have my Faith strengthened by the Representation of my Lord's
Sufferings; I may hope to have my Love to him enflamed by the Remembrance of
his expensive Love to me; my Resolutions confirmed, my Mind more Spiritualized,
and my whole Conversation made more Regular. I may meet with sweet Peace, and
strong Consolation; yea, perhaps with Rapturous Joy, Joy unspeakable and full
of Glory. 1 Pet. 1.8.
Something that shall prove a Cordial under the future Troubles of Life, and in
the Agories of Death too. I may there meet with Him whom my Soul loves, and
have such Tokens of his Love as shall in the Remembrance prove a Continual
Feast.

But however, if I am sincere, I shall not be wholly disappointed: My Labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord. I shall get real good, if not sensible; if
not present, yet certain. I shall reap what I sow, though it be long first. The
Harvest will be sure, though late; and then I shall have an abundant Recompense
for all the Fatigue of the Seed-Time.

Come then, O my Soul, up and be doing, spare no Pains in a Matter that
deserves the utmost Diligence, and will well reward it: And that thou may not
do this important Work negligently, lift up thy Heart to the Father of Spirits,
without whose gracious Influences thou can do nothing.

O my God, the Preparation of the Heart of Man is from thee. This I desire to
be, so sensible of, as to beg with the utmost Farn^^ness that I may be enabled
to prepare my self suitably to so solemn an Ordinance.

Oh impress me with an awful Sense of the Danger of receiving unworthily! that
I may not dare to trifle with Thee, the Holy and Jealous God. Make me duly to
consider the inexpressible Advantage of worthy Receiving; that I may not at
once sin against, Thee, and wrong my own Soul, by a negligent Behavior. Direct
me in every Step I am to take; Enlighten my Mind, Enlarge my Heart, raise my
Affections, Keep off the Tempter, keep down my Corruptions; and so help me in
the whole of my Duty, that I may have this Token for good, that thou designest
to meet me and bless me at that Holy Solemnity! It Is agreat Thing to be duly
prepared; but Thy Grace is sufficient for me. Let thy Strength be made perfect
in my Weakness, and the Praise shall be thine own.

SECT. III.
LET a Man examine himself, and so let him eat, says the Inspired Apostle: Come
then O my Soul, call thy self to an Account, whether thou art in any Measure
that which God expects every Worthy Communicant should be.

Have I Knowledge to diseern the Lord's Body? Am I appriz'd of the Nature and
End of this Ordinance? Has not the Minister bestowed upon me Labor in vain,
when he opened these Mysteries to me? Has what I have read and heard about this
Matter, given me a tolerable Notion of it? I know, a Man may have Knowledge
enough, and yet eat and drink unworthily; but yet without some good Measure of
Understanding, he cannot be an acceptable Communicant.

Do I therefore understand the Nature of the Gospel Covenant, the Covenant of
Grace, of which the Sacraments are Seals?

Do I know how the first Covenant was broken, into what a sad Condition the
Fall of our First Parents brought their wretched Offspring? How it pleased God
in Infinite Mercy, to enter into a New Covenant, through a Redeemer, in which he
has provided for his own Honor and our Happiness? Do I understand who is the
Mediator, what the Blessings, and what the Terms of this Covenant?

Do I understand the Relation that this Sacrament bears to that Covenant? That
it is instituted by the Mediator, to whom all Power is given, both (...) in
Heaven and Earth, That Mat. 28.18. its designed to represent the (...)
Blessings He has purchased, with the Manner in which they were procured and are
applied: That I am at the Lord's Table to show forth his Death: That the broken
Bread represents his Body, which was broken for us; and the Wine, his precious
Blood, which was shed for us. Our eating that Bread, and drinking that Cup,
signifys that Fiducial Feeding upon him, who is that (and more) to our Souls,
that Broad, the Staff of Life, and Wine that chears the Heart, is to our Bodies?

Do I understand how it Seals the Covenant to every worthy Receiver? How hereby
God obliges himself to be their God, to pardon their Sins, sanctify their
Souls, and at last bring 'em to Eternal Happiness and Glory. How herein they
engage themselves to Him, thankfully accepting what he offers, and cheerfully
complying with what he demands. That herein we open our Mouths to God, and
swear, that we will be his, in the Bonds of an Everlasting Covenant, that shall
not be forgotten; accepting him, and resigning our selves.

Do I know of what Advantage this Ordinance is to every Worthy Communicant? How
it is designed to confirm their Faith, to inflame their Love, purify their
Consciences, and comfort their Souls.

Do I understand how it produces these Effects? not in a Natural Way, nor
merely in a Moral One; but by the Powerful Influences of the Spirit, dispensed,
and to be expected in a Devout Attendance upon the Appointments of Infinite
Wisdom and Goodness? Let me put to my own Soul that Question which my Savior
put to his Disciples, Have thou understood all these Things?

I must confess, my apprehensions of these Things are too dark and confused;
but I dare not deny the Grace of God, who has given me some Acquaintance with
these Awful Mysteries. And I hope I do desire to improve in Knowledge, and am
willing to receive Instruction.

And O that God would teach me what I yet know not, and lead me farther into
the Knowledge of all necessary Truth! Oh that he would show me his Covenant;
Psalm. 25.
and help me to grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.
and in the Knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! That he would reveal
to me, by his Spirit, those deep Things of God, 1 Cor. 2.
which the Natural Man receives not, because they are Spiritually discerned. O
Father of Lights, Ephesians. 3.
who give Wisdom liberally, and upbraidest not; make me to know the Love of
Christ, which passes Knowledge; and help me to comprehend with all Saints, the
Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and Height of it. Amen.

SECT. IV.
COnsider, O my Soul, that mere Knowledge is not a sufficient Qualification for
the Holy Communion. If I have Knowledge to discern the Lord's Body, and want
Faith to feed upon him, I shall return from his Table disappointed and ashamed.
My Blessed Lord has told me, that Except I eat his Flesh, John 6.
and drink his Blood, I have no Life in me. Now this I know, must be by Faith,
not after a Corporal and Carnal Manner: Let me therefore put that Question to
my Soul, which my Savior put to his Disciples; Where is thy Faith? Do I
believe in an unseen Jesus? Can my Soul make her Applications to him, and
derive from his Fullness, even Grace for Grace? Am I in any Measure acquainted
with this Mystery? And can I understand by any Experience of my own, what the
Apostle meant, when he said, I live; yet not I, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me? What should He do at a Royal Feast, that cannot taste
of the Provision? Am I therefore taught of God to believe in Jesus?

Lord, I believe, help thou mine Unbe lief! I hope I have tasted that the Lord
is gracious. I can remember when I have sat under his Shadow with great
Delight, and his Fruit has been sweet unto my Taste. My Soul has followed hard
after him, and I have Reason to remember his Love more than Wine. But alas! I
have too much Occasion for that Prayer, Lord increase my Faith! Without
Controversy, Great is the Mystery of Godliness; and I am too often apt to
stumble at the Cross. My Temptations to Unbelief often find me much sorrowful
Employment; and at best my Faith is but weak and languid. O my God, Perfect
that which is lacking in my Faith; and when I find its Strength, I shall not
doubt its Reality?

SECT. V.
I must also enquire concerning my Repentance. An Impenitent Communicant I
know, must be an unworthy one. That I am a Sinner, is a Matter past Question,
and that as such I am exposed to the Displeasure of God; so that if he should
enter into Judgment with me, I could not stand; is what I know and believe.
Yea, that the least Sin I ever committed deserves the Wrath and Curse of God,
both in this World, and that which is to come. But all this is general and
common; let me therefore, O my Soul, press the Matter close and Home. And,

First, Have I laid these Things to Heart? Have my Convictions been affecting?
Have I not only known, but felt these Things? Have I been weary and heavy laden
under a Sense of Sin? Have I groaned and trembled under the Apprehension of
God's Displeasure? Has Destruction from the Lord been a Terror to me? Has my
flesh trembled for fear of Him; and have I been afraid of his Judgments? Yea,
have I been ashamed of Sin, as a nauseous, loathsome, filthy Thing, contrary to
the Nature and Law of God, and my own Happiness too; which consists in
Conformity to God, and Enjoyment of him? Has the Remembrance of my Sin filled
my Heart with Grief, and my Face with shame? Especially considering how it has
been committed against a God of Infinite Love and Goodness? Does this Thought
give a Peculiar Accent to my Grief, that I have sinned against a Bleeding,
Dying Jesus, and a forbearing and forgiving God? And does the Apprehension of
pardoning Mercy, through a Redeemer, promote in me the most kindly Relentings?
according to that, Ezekiel. 16.63.

In the next Place; Have I been influenced by these Convictions to take up a
hearty and Sincere Resolution of better Obedience? Do I hate every false Way?
and have I a Respect to all God's Commandments? Oh! let me remember, that
nothing is Repentance that consists with an Habitual Love to any Sin, or an
allowed Aversion to any Instance of Duty, or Branch of Holiness? Is my Heart
and Life changed? He that is the same after Repentance as he was before, can
never be accounted a true Penitent.

O my Conscience be faithful: Have I put off the old Man with his lusts, and
put on the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness?

I hope it is thus with me, in some Measure, that though I offend in many Things,
I allow my self in nothing, that God in his Word disallows. But alas! my
Repentance is far short of what I know it should be, and wish it were.

Oh that He, whose Gift Repentance (as well as Faith) is, would carry on the
Work which I trust, is begund Lord, open my Eyes, that I may see more of the
Evil of Sin. Strike this Heart, this Rock, that it may more freely bleed at the
Remembrance of my past Follies: Confirm my Resolutions, that I may have nothing
more to do with Idols; but may be steadfast and unmovable, and always abounding
in the Work of the Lord. Search me and try me, and see if there be any wicked
Way in me, and lead me in the Way Everlasting.

SECT. VI.
I Must also Examine my self concerning my Love, an essential and comprehensive
Grace. If I don't sincerely love the Master of the Blessed Feast, and all the
Regular Guests, I cannot be welcome. Come then, O my Soul, is thy Heart
circumcised to love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, Deuteronomy. 36.6.
and with all thy Soul? This is the First and Great Commandment. Can thou
truly say, that thy Desire is toward Him, and thy Delight in him? Do thou
love, not in Word and in Tongue, 1 John 3.18.
but in deed and in Truth? Has He the Pre-eminence in thy Soul? Can thou say,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, Psalm. 73.25.
and there is none upon Earth that I can desire besides thee? Is Christ
precious to thee beyond Comparison and Competition? And can thou truly say,
Yea, doubtless, I count all Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord? Phil. 3.8.


Is thy Love to him a Rational Love, the Effect of serious Thought, and deep
Conviction of his transcendent Excellency? Has the Spirit of God opened thy
Eyes, to see that He is the Chief of Ten Thousands, and altogether lovely? And
thou tell what the Church's Beloved is more than another's Beloved?

Is it a constant and fixed Love? Not a sudden Flash, or transient Passion, but
a rooted, settled Thing, a vigorous Flame, which many Waters cannot quench, nor
the Floods drown it? And though thy Love to some dear Creatures may unhappily be
more passionate, yet art thou come to a Point, that thou will sacrifice the
dearest Object, rather than part with Him whom thy Soul loves? But to bring the
Matter to a more certain Issue; is thy Love Practical? This is an Infallible
Test; for my Lord has said, Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command
you. Joh. 15.14.
Do thou count his Yoke easy, and his Burden light? Are none of his
Commandments grievous? Do thou delight to do his Will, and have thou chose
his Testimonies, as a Heritage for over? Do thou find his Love sweetly
const^^ining thee to the severest Instances of Selfdenial? And art thou fully
purposed in a better Strength than thy own, that thou will fo^^^^ the lamb
whithersoever he goes, what ever it costs thee? If it be thus with thee, thou
may cheerfully say, Lord, thou that know all Things, know that I love
thee.

And as a yet farther Evidence, do thou love thy Neighbor as thy self? Have
thou a real love for all Men, and a special, peculiar one for thy fellow
Christians? Is there no Man to whom thou do not most heartily wish well,
whatever Provocations he has given thee, or Injuries he has done Thee? Though
thou have many Enemies, has no Man an Enemy of thee? If there are those that
hate thee with a cruel Hatred, can thou appeal to God, that the Hatred is not
mutual and reciprocal? Can thou sincerely pray, Forgive our Trespasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us.

And as to the People of God, do thou honor and delight in 'em? Hereby we
know that we are passed from Death to Life, (...) John 3.14.
because we love the Brethren.

Do thou love every Soul where thou see the image of Christ? Is not thy
Love consigned to those of thy own Party, or Persuasion? But is it unrestrained
and large, as that Catholic Church of which thou art a Member? Does this Love
engage thee to all proper Acts of Kindness, and Expressions of Brotherly Love?
Do thou pity and help to the utmost of thy Power all those whom Christ calls
Brethren, with this View, that what thou do for them, terminates ultimately
upon him, according to Mat. 25? Can thou read the First Epistle of John, and
thy Heart not condemn thee?

I hope my Love is sincere.

But O my God, how weak and how imperfect is it! I even hate my self, that I
can love thee no more. I abhor my self that I love thy Christ no better, and
blush to think that I am no more kindly affectioned to those whom thou have
loved with an everlasting Love; and with whom I hope to live and converse for
ever.

My only Comfort is, that I would love thee; I desire to love thee; I long to
love thee, even as thou would be loved, Lord, kindle my Spark into a Flame,
and let that Flame be strong and steady. And especially grant that my Obedience
may prove my Love to be of the right Kind. How can I say I love thee, if my
Heart be not right with thee? And for thy Sake, may I love my Neighbor,
especially the Happy Members of that Glorious Family to which it is my highest
Honor to belong. O may I love them as my self, and in Honor prefer 'em before
my self, and think, no Office of Love too mean for me to stoop to, in Imitation
of Him, who came not to be ministered unto, Mat. 20.28.
but to minister. This I pray, Phil. 1.9.
that my Love may abound more and more, and being hearty and fervent in this
Request, is, I hope, an Evidence that I do truly love thee. Oh! let me not be
mistaken, for Jesus Christ his Sake. A^ men.

SECT. VII.
I Must also examine my self concerning my New Obedience. This I know is the
ultimate Test of all my Pretenses. Without it, Faith, Repentance, Love, etc.
are empty Names; and insignificant Shadows. Is the Will of God my Law? his Word
my Rule? and his Glory the end of all my Actions? Do I allow my self in the
Commission of no known Sin, or Omission of no known Duty? Is it my constant
Care to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and Man? Can my
Closet, my Family, my Shop, my Companions, as well as the Public Assembly's of
God's People, beat me Witness, that notwithstanding my unallowed Failings, I do
endeavor to walk in all the Ordinances and Commandments of God blameless? Am
Iwilling to know my Duty, and careful to do it? Am I thankful for Instruction,
and Reproof too? And do I count them my Friends that tell me the Truth? Are my
remaining Corruptions, and my many Failings, Matter of Humiliation to me? Do I
pray for Daily Grace as Heartily as for my Daily Bread, and can I appeal to the
Searcher of Hearts, that I am never more in Earnest, than when I pray that I
may be perfect in every good Work, Heb. 13 21.
to do his Will. That I may be cleansed from all Filthiness, both of Flesh and
Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord. 2 Cor. 7.1.
That I may be sanctified wholly, 2 These. 5.23.
and my whole Spirit, Soul and Body, be preserved blameless, to the coming of
our Lord.

I hope it is thus with me in some Measure.

But, O my God, let me not be deceived. If my Obedience be feigned, or partial,
or Legal, if it do not exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees; if I have a
Form of Godliness without the Power, or a Name to live while I am dead;
discover to me the worst of my self, that I may be upon a Right Bottom, and may
get that Gospel Holiness, without which I cannot see the Lord. If there be a
good Work begun, O carry it on to the Day of Jesus! and let the solemn
Ordinances I am preparing for, be a Means of my Spiritual Nourishment, and
Growth in Grace, Amen.

SECT. VIII.
I Hope I have been Impartial in my Self-Examinations. And though upon Review I
find abundant Matter for Humiliation, yet I cannot co^^lude my self a
Hypocrite, but must entertain some good Hope, through Grace, that I am (...)
Sincere, though very Imperfect Christian, and shall be a welcome Guest at my
Lord's Table.

That which now remains is, that I put my self in as good a Posture as may be,
to meet my Lord at that Solemnity, that I may not provoke his Displeasure, nor
baulk my own Exp^ctations. To this End I must see that every Grace be in lively
and vigorous Exercise, lest having in my Flock a Male, I should Vow and
Sacrifice to the Lord a Corrupt Thing. Mal. 1.14.


I am sensible, Faith is a Principal and Leading Grace. It is the Substance (or
confident expectation) of Things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. and 6.
and the Evidence of Things not seen. Without Faith it is impossible to please
God. I cannot question the Being of a God, and the Certainty of a Future State,
which are the great Principles of Natural Religion, and presupposed to all
Revealed. I believe that God is, and that he is the Rewarder of all them that
diligently seek Him. But this is not enough; my Lord has said, Ye believe in
God, John 14.1.
believe also in me. No Knowledge of the only true God is sufficient to Eternal
Life, while Men are ignorant of that Jesus Christ whom He h^s sent. John 17.3.
Come then, O my Soul, let thy Faith in Him be strong and lively. Have I not
abundant Evidence, that Jesus is the Messiah, the Christ of God, John 6.27.3,
39.
that Him has God the Father sealed. The Scriptures of the Old Testament
testify of Him. To Him Moses and all the Prophets bear Witness. In him there
was a full and exact Accomplishment of every Promise and Prediction. In Him are
the Substance of all the Legal Shadows, and to Him referred all the Types, etc.
He was evidently the Promised Seed the Shiloh, the Branch, etc. of the Ancient
Fathers, Lev. 1.
who waited for the Consolation of Israel.

Consider, O my Soul, what a Glorious Testimony God bore to Him by a Voice from
Heaven, by vast Numbers of great, public, and uncontested Miracles; and
finally, by raising Him from the Dead: Of which He appointed Competent
Witnesses, Men of Ability and Integrity; who could not be imposed upon in so
plain a Matter, and who could never be suppos^^^ (...) practice upon the World
(...) ^^^re was no Interest in View that should engage 'em in so base a Design.
And it is utterly impossible that Men in their Wits should be guilty of the
Blackest Villainy, in Prospect of nothing but Misery and Ruin. Besides, did not
God also bear them Witness, Heb. 2.4.
both with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost?
To which may be added this other Consideration; That that Doctrine must needs
be from God, which has so visible and peculiar a Tendency to make Men God-like,
in the Temper of their Minds, and Course of their Actions. That Gospel must
needs be the Grace of God which teaches us so effectually, that denying
Ungodliness, Tit. 2 11, 12.
and all Worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously and Godly, in this
present evil World. I find by the Records of past Ages, and the Observations I
have made in the Compass of my own Acquaintance, That the best Christians have
been the best Men. And, O my Soul can thou not bear thine own Testimony, that
the Interest of God in thee, bears a constant Proportion to the Measure of thy
Faith in Christ Jesus? Do thou not always find, that when thy Faith is ready
to fail, the good Things that remain are ready to die? And on the contrary, Is
thy Heart ever so pure, and thy Life so clean, as when thy Faith is vigorous
and lively? Now can any thing be more incredible, than that the Great God
should make use of an Imposture to renew his own Image upon the Souls of Men? I
will as soon believe any Absurdity, as that the most Holy God should erect and
support his Kingdom in the World by a Lie, and destroy the Interest of the
Devil, by Arts and Methods perfectly Hellish and Diabolical.

Come then O my Soul, be strong in Faith, Romans 4.20.
giving Glory to God. It Is true, Believing is hard Work; but consider whence
the Difficultys arise! from a Corrupt Heart, and a Malicious Enemy: And let
this Thought be a further Evidence to the Credibility of the Doctrine of the
Cross. Why should a base Heart, and a busy Devil, make such mighty Opposition
to the Work of Faith? If it were not the Work of God, the Enemies of God would
never make such Efforts to hinder it: The Devil would cherish his own Creature:
The World would love its own, and the Flesh would never express such a
Reluctance against the Gospel, if it were not Spiritual in its Tendency, and
Divine in its Original. Therefore, O my Soul, let me form Arguments out of
Difficultys, and Pave my Way with the very Stumbling Blocks that are thrown in
it.

It is indeed an astonishing Thought that God should become M^n, and that Man
die: Without Controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16.
great is the Mystery of Godliness, etc. But let not this stagger thee.
Consider seriously that the more awful and surprising the Mysteries of the
Gospel are, the more likely they are to be from God? who can scarce be supposed
to declare any Thing but what was extraordinary, and out of the Reach of
unassisted Reason, with such a solemn Pomp, annd Train of mighty Works, as were
wrought to confirm the Mission of our Lord. It would have been Matter of
Suspicion, if Christ and his Disciples had preached nothing but what the Pagan
Philosophers taught, and the Jewish Doctors owned. And it should recommend the
Doctrine of Christ to a considering unprejudiced Mind, that it was to the Jews
a Stumbling Block, 1 Cor. 1.23.
to the Greeks Foolishness.

Are not these Things so? Come then, O my Soul, believe and be established.

But, O wretched Man that I am, Who shall deliver me from this evil Heart of
Unbelief? It is not bare External Evidence that will produce a Divine Faith.
Faith I know is the Work, the mighty Work of God, and produced in the Heart by
no less Power than that which raised up Jesus from the Dead. Ep. 1.19.28.
It is not of our selves; it is the Gift of God.

And therefore, O my God, I turn me unto thee, in whose Hand my Heart is, and
who can prevail against the united Force of my confederate Enemies; and not
only begin, but carry on the Work of Faith with Power. I believe, Lord help
mine Unbelief, and perfect that which is lacking in my Faith. Not only propose
the Object, but open my Eyes, that I may no more question what the Gospel
reveals than what my Eyes see; that believing in him whom I do not see, I may
rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

CECT. IX.
I Must also remember my Lord in the Exercise of Holy Love, And, O my Soul, if
thou do believe, thou can not choose but love. View thy Lord in his Glory
and Beauty: Confider Him as the Brightness of his Father's Glory, Heb. 1.
and the express Image of his Person; think of him as the chief of Ten
Thousands, and altogether lovely; as one whom all Created Brightness,
Sweetness, Purity and Perfection, does but faintly represent; as one in whom
all that is lovely meets and triumphs; as one whom the highest Angels worship,
and by whom the most shining Seraphs are Eclipsed, who yet adore prostrate, and
veil before him with more Exultation and Rapture than they would govern a
Thousand Worlds. Think of him as one whose Glorys no Thought can reach, nor
Words express; and whom the Multitude of the Heavenly-Host will view with
everlasting Surprise and Admiration, as an Object ever new, and infinitely
entertaining; and as desiring no farther Happiness than to be with him where he
is, and behold his Glory. John 17.24.


And, O my Soul, consider that this Glorious Person, who is in himself so
infinitely lovely, has been Infinitely kind to thee! Need this be proved, or
can the Instances of it be forgotten? Did not his Love to thee appear beyond
all Contradiction, in his Incarnation, Birth, sufferings and Death, with all
the Circumstances of Humility that attended his Passage through this Vale of
Tears, this waste and howling Wilderness, to that Better Country, where he is
still mindful of his People, as ever living to make Intercession for 'em? He
loved thee before thou or Time were. He loved thee when he was on Earth, with a
Love stronger than Death, which many Waters could not quench, nor Floods drown.
He loves thee now he is in Heaven; and though he be exalted to the highest
Dignity, far above (...) Principalitys and Powers, and sits at the Right Hand
of God as Lord of all, yet have thou the same Place in his Heart, and the same
Share in his Affectionate Remembrances. Long Absence, great Distance, high
Preferment, Multiplicity of Affairs, which impair common Friendship, have no
Influence ^^^^e. Having loved his own which were in the World, John 13.1.
he does and will love them to the End; and that with a Love more Constant,
Steady and Regular, than the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, and settled
Course of Nature. Nor is this Love of his an Empty Name. Consider, O my Soul,
the Glorious Effects of it. It Is a Love big with Blessings; Blessings which no
Tongue can represent, and nothing here below resemble, but with a great deal of
Faintness and Imperfection. Rev. 1.5.
He has loved me and washed me from my Sins in his Blood. He was made Sin for
me that I might become the Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.
He was wounded for my Transgressions, and bruised for mine Iniquitys, the
Chastisement of my Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes I am healed. Isaiah
53.3.
Being justified by Faith, I have Peace with God Rom (...). him, and by him
Access with Boldness to the Throne of Grace. Heb. 4.
To his Expensive Love, as the Meritorious Cause, I owe my Regeneration; that I
am begotten again to a lively Hope: My Adoption, that I am called a Child of
God: My Sanctification, my Peace, Comfort and Joy; and finally, my Hopes of
Eternal Life; which is all that Heart can wish, and Ten Thousand, Thousand
Times more; for the Things which God has prepared for them that. 1 Cor. 2.9.
love him, have not entered into the Heart of Man.

Nor let me, O my Soul, forget who is the unworthy Object of all this Glorious
Love, What am I, and what is my Father's House, that I should be thus highly
favored? That the Prince of Life, the Living God, should set his Heart upon
such a Dead Dog! That a vile Worm, sinful Dust and Ashes, should be so regarded
by him whom all the Angels worship, Heb. 1,
whom the whole Creation obeys, and in Comparison of whom all Created Beings
are as the Drop of a Bucket, and the small Dust of a Balance! Nothing, yea
less than nothing, and Vanity! Behold what manner of Love is this! Expression
is at a Loss, and silent Admiration must supply its Place.

Now, does not this Love deserve Love? Whence is it, O my Soul, that thou art
no more affected? That in these Musings the Fire burns no more? One would
think, that upon such a Subject, serious Thought should exalt even a Spark of
Love into a Flame of Transport and Ecstasy! and whence is all this Coldness?

Oh it is from my Evil Heart of Unbelief! The Things are so great that they even
exceed Belief! But let me consider that Gods Ways are not as ours, nor his
Thoughts as ours, Isa. 55.8, 9.
but ^ore above 'em than the Hea^^^^ are above the Earth! and that his Ben^^^s
are in suitable Proportion to his own Greatness. Royal Favors use to be vast
and magnificent: They give like Kings; and what less can be expected from the
King of Kings, the Infinite Majesty of Heaven and Earth, than what he has
pleased to appoint for his Favorites! And the more mean the Objects of his
Love are, the more Glorious his Bounty! The lower his Goodness stoops, the
higher it rises! But that it should stoop so low as me, the least, and less
than the least of all Saints, nay the very Chief of Sinners; This, this
staggers my Faith, and makes me ready to cry out, It Is impossible, it can never
be, That God should love such a Worm, such a Devil as I am! A vile Traitor,
that have broken his Laws, despised his Grace, quenched his Spirit, trampled
under Foot his Son! an ungracious Dog, that has turned his Grace into
VVantonness, and continued in Sin in spite of all Reclaiming Methods! A
Backsliding, Treacherous, perjured Beast! and under the Convictions of all this
no more moved than a Clod or Rock! a stupid Hard-hearted Sinner! This I must
confess I find difficult to believe; and when I can hope, I wonder at my self
that I can venture to do it; and adore the Grace and Merey of God, that I have not
long ago been a Cain or Judas, or at least a Spira, a Magor Missabib, a Terror
to my self and all about me, by Reason of the Blackness and Horror of my
Despair!

And yet here Infinite Mercy, and Infinite Merit, are a Relief! I will believe
that there is Mercy for the worst, because God has said it, and will not venture
to except my self, because God han't done it. All things are possible with God;
Luke 7.42
he can forgive frankly Ten Thousand Talents as well as a few Pence: And he
will forgive manifold Iniquities, and mighty Sins, to every penitent, humble,
willing Soul. I must not deny the Grace of God, and therefore if I do avouch
this Character, consequently I must believe.

And then how can I choose but love? Oh my Soul, fall with the lowest
Prostrations, at the Feet of thy dearest Jesus; and if thou can do no better,
exp^ess thy Love by Sighs and Blushes, that thou can love him no more.

But, Lord, I may Expostulate with my self till I am weary, if thy Grace be
withheld, and thy Spirit denied! O shed abroad thy Love in my Heart, by the
Holy Ghost given unto me; Strike this Rock and it shall melt, breath upon this
Clod and it will warm. Draw me and I shall run after thee. I cannot say that I
do love thee, but I am sure I can say that I would love thee. This Thou
know, that know all Things. I can appeal to thee, that if I might have my
wish, I would love thee better than ever a Saint on Earth, yea than ever an
Angel in Heaven does. I had rather love thee as I ought to love thee than be
Master of all the Treasures on Earth; rather than have all the Monarchs of it
at my Feet, rather than have all that the World admires, at my Disposal. I had
rather (Lord thou know) die in an Ecstasy of holy Love, and breath out my Soul
into the Arms of the Holy Jesus, than live Ten Millions of Years; yea to all
Eternity, in the Fullness of all Created Enjoyments. O my God, is not this a
Request after thine own Heart, when I pray that I may love thee with all my
Soul, and that I may not be most flat and heavy, cold and Lifeless, at that
Solemnity where are the Memorials of the choicest and most glorious Love that
was ever known or heard of.

SECT. X.
I Must also, at the Lord's Table, be in a Penitent Frame. The Remembrance of
my Lord's Dying Love must melt my Heart into a Kindly Sorrow for those Sins
which wounded and slew him. John 53.10.
His Soul was made an Offering for my Sin, and shall not my Heart bleed at the
Thought of that bitter Cup in which my Sins were, deadly Ingredients, and which
for my Sake (...) drank off, even to the very Dregs! O my Soul, when I remember
my Savior, I must penitently remember my Sins, from which he died to save me.
My Sins! How wide a Field! How vast a Subject! I am amazed, and stagger at the
General Prospect, and must be swallowed up and lost in Particulars! Where shall
I begin, and where shall I end? Indeed I may begin at the Root. Behold I was
shapen in Iniquity, Psalm. 51.5,
and in Sin did my Mother conceive me! But the numerous Branches ex^^ed
Calculation! I know not the Numbers thereof! The Commandment of God is
exceeding Broad, and in Proportion to it I must estimate my Guilt! What
Commandment have I not broken? In what Instance have I not offended? As to my
Sins of Ignorance, and common Frailtys, I must only sigh and say, Who can
understand his Errors? Psalm. 19.12.
For to remember and ^^ment my grosser Follys will be a long, as well as
sorrowful Employment, and take up more Time than my Circumstances can allow.
But, O my Soul, I charge thee mourn over the more Heinous Offenses of thy Life.
Read over thy Calendar, and drop a Tear upon the Black Days there. Bp. Wilkins.


N. Here call sorrowfully to Mind such particular Sins as have been more
especially Heinous.

And though I hope God has forgiven thee, yet, O my Soul, never forgive thy self.
O what shall I say! I blush, Ezra 9.6,
and am ashamed to list up my Face to thee my God! I could have no Peace, no
Patience, no Hope were it not for such a Word as that: 1 John 1.7
The Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses from all Sin.

I would also particularly review my Conversation since the last Sacrament: And
here I can find Matter enough for Shame and Grief. Oh! Wretch that I am how
unsuitable has my Conversation, been to the Profession and Engagements I so
lately made, and the sweet Experiences I so much rejoye'd in, and seemed so
thankful for!

N. Here fix your Thoughts upon the grosser Follys of the preceding Month.

Was such an Action becoming what thou did so lately, at the Lord's Table,
pretend and promise? Was such a Management worthy of a Christian, and becoming
a Communicant? Did the Indulgence of such a Fleshly Lust become a Disciple of
the Holy Jesus the Immaculate Lamb of God? Did it become a Sheep of Christ's
Flock, to wallow like a Swine in that Mire? Was that Pride, that Passion, that
Malice, Envy, and Uncharitableness, suitable to thy solemn Profession of
retaining to him who came to destroy the Works of the Devil? Remember and be
confounded, Ezekiel. 16.63.
and never open thy Mouth any more because of thy Shame! Surely I am more
brutish than any Man, and have not the Understanding of a Man!

And, O my Soul, shall not the Time past suffice thee to 1 Pet. 4.3.
have acted so inconsistently and unaccountably? Surely it becomes me to say,
If I have done Iniquity I will do so no more. Let these be my sincere
Resolutions, and let me, at the Lord's Table, bind my self in fresh Bonds, that
my ^uture Walk shall be more Circumspect; that my Devotions shall be more
Regular, my Dealings more Just, my Charity more Extensive, and my Whole
Conversation more Spiritual.

O my God, this is my full Purpose; but let me not want that Grace which alone
is sufficient for me. Give me true Repentance, let me take up sincere
Resolutions, and let the Uprightness of my Heart in both, appear in a suitable
Behavior for Time to come. So be it for Jesus Sake.

CHAP. V. The Christian at the Lord's Table.
SECT. I.
NOW, O my Soul, the good Hand of God upon thee has brought thee into his
House, and set thee at his Table! Behold all things are ready! See to it that
thou be ready to meet and entertain thy Lord.

Awake: O North Wind and come thou South, Cant, 4.16.
blow upon my Garden that the Spices thereof may flow out. Let my Beloved come
into his Garden, and eat his pleasant Fruits. When the King comes in to see his
Guests, Mat. 22.11.
may not I be the Man that wants a Wedding Garment?

It Is an Awful Solemnity! O my Soul, approach with Reverence and Godly Fear.
This is none other but the House of God, Genesis 28.17.
and this is the Gate of Heaven. Let my Frame be suitable, Spiritual and
Heavenly.

O my God, keep off the Tempter, keep out the World, keep down my Corruption.

Let no Lust defile: Let no Business engage: Let no Impertinent Thought divert
my Mind, Unite my Heart; and let it be intent and fixed on thee.

Thy Grace, O Lord, is sufficient for me. Let thy Strength be made perfect in
my Weakness.

Work in me both to will and to do. Strengthen me with all Might, by thy
Spirit, in the Inward Man,

Call up my Faith and Love, and every proper Grace, into lively and vigorous
Exercise.

Blessed Jesus, without thee I can do nothing. I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me. Draw me I will run after thee.

SECT. II. While the Minister is breaking the Bread.
THUS was the Body of my Lord broken! It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and
put him to Grief! Isa. 53.10.5.


He was bruised for our Iniquity's!

Oh let me view the Representation of his Broken Body, with a Broken Heart, and
a Contrite Spirit!

Hard indeed must that Heart be which such a Sight will not affect!

Methinks I see his precious Body scourged and pierced! It Is an affecting
Thought, that perfect Innocence should be thus treated! But when I consider
that this Innocent Lamb was at the same Time God over all blessed for ever, and
that he underwent all this for me, what must my Heart be, if it ben't affected!

And while his Body was thus bruised, the Iron entered into his Soul: Who can
imagine what our Lord felt, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

See here what an evil and bitter Thing Sin is, and how abominable in the Sight
of God, when no less a Sacrifice could appease incensed Justice!

Here is Grace! Here is Love! That God should prepare his own Son a Body, and
that in that Body he should bear our Sins on the Tree! 1 Pet. 2.24.


SECT. III. While the Minister is pouring out of the Wine.
THUS was my. Lord^s Blood shed for me!

We are redeemed, not with Corruptible Things, 1 Pet. 1.19.
as Silver and Gold; but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without Blemish and without Spot.

If the Blood of Bulls and Goats sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh,
Heb. 9.13, 14.
how much more shall the Blood of him who through the Eternal Spirit offered
himself without Spot, to God, Purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve
the living God?

Oh let me view a Bleeding Jesus with a Bleeding Heart!

Behold the Fountain set open for Sin and for Uncleanness! 1 John 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin.

Approach, apply, O my Soul, wash and be clean. Purge with this Hyssop, Psalm.
51.7.
and thou shall be clean; wash in this Laver, and thou shall be whiter than the
Snow.

What may not be expected from the Blood of God? Acts 20.28.
The Blood of him that was God?

Oh how freely did he let out his Blood! View with Transport those Streams of
Love, and think how much thou owe to him that so freely said down his Life
for thee!

O my God, enlarge my Heart in Love to such a Friend; and never let my Heart be
straightened toward Him, who opened his Veins, and so freely Bled and died for me.

May my Eye affect my Heart; and may I with the utmost Tenderness remember what
Evidences he has given of his Love to me. Was ever Love like this!

SECT. IV. Taking the Bread, etc.
BLessed Jesus, Thou art that Bread of Life. John 6.48.
Thy Broken Body is food for Souls. John 6.49.
Oh let me by Faith Eat and live, Eat and never die. John 6.59.


When Judas took the Sop Satan entr'd into him. Lord grant, that as I receive
this Bread, Christ may enter, and take an Eternal Possession of my Soul.

Now, O my Soul, take a whole Jesus with a whole Heart, for a whole Salvation.

Lord, I am not worthy thou should come under my Roof.

I am indeed infinitely unworthy; but I hope, through Grace, not utterly
unwilling.

O were but my Appetite to this Spititual Food equal to my Need of it, how wide
would my Soul open her Mouth, Psalm. 81.
and how full would she be filled!

Oh thou that have provided Bread, give me an Appetite, and abundantly bless my
Provision.

Lord increase my Faith. O let this Bread be blessed to my Spiritual Nourishment,
and Growth in Grace.

O that I may receive, out of Christ's Fullness, John 1.16.
even Grace for Grace! By these Royal Dair^tys may my lean and withering Soul
become Fat and Flourishing. Psalm. 92.


His Flesh is Meat indeed. John 6.55.


O my Soul, accept and resign; take a Jesus and surrender thy self. My Lord and
my God, I am thine, save me.

I avouch the Lord this Day to be my God. His I am, Acts. 27.23^
and Him I Will serve.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.
who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly Places, in
Christ.

Blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

Thanks be to God for his unspeakable Gift.

SECT. V. Taking the Cup, etc.
THis Cup is the New Testament in my Lord's Blood! 1 Cor. 30.25.


I will take the Cup of Salvation, and pay my Vows.

Christ's Blood is Drink indeed! John 6.5^.


I take this Cup of Blessing, and O adored be his Love that was made a Curse
for me, Gal. 3.13.
that he might fill this Cup with Blessing.

O how freely did my Lord drink of the Brook in the Way! Psalm. 110.
Remember O my Soul, that Love which made him say, John 18.11.
The Cup which my Father has given me shall I not drink it? It was a bitter
Cup to him, and yet he drank the very Dregs of it. It is a Cup of Blessing to
me, and shall I not cheerfully drink of it in Remembrance of Him?

Blessed Jesus, Thou have drank at the Hand of the Lord, John 51.17.
the Cup of his Fury: Thou have drunken the Dregs of the Cup of Trembling, and
wrung them out; and have put into my Hand this Cup of Consolation. Behold what
manner of Love!

O precious Blood, that cleanses from all Sin!

Drink, O my Soul, and remember Jesus.

Drink, and mourn over thy Sins and Follys.

Drink, and receive thy Pardon.

Drink, and renew thy Covenant.

Drink, and forget thy Sorrows.

Drink, and forgive thy Enemies.

Drink, and triumph over the Adversaries of thy Soul.

Drink, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God.

Blessed Jesus, I will remember thy Love more than Wine. Cant. 1.4.


Unto him that has loved us, Rev. 1.5, 6.
and washed us from our Sins in his Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests
unto God, and his Father. To him be Glory and Dominion. for ever and ever.
Amen.

Blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gift.

SECT. VI. At the Conclusion of the Ordinance, Rev. 5, 12

WOrthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, 13.
be unto him that fitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and
ever.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles, Psalm. 84.1.
O Lord of Hosts! Blessed are they that dwell in thy Courts. 4.


A Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in
the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. 10.


And, O my Soul, if this Hour has been so sweet, while I beheld the King in his
Glory, and the Land which is afar off, though it were as in a Glass darkly, what
will an Eternity in Heaven be! When I shall see him as he is, and know as I am
also known; When I shall be with him where he is, and behold his Glory! Make
haste O my Beloved.

Thus I must remember my Lord 'till he comes. Blessed be God for such an
Ordinance. But O that my Soul could even break for the Longing I have for that
Second Coming; Heb. 9.28.
when He shall appear to them that look for him, without Sin unto Salvation.

He has said, Behold I come quickly; even so Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20.
come quickly.

In the mean Time, O my Soul, remember where thou have been, and what* thou
have been doing.

Thou have opened thy Mouth to the Lord, and must not go back. Thou have bound
thy Soul with an Oath. Thou have sworn, and must perform it, to keep his
righteous Judgments.

Thou have avouched, this Day, the Lord to be thy God. Be true to Him. Let Him
alone be Exalted in thy Soul. Be for Him, and not for another.

Now, O my God, I bless thee for the Liberty of thy House. I bless thee for the
Aids of thy Spirit. The Shame of my Misbehaviour I take to my self; but all the
Praise I give to thee. Oh by thy Grace help me, as I have received Christ Jesus
the Lord, Col. 2.6.
so to walk in Him, that where he is I, his unworthy Servant, may also be.
Amen, and Amen.

CHAP. VI. The Christian in his Retirements, after the Lords Supper.
SECT. I, When the Ordinance has been comfortable.
BLess the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, Psalm. 103.1.7.4, 5.
Bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his
benefits: Who crowns thee with loving Kindness, and tender Mercies: Who
satisfies thy Mouth with good things.

How Thankful ought I to be, that the Doors of God's House have been open to
me, and that I have had the Freedom of his Table! Whence is this to me, that I
who have long ago deserved to be shut up among the Spirits in Prison, and fed
with the Bread of Affliction, and Water of Affliction, should be admitted a
Guest at such a Feast! A Feast of fat things, and of Wines upon the Lees, well
refined! That I should see the King in his Glory, and sit with him at his
Table, who might have expected ever now to have been banished for ever from his
Presence, and have heard that killing Wood, See my Face no more!

Blessed be God, that he let me live to see this Day, this Joyful Day! That I
was not prevented by a surprising Stroke, and led Captive by Death into the
Chambers of that House appointed for all living, long before this!

Blessed be his Name, that I have been suffered to live no longer in the
Neglect of such a sweet and profitable Ordinance! That he convinced me of my
Duty, brought me to Resolve, and confirmed my Resolutions! so that in spite of
all the Malice of Satan, I have given up my self to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5.
and to his Church, by the Will of God. This is what I had designed once and
again, but Satan hindered. Blessed be the Captain of my Salvation, that he has
hindered no longer! That all the mighty Host of Objections he had mustered up,
could not deter me from my Duty; Psalm. 110.
that I was willing in the Day of his Power.

Blessed be God that my Natural Sloth, and Love of Ease, did not make me baulk
a Duty which requires Industry, and Laborious Application, in proparing for it:
That my Eagerness after the World did not make me grudge the Time which a
worthy Communicant must redeem from his Secular Affairs, for this Solemn
Service. Especially that my unbelieving Doubts and Scruples, Fears and
Jealousies, did not put me by my Duty, under Apprehensions of Unfitness and
Unworthiness.

I am also bound to praise Him for the Assistance of his Holy Spirit and Grace,
That my Mind was in any Measure composed; That the Desire of my Soul was
toward Him, and the Remembrance of his Name: That I have Reason to hope I was
sincere, and acted in the Integrity of my Heart: Though I must blush that I did
no better; I must bless Him I did so well. Not I but the Grace of God with me.
Not unto us Lord, not unto us.

But O my Soul, don't let thy Gratitude be only in General Terms: Review the
whole Affair, and be particular in thy Acknowledgments. There may be great Love
expressed in Circumstances seemingly minute, the Recollection of which may
afford great Delight, and does demand a grateful Resentment.

I am bound to bless my God, that by his Kind Providence he brought me to that
Banqueting House, Cant. 2.4.
where his Banner over me was Love. That the Doors of his Sanctuary were open:
That my Lot is not cast in those Places where the Synagogues of God are
destroyed, his Ministers driven into Corners, and devout Souls forced to gather
the Heavenly Manna, their Spiritual Food, with the Peril of their Lives.
Blessed be God that by the Favor of our Governors (whom the Lord bless and
preserve) we may assemble together, and none make us afraid: That He prepares
a Table for us in the Presence of our Enemies: Psalm. 23 5.
And if the Sons of Belial malign and curse us, they cannot destroy us, nay
dare not disturb us. Blessed be God they cannot insult us and say, Where is now
your God? We may now go with the Multitude, go to the House of God with the
Voice of Joy and Praise, Psalm. 42.3, 4.
with the Multitude that keep Holy Day. Blessed be his Name, that we who can
boldly avouch our selves to be of those that are quiet in the Land; Psalm. 35.20.
are allowed to enjoy our Native Rights, and are not by the Rulers counted
Disturbers of the Public Peace, or Hurtful to Kings. Ezra 4 15.


I must also praise Him, that no Evil befell me, nor Plague came nigh my
Dwelling, which might have shut me up, though the Doors of his House were open:
That my House was not shut up, and a Lord have Mercy, writ over it: That no
Evil Disease cleaved to me; Psalm. 41.8.38.7.
nor were my Loins filled with a loathsome Disease, which should have confined
me to my Bed, or Chamber, and forbid my going up to the House of the Lord: That
the Secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, and no sore Calamity befell me, that
would have unhinged my Mind, and made me incapable of attending at the
Ordinance, with any Composure and Devotion. Blessed be God that I had not
Occasion for Aaron's Apology, when he had neglected to eat the Sin-Offering in
the Holy Place, etc. and Moses Expostulated with Him upon it. Such things have
befallen me, Levit. 10.19.
and if I had eaten the Sin-Offering to Day, should it have been accepted in
the Sight of the Lord? Especially I would be thankful that God did not
withdraw his Spirit, unchain the Devil, and let loose my Corruption, so that
being overtaken with some Heinous Fault, or harassed with some grievous
Temptation, I should not have dared to approach to the Jealous God in that Holy
Ordinance! but my Place must needs he Empty, because an accusing Devil, and
condemning Conscience, would clamor and say, He is not clean, 1 Samuel: 20.26.
surely he is not clean!

I would also praise my God that I was not disappointed by his Hand upon the
Minister the Steward of these Mysteries; that Sickness, or other Calamities,
did not disable him for his Master's Service: That God was with him, according
to his kind Promise: That Christ Jesus was with his Spirit, and gave him the
Tongue of the Learned to speak a World in Season. How awfully did he warn us
that we should not presume to approach without the Wedding Garment! How sweetly
did he encourage every devout and willing Soul, to come with Beldness to the
Throne of Grace, and by Faith to draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation! How
pathetically did he represent the Sufferings of our Lord! How earnestly press
Faith in his Blood, and Conformity to his Death How passionately did he
recommend his Example, and encourage Universal. Obedience, by displaying the
Happiness of those that serve and follow him; who shall be with Him where he
is, and behold his Glory! How fervently did he pray for the Effusion of the
Holy Spirit upon every sincere Soul! That God would remember us, from the
greatest to the least, with the Love which he bears to his own, and visit us
with his Salvation; that never a Communicant at that Table might be missing at
the Right Hand of Christ another Day! That we might all sit down with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and enter into that Rest which remains
for the People of God! Blessed be God that his Mouth was not shut, nor his
Spirit straightened, as a just Punnishment of my Sins, whereby I have provoked him
to abridge me of those Privileges I have so wretchedly misimprov'd!

I must also bless his Name, that He did not deny his Grace, nor withold his
Spirit, when I approached his Table: although my Preparations were so short, so
vastly below the Standard of the Sanctuary, and my whole Management sadly
defective; nevertheless I hope I did meet with Him whom my Soul loves: And the
Kindness of my Lord exceeded my Expectations, as well as my Deserts. Blessed be
God it did not fare with me according to the Presages of my guilty misgiving
Heart. I expected killing frowns, and to my great Surprise, was welcomed with
reviving Smiles. He lift up the Light of his Countenance upon me, spoke good
and comfortable Words (...) to me, and sent me away with Mirth, Genesis 21.27.
and with Songs, with Tabret, and with Harp.

I will praise Him that He helped my unbelief. That though I am of little Faith,
it was not to seek when it should be in Exercise. I would affectionately
remember his Kindness in enabling me to realize invisible Things, that when I
saw the Elements, I could look through 'em to the Blessed Object they were
appointed to represent. Though I am apt to be like unbelieving Thomas, yet then
(thorough my Savior's adorable Condescension) I was not faithless, Jo. 20.27,
28.
but believing. He so discovered himself to my Soul, that I could not forbear
saying, My Lord, and my God. I thought I no more doubted that Jesus was the
Messiah, Him whom God the Father sealed, than if I had been by when there came
such a Voice to Him from the Excellent Glory; 2 Pet. 1.17.
This is my boloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. I thought I as firmly
believed his Dying upon the Cross for my Sins, as though I had been present at
the Awful Spectacle; as though I had stood by with the Blessed Virgin and the
Beloved Disciple. John 19.23.
I ^aw by Faith his Body broken, and his Blood flow; what Inward Agonies his
Countenance expressed when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou for
saken me? And with how Glorious a Mixture of Majesty, Love, and Sorrow he
looked, when having said It is finished, He bowed his Head and gave up the
Ghost. John 19.30.


I was enabled without any Hesitation, to believe that as He died, so He rose
again, according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.4.
That though He was dead, Rev. 1.8.
He is alive, and lives for evermore. I was almost in my own Mind, a Witness of
his Ascension, doubting no more of it than if I had been among the Men of
Galilee, Acts 1.10, 11.
when He was taken up, and a Cloud received Him out of their Sight. I was as
firmly persuaded of his Sitting at the Right Hand of God, there pleading the
Cause, and managing the Affairs of his Church; as if my Eyes had seen the King
in his Glory, Isa. 33.17.
and the Land which is afar off. Yea I could, I thought, look for his Second
Appearance (which is to be without Sin unto Salvation) with as much Confidence
as if I had heard the Two Angels say, Acts (...). 11.
Why stand ye here gazing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is taken up
from you into Heaven, shall come in like manner as ye have seen Him go up into
Heaven.

Yea, blessed be God, I was enabled to believe in this Jesus as my Savior. I
was encouraged to say, This Body was broken for me. This Blood was shed for me.
The Son of God loved me, and gave himself for me. Gal. 2.20.
And though I had a deep Sense of my own Unworthiness, and had manifold Iniquitys
and mighty Sins to Mourn over, yet (praised be his Name) I was born above my
usual Fears and Scruples, and by a Holy Violence, as 'twere, obliged to believe
in Hope, though against Hope. I saw my self vile and base as Hell, Romans 4.18.
one of the worst and chief of Sinners; and yet I durst not despair, because I
had that Word set Home, 1 John 1.7.
The Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin. My dear Lord seemed to smile, and
say Be of good Cheer, be not afraid, it is I. Come unto me ye that are weary
and heavy laden; Mat. 11.29.
John 6.37.
and Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out. Rev. 22.17.
Whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely.

Indeed my unbelieving Heart was ready to say, How can these Things be? Can
such a Worm be the Object of Everlasting Love? Can such a vile polluted Wretch
pretend Relation to, and Interest in the Holy Jesus, and expect Admission into
his Holy Hill? I was like Jacob when he heard the News of Joseph's being alive,
and Lord of Egypt, His Heart fainted, Genesis 45.26.
for he believed them not. But my Spirit was revived when my Lord showed me the
Provisions He had made for my going to possess the Kingdom: And when I was
helped to consider that nothing is too great to be expected from infinite
Mercy, through Infinite Merits. Blessed be God I could cry out, Lord I believe,
help thou mine Unbelief.

I must also adore and Bless Him, that His Love was shed abroad in my Heart,
Romans 5.5.
in a Degree beyond what I could have expected; considering what a Rock of Ice,
what a stupid, senseless Thing this Heart is. I beheld my Lord's Glory, and
could scarce forbear crying out, This is my Friend, this is my Beloved, Cant.
6.16.
O ye Daughters of Jerusalem. I thought I saw Him as the Church describes Him,
in the 5th of Canticles, and could heartily join in that Acclamation. Yea he is
altogether lovely. Oh how did I wish for nearer Access to Him, and clearer
Views of Him! Psalm. 42.
My Soul did thirst for God, for the living God: Yea, as the Heart pants after
the Water Brooks, so did my Soul pant after Him. I could have been even
willing to have died in an Ecstasy of Love, that I might not have lost the Sight
of so Glorious an Object to all Eternity.

Oh how did the Tokens of his Expensive Love affect my Soul, and fill me with
Gratitude! I thought I could have died a Thousand Deaths for Him who loved me
and gave Himself for me. And O may I never forget how ashamed and confounded I
was then, to think of the Sins and Miscarriages of my past Life. When I called
to Remembrance some of the many Omissions and Commissions that are upon Record
in my Conscience, how did my Heart smite me? Oh thought I, Is this thy Kindness
to thy Friend! Do thou thus requite the Lord, O foolish Creature, and unwise!
Are these suitable Returns to such am^^ing Love? For which of his good Works
has he been thus treated, so neglected, so affronted by thee? Is it not High
Time for me to awake out of Sleep, to take up more firm and steady Resolutions
of better Obedience? Sure the Time past shall suffice to have acted so unworthy
of a Christian, and of a Man, yea to have debased my self below the Beasts that
perish? Isa. 1.
For the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib.

Therefore I offer up my solemn Thanksgiving to God, that He has by his Spirit
and Grace enabled me thus to Believe and Love; to Repent and Resolve. It is He
has worked in me both to will and do, and his shall be the Praise. Else it had
been with me as at other Times, when to my Shame I must own I went to the Table
dull, and returned stupid, I went dejected and returned disconsolate, when the
whole of my Performane^ was mere Bodily Exercise, which found profited
nothing. I must ascribe it to his Grace, that it was better with me than usual;
for let others pretend what they will, for my part I find that I am not
sufficient of my self to any thing Spiritually Good. In me, that is in my
flesh, dwells no good Thing.

Now, O my God, accept my Thankful Acknowledgments. Let me keep a Sense of thy
Love ever fresh upon my Soul. And especially help me to walk worthy of my
Profession and Privileges; Heb. 10.29.
let me never tread under Foot the Son of God, nor count the Blood of the
Covenant, wherewith I am sanctified, an Unholy Thing. Amen, for Jesus Sake.

SECT. II. When the Ordinance has not answered Expectation.
I Have been at the Table of my Lord, where He uses to meet and bless his
People. I went with raised Hopes that (though infinitely unworthy, I should have
Communion with the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and his Son Jesus Christ; that I should be Richly entertained, and return
Rejoicing: But alas how sadly am I disappointed! I came to the Pit and found no
Water! Jer. 14.3.
I am returned with my Vessels empty! I am ashamed and confounded! I had
prepared a Song of Praise, and thought to have closed the Festival with
Hosanna's to the Son of David; but Woe is me, I am forced to hang my Harp upon
the Willows. My Feast is turned into Mourning, Amos 8.10.
and my Songs into Lamentation, and the End thereof as a Bitter Day. My Mind
was dark, my Heart hard, my Thoughts confused, my Affections disordered, my
Soul and all within me utterly out of Frame; I could neither believe, nor
repent, nor hope, nor love, nor do any thing as I ought to do. I tried and
struggled with my self in vain. I was as it were fettered, pinioned and
becalmed, and my very Heart asleep. In the mean Time my Enemies were lively,
Psalm. 38.19.
the Devil busy, and the World Importunate; yea Ten Thousand Trifles amusing
and distracting me.

O wretched Man that I am! When I should have been best I was worst! Romans 7.24.
When I would do good, Romans 7.21.
evil is present with me! I even tremble to think what a Guest I was at that
Holy Table; and cannot but wonder that the Master of the Feast did not single
me out and say, Mat. 22.12, 13.
Friend, how came thou in hither? That He did not say to his Servants, Bind
Him Hand and Foot, and take Him away, and cast Him into outer Darkness. I am
amazed at the Patience of God, that He could bear with such Trifling, and did
not awaken my drowsy Soul by some terrible Judgment: That seeing the Threatening
affected me no more, He did not try what the Execution would do, according to
that 1 Cor. 11.30. For this Cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep.

I adore the Divine Patience, and will not despair of Forgiveness through the
Blood of Jesus. But I cannot forgive my self, and am even out of all Patience
when I consider how stupid I have been, and how unaccountably I have managed. I
could wish the severest Providence had detained me, that any thing but Sin, had
prevented me from profaning such an Ordinance, contracting so much Guilt,
incurring such Danger, and creating my self so much Sorrow. But alas it is in
vain, and perhaps unlawful, so to wish.

Come then, O my Soul, instead of spending Time in Fruitless Lamentations,
consider seriously what the present Circumstance makes this Duty. Humble thy
self deeply before God, and entreat his Favor. See if there be any Ground of
Comfort, and labor to improve so sad a Disappointment (if possible) to some
good Purpose.

God be merciful to me a Sinner. I acknowledge my, Iniquity, and desire to take
to my self that Shame which is my Due. Against thee, O Lord, Psalm. 51.4.
have I sinned, and thou must be justified when thou speak, and be clear
when thou judge. There was nothing wanting on thy Part. All things were
ready. Mat. 22.4
I found a Table spread, and a Cup flowing. The Minister performed his Part
faithfully and devoutly, and it was only my own Fault that it was not a sweet
and edifying Ordinance to me, as well as others. It was my own Sloth, or Pride,
or Unbelief, something or other in my self, that provoked thy Spirit to
withdraw, and caused thee to deny that Grace without which I can do nothing. I
humbly confess, and heartily lament my walking unsuitably to the Vows I
formerly made, and the Favors which I have heretofore received. I have at this
Table sworn and not performed; had Peace spoken, and yet returned again to
Folly; enjoyed sweet Communion with thee, and yet forgot, neglected, and
provoked thee: And therefore I was justly punished, in my Beloved's withdrawing
Himself; Cant. 5.6.
so that when I sought Him; I could not find Him; and when I called Him, He
gave me no Answer: I will therefore ascribe Righteousness to my Maker, I will
abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. Lord forgive me that my
Preparations were so slight, my Self-Examination so superficial, my Meditations
so loose, my Prayers so cold, and my Pains in the whole so little. Pardon me if
I omitted Preparatory Dutys or laid too great a Stress upon, 'em: If Sloth
prevailed with me in neglect 'em, or Pride to trust to 'em. Forgive me, if I by
Eagerness in Worldly Business, Excessive Indulgence of the Flesh, in Meat or
Drink, Sleep, or needless Recreations, by Intemperate Passion, or Imprudent
Ordering of Affairs; I not only provoked my God, but actually indisposed my
self for the Holy Solemnity. Of if I have been guilty of any Sin that I have not
duly repented of, if I live in the Neglect of any known Duty, or under the
Power of any unmortify'd Lust. Show me I beseech thee, wherefore thou
contendest with me, Humble me deeply, wash me thoroughly, and pardon me freely,
for Jesus Sake. Amen.

But, O my Soul though there be so great Reason for Humiliation and
Self-Abasement, I must not be utterly discouraged, and refuse to be comforted.

I must hope that my Heart has been right with God, and that I have not
wilfully prevaricated and trifled with Him; therefore several Circumstanees may
be considered, to check my Fears, and mitigate my Sorrows.

I do not serve a Hard Master, a Kind and Gracious God can make Allowancer for
that Indisposition which may arise from Melancholy, or other Bodily Disorders;
from extraordinary Affictions, violent Temptations, etc. He considers our
frame, and knows that we are but Dust, and does not expect the same from frail
Mortals as he does from the Angels in Heaven, and the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect. That kind Expression of my Lord, Mat. 26.41.
The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak, may be used to comfort
Real Humble Christians; though it be often abu^^d (...) harden the slothful and
presumpt^^ (...) Formalist.

Let me also consider that I must not always conclude an Ordinance last (...)
where the Affections have not been (...) There may be Real Communion wi^^ (...)
where there is not a sensible Delight. The Sacrament may be blessed to promote
Humility and Real Holiness, though I have wanted sensible Meltings, and desired
Manifestations; yea, it is very possible these may be withheld on a wise
Design, to carry on the Work of God in my Soul, which seems to require a
Variety of Dispensations; as Wind and Rain, Frost and Darkness, are in their
proper Courses equally necessary to the Earth as Calm and Sunshine. Hereby it
may be God is teaching me to live more by Faith, upon the Righteousness and
Fullness of Jesus; to distrust my self more, and censure others less; to be more
watch^^l. humble, charitable and compassionate. than ever. I may see Cause to
bless God hereafter for what is so grievous now. John 13.7.
I shall never forget that Saying of my Lord to Peter, What I do thou know
not now, but thou shall know.

Besides, I would remember that I cannot presently judge of the Benefit of an
ordinance. That which is sown, in Tears, may be reaped with Joy, though, at
present there be but small Appearance of it. The Spiritual Medicine may
gradually mend my Constitution, though it don't operate sensibly, or prove an
immediate Cure.

However, I have been doing my Duty, and God may accept my Honest Intentions,
though he don't at present smile upon me and say, Well done good and Faithful
Servant.

And after all, it is some Comfort to think that others have performed more
acceptably, and met with (...) and Peace in Believing. And I thank God for this
Sign of Grace, that I can rejoice in other's being better, and more favored
than my self.

But be Things as bed as a guidty Conscience and an accusing E^^^^^ represents
'em? I will bless God (...) I have had Grace to bemoan my sel^^ lament my
Folly, and cry to God for Mercy, through that Blood which can ^^^one even for the
Heinous Sin of having interpretatively counted it an Unholy Thing.

And now it remains that I resolve ^^riously, in a better Strength than my own,
to manage better for the Time to come. And 'till an Opportunity offers to make
a fresh Effort, let me walk humbly under a deep Sense of my Sin; let me be more
strict and circumspect in my whole Conversation, and live every Day under the
Awe of those Vows of God which are upon me. In an especial manner let me be
careful to keep my self from Iniquity. Psalm 18.23.
That Sin to which by my Constitution, Business, etc. I am most inclined, and
with which I am most frequently overtaken. Let me be peculiarly careful to
perform those Dutys to which I find a corrupt Heart most averse. This will be
the best way to retrieve the Loss I have sustained, God forbid that I should
encourage my self in Future Neglects, by any Considerations whatsoever; yet I
must believe that He remembers Christ in the Sacrament to the best Purpose I
who under a Sense of what He has there professed and promised lives best after
it: Being well assured that a Holy. Conversation, upon Gospel Principles and
Motives, is a better Evidence of worthy Receiving, than all the Transports and
Extasys imaginable. I would not be sati^sy'd without being affected; but surely
the Principal Thing is by so apt a Means to be improved and bettered, to grew
in Grate, and in the Knowledge of (...) Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Therefore I must make it my earnest and daily Prayer, that God would bless his
Ordinance to this great End; or else my Labor will be lost, and my
Expectations frustrate.

And Oh that he would vouchsafe his Blessing accordingly. Grant that I may
never forget the Engagements I am under, but upon every Occasion remember that
I am a Christian, and have solemnly owned my self to be so before many
Witnesses. That this Thought may be a Restraint from Sin, and a Spur to Duty,
an Antidote against all the Poisonous Suggestions of the Grand Enemy of Souls;
a Preservative from the Ill Example of those Children of Disobedience in whom
he rules; Ephesians. 2.
and a Cordial under all the Troubles and A^^lictions of this Mortal Life. May
I find so great Benefit by thus waiting upon God, that I may long for the
Return of such Seasons, and by Frequent Communion with Saints on Earth, be
fitted for Better Company in a Better Wor^^, when I shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. yea be with Christ, where He
is, and behold his Glory, which is all my Salvation, and all my Desire. AMEN.

FINIS.
(...) by D. Henchman in King Street, Boston.
MEditations on (...) Sanctification of the Lord's Day. And on the Judgments
which attend (...) P^^sa^^tion of it. With seasonable Meditations (...) both
Winter and Summer. By Increase Mather, D. D. Price Bound 1 s. 4 d.

THings to be more thought upon. A Brief Discourse on the Injuries offered unto
the Glotious and only Savior of the World: In many Instances, wherein the
Guilty are seldom aware of their being so Injurious to the Eternal Son of God.
Price Bound 1 s. 2 d.

A Monitor for Communicants. An Essay to Excite and Assist Religious Approaches
to the Lords Table, Price St. 4 d. and 3 s. per Doz.

THe Will of a Father submitted to. The Duty of Patient Submission to every
Condition, which the Providence of God, orders for the Children of Men.
Enforced from the Glorious pattern of the Blessed Jesus, readily and cheerfully
Submitting to take the Cup, which His Father had given Him.

These Three by Cotton Mather, D. D. and F. R. S.

A Humble Discourse of the Incomprehensibleness of God. Being the Substance of
several Lecture Sermons, upon Job XI. 7, 8. By Benjamin Co^man, A. M.

THe Young Secretary's Guide, or a speedy ^^lp to Learning. In two Parts. Price
Bound 28. By Thomas Hill, Gent.

THe Simple Cobbler of Aggawam in America. Willing to help Mend his Native
Country, ^^mentably Tattered, both in the Upper-leather and (...); with all the
honest Stitches he can take. And as willing never to be paid for his Work, by
Old (...) wonted Pay. By Theodore de la Guard.


