On the much Lamented DEATH of the Reverend Mr. Noadiah Russel, Late Pastor of
the Church of CHRIST in Middletown, who had his Clayey Tabernacle Dissolved and
his Mortality Swallowed up of Life, December 3d. 1713. Aetatis Suae, 55.
DID Israel Mourn when holy Sam'el died?
Or when, they of their Aron were deprived?
When Saul was slain, and when, great Abner fell
A hearty grief that Monarchs Tears did tell.
Elisha dying, Wicked Jo^^ Cry's,
Whom once (...) Slighted now to late does Prize
Both Isr'els Sons and the Egyptians Fierce
With Ecchoing Moans did follow Jacobs Hearse.
And shall sweet RUSSEL unlamented Die?
Twould speak we are Sick of deepest Apathy;
Ay! worse than Brutes, more Stupid far away
Who howl and moan when Mates become a Prey.
Let cease our Joy, and ^ables only wear,
Let naught but Sighs of dismal Grief appear.
Come all his Flock, his Household Brethren too,
Ye Priests of GOD Enfeebled by this Blow.
Oh come from every Place, come Join in One
Our Grief conjoined, will make the louder Moan
Forbear a Smile, let Tears stand in all Eyes
Come wet his Grave, and fill the Air with Cries
In broken, sobbing Notes, let us set forth,
Our Heavy, Heavy Loss, his Golden worth.
The Task's too Great and far out bids my Skill
I fear t'eclipse in showing my good will;
His Shining Merit, and to wound his Name
Mounted long since, on spreading Wings of Fame.
His Name is Precious and his Memory,
Perfumed shall last, unto Eternity.
His small Remains lock'd-up, unmade must be
But rise e're long, and Glorious stand, you will see.
Beloved of all but slighters of what is rare.
Virtue's a Crime, with such as haters were.
Not without woes, but from base Vices free,
In World Corrupt, untouched, untainted he:
Like healthy Body's in Contagious air
Or Fish that fresh, whose livings in salt (...) are.
His Virtue's rare, in this our Cloudy Night,
As Stars, in azure Sky, they shined most bright
Methinks as A'ron, in his Sacred Dress,
So RUSSEL's Soul adorned with Grace no less.
His Speech was sweet, and Aspect well might win,
But greater, Richer Beauty, lay within.
His Head with Learning, Prudence, Holy Art,
Firm Faith and Love, Humility his Heart,
Peaceful and Meek, but yet, with Courage Stout,
Engaged the Fiend, and did him sorely Rout.
From David's Tower with Armor bright supplied
Both Shield and Sword, Helmet and Brestplate wide
Th envenomed Darts, he bravely did Repel,
With full strength shot, from Fury's fierce of Hell.
To needless strife a Foe, yet ready Stood,
To spend for Christ, his Name his Strength (...) Blood,
Lightened by CHRIST, a fixed shining Star.
Keeping strait course, gave warmth and guidance rare
A Pregnant Cloud and Fruitful Showers Yielding,
Softening Hearts most Hard; and yet most Cooling
To Conscience Scorched, with Gods dismal wrath,
Producing hope, of what is somewhat worth.
Skilled was he in his work and Painful too,
Souls to beget and then to make them grow.
Oh! with what skill did he GOD's Word divide;
'Twas first unvailed and then with warmth applied
He dealt to each with care his Portion due,
Dread Woes to some to others Comforts new.
Unto Christ's Lambs he was a tender Nurse
But smartly Scourged all such as still grew worse
He Preached, he Prayed, he Watched, he Wept, and why?
His Love to Christ, and fears lest Souls would die.
But we are deprived and now too soon we see
His greater Worth, Augments our Misery.
Our swelling Joys are ebbed and now we stand
Parched like the (...) as the day Africa sand.
Methinks as when the hasty setting Sun,
Makes glad the East it leaves the West Undone,
So, Joy'd were Saints above, when he came in,
But left are we, midst Woes, Darkness and Sin.
Oh Ra^^els dead (blessed Saint) thus we are undone,
Our town is fallen and our Beauty^s gone.
We (...) lost our Pastor and our Patron dear,
Our strongest Chariots and our Horsemen rare:
Our Feet will wander and our Souls must starve,
There Is none to guide, nor Bread when as we crave,
That can it break, though once we had good fare
Of Bread most fat, and Dainty's that were rare
Surpised with Ill, no Watchman to descry,
Gods Angel great and Judgments when they are nigh.
Now Hell will shout, and Sinners will grow bold
Young Seekers faint and Saints themselves wax cold.
The Wall is broke, and now the Cursed Foe
Of Souls, more fierce and sedulous will grow
With doubled force and more his Game anew
Our Leader' dead, unwearied will pursue.
Mourn do our Zions ways, our Lord's-days sad,
Gods sacred House where frequent we have had
Our Souls, refreshed and filled with Joy that is true,
There are we sad and sinking griefs renew.
Thus into darkness, I am bro't, and left,
I Am Naked made, of Treasure rich bereft,
In Ashes rolled with bitterness I Am filled
I Am plunged in the deep, yet it is what he has willed.
Show me the Sin that yields such smart as this,
Oh make me grieve for what is in me amiss
Lord pity me, and stanch my Bleeding Wound
Repair my Loss, Oh! make me Whole and Sound.
N. C.

On the same Sorrowful occasion.
NO Gifts of Nature, Art or Grace
Where Death's Subpaena's issued out,
Exempteth from the Burying Place;
The so inlay'd, and most Devout
NO'DIAH could have pleaded those,
Had they been of Validity:
But when Death comes with us to close,
Alas, what do they Signify?
True Grace indeed it does Avail,
For those endowed there withal,
That the Second Death has no Entail
On them; and yet their Bodies fall,
Into the Prison of the Grave,
Until the Jail-delivery thence;
They in that Dormitory have
A sweet Repose, and have no sense
Of all the Worms and Rottenness
Which there Triumph and make a Prey.
Of their Vile Bodies they Possess
Until the Resurrection Day;
When they will off those Vermins shake
And in a new and bright Array,
Their Ascent to the Skies will make,
Where CHRIST his Glory shall Display.
NO'DIAH then will wear a Crown,
At our JESUS Right Hand placed,
Will Contribute to the Renown
Where with that Juncture shall be graced.
EPITAPH.
N O'DIAH RUSSEL here is Interred.
Of him it truly is averred,
A Still, yet Powerful Preacher he,
And from the Pulpit heard should be
Sounding this Whisper, that all must
As he, go to a Bed of Dust.
And therefore should an House provide
Where their Dislodged Souls reside,
As his may; Clothed with Heavenly Bliss;
Nor of Eternal Glory miss.
J. J.

AN ACROSTICK.
N ow he is admitted to Celestial Joys,
O ut of Earths grief's, and World's disturbing noise;
A nd all his Works, him follow shall, though he,
D oath rest in's Grave, from those his Labors free;
I n which his body sleeps till the dreadful Day,
A nd final Trumpets sound, then must obey;
H ave Glorious shining shall his risen Clay.
R Emaining whilst his body's here, in the dust
U nto the perfect Spirits, of the Just,
S hall be received, (with Glory raised) his Soul;
S o abides, till Heaven's Rolled, as a Scroll;
E njoying things, unthought, unheard, unseen,
L ay'd up for those, of GOD, who have Lovers been.

