Some of the HONORS THAT RELIGION Does unto the Fruitful Mothers in Israel.
Meditated Upon the BIRTH and Preached at the BAPTISM of a CHILD.

Boston Jan. 16. 1714, 15:

By BENJAMIN COLMAN A. M.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop on
the North side of King Street, near the Town House. 1715.

To the Truly Virtuous Mrs. Margaret Sewall: The Happy Consort of STEPHEN
SEWALL, Esqt. in Salem.
MADAM,
IF I knew any One to whom I ought rather to Inscribe the following Discourse
than to Your Self, I should certainly do it. For how much soever my known
Friendship to You may Incline me, or Your generous Friendship to me may Oblige
me, to this small Testimony of my Respect to Your Name; yet I may venture to
appeal to all that have the Happiness of knowing Your Pleasant Family, to say
where I could find a more happy Wise and Mother to address unto. For as the
Divine Providence which made You for Major Sewall, formed both Your Souls
exactly to Exhibit the Felicities of the Married State; so has it blessed You
with a Numerous Offspring, You whereof yet Survive, in all (...) (as far as
has hitherto appeared) You are likely to have much Comfort and Joy: not only
in respect of that Native Goodness of Temper and Ingenuity which peculiarly
Adorns 'em; but also in respect of their Conspicuous Virtue and I hope Serious
Piety. For as you have found Grace in GOD's Sight to be One of the best of
Mothers, so also to be the Mother of some of the best of Children. In You as
much as in any One are fulfilled those Words of Solomon, Her Children rise up
and call Her Blessed; Her Husband also and He praises Her.

Madam, I Pray the GOD of Heaven long to spare and continue You to Major
Sewall, and to Your Children; and Them to You: and grant You to see more of the
united Graces of the Sewalls and Mitchels in them all; as the Earnest You
desire of their following You to Heaven.

Accept Madam this hearty Expression of a sincere Affection from

Your most Obliged Friend, and very Humble Servant, BENJ. COLMAN
Boston, Jan. 24. 1714, 15.
THE Blessing and Honor OF Fruitful Mothers.
GENESIS xxxiii. 5. And he lift up his Eyes and saw the Women and the Children,
and said, Who are these with thee? And he said, The Children which God has
graciously given thy Servant.


IN the beginning of this Chapter we have the Account of the Brotherly
Affectionate Meeting of Jacob and Esau. It was a singular Proof of Gods Empire
over the hearts of Men, and of His gracious Care of good Men and anfwering
their Prayers. Jacob had been Wrestling in Prayer for this favor of
Providence. His fears of his Brothers resentments had been very Great. In his
great Prudence and Wisdom he had taken the most likely measures to Soften his
Brothers heart toward him. He sent his Presents before him, and now put his
Wives and their Children into the most Moving Order that could be, and himself
as the head of them. Seven times he bowed himself to the Ground before his
Brother; He did Obeisance to him as his Elder Brother, and his Temporal Lord;
He remembered also its very likely the Injury and Provocation he had on his part
given though the thing was of God. This Humility and Respect of Jacob turned
Esau's heart within him, or rather GOD changed it in that Instant; and Esan ran
to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his Neck and kissed him, and they
both wept.

THE Natural Affection which had been so long Suppressed, now returned in the
Full Tide thereof. How good is it to see Brethren that have been at Enmity so
reconciled! A Brother offended is hard to be won. He that offends is hardly
bro't to submit like Jacob. When God touches a Man's heart his Enmity to his
Brother vanishes. When shall we see Brethren at distance meet again like these
in our Context, and Emulate -- I will not say the temper of Profane Esau, --
that would be a reproach -- but the humility and affection of good Jacob.

THEY meet and say not a Word of their old differences: that would have soon
broke the Peace again; had Esau remembered how Jacob had Supplanted him with a
Lie, or Jacob repeated Esau's threaning to Murder him. It Is the Repeating a
Matter that Separates Friends, and Perpetuates their Separation. A submissive
Carriage will go a great way to conquer a very Esau and turn away Wrath. The
Bullet flies over him that stoops: Says Mr. Henry.

I AM afraid, though Charity obliges us to think the best; yet I Am afraid that
Esan's carnal tho'ts of the Birthright and of the Blessing helped to preserve
Jacob. He was born the Prince of the Family, and saw now that Birthright
secure; Jacob with his Children lying at his Feet. This might help to make him
Easy. His Arming and Contest might be for a Temporal Dominion; that is the
Blessing that most People desire. The Case was the same as that in the
beginning between Cain and Abel; and God told Cain that Abels Preference in the
Divine Acceptance did no ways release him from the Duty and Respect which was
owing from him as a Younger Brother: To thee shall be his desire, and thou
shall reign over him. Jacob understood this well, and accordingly he did in
Duty and Loyalty submit to my Lord Esau.

BUT the thing was of God, who turns Men's Hearts by a Secret, Silent,
Resistless Power, as He pleases. The Brethren both wept: how pleasant are the
Tears of Joy after those of Anger, Grief and Fear? The Discord of Brethren
occasion the One, their Reconciliation the Other.

TO come to our Text.
ESAU begins the kind Discourse, after they had Embraced and Wept a while. He
lift up his Eyes and saw the Women and the Children, and said -- Who are these
with thee? How pleasant was it to them to see the Brothers meet so? In their
Peace their Families had Peace and Safety. With what Joy came they forward to
how themselves also.

" JACOB had now Eleven or Twelve Little Ones in his Retinue, the Eldest of
them not Fourteen Years Old. Esau had seen his Servants and the Droves before,
but heard nothing of this Fair Troop and Flock. Who are these, says he?

TO this common Question Jacob returned a very Serious Answer: They are the
Children which God has graciously, etc. Observe in this Answer, the Devotion
to God in it, and the Humility to Man.

1. THE Religion and Devotion toward God in it. This was as became Jacob, the
Inheritor of the Spiritual Blessing. He spoke after a Godly sort. The Holy
Patriarchs most common Words and Actions were ordinarily thus framed. He looks
upon his Children, and speaks of them, (1.) As Gods Gift. (2.) The Choice Gifts
of His Free Grace: which God has Graciously given me. This is Speech seasoned
with Grace, to minister Grace to others.

2. THE Humility toward Man in this Answer: The Children which God has
graciously given thy Servant. Under the Outward Favors of Providence we should
be the more Meek and Lowly in Heart, in Words, in Behavior. And Note, that
such Forms of Speech among Men, are no vain Modes of Compliment. Jacob in a
very serious manner says to his Brother, I am thy Servant. As Abraham before
him was very Gentile in Behavior, rising up and bowing to the Children of
Heth: So Jacob that Plain and Good Man was very Sincere in Professing himself
ready to Serve his Brother. The better Children of God we are the more humble
shall we be to Men; and the Servant of God is the readiest to become the
Servant of all Men; 2 Cor. 4.5. Our selves your Servants for Jesus sake.

HAVING thus descanted on the Text; I would ask leave to make Three
Observations from it.
[I.] That a Mother with a Train of Children after her is One of the most
admirable and lovely Sights in the Visible Creation of God. And Esau lift up
his Eyes and saw the Women and the Children, and said who are these with thee.

[II.] That Children are among the Choice Favors and Gifts of Providence, and
we should have a high Sense of the Gracious Favor of God to us in them. They
are the Children which God has graciously given me.

[III.] Under the Outward Smiles of Providence on us and our Families, it well
becomes us to be the more Humble, Meek and Lowly before God and Man. They are
the Family which God has Graciously given thy Servant.

I. Obser. That a Mother with a Train of Children after her, is One of the most
lovely and admirable Sights in the Visible Creation of God.
A very Superious Part of it in our Eyes to be sure, if we at all honor Our
Selves. But because we may be Partial to our Selves, let us judge only by the
Honor that God has put upon us. The Earth and all the Creatures in it were
made for the Comfort, Service and Dominion of Man: Genesis 1.26. And God said, let
us make Man in our Image, after our likeness, and let him have dominion over,
etc. So God Created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created He him,
Male and Female created He them: And God blessed them, and God said unto them,
be fruitful and multiply and replenish the Earth and subdue it. It was the
Honor of Man, and in Token of his Dignity and Pre-eminence above the other
Creatures, that he was made Last; for the Method of the Creation was to advance
from that which was least perfect to that which is more so; and thus Man the
Lord of the lower World and the Image of the Creator in it was made the Crown
of it; and as the Top-stone in the Noble Structure was bro't in with shouting;
Grace, Grace unto it. The Flights of Birds in the Air are a fine and curious
Spectacle, when they sometimes cloud and cover the Skies from our Eye: The
Shoals of Fish in the Sea are a very admirable Sight, when now and then a few
only of those Innumerable Inhabitants of the Waters show themselves to the Eyes
of Men. Again, the Flocks and Herds and Droves of Cattle; such as these which
Jacob sent before him, the Lambs playing about their careful bleating Dams, are
a very beautiful sight on the Plains and Pastures where they feed: But how much
more the Families and Tribes of Men, We and our Children, the Flock of God that
should be, the People of his Pasture and the Sheep of his hand.

MALE and Female Created He them; and blessed them, and said, be fruitful and
multiply and replenish the Earth. Equal in this tho Women and the Men: for though
Adam was first formed and then Eve, yet Both in the Image of God alike; Eve as
well as Adam. Angels were not made Male and Female, for they were not to
Propagate their Kind. In the next World we shall be as the Angels which neither
Marry, etc. But Man an Earthly Creature, an Imbodied Angel, was created Male
and Female that their Nature may be Propagated and the Race continued. Thus
(says Mr. Henry) Fires and Candles, the Luminaries of this lower World,
because they waste and go out, have a power to Light more; but it is not so
with the Lights of Heaven; Stars do not Kindle Stars.

WHEN GOD had Created our First Parents, and Looked upon them with Love and
Pleasure then He Blessed them, with the Promise of a Numerous and Long
Posterity. Be Fruitful and Multiply. This was the Honor of our first Mother
Eve, that She was the Mother of all Living, Genesis 3.20. The Word Adam signifies
Earth, Man's Original; but the Name Eve signifies Life, because by Her Life is
Propagated to the many Generations that have been and are to come. " Adam bore
the Name of the Dying Body, Eve of the Living Soul. It was because She was to
be the Mother, that She was called Life. And doubtless it had respect to that
Blessed Seed of "the Woman, the Redeemer, the Life of all the Living, the
Author of Everlasting Life unto us.

NOW the USE of this first Meditation might have been,

1. TO Congratulate some of You whom God has blessed with very Amiable and
Lovely Consorts, and a Numerous hopeful Family of Children. Hail you my highly
favored Friends! the Lord is with you, and blessed are you among Women; if
together with this Outward favor of Providence you do but secure a Better Name
than of Sons and Dau'ters; and be sure you are among the Children of God your
Selves.

2. IT should direct Christian Husbands how to prize, esteem and value such a
Blessing of Providence; both the Mother and her Train. Rejoice in the Good you
have found, the Favor you have obtained of the Lord. Happy shall thou be and
it shall be well with thee; thy Wife a fruitful Vine by the sides of thy House;
thy Children as Olive-branches, etc. May you live to see your Childrens
Children and Peace upon Israel. But it may be you will be too apt to Dote on
the Creature and Idolize what you should only Love, and thank God for; It may
be therefore needful rather to insist on a Third Reflection.

3. WHICH is of Caution and Restraint: And that,

1. To Fruitful Parents, Not to be Proud of the Favors of Heaven to them. No;
be humble yet; you neither Made your Selves Parents, nor can you be Sure of the
Comfort you ought to hope for in your Children, nor can you say how long they
shall Live to be your Honor or your Joy if they shall do well.

2. LET it Caution Poorer Parents not to grow into Fears, Distrusts or Anxious
Cares how to Provide for and subsist their Numerous Families. GOD that feeds
the Ravens, will feed thine. These are thy Portion upon Earth, and many a Rich
and Greater Nei'bour would give half his Estate and all his Honors for Half
thy Family. Jacobs Family were his distressing Care in this day, wherein he
owns them the gracious Gift and Favor of Providence to him.

3. LET me add a Caution to the Barren; Not to be dejected for want of
Children; as Rachel and poor Hannah were too much. For though it be such a favor
to be the Mother of many, yet there are Greater favors than this to set our
Hearts upon; and it may be you in your Espousals to Christ have much more to
satisfy your Soul in; or at least thither let me direct you. Or indeed even
our present Life Consists not in a Numerous Posterity; that we should say
Sinfully and Extremely foolishly with Rachel, Give we Children or I dye. No;
you may with Hannah Pray; but you must be Content if you are even denied; which
She was not.

4. THOSE of us that have but a Single Branch or Two, an only One (it may be)
the Siender Hope and Prop of our House, must be very Thankful to God for the
single Lamp in our House. If We were meet for more; as meet as our better
Nei'bours, God would have given us more, it may be. Let humility preserve us,
and let us be thankful for the least, when we deserve Nothing.

AND then in the (...) Place,

5. A Word to them that have had many but have buried all: Our Mournful Mothers
that have Sorrow upon Sorrow, those of Burying upon those of Bearing; Be
comforted in the Hopes of the Children you have in Heaven, in Glory; gathered
into the Saviors Arms and laid in His Bosom. Suffer your Little Ones to go to
Him; He Will take them up and bless them; as He has said of them -- That of such
is the Kingdom of Heaven. Believe it, (where is your Faith? And O thou of
little, wherefore do thou Weep? believe it). That it is well worth the
Sorrows and Pains of bearing and of burying too, to have a Child in Heaven:
While so many have their Families Growing up and Branching out, of whom God
only knows what they will be and prove in this Evil World.

BUT so I dismiss my First Observation; That a Mother with a Train of Children
after her is One of the most Lovely Sights in the Visible Creation of GOD.

II. Obser. THE Second Observation which I would make is; That Children are
among the Choice Favors and Gifts of Providence, and we should have a high
Sense of the gracious Regards of GOD unto us herein.
They are the Children which God has graciously given me.

I. THEY are among the Choice Favors and Gifts of Providence to a Person. Let
Nature decide this; Or if that in its present Affections and Judgment is apt to
err, let the Scripture determine it: Psalm. 127.3. Lo, Children are an Heritage,
and the fruit of the Womb is his Reward. They are their Parents best
Inheritance, and the Gift of Free Grace. Psalm. 113.9. He makes the barren
Woman to keep house, and to be a joyful Mother of Children; praise ye the Lord.
Psalm. 107.41. He sets the Poor on High from Affliction, and makes him
Families like a Flock. To be sure if Providence concerns itself in any thing
here below, it is in the Matters of our Life and Death; Who, How many shall be
born into the World, and Where and by Whom, etc.

YET Children are by no Means to be put among or equaled to the Saving Gifts of
Gods Grace. There is a better Name than of Sons and Dau'ters. A Numerous
Posterity is the Portion of many a Wicked Person. Psalm. 17.14, 15. They are
full of Children, and leave their Substance to their Babes; as for me I will
behold thy face in Righteousness, etc. Nevertheless Children are a very
Gracious Gift of God to us in this Life. They are so,

1. IN the Formation of them in the Womb. For who knows the way of the
Spirit, or how the bones do grow within Her that is with Child? It is not at
all owing to the Parents care that there is a perfect Child formed, and
quickened by a Living Soul. God that formed Adams Body out of the Ground, forms
our Bodies in are their Names for ever in the Church on that Account! But could
Pious Hannah or Ruth receive their Sons without their Solemn Offerings of
Praises to God? No: Ruth 4.14. And the Women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the
Lord which has not left thee this day without a Name in Israel: and Naomi took
the Child and laid it in her Bosom. Read also Hannah: transport of Devotion at
the Dedication of her Little Nazarite, and Her Song: 1 Samuel 2. Chap.

3. IF Children are Gods Gift to us, Then they should be given to God again:
Dedicated to Him as His Propriety and Resigned to His disposal; to be bro't up
for Him, and to Live to Him and Serve Him for ever. So Abraham Circumcised his
Isaac, and Hannah devoted her Samuel, and we in Baptism Consecrate our Children
unto CHRIST.

4. CHILDREN should remember themselves to be the LORD's, and their Bonds to
Live to Him. God gave thee thy Being and thy Life; and gave thee to thy Parents
who have given thee back to Him again. Be His, My Child; and so Gods gracious
Gift to Us, and Ours and thine Own to Him again.

5. IF Children are the gracious Gift of God, then it is Lawful and a Duty to
Mourn under the Holy and Awful hand of God in their Death; or in their Sinful
Courses which may be worse than Death. Sorrow is Natural, and may be Gracious
in such Cases; but it must be in Moderation and with Resignation. Even Jacob
himself was an Intemperate Mourner for Joseph; and bitter was his Grief and
deep his Shame when some others of his Sons stained their hands with blood,
shed treacherously and cuelly. Our Dead Sorrows are often very heavy ones; like
the shrieks at Rama, Rachel Mourning for her Children, not to be Comforted. But
our Living Sorrows may be heavier far, as well as more Lasting: Prove. 10.1. A
wise Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the heaviness of his Mother.

THIS is the First Thing under the Second Observation; That Children are among
the Special Favors and Gifts of Providence.

II. WE ought to have a high Sense of the Grace of God expressed toward us in
the hopeful Children which He gives us. They are Graciously given to us. The
Gift of free Grace; without and against our deserts.

THEY are a Visible and Sensible Expression of the Divine Favor to us. So we
read, 1 Chronicles. 26.5. That Obed-Edom had Eight Sons, for God blessed him. Many
Children are the Divine Blessing on a Family.

THEY are a great Pleasure and Delight to Parents: an Honor and Reputation
also among Men; and a Safeguard and Protection to us as they grow up. Psalm.
127.4, 5. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty Man, so are Children of the
Youth. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: -- they shall speak
with the Enemies in the gate. Good Children are so many faithful "Zealous
Seconds to their Parents, in the vigor of their Youth to stand up in Their
defense, when They are Injuriously run down in Age. "As arrows in the hand of a
Mi'ty man, who knows how to use them for his own safety, And as a giver full of
them; so is his (...) supplied, and under the favor of Providence abides in
strength.

CHILDREN are more than Riches: they are the Heirs of it: and which is,
Greater, the Earth or its Owners? Moreover, we may and ought to hope well
concerning our Children with respect to the Spiritual and Everlasting Blessings
of the Life to come. As Jacob here looked upon his Children as Graciously given
him because they were Heirs of the Covenant Blessing; they were to build up the
Church of God, and be the Patriarchs, the Fathers of the People of God. He
Hoped too that they were or would be Gracious, that they did belong to the
Election of Grace; and so were Heirs of Everlasting Life.

IN a Word; the least Token of Gods favor is free Grace to a Sinful Creature.
Our Sins daily forfeit our best Mercies, and might for ever keep good things
from us. It is of Gods Free, and Rich, and Sovereign Grace that He does not
call our Sins to Remembrance so as to Slay our "Children. When God Removes our
Comforts He Remembers our Sins; while He continues them to us He graciously
Overlooks our Sinfulness: i. e. This is the Face and Language of His Providence:

TO Improve this Head a little.

1. PARENTS take Pleasure in your Children, be very Tender of them, and look on
'em always with Complacency and Esteem. A very needless Exhortation you may be
ready to think; for alas Parents are ready to be but too fond of their
Offspring. But however, Love them and Delight in them they ought; and may not
be without Natural Affection, which were to be worse than Insidels. Let us
receive our Children with great Pleasure from the Hand of God; Study their
Interests, and Promote them, Temporal and Eternal.

Yet,

2. BEWARE of Inordinate Love. Do not give them thy heart. Make 'em not Idols.
And don't Love 'em to death; by provoking God to Jealousy by giving that Love
to any Creature which is due to Him alone. Love them in Obedience to God, and
as His more than thine. Mat. 10.37. He that loves Son or Dau'ter more than Me
is not worthy of Me.

3. CARRY and behave thy self graciously under this favor of Providence; if
God has filled, or is filling thy House with Children.

AND therefore,

1. BE the more Devoted to God thy Self, every Child He gives thee. Renew then
the Consecration of thy Self, and thy Covenant Engagements to the Lord: it is a
very Proper season to do it Solemnly.

2. INSTRUCT and Educate well the Children that God gives thee. Bring them up
for Him; in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; this is the Grateful
Offering which He requires.

3. PRAY much for them, and Over them, and Charge them to Know the God of their
Fathers, and to Serve Him with a Perfect Heart and Willing Mind, etc. Pray with
Abraham, O that Ishmael may live in thy Sight! Bless them as Isaac and Israel
did. And Charge them as David did Solomon; and as his Mother too did; What my
Son, and what the Son of my Womb? and what the Son of my Vows?

4. BE not Proud or Elated on this Account before Men; if God blesses thee with
Children and builds up thy Family. Do not despise the Nei'bour who is not
blessed in this Instance as you are. Hagar had no sooner Conceived, but Sarah
her Mistress was despised in her Eyes. Hannahs Enemy vexed her because she was
barren. Leah gloried over poor fretful Rachel; having so many Sons to show and
her Sister none. Alas, though Childrens Children are the Crown of Old Men, yet
are they nothing to be Proud of; for who knows but they may be our grief and
our shame; as very often the Idolized Child proves? Or how soon may the most
fruitful Parents, that have Families like a Flock, be Written Childless?

BUT I seem to forget that I am run into the Third Observation Propounded from
the Text, and which I would but Name.

III. Obser. THAT under the Outward Smiles of Providence on us and our
Families, it well becomes us to be the more Humble, Meek and Lowly before God
and Man.
THEY are the Children which God has given thy Servant. It may be Esau had not
then so fair a Troop to show; yet they with their Father were Esau's humble
Servants. Together they were ready to Prostrate and lie at his feet. Humility
is a lovely Grace and Virtue in the sight of God and Man. It charms down Pride
and Wrath together. And its beauty is Greatest under the Smiles of Providence.
It is the Ornament of the Soul that is of Great price in Gods Eyes, and as it
exalts the Soul in His Sight, so it procures Exaltation in the Kingdom both of
Providence and Grace. He that humbles himself shall be Exalted. He gives
Grace to the lowly.

BE ye clothed with Humility: says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.5. This is our
glorious but decent Array whether we be in Prosperity or Adversity-Without it
the Nakedness of the Soul is discovered, and its Shame is seen.

WHAT is there on Earth, I beseech you, to be Vain or Proud of? What in a
corrupt and dying World! Or if we so vainly abuse any Enjoyment, and fall into
the Condemnation of the Devil, how sadly do we forfeit it?

SOME under the visible favors of Providence grow vain and hau'ty, and forget
their Rise, that they are like others of the dust, and turning apace to it
again, that they or their Fathers were Poor and low once in outward State, and
in this uncertain World may suddenly be so again: The Upstart and Mean Spirit
is ready to forget the Rock whence he was hewn, and to scorn and upbraid the
Poor, the Needy and the Afflicted. But not so Good Jacob, who looking over his
Servants and his Flocks, and his Children cried out; O God of my Fathers, I am
not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth, which thou
have showed unto thy Servant; for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan, and
now I am become two Bands. Job also in his Prosperity and in the Months when
God preserved him; when the Candle of the Lord shined on his Head and by His
light he walked through darkness; while his Children were about him, and he
washed his steps in butter, etc. Even then he did not despise the Canse of his
Servant, but remembered; -- He that made Him in the Womb made me, and One God
fashioned us both.

O it is a little and Mean Vice, but of Great Guilt, to swell upon a few Worldly
Advantages, and bear our selves above Others on that Account; the King of
Israel remembered humbly his Original and said before God, Lord who am I and
what is my Fathers house that thou have bro't me hitherto! and that thou
should speak of the House of thy Servant for a great while to come!

WHEN Jacob Pointed to his Children, and Spoke of them to Esau with so much
Humility; think not that he Complemented his Brother, in calling himself His
Servant: No, that Patriarchal Age was full of Simplicity as well as Courtesy:
He spoke the Words of Truth and Soberness; his Heart went with his Lips; He
Spoke as he though it and as he felt; the Inward Sense of his Soul; and as became
an Inferior in Outward State, and Natural Relation. He was ready and inclined
to Serve him. His Fears were Great, but he had the real Love of a Brother, and
the Respect of a Junior. And just now he was especially Obliged by Esau's
Kindness, and full of Gratitude both to GOD and Him.

TO Conclude, We should least of all be Proud of our Children, because our
Savior has made a Little Child the Emblem of Humility to us. Mat. 18.2, 3. He
took a little Child and set in the midst of his Disciples, and said to them,
Whosoever shall humble himself as this Little Child, the same is Greatest in
the Kingdom of God: And except ye be Converted and become as Little Children ye
add in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. It seems then that Converting
Grace make us as Little Children. As One says, Not Foolish as Children, nor
Fickle, nor See Mr. Newy in Lac.
Playful; but as Children ready to Learn, and desirous of the Sincere Milk of
the Word; as Children Careful for Nothing but Depending on the Care of our
Heavenly Father; As Children Harmless and Inoffensive and void of Malice. As
Children. Governable and under Command; and finally, as Children Humble and not
taking State upon them. As they are Little in Body and Low in Stature; so
Christians should be Low in Spirit and Little in their own Tho'ts. It would
therefore be a most absurd thing for us to be Proud of our Children, when
Christ has made them the sign of Humility to us. We are to look on them and
learn Humility.

HAPPY the Man that can Say and Sing David's Psalm and Profession of Humility,
Psalm. 131.

UNDER the Favors of Providence our Heart should not be hau'ty nor our Eyes
loftly; we must neither court our own Shadow, nor envy nor despise Others; And
under the Frowns of Providence, Surely we must behave, and quiet our selves as
a weaned Child.

THE Child at the Age of Weaning is not come to the Acting of Pride; or the
Child may take on at first when it is Weaned from the Breast; but when Once
weaned it grows quiet. So Sanctifying Grace weans us from Worldly things, and
Quiets us in the Possession or in the Loss of them. We must Learn to Live upon
God and the Covenant of Grace, when Creatures prove Dry Breasts to us; or when
Providence puts Wormwood on the Breast to Wean us from it.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press and Speedily will be Published, Sacramental
Exercises: Or, The Christian's Employment, Before, At, and After the Lords
Supper.

By JABEZ EARL.

Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop on the North side of the Townhouse in King
Street, Boston. 1715.


