A Legacy for CHILDREN, BEING Some of the Last Expressions, and Dying Sayings,
OF Hannah Hill, Junr. Of the City of Philadelphia, in the Province of
Pennsilvania, in America, Aged Eleven Years and near Three Months.

The Third Eddition.

Matthew Chap. 21. v. 16. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou have
perfected Praise.

Mark 9.37. Whosoever shall receive one of such Children in my Name, receives
Me.

Luke 18.16. But Jesus called them unto him, and said Suffer little Children to
come unto Me, and forbid them not: For of such is the Kingdom of God.

Printed by Andrew Bradford, at the Sign of the BIBLE in the Second Street, in
Philadelphia, 1717.

THE PREFACE.
Tender Reader;
AS the Ardent Desires of the Deceased, were for the General Good and Welfare,
of all the Sons and Daughters of Men, under what Denomination soever, So it is
hoped, (...) of that same Love, (...) filled her Heart, will, more especially,
redound to the Refreshing each Particular, in their Serious perusal of this
little Book, which is Published, as her Last Bequest, to the World; That God
over all may be Glorified in his own Works, and thy Heart with Here Is, may
livingly Say, So be it, now and for Evermore, AMEN.

SOME Of the last Expressions and Dying Sayings of HANNAH HILL, Junior,
ON the Twenty third day of the Fifth Month (commonly called July) 1714. being
the Sixth day of the Week, this Dear Child was Seized with a violent Fever and
Flux, which so Increased upon her by the third Day of the Week following, that
both herself and others present, expected she would then have Departed: But the
Lord was pleased to continue Her a little longer, to testify of his goodness
for the Encouragement of the Living; At this time she was in a deep Travail of
Spirit, Concerning her Future State, and diverse times crying out, would say. Am
I prepared* Am I prepared! Adding, Oh! that I might dye the Death of the
Righteous, and be Numbered with them at Thy Right Hand! O Almighty God! Prepare
me, Prepare me for thy Kingdom of Glory.

Then She Earnestly entreated those that stood about her, to help with their
Prayers, that her passage might be made Easy.

A Friend present (being moved thereto, and Sympathizing with her Afflictions;
Kneeled down to Prayer, during which (notwithstanding her extreem pain) she lay
still, with great Attention, and Lifting up of Hands and Eyes: a little after
she said, Father, I shall Dye, and am now very Willing; And being Admonished
(without Fear or Doubting to Rely on GOD's Mercy, whose Love to Innocent
Children was so exceeding great, that Christ had bid them come unto him; and
that she should freely Forgive all Injuries done to her, by any Person
whatsoever, so would the Lord forgive her Offenses against him, and freely
receive her into Mercy; To which she Replied, I do freely Forgive all, and have
nothing in my Heart but Love, to both White and Black. But Father (said she)
will every Body Forgive me? It was answered, Yes, doubtless, every one will
readily Forgive thee. Then she desired her Father and Mother to forgive her
Offenses against them; and having their Answer, she seemed to Rejoice, and be
well satisfied.

After some Pause, she said, O most Glorious God now give me Patience, I
beseech thee, with Humility to bear what it shall please thee to lay upon thy
poor Afflicted Hand-Maiden. After this she entirely made Death her Choice, and
would often say, I had rather dye and go to God, than to continue in this World
of Trouble; Adding, When will the Messenger come Oh! hasten thy Messenger! Then
turning to her Father, she said, Oh! that I could Launch away like a Boat that
Sails! So would I go to my Dear Brother, who is gone to Heaven before me.
Desiring the Bystanders not to grieve Because (said she) I am but going to a
better place.

Doctor Owen* who was one of her Phy^^^^ans (after all their hopes of her
Recovery failed) came to visit her, she prayed him to sit down by her, and
said, My dear Doctor! all the Town knows thou art a good Doctor; but I knew
from the beginning that I should dye, and that all your endeavors would
signify nothing; But Doctor (added she, with a pleasant Air) The Lord has
heitherto given me Patience and I still Pray to him for more, that I may be
enabled to hold out to the End, for my Extremity of Body is very Great.

She was very Importunate in requesting her Parents freely to give her up to
the Will of God, saying, It would be better both for them and her, so to (...).
And when she thought to have prevailed, Now (said she) I am Easy in Mind. Then
asked her Father for a piece of Silver (which he gave her) and after she had
held it and looked at it a little while, returned it to him again, saying, Now
I give it to thee freely, for it was mine, because thou gave it me. Thereby
Intimating herself Gods Gift to them and her Example therein, for their
Resigning her to him again Cheerfully.

When any would seem to Encourage her, with hopes of Recovery, She made light
of it, Saying, Why is there so much to do about me, Who am but poor Dust and
Ashes? We are all but as Clay, and must Dye; I am going now; Another next Day;
And so one after another: The whole World Passes away.

One taking leave of her said, I intend to see you again to Morrow; To which
she sharply Replied, Thou may see me, but I shall scarcely see thee any more;
though I Will not be Positive Gods Will be done.

She would, diverse times, say (to her dear Mother) Art thou sorry I am going to
my Dear Brother? And to others about her, Why are you Troubled and Weep, seeing
I am but going to a better Place? Adding, Oh! that the Messenger would come!
That my Glass was Run! Turning her Eyes, and Discourse to Hannah Carpenter (who
came to Visit her) she said, My Namesake, I am going to my Dear Uncle, (meaning
her Husband Samuel Carpenter) who is gone to Heaven before me. Another time
she said, Dear Frances, I am coming to be with thee! Meaning her
School-Mistress Frances Janney Deceased. Another time Thomas Chalkley being
present, she said, Oh! my Dear Martha! (meaning his Wife, Deceased) How do I
long to be with thee!

She would be often speaking of her Funeral, and desired that Friends, and others
might generally be invited to her Burial; and mentioned diverse Persons
particularly by Name, that were Non-Resident, and some Strangers, that but
lately came into the Country, lest they should be omited.

At a certain time, near the Medium of her Six Days, most Violent Extremity of
Pain, (for so long was she accounted Dying, or at least more than once each
Day, had the Symptoms of Death strongly upon her) with a Sorrowful Countenance
and very Mournful Voice she said, O my Dear Mother! I Fear the Lord is
displeased with me again; One Answered, Dear Child, Why should thou
Entertain such thoughts? Because (said she) I am continued, thus long, to
endure this Extremity of Body, which none knows but my self, nor can any think
how great my Pains are.

Her Afflicted Mother being Sore Distressed, to see her Languishing Child lie
thus without Help (and willing to try the Effect of a Dose of Medicine, which
the Doctor had before prepared) prevailed with Her to take the same, but it
Immediately came up again; at which her Mother, in an Extacy of Sorrow, said, O
my dear Child! I am in a great Strait, what shall I do for thee? to which she
in a Solemn manner Replied, My Dear Mother! Pray to God for Direction; Then
Pausing a little, she said, Dear Mother! if thou desires it, I Will take another
Dose.

Not long after, it Pleased the Lord, in his tender Mercy to this Dear Soul, to
Remove her Doubt, (as appeared) For, said she, Father, I think the Lord, has
showed me that I do not bear all this for my self only; Has he not? added she,
To which one Answered, It might be so. Ah! (replied she) He has; Glory to his
Infinite Name! For he is better than Kings, Queens or Governors, and there is
nothing can be Compared to him.

As her Mind was fully bent Heavenward, so she would often speak, with earnest
Desires of drawing to a Conclusion here, and giving some Directions about her
Interment, Desiring that she might be Neat, and Decently laid out; and said
she, I shall go Clean to God, for no Unclean thing can enter his Kingdom.
Prayed her Father to Provide a Horse* least her Mother should not be able to go
to the Burying Ground; Desired her Mother to take her Breast smell Bottle, and
have a Chair brought to the Grave, least she should Faint there.

The Seventh Day before her Departure, (after querying what Day it was) she
said* I long for First Day. One replied, Why, seeing all Days are alike to the
Lord? I Know that, said she, but my fervent Desire is, to be gathered into the
Heavenly Church. Then turning to her Father said, If I Dye to day, Pray let me
be carried to the Meeting House to Morrow.

When First Day came, she asked if her Mother intended to go to the Meeting?
who Answered, No, she could not leave her Dear Child in that Condition: Then
(says she) let my Cousins go for it may be the Lord will be displeased if all
the Family stay at home. Adding not to look upon one another, but to wait upon
God. Then with much thankfullness she expressed the great Satisfaction and
Comfort she had enjoyed, by the Public Testimonies of Friends; and called
those that Traveled amongst us, of late, in that Service, to wit, Thomas Wilson
and James Dickinson, etc, Gods Messengers, sent from far to Visit and Warn us.

She would repeatedly say, she was freely Resigned and Willing to Submit to the
Will of God, whether in Life or Death; and was frequent in Prayer and
Supplication to the Almighty, not only on her own behalf, but a real Concern
was upon her, for the Welfare of others: still humbly beseeching the Lord to
grant her Patience, and that she would be pleased, with an Eye of Pity and
Compassion, to look down upon the Poor Bowed-Down-Ones and on her his Afflicted
Servant; O my good God, said she, Comfort the Mourners in Sion, and Support
their Drooping Heads; Be pleased to provide for the Widows and Fatherless, and
be thou both Husband and Father to them.

These were her frequent, and repeated Cries unto the Lord, and indeed it was
Astonishing (in one of her Years) to see and hear, how Powerfully she was drawn
forth, at times, on Various Subjects, for the space of a quarter of an hour
together, to wit, That GOD in Mercy would, yet more abundantly shower down his
blessings on Philadelphia* and the inhabitants of these parts of the World; The
Restoration of her Beloved Aunt Preston, from her long continued and present
Indisposition; Earnestly desiring the Lord to accept her Life and (...) her
Dear Aunt, who was, and might be so Eminently Serviceable in the Church. A like
Concern came upon her Expressly to Pray for her Uncle Loyd and his Family at
London; and with great Fervency of Spirit, did she beseech the Lord very
particularly, on behalf of her Honored Mother, that he would be pleased to
continue her; and turning to her* said, O my Dear Mother! don't grieve so for
me, God will bless my Father; Then turning to him said, My Dear Father!
Comfort, Comfort, my Dear Mother and the Lord will Comfort thee.

At another time she Prayed Earnestly to the Lord of the Harvest, (in regard it
was very great, and the Laborers but few) That he would be pleased to Raise up
and send forth, many more Faithful Laborers into the Harvest. She was diverse
times, concerned to Supplicate the Lord, for Living Water, Oh! said she, that
it might Spring up in me to Eternal Life! (Alluding to our Saviors Discourse
with the Woman of Samaria, at Jacobs Well) Amplifying and very Suitably
applying the Text.

In the time of Health, she greatly delighted to Read, had a good Memory and
was conversant in the Holy Scriptures, beyond most of her Age. At a time after
drawing to a Conclusion of her aforesaid Prayer, she asked some present, If
they had ever tasted of this Water of Life? Who Answered, Yes; Ay [Replyed she]
and so do I Glory be given to thy most Excellent Name, O my God!

Not long before her Departure she said, Father the Lord has assured me I
shall be Happy, it was Answered, That is Comfortable Indeed, it is better than a
Thousand Witnesses; Ay [Re [Replyed she] This is matter of Joy and Rejoicing,
can my Soul say, by Living Experience. After she (...) some time, One offered
her the Cup to Drink, but she put it by saying Not that Drink, it is the Divine
Spring of Life, in my Self, I long after, and that I might neither Thirst, nor
need to Drink any more of this.

She Desired to see John Wright, [a Friend of the Ministry* who, upon Notice
thereof, came to Visit her] she asked him how he did, and how his Dear Wife and
Children did? Told him, she was glad to see him, and that her Heart was filled
with Love, to him, and them. She was very respectful to all that came to see
her, and Gratefully acknowledged the Kindnesses of all those that were any ways
Aiding about her; Thanked even the Servants of the House, for the Services done
her; and desired the Lord would bless them, that had been helpful [as she said]
to Poor helpless Hannah, She very respectfully thanked Mary Dickinson, for her
Kindnesses, and said She had been as a Mother to her in this Sickness; and duty
acknowledged Sarah Rolfs and Ann Brown's good Will in their Neighbourly Visits
to her. To some she gave small Tokens of her Love, and desired her Parents to
do something further of that kind, to such particulars whom she named to them,
in Remembrance of her.

The Council which she gave, to her Dear and only Sister and Cousin Loyd
Zachary, whom she dearly loved, was very grave and Pithy, at the time when she
took her Final Leave of them, viz. Dear Sister! my desires are, that thou
may Fear God; be Dutiful to thy Parents, Love Truth; Keep to Meetings, and
be an Example of Plainness: And Dear Cousin! Be a good Boy, Observe thy Uncle
and Aunts Advice and the Lord will Bless thee, and they will regard thee as
their Own, and do for thee. Will ye not [says she] Father and Mother? And
continued, But it is better to have Treasure in Heaven where neither Moths,
Rusts nor Theives can Destroy.

She had indeed an Admirable Fluency of Pertinent Expressions, Suitable to the
Subject matter, which pressed upon her Mind, For which she was often Thankful
to the Lord, that he had not only enlarged her Heart in Prayer, but had also
hitherto Enabled her to utter those Things, that were, as a Concern, upon her
Mind to deliver.

A little before her Departure, [finding a shortness of Breath, and greater
difficulty of Speech, her Spirits being now much Exhausted] She desired her
Father and Mother's Assistance, on her Failure to Express the Things, which
they conceived to be upon her Mind, as Doubtless finding it her Duty to Declare
what she did, though with great Difficulty, for she was in all other respects
very sparing of Speech, during the whole time of her Illness.

About an hour before her Decease, being in a Slumber, she said, The Fire would
not cease burning, until all the Cha^^ was consumed, though Men Strive never so
much in Vain, to Quench it. Then desired the Watchers Care of her Sister, least
she should take Cold, Took some Drink at her Mother's Hand, and said, Now my
Dear Mother! Pray lay thy Head close to mine, and pressed hers toward her
Mother's Bosom, which sufficiently betokened the strength of her Affection and
Duty to continue, even beyond Expression of Words.

Then she recommended her Spirit to God saying, Glory! Glory! Glory! And so as
with the Sound of an Hymn, this Innocent Lamb closed her Eyes and Expired as
one fallen into a sweet sleep, without groan or sigh. She Departed this Life
the Second Day of the Sixth Month 1714. Being the second day of the Week, about
two a Clock in the Morning.

And being her self Translated from this Life to that which is Eternal, in the
Heavenly Mansion of Rest and Peace, with God her Maker and Redeemer has left
these Fruits of Love and Good Will to her Dear Relations, Tender Companions and
Young People, For whose sakes, Chiefly, it is made Public, as a genuine
Collection, from those who were most constantly present with this Noble
Spirited, Valiant, little Maid, during the time of her Sickness, until Death;
By one whose humble prayer to the Lord, is, That it might have the Blessed
Effect of exciting Children To Remember their Creator in the Days of their
Youth, And to live Answerable to his Holy Will, that so they may be Eternally
Happy, And God over all may Everlastingly be Glorified, in the Young and Rising
Generation, World without END, AMEN.

Postscript,
SInce the Decease of this dear Child, Hannah Hill junior, it is Evident, That
She had a Sense of her Approaching Death, for some Considerable time before she
was Seized, and would be often speaking of it to diverse of the Family (as they
now declare) and in particular to her most Intimate Associate and Cousin
Elizabeth Norris to whom she also divulged the Matter, with such a Sollid
Assurance, as broke them both into great Tenderness; When being at the Burial
of a Relation) she told her said Cousin, The next Burial she would be at,
should be hers, which did indeed so happen accordingly; Whereby it appears,
this Innocent Soul was Preserved near unto the Lord in Spirit, who had thus
highly favored her with this Secret.

And the Sense that was given her, of our Friend John Lowdon's Decease is very
Remarkable, viz. Being asleep in bed the Night before his Departure, she
Suddenly broke forth into an Exta^y of Sorrow, with Weeping and Sighing, which
very much Surprised her Father and Mother (who lodged in the same Room) they
speak tenderly to her, and queried what was the matter? She Replied, Oh! I
dreamed my dear Friend John Lowdon was a Dying. They endeavored to Pacyfie and
divert her Thoughts, saying, it was but a Dream, and that they hoped to see him
to morrow, etc. But she continued under the same Exercise, beyond what is
common (the said John Lowdon being then Twelve Miles distant, where he had
appointed a Meeting at Abington, and Preached the day before at Germain-town,
about Six Miles off, so that there was then no Tidings of his Indisposition, he
being taken Ill in the aforesaid Meeting, and Dyed the next Day following) And
when the Account of his Death came, she was most Sorrowfully Affected, and
earnestly desired the Corpse might be brought to their House, and Buried in Town.

The Substance of a Letter from H. H. junior, to her Cousin E. Norris.
Dear Cousin E. Norris;
THe Burial of our worthy Friend, John Lowdon, was performed in the most Solemn
manner, the Corpse being carried from our House, first to the Meeting, which was
very large and from thence to the Grave, where many expressed their Sorrow, for
the Churches Loss: But it must needs be his exceeding gain, who expressly said
(a few minutes before his Departure) he had done his days Work in his Day; and
that he laid down his head in Peace with God, and in Unity with his People;
Which that thee and I may do, is the Earnest desire of,

Thy Affectionate loving Cousin, H. Hill, Junior.


Griffeth Owen, His Testimony.
THE Lord God has been pleased, in his great Love and Favor, to give a Gift,
or Manifestation of his Holy Spirit Light, and Grace of his Dear Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, to the Sons an Daughters of Men, to show unto them, the Way to
Eternal Happyness, and to Direct them, and help them, to Walk in it. And
although it is universally extended to all, yet it is those who gave up their
Hearts, in thankful Reverence, to Obey and follow the Manifestations and
Requirings of it, have found Favor with God. And those he raised up and
Established, by the Power, and Spirit of his Dear Son, to be Good, Living and
Bright Examples to the Children of Men, in their Generations; Paterns of
Righteousness, Meekness, Humility, Self-denial, Patience, Temperance,
Godlyness, Brotherly Kindness and Charity; Which are the Fruits of the Holy
Spirit of Christ Jesus which appeared, and shined forth, through them, to the
World. And some has the Lord been pleased to make Willing, to give up their
Hearts, to Obey and Follow the Discoveries, and Leadings of his precious Gift;
And to take pleasure in the Fruits and Way thereof, in their Young Years, Which
the Lord did Adorn with the Beauty of Holiness, and made to shine as Lights to
the World, And among these, or in this Calendar, may be Recorded Young and
Innocent Hannah Hill, Daughter of Richard Hill, and Hannah Hill his Wife, of
Philadelphia, in Pennsilvania; Considering how she spent the short time, the
Lord was pleased to give her in this World. Her Meek and Godly Behavior from a
Child, since she had any Knowledge of Good and Evil; Her Dutifulness to her
Parents; Her love and Good Will to all, but especially to those who walked in
Obedience to the Truth. I knew her from a Child, and I never beheld any airy,
light or undecent Carriage, Behavior or Expressions, from her, but attended
with much Gravity, Modesty, Meekness and Plainness. I was several times with
her on her Deathbed, and was much Tendered and Comforted, in the Sense of the
Love and Power of God, that attended her; In which and by which, She uttered
many Wise, Heavenly, and Excellent Expressions, beyond what could be expected
from one of her Age; Some of them are, set down, as in the foregoing may be
read. I was made to say, It is the Lord's doings, and it is Marvelous in my
Eyes. These things are Published, not thinking that any thing that can be
Written or Spoken, by any Man or Woman whatsoever can add any thing to the
State or Condition, of the Deceased, Whom the Lord (I believe) has taken to
himself, from the troubles of this World, to rest and dwell in the Mansions of
Glory for ever and ever, but for the sake of the Living, who are yet upon the
Stage of this World, and especially our Young People, for whom my Secret Cries
and Prayers go often up to the Lord, That he would be pleased, to work upon
their Hearts, as he did upon the Heart of this Maiden; a Willingness to leave
off and Forsake the Vanities, Follies, Pride High-Mindedness, and the many
Evils, which by Nature, they are inclined to; and bring them to live a Godly
Life, Innocent and Righteous Conversation, That the Work of Regeneration may
clearly appear in all their Actions and (...), That those who may Converse with
them, and behold their Good Works (coupled with the Fear of God) may be made to
acknowledge, That they are the Seed, whom the Lord has blessed. These are the
Fervent Prayers of Him, who Sincerely Desires the Prosperity and Well-being of
all People, that they may come to Dye unto Sin, and to Live unto Righteousness,
the way to Eternal Happyness,

Griffith Owen.

Thomas Chalkely, His Testimony.
THere is some thing in my Mind to Write, in Memory of that Dear Innocent Soul
Hannah Hill, jun. Who Departed this Life about the Eleventh Year of her Age, in
Peace with God, and in great Love and Unity with his People, and in much
Assurance of her own Eternal Happyness.

I Was well Acquainted with this tender Young Maiden, for several Years before
she dyed, and I took good notice of her Conversation, and the more by how much
it was bright and shining, in that which is commendable in Youth. Oh! (says my
Soul) that the Youth of our Age and this City might follow her Example! she was
a pattern of Piety, Plainness and Obedience to Parents, and of a Womanly and
Obliging temper unto all.

It was my Lot (for which I have many times been truly thankful) to be for some
Months a Co-habiter in the Family, and I Observed that she was always very
Dutiful to her Parents, Loving to her Friends and Neighbors, and kind to the
Servants, both White and Black. I have seen some Children very Rude and
Imperious to their Parents, Negroes* but I observed the contrary in her; And
Doubtless, it is a Great and Crying Sin, in either Old or Young to abuse poor
Slaves.

I also Observed, That many times when other Children would be at Play in the
Streets, (the which our Youth are too much addicted to in this City, and too
much Winked at by their Parents) she would be either at her Book or her Needle,
at both which she was very Dexterous, and it rather seemed a Delight to her,
than a Burden.

She could Write well, and would Indite Letters* that were full of Inteligence,
her Conversation, that Way, was very desirable, as well as Viva Voce.

She had an extraordinary Gift in Reading of the Holy Scriptures, and other
Good Books, in which she took much Delight; And if any Friend gave her a Book,
she would not seem to be satisfied until she had Read it through; and would
sometimes get much of it by Heart.

May the Minds, of Young People be Stirred up, by her Example, to put the same
in Practice, is my Hearty Desire. This Testimony I am Constrained to give
concerning her, That she Lived and Dyed Beloved, and her Loss Lamented of, or
by, all that knew her. One great Virtue I may not omit mentioning, which would
be very Becoming in Christians of Riper Years, she would often Sympathize with
those that were in Affliction, or under Exercise; Of which my Poor Self was a
Feeling Witness; For when I Buried my Loving and Beloved Wife, after I came
home from the Burial, she came to me and took me by the Hand with both hers,
and leaned her Head upon my Side, in much Tenderness of Spirit, which greatly
Affected my Heart at that time, to Consider, that her Years were so Green and
her Soul so Ripe, she being then about nine Years of Age. And the Dolorousness
of my Mind at that Instant, and now also, causes my Heart to Affect my Eyes,
Oh! may I meet with them in Gods time, in his Eternal Rest and Glorious
Kingdom! To which I doubt not but that those Dear Souls are ascended.

I made a Visit to this Dear Young Woman the Day before she Dyed, and she
looked upon me, and Remembering my Wife (whom she loved Dearly) I am going to
her, said she, and to my Brother; another Dear Soul, who a little before he
Dyed, being about four Years of Age, said, He should have a golden Chair in
Heaven; and that he would take Wings and fly thither. And may all who cast
their Eyes on these lines say, with the Man of God of Old, Oh! That I had Wings
like a Dove, Then would I fly away and be at Rest. Even so come sweet LORD
JESUS Prays thy Servant

Thomas Chalkely.

H annah a Sweet and tender Flower,
A h! She Is gone to Heavens Bower,
N ow She Is out of Misery and Pain,
N ow She Is in the Glorious Plain,
A ssurance to her Soul was Given,
H ail Saints of Light I come to Heaven.
H er Piety and Virtues Bright,
I n her most tender Years Invite,
L ove of all that knew her right well,
L ow now she is gone on High to dwell.
T hough she be gone before her Noon.
C hrist Jesus thought it not too Soon.
T. C.
THE END.

