THE Firm Union OF A PEOPLE Represented; AND A CONCERN for it, Urged; UPON All
ORDERS and DEGREES of Men: IN A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of
the Colony of CONNECTICUT, at Hartford, May 9. 1717.

The Day for Electing the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the Deputy Governor, and
the Worshipful the Assistants there.

By TIMOTHY CUTLER, M. A. Pastor of the Church in Stratford.

Published by Order of Authority.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, Printer to his Honor the
GOVERNOR, and COUNCIL. 1717.

An Election SERMON.
PSALM CXXII. 3. Jerusalem is Builded as a City, that is Compact together.
IF we will consider Man with regard to his Inclinations and Necessities, his
Reason and Speech, and his other Conversable Quality's; such as, the Mansuetude
of his Nature, his Love to Justice, Equity, Probity, and the like Virtues; we
must Acknowledge him a Being naturally Framed and Designed for Society; and
shall have a Proof not only from the Veracity of God, Genesis 2. 18
but the Evidence of the Thing, That it is not good for man to be alone. It was
Wisely Observed by the great Philosopher A^is. Pol. Lib. 1 Cap. 2.
That a Being that can Live alone must be either a Beast or a God: Either a
Being of the Lowest Sensation, Sordid and Stupid, Unmanageable and Fierce,
without Reason and Foresight, Governed only by Instinct, without any Sense of
it is own Wants, but what is, Suggested by Hunger and Thirst, Bodily Pain or
Immediate Fear; Insensible of the Wants of others, and as little Inclined to
Help them; Incapable of the Noble Impressions of Generosity, Gratitude,
Compassion, Equity, Justice, Faithfulness, Self-denial, and all those Social
Virtues the Notion whereof is Connatural to our Minds: Or a Being Endued with
those Supereminent Perfections as will make it Completely and Securely Happy;
and can Entertain it self with Infinite and Everlasting Pleasure in the
Reflection on them. But Man is a Being between these; below the Divine Nature,
and above the Bestial: and so his Nature, is Necessitated, Adapted, and
Disposed to Society. We have an Early Instance of this after the Flood, in the
Endeavors of men to Cherish and Continue an Universal Society and
Cohabitation, in the Mighty Building of a City and Tower they Attempted, That
they should not be Scattered abroad on the Face of the whole Earth, Genesis II. 4.

It Pleased GOD in a Miraculous Manner, and for Wise Reasons to Ruin that
Project, and to Disperse them by the Confusion of their Language* But however,
as He is well Acquainted with the Nature, and Tenderly Affected toward the
Necessity's and Comforts of Mankind, he has not rendered Society an Impossible
Thing; but has Placed us in lesser Body's, wherein all the Advantages of the
biggest may be had and enjoyed: although that City could not be Built, yet (
Blessed be GOD,) City's and Corporations, and Kingdoms now there are; wherein
we may enjoy the Comforts of Life, do Good to others and be Advantaged by them;
and Best Answer the End of our Beings.

Now these Happy things must not be expected Barely by a Local Union. A Number
of men nothing but Placed together, is but a loose Body, and the Various
Disposition of the Parts may Spoil any Harmony and Good Agreement, make them
J^stle and Interfere one with another, and Intercept all the Comforts of a
Social Life. There are sundry things requisite to make a Nercius, a Band, and
Ligament that must not be wanting, and then a Place attains the good Character
which Jerusalem had, That it was Builded as a City, Compact together.

This Psalm is Expressive in General, of the Affectionate Regard King David had
to Jerusalem, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Israel: Which had sundry
Advantages Appropriated to it; the Glory's whereof Inflame his Heart, and Exalt
his Style; as we may see in his lofty Description of that Place, and the warm
Addresses he makes to the minds of Men to excite the same Cordial Affection
toward it. The Text in Particular Represents to us the Glory's of this Place;
and there are no other Parts of the Psalm, that I design to Consider and
Descant on, but only as they may fall in, in the Subsequent Discourse. The
Words read are an absolute Sentence and distinct Proposition: Jerusalem is
Builded as a City, that is Compact together.

The Thing here Described is Jerusalem. And it may be considered in several
Respects: either barely as a particular Place and Portion of Land in the
Kingdom of Israel; or as a Place Comprehending the Inhabitants in a Civil
Society; or since the Kingdom of Israel was the only Kingdom where the True GOD
was Worshipped, and Jerusalem was the Place for the Public and Solemn
Convention of his Worshippers three times Annually, so the Word may be a Term
used to Signify the Church of GOD by: Thus Gal. IV. 25. And it may also from
thence be Typical of the Church of GOD now, as in Ver. 26. and in other Places.

The Description whereby Jerusalem is set out to us in our Text is, That it is
Builed as a City, that is Compact together; or Joined to it self, as rendered by
one, Mr. Ainsworth.
And it is the same Word that is used to signify the Fastening and joining the
Parts of the Tabernacle. It denotes the Unity of the Whole, and the Firm
Coherence of the Parts. And the Description may agree to Jerusalem considered
in either of the Senses forementioned.

Thus consider it in the first Sense, It was Builded as a City, that was
Compact together: It was Enclosed as Villages are not; and whereas it was two
Villages before, King David had United them and made them one, 1 Chronicles. II. 7,
8. Or consider it as a Civil Society in that Place, it was United and Compacted
then in it is main Interests, Religion and Government; which it was not so while
the Jebusites Held the Fort of Zion: Or Lastly, Consider it as the Church of
GOD, It was as the Forecited Author Mr. Ainsworth in Loc.
says, Compacted, fitly Framed, and Builded together for an Habitation of God
through the Spirit; Applying the Expression, Ephesians. II. 21, 22. And it is
Desirable to see the Church Catholic, National, Provincial, or even a
Particular Congregation Adorned with these, United to Christ by a Lively and
Sound Faith, and to one another by a Fervent Love and Charity, without
Intestine Divisions and Jarrs, keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace. But the Occasions of the Day Lead me to Consider it in the Sense
mentioned before; and I Hope the Text will Bear me out in it. And in
Considering Jerusalem thus, Namely, as a Civil Society Comprehended in that
Place, I shall take no notice of the Particulars of it is Compactness here
Referred to, any further than as they may fall in with other things in the
Discourse on the Words: In General I Observe, the State of that Place, It was
Compact together; And the Sense the Psalmist had of it is Excellency on this
Account: for this is one thing he sets it off by, and therefore was Glad of
the Resort made to it, and thinks himself and others Bound to Seek and Pray
it is Welfare.

My Business then will be, to set this Truth in a Clear Light: Namely,

That it is highly Conducive to the Happiness of a Civil Government and Society
to be Firmly United and Compacted.

And the Discourse may be Applied to Kingdoms in General, or Particular
Governments Comprehended within them.

What I design for the Clearing of this Truth, is by showing I. Wherein the
Firmness and Compactness of a Place does consist: Or what those things are that
Conduce to it. II. The Happiness that does Result from it.


I. I am to show wherein the Firmness and Compactness of a Place does Consist;
or what those things are that Conduce to it. And here do I intend to keep
within the Compass of my own Profession; and to point out only to those that
may be Improved as Directions for the Obtaining of it. Now Omitting the mention
of what is necessary to the Primary and Fundamental Establishment of a Society,
and the Formal Distinction of Society's from one another; I may say,

1. That it is necessary to the Compactness of a Place, That the Government be
under a suitable Administration: whereby I Comprehend the Quality's of those
who are in Power, and the Regular Improvement of it. And how well soever a
Society is Compacted together, what Prudent Laws and Constitutions soever are
appointed, yet if the Oversight, Direction, and Execution of all things, is
Vested in such as are Incapable, or Unfaithful, there is no Prospect of the
Firm Continuance of such a Place: The Place is Deplorable where there are no
strong Rods for a Scepter to Rule. If the Head be Sick, the Heart will be
Faint, and the Body Disordered.

There needs a continual Inspection into the State, and a Wise Ordering of
things for the Honor and Prosperity of Government; there should be a continual
Looking out against Evils Approaching; there are many Contingency's that a
Society is Exposed to, and give a new Face to things and Require a Wise
Accommodation to them; there are Various Ferments in the Body which it concerns
them to Appease, Allay and Cool.

Therefore Places of Eminence should be filled with Persons of Eminent
Accomplishments. Among which we may Reckon, a Thorough Penetration, a Deep
Sense of things, a Practical and Political Wisdom and Prudence. This is Better
than Strength, Prove. IX. 10. For it is by a man of Understanding and Knowledge
that the State of a Land is Preserved, Prove. XXVIII. 2. He spoke this, that
well knew the Weight of Government, and Requested it as a Necessary
Accomplishment for his Regal Station, 2. Chron. I. 10. Whatsoever other
Qualifications a man has, yet if there be a Remarkable Defect in Wisdom, he
will not have a due Sense of his Place, or have True Rules to go by, or Spy
Dangers Present or Approaching, or know what to Choose for, or Apply as
Preventives or Cures.

Wisdom will Teach men the Ends of Government; the Glory of GOD, the Beauty,
Order and Good of the World: It will show them wherein the Happiness of a Place
does consist, Offer them the best Maxims and Rules, set before them the best
Examples, help them to the most likely Methods wherein to Prosecute the Ends of
Government; and the People shall be Led by the Skilfulness of their Hands: It
will give them a due Knowledge of the Nature of Man ^n general, of the
Community to which they belong, of particular Persons, of Cases, and Times of
Action: It will give them a due Knowledge of Him who is the Fountain of Power
and Authority, whose Honor it is a Peoples Duty and Interest to consult, whose
Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and whose Dominion is from Generation to
Generation: It will give them a due Knowledge of themselves that they may not
be too much Elevated in their own Conceits and Giddy by their Eminence; that
they may know that they are but men Vested with Power by God to be Improved
according to his Will; and that they are Accountable to him.

And this leads me to add Religion, the most Elevated Wisdom of all, and
without which all other is but Insipid and Fruitless; as God says by the
Prophet, Jer. VIII 9. They have rejected the Counsel of the Lord, and what
Wisdom is in them? If Rulers are governed by the Love of GOD, they will in
their Public as well as in their Private Actions, express Him, who is Holy in
all his Ways, and Righteous in all his Works; who Judges the World in
Righteousness and the People with Equity; who though he is a Sovereign Being,
is Sovereignly Wise, Good, Just, and Merciful. If they have Truly Subjected
themselves to CHRIST, they will Learn of him, who Judges not after the Sight
of the Eyes, nor Reproves after the Hearing of the Ears; who Judges the Poor
with Righteousness, and Reproves with Equity for the Meek of the Earth; who
has Righteousness for the Girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness for the Girdle
of his Reins.

With Wisdom may be joined a Cool and Calm Mind, whereby things may be duly
Debated and Considered, and a People may be Preserved from Hot and Precipitate
Actions.

And when I have mentioned Religion as a suitable Qualification, need I add a
Sober and Virtuous Life, and well Ordered Conversation? for this the Grace of
God ^eathern: He that is not Regular in his own Life and Conduct, may be as
little Careful of the Regular Lives of others; He that is Free from Pride and
Haughtiness will Treat others as Men, and not as Beasts; He that is Free from
Expensive Vices will be kept much from the Temptation to a Crew Exacting on a
People; a Freedom from Covetousness, Sordid Thirst of Lucre and Pan^ing after
Rewards is Necessary to keep men Inflexible in their Duty; else they will Sell
the Righteous for Silver, and the Poor for a Pair of Shoes: Judgment shall be
turned away Backward, and Justice Stand afar off: Truth shall fall from the
Streets, and Equity shall not Enter. Or need I add Clemency and Tenderness,
that they may be suitably Affected to ^ards the Good of a People, and Disposed
to Moderation under the rough Tempers of those with whom they have to do?

I may add further, a Generous and Enlarged Spirit, to Devise Liberal Things
for the Good of a People. A Contracted Mind will Contract the Sight, and Suffer
it to see no Good but what is Present and Immediate.

To say no more, Active and Passive For^itude is a Desirable Qualification;
when Men can do the Duty's of their Place, Prosecute the Common Good of a
People, though they are to Contend with the Mightiest, and have a Prospect of
nothing but their Anger and Unkindness; when they can Look the Loftiest
Transgressour in the Face, and make him Feel the Keenness of the Law, as well
as Shelter the Poor by it: when they can Patiently Hear Evil in doing of Good,
and are not moved thereby to Slacken in their Duty or Meditate a Retaliation.

To Conclude, Jethro's Character is Desirable in all, That they be Able men,
Fear GOD, Deal Truly, and Hate Covetousness: And these are the Glory and
Strength of a Place.

And the Improvement of their Power will be Answerable to their Quality's, and
thereby the Soundness and Health of a State will be Secured.

For Instance: As to the Directive and Legislative Powers, this is likely to be
attained when Rulers are sensible, not only of the Honor, but the Duty of
their Places, when they give up themselves to their Work, make the Common Good
their main Concern, when they have it always upon their Hearts, how they may
Advance the Honor of Religion, and Tranquillity of Men, when there is an
Unanimous Concurrence in all that are concerned in the Public Administrations
in this, (which there is a likelihood of when all Prejudices, Private Piques
and Grudges, Selfish Ends, Pride and Contradicting Humors are laid aside) and
they are wholly Concerned for the Rectifying what is Amiss, the Supplying what
is Wanting, the Retaining what is Good, and the Removal of what is Evil. These
things are apparently for the Good of a Common Wealth, And a great Heathen
Writer Sall Or. 2da. ad Caes.
has told us, That after his much Reading and Intelligence he has found it
true, That all Kingdoms, Cities, and Nations have so far Prospered as true
Counsels have been regarded by them.

And thus, As to the Executive Powers, when there is an Equal, Impartial,
Vigorous and Steady Execution of Justice and Judgment, and neither Entreaty,
nor Flattery, nor Bribery, nor Friendship, nor Terror, shall stop the Course of
Justice, divert, or slacken it; when the Merits of the Cause outweigh the
Greatness of the Person; when nothing is cherished or frowned on but what
should be, and when that never wants it; when Rulers answer their Character,
Terrors to evil doers, a Praise to them that do well; then you will see a
Place to be Strong and Mighty, Firm and Compact: On the Contrary, the
Philosopher A^^t. Pol. Lib. 1* Cap ^.
tells us, That Armed Injustice is intolerable; and the Wisest of Men gives it
as a very Melancholy Consideration, That he saw in the Place* of ^udgment, that
Wickedness was there; (...) the Place of Righteousness, that Iniquity was
there, Eccl. III. 16. Society would soon Drop to Pieces, and men would Fly one
from another and Live Separate as the Wild Beasts of the Field, if there was
nothing to Guard them from the Insolence and Ravenousness of the Wicked and
Unjust. For the Throne, and the whole Dominion is Established by Righteousness,
Prove. XVI. 12.

2. Good Laws and Constitutions are Requisite to the Compactness of a Place.
That the Actions of men may be Governed by a certain Rule, and in a certain
Method. Without it a Society of men would be no better than an Herd of Beasts.
What Mad and Desperate Sallys, what Unreasonable and Pernicious Actions would
Men be Guilty of! Fire and Sword, and Brutish Force must Govern where no Laws
do: The Weakest must Suffer and not the Worst. Accordingly GOD having made Man
a Rational Creature, has (as it were) Twisted Law into the very Frame and
Constitution of his Soul, that if he should be at any time without an External
Law, he should be a Law unto himself; his Conscience is appointed Judge, and
the Thoughts and Reflections of his own Mind Diversifyed according to his
Demeanor, are the Sanctions.

But though this is Fundamental to all the Duty's of our Lives, Private or
Public, yet it seems Incapable alone, to Place every man in his Proper
Station, Assign him his proper Work in a due Subserviency to the Common Good,
and to direct to all the Particular Commodity's of it: For the External
Circumstances of things, which are much diversified in particular Places and
Times, and by the Different Tempers of a People, must be also considered.

Besides, as to it is Proper and more Immediate Acts, so Weak and Irresolute are
our Minds, so Dark is our Sight, so Strong are our Prejudices, so much does
Interest and Self-Love Bias us, and our Passions Overpower us, as there need
External Laws to Direct us in the Particulars of our Duty, with suitable
Rewards and Pen^lties to Enforce the keeping them. (...) goes but a little way
with many* (...) knows no Shame, (...) III. 9. The Favor of GOD, the
Serenity of Conscience, the Mighty Rewards we Expect from our Maker, are too
Spiritual Things for a Carnal Mind to See and Relish, Death, and the Final
Judgment, and the Miserys of Hell are things too far off (though God knows,
near enough,) to Impress Fear on our Minds. And thus by keeping the Outward
Actions of Men in due Bounds and Channels, the Good of Humane Society is
Secured; besides what Advantage the Practice of what is Good, and Avoiding of
what is Evil may be to the Mortifying of Corrupt Principles within us.

Therefore Laws should be Made and Enacted; but such as Cross not the Superior
and Antecedent obligations we lie under, to the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of
God; They should be such as it might be no Sin to Obey them: They should
Subserve to the Honor and Flourishing of the Commonwealth, that Countenance
Worth and Merit, to make Virtue Loved and Practiced, and Vice Abhorred and
Feared: And when Sin and Iniquity Prevails over the Laws already made, the
Nature of such Times call for the Addition of further, to Force it to Hide it is
Head. Thus there should be Laws made, as Sepimenta Legis Moralis, for the Guard
and Defense of those Laws that are of Moral and Eternal Obligation; in all
which Wisdom is Profitable to Direct.

These things Link a Society together, and Strengthen it. And Happy was
Jerusalem and the People of Israel in the Times of Old in this Respect: For GOD
Showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; Psalm.
CXLVII. 19. He gave them Laws Moral, Religious, Political; He was their Civil
Ruler. From Mount Sinai* and the Tabernacle of Old, did he Dispense his Laws,
and made Additions according to the Exigency's of the People. The Religious
Laws of that People, as in Contradistinction to the Laws of Christianity, are
Ceased; we having a more Perfect Institution now. The Moral stand in full Force
and Obligation on us to Observe them. The Political Deserve the greatest
Reverence, as the Result of Perfect Wisdom and Rectitude; and are most
Reasonable to be observed by us where our Circumstances Run Parallel with
theirs.

3. A Humble Deference to Authority is very Subservient here. That those who
are under Rule consider the Original and Dignity of Power, and therefore, Love,
Honor and Obey those who are Vested with it; That they Pay Reverence to those
who are in Public Power, not only for their Personal Merits, but their
Character and Divine Deputation; Th^^ they look on them as the Common Fathers
of their Land, Submit to their Directions of them, and Concerns about them, and
Encourage others to do so; That they Rejoice in their Welfare, and Thank God
for the Blessings they are means of Conveying to us, Pray for them, and Support
them; That the Bias of a People be to put a kind Construction on their Actions
and Orders, and not to think Ill of them, and Blaze Evil Reports about them;
That in Doubtful Cases we think it best to yield to them, be willing to Cover
their Imperfections, and if their Commands be contrary to our Antecedent
Obligations to GOD, though we must Deny them our Obedience, yet that we Honor
them as our Fathers at the same Time. And if we could not see the natural
Tendency of this to our Good, we have a Promise from God Annexed to the Fifth
Commandment, thus Paraphrased by the Apostle, Ephesians. VI. 3. That it may be well
with thee, and thou may Live long on the Earth. By Paying such a Regard to
our Rulers, we Force their Love to us, and they Advance the Public Good by a
Pleasing Violence. We Encourage their Hearts, we Strengthen their Hands, and
they go on Easily, and with great Dispatch in minding the Common Welfare.

Whereas on the other Hand a Querulous, Perverse and Disobedient People
Endeavor to Break the Bands of Society in Sunder, and to Cast those Happy
Cords away from them. Thus, when a Government, is Aspersed; when we look on
things with an Evil Eye, and the cast of our Minds is only toward the
Blemishes of our Rulers in their Persons and Administrations; when an Ear is
Open to all the Slanders that Malice, Faction and Iniquity can Invent; when we
cannot Cover any Imperfections in them, who are Men of like Passions with us;
when our Defamations are Heartier than our Prayers by far; and we give an Ill
Gloss to the Laws and Constitutions that are made, and find Fault with every
thing not Just Quadrating with our particular Humors and Interests: Then we
try to bring Confusion and Anarchy into the State, and then a Society will
Dissolve. And by such an Unsuitable Demeanor toward them, we not only Provoke
the Displeasure of God, who can Confound particular Men and Society's in a
Moment; but we make them Weary of Serving a Stubborn and Unthankful People, or
we Weaken them in the way of their Administrations, Tempt their Paternal
Affections to the Public to Cease, and Them to Act from Resentments of the
Unkindnesses we Offer: And it is too often so that nothing but a Sense of their
Duty to the HIGHEST BEING, and of Honor, and Greatness and Generosity of Mind
can hinder them; and if we are Jealous of our Rulers, we are concerned to add
other Principles and Motives to these, to Engage their Love to us.

And surely Reverence and Obedience to Authority has a great Influence on our
Good, or it would not have been so Strongly Urged upon us in the Word of God. I
mention but two Places; 1 Pet. II. 13. Ultr. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lord's Sake: whether it be to the King, as Supreme; Or
unto Governors, as unto them that are Sent by him for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do Well, etc. Romans XIII. 1. Let
every Soul be Subject unto the Higher Powers. For there is no Power but of God:
the Powers that be are Ordained of God. Whosoever therefore Resists the
Power, Resists the Ordinance of God: and they that Resist, shall Receive to
themselves Damnation, etc.

4. Another thing whereby a Place is Compacted is by a Due Regard to Religion
and Virtue. An Article that ought never to be Forgotten, when we are
Considering the Good of a person or People. Which calls to Mind an Excellent
Remark of a Judicious and great Divine, Archbishop Sharp.
Discoursing on Deuteronomy. V. 29. Oh that there were such an Heart in them, that
they would Fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be Well
with them, and with their Children for ever. Where Observing that this Relates,
not so much to the Children of Israel, considered Singly, as Collectively,
under the Notion of a People or Nation; he gives us this Weighty Truth: That
the Happiness and Prosperity of Nations, is to be Obtained the same way that
any particular Man's Happiness is: That is to say, by Fearing God, and Keeping
his Commandments. And it seems Necessary, That that which is the Perfection of
Humane Nature, should be the Happiness of Humane Life, whether Single or
Social. Indeed sometimes Irreligion or Wickedness may Serve a Turn, and Advance
an Interest that Religion or Virtue might Obstruct, or not Forward; but then
the Advantage will be but Small and Present, and there will be a Dreadful Train
of Ill Consequences to follow, which will Abundantly Punish any man, for the
Present Pleasure or Profit of Sin. True Religion and Virtue is the most Solid
Happpiness of a Man or People, and that alone which is to be Depended on. This
was the River the Streams whereof made Glad the City of Jerusalem of Old. And
the Subserviency of Religion to this great End will appear, by Considering the
Natural Frame and Texture of Religion; and the Countenance GOD gives to a Truly
Religious and Virtuous People.

(1) Let us Observe the Natural Frame and Texture of Religion; in the Rules,
Patterns and Motives it gives us. If the Precepts of the True Religion, that
is, the Religion of Jesus, were duly Observed, the State would be in the Best
Order, and under the most Healthful Constitution. They that come up to them are
the most Excellent and Useful Persons in the World. There is not Half the need
of Outward Restraints and Laws for them as for others. For the Law is not made
for a Righteous man, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly and
for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers of Fathers and Murderers of
Mothers, for Man Slayers, for Whoremongers, for them that Defile themselves
with Mankind, for Men-Stealers, for Liars, for Perjured Persons, and if there
be any other thing that is contrary to Sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

When the Precepts of the Gospel take Place in us, the Heart is Pure and
Undefiled, the Evil Thoughts, Desires and Propensities of the Mind are Cured,
whence proceed Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness,
Wickedness, Deceit, Lasciviousness, an Evil Eye, Blasphemy; Pride, Foolishness.
etc. Mar. VII. 21. Those Lusts are Subdued ^^at War in our Members, from which
come Wars; Fightings, Discords, and Divisions among us; Jam. IV. 1. The Tongue
which is a World of Iniquity; Jam* III. 16. is Bridled and Restrained from
Reproach, Slander, Backbiting; is Possessed by the Law of Kindness, and Utters
it self in nothing but what is Innocent, or Subserves to the Glory of God, the
Good of Men, and our own Edification. The Senses which do too much Impose on us
are Stripped of their Exorbitant Power, and all our Executive Powers are
governed by Laws Advantageous to Persons and People. Whatsoever is Prejudicial
is Hindered in the Conception, or afterward made Abortive, or soon Killed when
Born, by Repentance and Reformation.

For Instance, Religion Commands us to Show our selves Men, to do nothing
Unworthy of Humane Nature; which will Preserve us from the Little, Base, and
Pernicious Practices that our Degenerate Natures are Prone to.

On the other Hand, It Forbids Pride, the Mother of an Haughty and Insolent
Demeanor, of Untractableness, of Disobedience and Incorrigibleness, of
Resentment, Rage and all the Turbulent Passions of the Mind: It Commands
Humility, the Parent of a Good Understanding and Rectifyed Notion of things;
makes us of Yielding and Complying Spirits; ready to give the best
Interpretation to things, and in Lowliness of Mind to esteem each other better
than our selves.

It Restrains our Immoderate Desires and Endeavors after these Worldly things,
and Permits us not to go beyond what is Just and Right to Accomplish our Ends.
Our Lives must be without Covetousness, and we must be content with such things
as we have; and a Firm Dependence on God, which is our Duty, will keep us from
Indirect means.

And yet at the same time it Commands us Diligence and Frugality, to do our own
Business, and to Work with our own Hands; and not to be Sloth^ul in Business,
but to put forth all our might in the things which our Hands find to do; That
we be not Prodigal of the good things, GOD gives us, nor Wast our LORD's
Goods, but have for the Supply of our Selves and Household, to Help the Poor, to
Support the Church and Commonwealth. To that End it keeps us from Expensive
Vices, such as Drunkenness, Gluttony, Unchastity, Riotings, Wantoness, and c.

The time would not Admit me to carry but such a Brief Descant, on all the
other Beneficial Duty's of Religion, the Duty's of Love and Pity, Sincerity,
Forgiveness, Humanity, Mildness, Justice, Truth, Fidelity, Patience, and c.

In short, It Obliges us to all those things that are Accepted of God, and
Approved of men; to whatsoever things are True, whatsoever things are Honest,
whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are
Lovely, whatsoever things are of a Good Report; that if there be any Virtue,
and if there be any Praise we should think on these things.

Religion sets before us the Brightest and most Excellent Examples of these
things, to Stir up our Emulation; Non Divitiis Cum Divite, Neque Factione Cum
Factioso; Sed Cum Strenuo Virtute, Cum Modesto Pudore, Cum Innocente
Abstinentia, Sall. Bell. Catill. de Catone.
That we should Strive to Imitate Men, not in their Accidental Advantages or
their Vices, but in their Real Excellencies and Virtues. Religion particularly
sets Christ before us, as our Great Pattern and Examplar, who did the
greatest Good and Abstained from all Evil, and Practiced all those Duty's, in
the most Perfect Manner, that tend to the Good of Men's Souls, and the Peace of
the World.

The Motives to these things are the Greatest and Strongest. What more
Persuasive than the Arguments on which Religion is Built? What more Awakening
than a Judgment-Day? What more Inviting than the Rewards of Religion? What more
Terrible than the Miseries it Threatens the Disobedient with? So that if Humane
Rewards do not Teach us in our Serviceableness to the Public, we may be
Assured of others far greater; and if we should Dare to Offend from the hopes
of Impunity by Humane Laws, the Eternal Displeasure of an Omniscient and
Almighty GOD, might be a Terror to us.

And thus Religion considered in the whole Extent of it, has an Aspect on
Rulers, and those that are under Rule, as might be particularly showed. But
what has been said shows it to be for the Firmness of Societies, as well as
the Good of Particular Men; and those that are Principled and Influenced by it
are Cae^eris Paribus, the best Commonwealths* Men; and even others, it
Qualifieth and Moderateth them. We know that Felix, when the Apostle reasoned
with him of Righteousness and Temperance, Subjects that no ways Suited with his
Guilty Mind; and added to it a Discourse on a Judgment to Come; he Trembled:
and had such a Powerful Minister of Religion been Advantaged with a near, and
Constant Access to him, it might have much Repressed his Rapacious, Voluptuous
and Intemperate Disposition.

(2) We may Observe the Countenance and peculiar Respect, that God gives to a
Truly Religious and Virtuous People. And this is a Support to the preceding
Head: For though the natural Tendency of Religion and Virtue is to the Firmness
and Flourishing of a People; yet the Vices and Imperfections of others, and the
External Circumstances of things, may Intercept the Natural Fruits and Benefits
of it. However if God's Word be Passed we may Depend on him to Verify the
thing. He can make the Wickedness of the Wicked to come to an End, Suppress the
Malignity of Second Causes, or turn them into Blessings; and all this besides
the Extraordinary, Distinguishing Blessings his Royal Bounty may Afford. God
Almighty is the Governor of the World, and has a near Inspection into
particular Persons and Communities. He Stamped Religion into the very Nature of
Man at the first, and doubtless will not Forsake the Mark and Signature of his
own Hands. The great Duty's that our Religion Teaches, are but the Image and
Resplendence of his own Perfections, and therefore what the Psalmist says,
has a Demonstrative Evidence; That the Righteous Lord Loves Righteousness,
and his Countenance does Behold the Upright; Psalm. XI. 7. By a Regard to
Religion in the Positive Institutions of God, and in it is Duty's of Eternal and
Immutable Obligation, we Pay all the Honor to GOD that our Natures can yield,
and he Requires; and his Word is Passed; 1 Samuel II 30. That them that Honor
him, he will Honor, and those that Despise him, shall be Lightly Esteemed.

It must be Granted, That a Good Man has not Outward Prosperity Promised to
him, as a certain Reward of the greatest Piety and Virtue; and there is no need
of it: for as he is an Immortal Being he may Receive his Happiness in another
World. But these Society's are not Immortal; they are fitted to this World, and
Dissolve with it; and particular Men that make them up, shall at last Appear
only in single Capacities, and so be Rewarded: Therefore the Notice God takes
of Societies, as such, must be presently, before they End.

We have a particular Account of his Treatment of his People in the Times of
Old. GOD Promised them all Sorts of outward Blessings, in the greatest Degree
that the World could bear, on Condition of their Obedience, and Threatened
their Disobedience with as Great and Astonishing Misery's; and he made it Good
in the whole Series of his Dispensations to them* N^ Nation in the World was so
Happy as they, whilst they Answered the Character of GOD's Peculiar People, in
a Distinguishing Love to Him, his Ordinances, and Commands; none more Miserable
when Idolatry and Wickedness Reigned among them.

And there are no Instances, of any Nations under Heaven, but have Flourished
when Virtue and Goodness have been Cherished, and been made Miserable by their
Vices and Immoralities. And there may be a great deal in the Judgment of the
Forecited, Worthy Author, Dr. Sharp.
That there is no other Difference between the History of God's Dealings with
his own People the Jews, and that of other Nations, but this: That in no other
Nations the Public Events that Happened, whether Good or Bad, though they were
taken Notice of, yet they Passed without any Reflection on the True Causes from
whence they Proceeded. The Historians did indeed Lay their Fingers Rightly upon
the Immediate, Visible, Outward Occasions, or Means, or Instruments, from
whence their Good or Bad Fortune was Derived to them, but they Searched no
further. They considered only Second Causes, and took no Notice of the First
and Principal Cause of all things, God Almighty, and his Influencing Humane
Affairs. However an Heathen Val* Mare de Rel*
has Told us, That it was no Wonder the God's were so Steadily Regardful of
the Increase and Safety of the Roman Empire, when that was so Scrupulously
Observant of, and Exact in, even the least Punctilio's of Religion. Though it
was not a Religion that had God for it^^ Author; it might be Influential to
Good Laws and Practices, and so the People might be Countenanced and Prospered.
However we see this is no Singular Opinion, That God Countenanceth the Religion
and Virtue of a People. And what Influence this has on their Happiness, I
leave to your Consideration.

5. I add here, a Spirit of Unity, Love and Peace. This indeed is Implied in
the former Article, and was Just Hinted there. It is certainly a Part of
Religion and a Vital Part too. But of such Importance is this Duty; and so
great are the Benefits of it, even where the True Religion does little Appear,
and so Necessary is it to be thought of at this Day; as it may Well Deserve a
Separate Consideration and Enforcement on us. Jerusalem Signifies the Vision of
Peace, and the Reality of the thing was it is great Compactness. Among some
Notes on an English Translation of the Bible Preceding this, there is this
upon the Text, That by the Artificial Joining and Beauty of the Houses, the
Psalmist Means the Concord and Love that was between the Citizens. And of such
a mighty Efficacy and Value is this, that we may easily Observe that by the
Word Peace, the Scripture is Wont to Comprehend all that is Desirable and
Happy among a People. Love and Peace is an Uniting thin^, we Claim a Right in
what we Love, and give it a Right to us* and our Interests are Undivided and
Inseparable; We are set together not only in Place, but in Heart and Affection
too, and while this is so* nothing can hinder a Pleasant carrying on of all
Offices, and a Joint, Undisturbed, Ind^^soluble Concert in a Common Cause. Have
Salt, says our Savior, Mar. IX* 50. Among your Selves, and have Peace with
one another* Salt Applied to Body's which we Preserve makes them more Firm and
Solid and so they Resist putrefaction: of his Nature is (...), which our
Savior would Press on them by such an Allusion. By a Spirit of Peace and
Unity, the Loadstone and Steel are brought together, this gives a Common
Center and Inclination to all the Elements of this Sublunary World. This is one
of the great Blessings of Christ's Kingdom, That the Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the Young
Lion, and the Fatling together, etc. and that they should not Hurt, nor Destroy
in all God's Holy Mountain.

We shall see how Love will Compact us, when we are told what it will do: It
does all Good Offices to all, and Inviteth men to dwell the nearest to us for
the Good Effects of it; it Forgives Injuries, is Tame under Provocations and
Affronts; gives a good Interpretation to what is Doubtful, and Extenuates the
Malignity of our Ill Treatment. Love to our Rulers will be a strong Incentive
to Paying the Honor we owe to them, it will make us very Decently Resent the
good things we receive from them, and not forward to be Jealous and Censorious
of their Administrations; we shall Obey their Commands, and be loath to
Displease them: Hereby they go on Cheerfully in their Work, and are willing to
Spend, and be Spent for us; and our Love and Thankfulness is Esteemed by them
as a Glorious and Happy Reward: This Begets, Cherishes, and Increases in
them a Love to us, and Procures a Reciprocation of good Offices between us.

On the other Hand, where there is a Remarkable Defect in this what Firmness
can there be expected? Is not Order, the Beauty and Strength of things,
Disturbed? And is not a People Threatened to be broken in Pieces? Where there
are Envyings and Strifes, Animosities and Divisions, there is Confusion and
every Evil Work. Where these Govern, if men can but Obtain their particular
Ends and Desires, Advance their Party, Confound their Opposers, they are
Content, what Prejudices soever the Public Suffers: Then all the good Offices
that make Society Valuable are Intercepted, and Fierceness, and Provocations,
and Injuries Succeed. When Families, or Towns, or Counties are thus at
Variance, Tongues and Pens are little enough to Manage the Controversy: And the
Tongue is a World of Iniquity, and when Inflamed it sets on Fire the Course
of Nature. When Heat and Contention is great, the Dust Raised thereby Hinders
us from the Sight of Truth, or our Passions are so Roil'd as we cannot Consider
and Regard it. Where we have no likeing to Persons, what they do is
Misrepresented, the Goodness and Propriety of the best Actions shall be
Questioned, the Principles, Motives, and Ends shall be Groundlesly Suspected.
Error shall be Villainy, and the Imperfections of Humane Nature shall be the
Perfection of Wickedness.

And hereby we create great, and sometimes, insuperable Difficulties to our
Rulers, and they find it all one to Extinguish a Mighty and Prevailing Fire, to
Appease the Raging of the Sea, and the Tumults of the People. A People will
have a Jealous Eye on all their Pacifick Endeavors, and sometimes their
Turbulent Humors will not Suffer them to do what is best; they can only Choose
the best Means that they will Allow of, and Mourn because they can go no
further.

There is no Difficulty to tell the Conclusion of these things. Our Savior
has given us this Wise Aphorism, A Kingdom Divided against it self cannot
Stand; Mar. III. 24. The Psalmist when he Prayed for the Destruction of his
Enemies, Desired their Dissension as a means to it, Destroy, Oh Lord, and
Divide their Tongues; Psalm. LV. 9. We see a high Ferment in a Vessel sometimes
Bursteth it in Sunder, after all Outward Means Used to keep it together. We are
Told, That the Confusion of Languages hindered Building of Babel; and, That
Jerusalem had stood out longer against Titus, had it not been for the Divisions
God Suffered among the Besieged, as Penal Judgment on them. And we have the
Judgment of Sallust, Or. 1. a^ C^^^,
when Rome shall be Destroyed, It is my Opinion, (says he) That as all things
that have a Beginning will have an End; so when this Fatal Day draws near the
City of Rome, Citizens shall Quarrel and Fight with Citizens. We may know when
Divisions begin, but GOD alone knows when, and where they will End: For the
Beginning of Strife is as when one lets out Water, whose Course is Rapid and
Irresistible; therefore leave off Contention before it be Meddled with.

All that we can do then is not too much to Remedy this Evil, to Sweeten the
Tempers, Rectify the Misunderstandings, Abate the Heat of Parties. And if we
can do no more we should Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, that God would Heal
us, and Inspire us with that Wisdom that is from Above, and is Pure and
Peaceable.

6. A Public Spirit is Highly Conducive to this End. More Especially necessary
in those that have any thing to do in the Management of the Public Affairs;
but the more Extensive it is, the more is it for the Happiness and Safety of a
People. It is this which Upholds the World, and all Societies and Communities
of Men. This made King David Seek the Good of Jerusalem, and Stirred up such a
Mighty Concern in Nehemiah for the Rebuilding it. Our Savior has
Astonishingly Shown this in Care for the Building of the Heavenly and Spiritual
Jerusalem, And God Shows it in his Disinterested, Universal Providence over the
World, and his Liberal Supplies of the Desires of every Living thing. That
makes us Endeavor the Public Welfare, be Thankful for Public Blessings;
when called to it, to Serve the Public with a Generous and Faithful Concern,
and when in a Private Station, to Pray for, Submit to, and Encourage those who
are Over us. The Voice of such an one's Soul is, If I Forget thee, Oh
Jerusalem, let my Right Hand Forget her Cunning, if I do not Remember thee, let
my Tongue Cleave to the Roof of my Mouth: if I prefer not Jerusalem above my
Chief Joy. That makes not any Part of our Estates and Services too much, nor
our Lives too Dear, when necessary to Advance a Public Good. A Private, Narrow
Spirit Weakens the Sight, and sometimes will not see those things that Conduce
to the Public Good, especially if at a Distance, for Fear of the Expenses it
might Demand. Our Savior has told us; Mat. VI. 22, 23. The Light of the Body
is the Eye: If therefore thine Eye be Liberal (according to a great Critic Dr.
Hammond. Pract. Cat. Lib. 3. S^ct 4.
) Thy whole Body shall be full of Light: but if thine Eye be Evil, Envious,
Covetous, or Nigardly, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness. A Selfish
Spirit will Contribute but little to a Public Design, but a Liberal Eye, and
Heart, and Public Spirit, will Direct to Liberal and Beneficial Things.

Particularly

It will appear in a Cheerful Contributing what may Avail to the Support of
Government, that it may not be Despised at Home or Insulted Abroad. We shall
consider them that are Ministers to us for Good, and Assist and Strengthen them
in their Work, and Reward them according to the Dignity and Expensiveness of
their Places, and the Nature and Largeness of those Blessings God makes them
Means of Conveying to us. Though they are God's by Deputation, they are Men by
Nature, and in their Necessities, and need Supports, such as are not Scanty, to
carry them through their Work: And as GOD lays them under the Ties of
Conscience, we shall lay them under the Ties of Gratitude and Love to Pursue
our Good.

A Public Spirit will be concerned for the Propagation of the Gospel, and give
due Countenance to the Dispensers of it. That is a Work that requires all our
Thoughts, Pains, and Diligence; here we must Spend, and be Spent; here is our
Study by Night and by Day; the Materials are Costly; we must Meditate on these
things, give our selves wholly to them, that our Profiting may appear to all
Men: The Time that we Spend necessarily in any of the Business of this Life,
hinders us in our Work, and in our Proficiency too; and though we may Aspire
after it, yet alas! We Fall Vastly Short of that Character, Workmen that need
not to be Ashamed. Hereby our Public Performances are Raw and Poor, we have no
time to Wield and Manage the W^apons of our Spiritual Warfare in a Dextrous
Application to the Souls of Men; our Private Concerns Hinder us in Watching
over our Flocks, and Observing the Errors and Corruptions that Grow among
them; nor have we time for more Particular, and Personal Addresses, that we
might otherwise make. Sin and Iniquity Grows Bold and Rampant, Countenanced not
only by the Set, but the Witty and Cunning too: A Solemn and Grave Check should
be given to these things; but we need also a Wisdom that our Adversaries cannot
Resist; which must be had now from our Prayers and Study in our Closets, and
not from the Field. And if Religion be so Influential (as we have said) on the
Public Good, and God Advances it by Humane Means, a Public Spirit will
herein Appear.

Again, Schools of Learning and Knowledge will be Cherished and put into Good
Circumstances. Such there were in Jerusalem. This is a Matter of great
Importance, for the Furnishing Men for all Weighty Services Civil or Sacred,
for the Bettering of those who have it, and the Advantage of those about them.
This Civilizeth Men, and Cultivateth Good Manners, and the want of it brings
in Bestiality and Rudeness, Barbarity and Fierceness, and all these Ill and
Crooked Dispositions that make Society less Pleasant and Delightful.

Lastly here, Merit should be Rewarded wheresoever it Appears. King David ga^e
a Reward to Military Virtue in Joab 1 Chronicles. XI. 6.
And a Public Spirit will be thus Thankful for all the Public Kindness and
Services it Receives.

7. The Last Thing I shall mention as necessary to the Compactness of a Place,
is, That Every Man keep within the Limits o^ his Sphere and Station. And this
comes Well after the Proceeding Head, to Qualify our Understanding and
Improvement of it. For the Public greatly Suffers many times, by the Pretense
of a Public Spirit. A Public Spirit is too often Pleaded to Gratify a
Factious one: when men go beyond their Line, and are Busy-Bodies in other Men's
Matters. Under this Cloak there Walk about Talebearers, Slanderers, Backbiters,
like the Pestilence that Walks in Darkness; and such as are Presumptuous,
Self-willed, and not Afraid to Speak Evil of Dignities. This is sometimes
Pleaded when Authority is Abused, Wholesome Laws and Constitutions are
Quarrelled with, and all Peace and Tranquillity Subverted. A Public Spirit
alone, is not a Call to Intermeddle in Public Affairs. If we are Concerned for
the Public, then Order which is the Beauty and Strength of it will be Promoted
by us, and that is best Secured by the Practice of that Rule, 2 These. IV. 11.
That ye Study to be Quiet, and to do your own Business, and to Work with your
own hands. It is a particular Call besides out Qualifications that lets us
into the Management of Public Affairs, and when without this, we Concern our
selves about the same, as our particular Work, we do but Justle with those
whose Work it is, and make it more difficult.

It is a great Instance of the Goodness of GOD's Providence over the World,
That he has Distinguished men in their Particular Genius's, Inclinations and
Business. A Commonwealth is aptly Connected together by them, as the
Tabernacle of Old was Coupled together by the Boards of it Fastened one to
another. Then the various Necessities of a Commonwealth are Supplied, and men
are Preserved from those Querulous and Discontented Behaviors, that Roile and
Disturb all things. And thus in the Body Natural, though every Part should do
it is Duty to the whole, yet there are particular Offices of Eating, Digesting,
Walking, Handling, and c. Assigned to every Part, and it is the Head only that
gives Life and Motion to the Whole. I come now to

The Second Head, To show the Happiness of that Place that is in such a Firm
and Compact Condition. And I might show, That it is to the Comfort of every
Individual; That it is the Glory of a Place when it is so; That this
Strengthens and Secures it, as a Well Disciplined Army is less in Danger than a
Confused Rabble; and that it is a near Resemblance to the Heavenly Jerusalem,
where these Blessed Things, of an Entire Subjection to GOD, the Ruler of that
Place, of an Hearty Conspiracy in all to Peace and Love, and the Strongest
Concern for the Good of every one, and the Heartiest Thankfulness for the
Vouchsafement of it, are Apparent and Visible. You see, there need not
Arguments to Recommend this to you; but the Prosecution of the former Head has
taken up almost all our Time, and besides, the Representation of it is enough
to Recommend it to us.

It is Time now to Apply the Truth before us. And

I. This may Point out to us those that are fittest to be Improved in the
Government and Service of a Commonwealth; Namely, Such as are most likely in
this Manner to Promote the Good and Welfare of it, That can best Preserve the
Honor and bear the Weight of Government, who have Ability for it, and Fidelity
to Discharge it, and Courage and ^^^ience to go through and Endure the
Difficulties of it: The Fear of God (you see) will make them Blessings to Men,
and a Public, Generous Spirit will make Men Mindful of the Public Good. And
to this should a People have Respect who through the Good Pleasure of GOD and
the Indulgence of their Sovereign, have the Privilege of Choosing their own
Rulers. Where it lies not in a People's Power to Vest whom they Please with
the Rule over them, they are to be Pitied when the Unworthy, the Lame and
Sloathful and Cowardly; Or the Tyrannical, the Profane and Ungodly, the Vicious
and Debauched, the Covetous and Rapacious, have the Rule over them. But such a
People are much to be Blamed who under a Distinguishing Privilege, Distinguish
not those whose known Ability, Integrity and Merits Render them Worthy of
Respect and Honor: If Private Respects Blind their Eyes, if Piques,
Prejudices, and Resentments Hide from them the Best of Men, if they Choose Men
only to Advance a particular Interest, to Abet a Party, and Maintain a Faction;
if a Vile Person is not Contemned in their Eyes, and they Honor not those that
Fear the Lord, or if they Choose those whose Spirits will never Prompt them to
any thing that is Great and Worthy. Men can never Expect that GOD will Justify
those Actions, that are Calculated to the Advancing Unjustifiable Ends, and
which they are Ashamed to own. Our Duty is not only to Pray for our Rulers, but
to Use Prudence in the Choice of them: Else a Voluntary Ill Choice may be
Interpreted as a Refusing the Benefits of a Good Government, and GOD may say of
us, as they Delighted not in Blessing so let it be far from them.

And let this be thought on by those who are to Complete the Work of Election
this Day: And it is the Duty of all to Remember it who may be called to
Occasions of the like Nature hereafter. You have been Told those things that
are for the Glory and Strength of a People: Look out then for such as have
Wisdom and Fidelity to Promote it, and do Exemplify a Regard to this in their
Personal Private Conduct. Under God, the Good or Misery of this Government
lies in your Power, and will Issue according to the Nature of the Choice you
make. And he that Conscientiously Pitcheth upon those that are most likely to
Act Worthy of their Places, may find his Accounts in it now, to be sure he will
at Last: But he that Knowingly Pitcheth upon those that are Unsuitable and
Unworthy for any Posts of Government, when better are before him, may Hurt his
own Comfort; which will Decline with the Public Good; and to be sure, is
Answerable to God for all the Inconveniences a Government Sustains by that
Choice. Do your Work then in the Fear of God; Act Conscience, and Prudence:
Honor those that Love the Public Good, and can, and will Promote it. It may
be there never needed among us more Wisdom, Dexterity, Tenderness and Care to
Compose our Differences, and keep us from Bursting Asunder than now. The LORD
Direct you; and the LORD Direct, Assist and Bless those on whom this Work may
be Devolved.

And here under this Head I would Humbly Offer, That an Eye might be had to
those in all the Inferior and Subordinate Stations of the Government, who are
Well Qualified by their Wisdom, Piety, Probity and Courage; who know what to
do, and will not be Imposed on, nor are likely to Sleep in their Stations, to
be Flattered or Bribed or Affrighted from their Duty. It would be Well to
Advance those whose Minds are well Affected toward the Felicity of those
Places where they are, and thoroughly Seasoned with an Esteem and Love to those
things that will make a People Happy. When such are Preferred to Office, they
are only Commanded, and put into a better Way to Follow the Bias of their own
Minds. A Man of Honesty, Sobriety, Temperance, Chastity, Religion, can with a
greater Grace and Courage Advance these things and Discourage the Contrary
Enormities, and has a Stronger Principle to it than another, and is more
Reverenced in his Work; besides the Peculiar Presence of God he may Expect to
make him a Blessing in it. But on the Contrary what may we Expect from Wicked
and Immoral Persons, when GOD and their own Minds are against them? When they
are put upon such Work, they Fight against the Darling of their own Souls. They
carry within constant Reproofs in all their Administrations, Wherein thou
Judge another, thou Condemnest thy self; for thou that Judge, do the
same things. They Answer not the End of their Beings, will they Answer the Ends
of Society? They are Unfaithful to God, and to whom will they be Faithful? They
are Plagues and Torments to their own Minds, and not likely to be Blessings to
a Commonwealth.

II. I would now turn my self to our Present Rulers, or such as may be for the
Present Year, Namely, the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and
the Worshipful ASSISTANTS of this Colony; with the whole GENERAL ASSEMBLY. And
the Address I shall make to you, Honorable, Worshipful and Highly Esteemed, is
only by Presenting before you the Ends of Society and your Exaltation, the
Expectations of GOD, and the Desires and Hopes of all that Fear him; Namely,
That you Contribute all your Wisdom, Dexterity, Zeal and Diligence to Compact
us together. Take Jerusalem for your Model; Nay, take Jerusalem that is Above,
as it is Delineated to us in the Word of God. When Multitudes of us can do but
little more than Pray for the Peace and Welfare of Jerusalem, You can Apply
those Means also that Tend to Advance it. It is much with you under GOD, to
Appease our Intestine Divisions and Disorders, and Apply those Bands and
Ligaments that shall Hold us together, and Prevent our Breaking and
Dissolution. Your Wisdom and Knowledge Faithfully Improved, may be the
Stability of our Times. The Darkness of our Present Day, the Number and Weight
of our Sins, and the greatness of our Disorders make your Work more Difficult:
Deal Courageously, and the Lord be with you, And though the Earth and the
Inhabitants thereof should be Dissolved, Hold you up the Pillars of it.

I am Confident of the Real Advantage of those things I have Laid before you,
as Conducive to the Happiness and Strength of us, and that in Mentioning them I
have kept within my own Limits; and can therefore with an Humble Freedom
Commend them to your Care. Give me Leave to say then, That we look for your
Watch over us, and your Faithful Discharge of the Duties of your Places; We
Look for your Paternal Tenderness toward us, and your Correction of us when we
need it. And though a Suitable Deference to Authority is more nearly to be
Pressed on a People as their Part in Advancing the Public Welfare, yet it is a
Certain Truth, That the Wisdom, Gravity, Integrity, Fidelity and Shining
Examples of Rulers do much Tend to Command this from a People; and that the
Doing Good to a People is the most Solid and Sure Means to a Reputation with
them, You know Job found it so, Chap. XXXIX. Though indeed an Ill Disposition
sometimes may Hinder you of Due Respect till you are Dead, but then you have
Comfort Enough at present from another World.

And Suffer me here Particularly to Press Religion and Virtue on your Practice
and Care; for this is a Principle and a Leading Thing. God that Investeth you
with Power and Honor, Expects to be Served by it. Jerusalem was of Old
Distinguished by Religion; how can this Name by any Analogy be given to us if
here it be Neglected? We Hope your Ambition will herein Appear, that we may be
called the City of Righteousness, the Faithful City. Would to God, there were
no Reason to Complain of Defects in this Necessary Article. We that are
Ministers of the Gospel delight not in Declaiming against the Corruptions of
the Age, and Time, and Places we Live in, but when they do Appear, we must not
only in Faithfulness to our own Souls, and the Souls of our People, but also in
Faithfulness to our Land, Cry Aloud, and not Spare, Lift up our Voice like a
Trumpet, and Show God's People their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob
their Sins. Particularly, are we not to be Charged with great Indifferency to
Religion; Unthankfulness for the Gospel, Insensibility of the Benefits of it?
Is not the House of GOD, by many Unfrequented, his Ordinances Neglected, his
Sabbaths Profaned? Is not a Carnal, Worldly and Hypocritical Spirit too
Visible? Have we not with us Murmurers, Complainers, those who speak Evil of
Dignities, and are of Levelling Spirits? Have we not Complained of Injustice,
and Fraud, and Oppression, and is there not Reason Still to do so? Does not
Drunkenness continue, yea Increase by Yearly Accessions, and like a Mighty
Torrent Bear down the Force of all the Laws that have been Enacted against it
and all the Pains that are Used? Can any Man Shut his Eyes, or Stop his Ears,
from Observing it among the Indians in our Towns, when it is so Apparent in
their Staggerings to and fro, their Apish Gestures, and their Hideous Yellings
in our Streets? And is this all they get by Dwelling among us CHRISTIANS, that
they are now made a more Stupid, and Polluted People than they were before! And
do not too many among us Stain their Profession by this Sin? Cannot we see
Persons and Families, Estates, Healths, Bodies, and Souls Undone by this Evil?
And it is well Worthy of your Notice whether there are Sufficient Provisions
for the Prevention of it. I have been the more Earnest and Full upon this Head,
for it looks like the Approaches of a GENERAL DELUGE, and is as Dreadful. Have
we not Disorderly Families? Which we look to you to Govern. Have we not Rioting
and Revellings and many Provisions for the Flesh to Fulfill it in the Lusts
thereof? For these and the like things, may I not call upon you to Arise and
Show your selves Mer, Nay, to Arise and Show your selves God's, as the Title of
Rulers is? And as the GREAT GOD has Revealed his Wrath from Heaven against all
the Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men, so do you yours upon the Earth*
What Provision is Wanting in our Laws to this End, let it be Supplied, and put
the Execution of them into Faithful Hands, and let them be Duly Inspected,
Assisted, and Encouraged in their Work.

And let Government be Supported for the Interest of Religion, Virtue and
Honesty.

And we that are the Ministers of Religion look to you that are our Rulers, and
the Directers and Managers of our Public Affairs, That you would Speak
Comfortably to us, and Assist us, when we are by our Utmost Endeavors
Promoting the Good of the Common Wealth, as Well as the Good of Men's Souls, in
Encouraging Men to all those Duties that make them Blessings in the World, and
Procure the Blessings of God. The Complaints of the Lord's Ministers from this
Place have been, on this Occasion, Frequently, and very Pressingly Urged before
you: And Necessity is ready to Furnish Men with Eloquence even when Natural
Parts can Help but a very little. I intend to pass it by, leaving with it this
Reflection: That it looks Dark, and has an Ill Omen on a Land, and so is
Worthy of your Notice and Consideration. Let the Complaints of Ministers be
Just, or not: In the first Case, a great Guilt ^ieth on a Land, which has
never Failed to bring down Judgments on a People; in the Second Case, when
there is an Unjust Complaint among the Ministers of the Gospel it is an
Argument of their Greedy and Covetous Disposition and the Unhappiness of a
People they have the Care of. But the Authority appears to have the same
Sentiments with us in their Public Orders for Printing the Sermons of these
Days, which are seldom wanting on this Head.

I would only before I leave this Head, Submissively Offer, whether the
Collecting the Ministers Rate might not be in a way that might Expose them less
to the Odium of many of their People? It is well known, That Compulsion of Men
to their Duty in this Point is a very Tender thing, and sometimes Disaffects
Men to their Ministers so, as they never afterward Profit by them. Our Business
is with the Hearts of Men; and if they are once Prejudiced against us our
Success may be all over.

The Spreading of the Gospel is a Glorious Work, Worthy of your Care. And when
New Towns and Societies are set out, if they are not Able, ought they not to be
Enabled to Support the Gospel? Religion must Suffer, where Places through their
Incapacity or Neglect have not the Dispensation of the Word; Nay, where though
they have it, if they want the Sacraments and Seals, and the Authoritative,
Pastoral Watch and Government of one Ordained over them in the Lord. And Places
have too often and too long Suffered here.

Let me add here, The Charitable Compassion which the Natives of the Land need.
We Bless GOD for this Pious Thought, he put into your Honor's Heart, which you
Expressed in your Commands to us, by the Advice of the COUNCIL, on the late
Fast, April X. 1717.
That we should Pray to God to Favor all Endeavors for the Conversion of the
HEATHEN. May such a Truly Excellent Thing be Enlivened and brought to some
Desirable, Perfection in this ASSEMBLY. This will Discover a Public Spirit,
to make them Better Men, and so Better Neighbors and Friends; as well as a
Generous Compassion to Save Souls (...) Death, and to Hide a Multitude of Sins.

And may we see the Excellency of Peace and Unity in the Management of all
Affairs before you, in all, Particularly in the present Sessions.

And in all things, we Desire and Trust you will Rule us in the Fear of GOD,
and we cannot Desire a greater Blessing. I would Modestly mind you, That though
by Office you are Gods, yet Death will Destroy your Character: You shall Dye
like Men, and this your Glory shall not Descend after you* You must Stand a
Trial for your Betrustments as well as the Meanest of us; and you will have
nothing else to Distinguish you at that Time, but a Distinguishing Account you
have to give, and Distinguishing Rewards if you have been Faithful, and
Distinguishing Miseries if you have not. And I Conclude with my Wishes, That
you may not only have a Share in our Prayers, but in our Praises and
Thanksgivings to GOD too.

III. And now I would continue the Exhortation by Addressing those of the
SACRED ORDER, and my Self the Least in it. That we would Heartily Pursue this
Business. Notwithstanding the Contempt and Difficulties that our Work brings
with it, we have a great deal of Consolation from the Nature, Tendency and
Design of it. We turn not the World upside down, nor are the Movers of
Sedition, as they were Unjustly Accused, Act. XVII. 6. and XXIV. 5. In the
Faithful Discharge of our Work we Promote the Happiness of both Worlds. We Use
the most Solid Methods for this; for we Lay a Foundation in the Hearts of Men.

Our Fidelity tends not only to the Salvation of the Soul, but also to make Men
Better Members of the Commonwealth, and has an Aspect on all Ranks and
Degrees of Men, and is to Secure all Interests. And besides the Natural
tendency of the Virtues we Exhort to, we bring a People into the Favor of that
God, who was the Keeper of the City of Jerusalem, and Hold's the World
together. So that not only in Faithfulness to our own Souls, but also from a
Love to our People, and the City of our GOD, we are Obliged to Bestir our
selves in our Work, and be Faithful in every Part of it, and Conduct our selves
Wisely to the Promoting it. May I here Hint those things, which it were Proper
for me to Learn of you.

What Care and Prudence becomes us in our Common Conduct and Deportment of our
selves in the World? For that has an Influence on our Serviceableness in our
Station. Though where the Gifts of a Minister are Extensive, I know not why his
Improvement may not be so too; yet at the same time it becomes us to be Wise
as Serpents and Harmless as Doves* We know the Vile Words that are cast about,
of Priest-Cra^t, and Priest-Ridden, and an Ambitious and Designing Clergy, and
the like Effusions of Men's Corrupt Minds* and the Jealousies the World has of
us. It therefore here stands us in stead to Labor after a Spotless
Innocence; and to see that all our Designs be Worthy of our Station, and Truly
Christian.

And when we are going to Promote Religion in the World, how does it become us
to give it Life and Power in our own Souls? Our People Expect we should Walk in
the same Path we Direct them to, and the most Obsequious Language to a Minister
is, I Prae, Sequar. If we would Press Religion on our People's Hearts, our
Lives are the best Seal; and they will make our Services more Excellent. Can we
so well Declare the Excellency of Religion, unless our own Hearts Feel it? Can
we make such Warm Addresses to the Souls of Men as we should, if our own Hearts
are Frozen and Dead? Can we have the Courage to Reprove Iniquity, if our own
Consciences at the same time Reprove us? Can we Comfort Men with the Hopes of
Heaven if we are Indifferent to all the Joys of it? We are Obliged not only to
have the Reality of Religion in our Souls, but the Highest Dgrees and the
Greatest Exactness of it. Might not this be a Reason that the Apostle Exhorted
Timothy to Exercise himself unto Godliness, I Tim. IV. 7. Are we not Separated
to the Work of Religion for this End with others, That we should have a Daily
Inspection into our own Souls, and Watch against all the Indecencies that
Cleave to our Hearts and Lives, that our Lives may be as Clearly Expressive as
our Language.

And having Observed this Rule, and Living in the Practice of it, let us set
our selves to our Work, and make it our Daily Care and Study. Indeed such are
the Avocations and Difficulties of many of us that we are to our Sorrow much
Hindered; but let them hinder us only where they are Real and Unavoidable, and
only as far as they are so. But such as are Bless't with Easy Circumstances in
the World, they are Inexcusable if they do not give themselves wholly to these
things, and make their Profiting under such Circumstances, Appear. And let them
be Exemplary in Acts of Charity and Hospitality, and not in the Eager and
Vehement Desires of the Worldling. If their Places have not so Enabled them,
God has: And how can they better Bestow themselves and what they have, than in
his Service, and for the Good of his People?

Those who have been Necessarily Engaged in Worldly Affairs, would ^o Well to
consider whether they have not Engaged in them too much, and too long? And
having been taken off from their Proper Work and Business, it is to be Feared,
That some have not Returned to it, that is, to their Studies, when God has
Bless't them in their Endeavors, and Enabled them to it.

And those of us who may be by Outward Low Circumstances kept off much from our
Work, let it not carry us too far. We may Possibly Redeem more time than we do
in this Affair. Pliny's Plin. Jun. Lib. 7. Ep. 3^.
account of himself should be Emulated by us, Praecario Studeo, Studeo Tamen.
By such a Faithful Application according to our Power we best Express our Trust
in God. We show our Confidence in his Care, and Goodness toward our selves,
our Families and Children, when we can attend his Service and leave all wholly
to Him. And as God made the Ravens to Feed Elijah, So Doubtless he will one way
or other, Feed us with Food Convenient for us. If God makes us Blessings in
our Work, this may Comfort us in all our Sorrows, that through our Sufferings
we Promote the Good of the World, and Prepare Men for that Place, where all
Narrowness and Selfishness of Mind shall be Removed, and they shall
Everlastingly Prize us as Instruments of the Highest Good to them.

We have greater things to mind, than our own Particular, Temporal Interests,
even the Saving Men's Souls and the Good of the World. To that End let us
Bestir our selves in the following Manner,

Let us put Men in Mind to be Subject to Principalities and Powers, to Obey
Magistrates, to be Ready to every Good Work, to Speak Evil of no man, to be no
Brawlers, but Gentle, Showing all Meekness to all Men. This is a Necessary
Work, and thereby we directly Level at the Good of the State, and if ever the
thing is Proper to be Enforced, does not the Present Time Peculiarly call us to
it?

And let us Represent the Whole of Religion in it is Reasonableness and Beauty,
and Press it on the Affections of our People. The Good Success of such
Endeavors could not be too much Prized. What can Exhilarate us more than the
Promotion of that, whose Work is Peace, and the Effect whereof is, Quietness
and Assurance for ever? And to see our People (as a Consequent of it) to dwell
in a Peaceable Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in Quiet Resting-Places?

Finally, As we are the Lord's Remembrancers let us Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, and keep no Silence, nor give him Rest, till he Establish, and till
he make it a Praise in the Earth.

To Conclude, Let Wisdom and Prudence, Fidelity and Conscience, Zeal and an
Unflacken'd Industry, Appear in our Work. God knows how few Moments we have
to continue in it. The Treasure we have to Dispense out is put into Earthen
Vessels which may Suddenly Break. The Mighty Hand of God has given us, of late
in the Neighboring Province, very Humbling Instances of this Truth, In the
Death of th^se two Reverend Divines, Mr. WILLIAM BRATTLE, and Mr. EBENEZER
PEMBERTON.
Oh, That our Zeal for God, and our Fidelity in His Service might give us the
like Comfortable Reflections with them, when we come to Die! Nay that our
Fidelity might be in some Measure like our MASTER's, and we might truly say in
our Exit like Him, I have Glorified thee on the Earth: I have Finished the Work
which thou gave me to do.

IV. Let me Exhort the WHOLE BODY of the PEOPLE, to be suitably Affected toward
the Firm and Flourishing State of our Land. It is a General Good and it
becomes no man to Obstruct it, but every Man to Pray for and Endeavor after
it. If the Inhabitants of Jerusalem of Old were to Consider it is Welfare and
Seek for it, (if any thing) we are under Stronger Obligations now, May I not
say to you, ye are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem? We have Privileges
Superior to what that had; we have the Gospel Dispensation, they the Legal. We
have Easier and more Exellent Services, Clearer and Fuller Directions to our
Duty and what is Good and Reasonable, Stronger Incentives, more Encouraging
Hopes, and Brighter Examples. And the greater our Advantages are, the more
should we be Concerned for those Societies that Secure them to us. And let us
Express our Concern in this Manner* Briefly

1. Let us be Thankful for all the Good Things we Enjoy, wherein the Security
and Lasting Welfare of a People does Consist. Let us be Thankful for all
Public Blessings, for the Wisdom and Fidelity of our Rulers, and for all the
Rich Blessings God has by them Handed down, and Continued ^o us. Thankfulness
is the way to Continue and Increase those Blessings, and Unthankfulness to Cut
them Short.

2. Let us Contribute what we can to the Ease, and Encouragement, and Help of
our Civil Rulers on whom this great Concern more Peculiarly, and Immediately
Lies. For we shall find our Accounts in their Good Success. The Weight of
Government is as Great as the Honor, and we may make it far Greater, and may
so Conduct our selves as to Miss of the Happy Fruits and Effects of it. Let us
then Pursue a Due Love to our selves, by the Exercise of a Due Wisdom and Care
in this Matter. Let their Honor Dignity, and Expense be Cheerfully Supported
by us, Let them have a Proportionable Share in the Common Good, and a Reward
Answerable to the Merits of their Station and Services. Let us Love, Prize, and
Honor them, Rejoice in their Happiness, and be Grieved in all Censures and
Reproaches, and be Thankful to them for all the Good they do to us.

We may Discourage their Hearts, and Slacken their Hands by a Peevish and
Discontented Spirit, by Reflections on their Persons and Conduct, Denying all
the Good they do, Opposing them in all their Designs and Endeavors for our
Welfare, Finding Fault with the Laws and setting our selves to Find some ways
or other, to Enervate the Force of the Best of them.

We find them Work by our Tough and Ungovernable Spirits. And we sometimes give
them Insuperable Difficulties, by our Dissensions and Divisions; when we so
Divide into Particular Aims and Interests as at the same time Neglect the
Common Good, which much Consists in Unity, Love, and Peace.

To Avoid these things, therefore, is always our Duty, and to call upon us is
never Improper; but this Day and Time more Particularly Bespeaks such Counsel,
under the Present Heats, Discontents and Divisions among us. Every Good Man
Lays such things to Heart, and in the Exercise of his Goodness will Endeavor
to Allay and Quench them. Woe be to those that Sow the Seeds of these things;
the Fruit may be as Thorny to them as others. And it is the Duty of us not to
be Easy in Crediting Ill Reports, nor to be soon Enflamed by every Incendiary,
nor to think that wrong that does not Please us.

A Better Improvement of our Selves is to Lift our Hearts and our Hands (...)
whose Kingdom Rules over all, Th^^ (...) Bless our Land, our Rulers, and
(...), and Concerns. We then (...) ^^^selves to the Savior of Israel, (...)
Strength: and Blessed is that (...) the Lord. And now to (...)

3. Let us Fear God and keep his Commandments; that it may be Well with us and
our Children for ever: For surely his Salvation is Nigh them that Fear him;
that Glory may Dwell in our Land. It should be the Rejoicing of every one of
us, That we can b^ the Help of GOD, do tha^ which is for the Security and
Strength, Peace and Happiness of this Place. And this that I Exhort you ^o is a
Work Excellent in it self, and will make Particular Persons Happy, Yea it will
make our Jerusalem a Quiet Habitation, a Praise and a Joy in the Earth; and fit
us for the Jerusalem that is Above. It is a Work Equal to all our Capacity's,
not Below the Greatest, and Level with the Meanest. It may be Performed by
Young and Old, High and Low, Rich and Poor together. The same time that we Save
our own Souls, we may Promote the Welfare of the Places where we are, and shall
Expend nothing for it that is Worth a Keeping. If we do not Secure Religion to
our own Souls, we are but Common Plagues and Nusances, And if there were none
but such as we, the Judgments of God would soon break us to Pieces. God may
indeed make a Wicked Man an Instrument of much Good to others, but he has
little reason to hope he shall (...) Advantage^ by it himself; and with the
Profane (...) in the Time of Famine ^ (...). VII ^.
he may See it with his Eyes, but not Enjoy it. No Man shall Strengthen himself
in the Wickedness of his Life: For there is Destruction to the Wicked and a
Strange Punishment to all the Workers of Iniquity: he shall Lean upon his
House, but it shall not Stand; he shall Hold it Fast, but it shall not Endure.
Let then Serious Religion, Practical Godliness, Universal Justice and Sobriety,
be the Character of us a Professing People. And let every one that now Hears
me, do his Part to it, and let us all Grow Wiser and Better every Day, and do
all that we can to Strengthen and Secure us here in this Shaking and Tottering
World, till we come to a City that has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is
God. Blessed is every one that Fears the Lord, and Walks in his Ways: The
Lord shall Bless thee out of Zion, and thou shall see the Good of Jerusalem,
all the Days of thy Life.

I have done when I have left with you the Commands of the Apostle, 1 Pet. II.
17. Honor all Men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King; and (as
Comprehended in the Sense of it) all that are in Authority. And my Desires
Concurrent with those of all Good Men, That under them we may Lead Quiet and
Peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THIS Sermon is also Bound up, with the Four Preceding Election Sermons; and to
be Sold by T. Green, at New London, near the Meeting House. 1717.


