Invitations TO THE Gospel FEAST, OR, Free Offers of Salvation Through CHRIST.
Eleven SERMONS, from Luke XIV. 16. -- 24.

By Benj. Wadsworth, A.M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston. N.E.

Prove. 9.1, 2, 4, 5, 6. Wisdom has builded her house -- She has killed her
beasts, she has mingled her wine: She has also furnished her table -- whosoever
is simple, let him turn in hither -- Come eat of my bread, and drink of the
wine which I have mingled. Forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way of
Understanding.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Benj. Eliot at his Shop on the North side of
King's-Street. 1715.

PREFACE.
VERY Wonderful and Astonishing is the Divine Love and Gra^e, in the Redemption
of Sinners through Jesus Christ. This Subject, justly calls for our highest
Meditation and Admiration: we should so contemplate on it, as heartily to
comply with it is Invitations in the Gospel. To move and quicken Sinners
here-unto, is what is mainly aimed at in the following Sermons. I hope every one
who seriously Reads them, will (by Gods blessing) be clearly convinced, that
Christ is fully able and willing to Save all Sorts of Sinners, that will Submit
to Him on Gospel Terms. It Is the Wisdom and Interest of all so to Submit, and
Inexcusable folly and wickedness in any to refuse. I have Endeavored to answer
several Objections, which Sinners are apt to make against coming to Christ:
they will surely be Self-condemned if they refuse Him. And how shall any escape
if they neglect so great Salvation! Here are offers of Salvation to Men and
Women, to those of Various Nations, to Old and Young, High and Low, Rich and
Poor, Bond and Free. I have here treated on sundry Subjects, I hope none
Unprofitable to a diligent Reader. The Preaching of these Sermons, I hope was
not fruitless; a number of the Hearers Speedily desired the Printing of them,
and readily Subscribed to the doing it: I wish their Souls may be abundantly
Profitted, by what they desired should be thus made Public, the same I wish to
the Souls of all that Heard them or may Read them. It Is my earnest desire, that
my Poor Endeavors may be Instrumental to promote the Glory of Christ, and the
goods of Souls; that these Sermons, and whatever else I have Printed, may be
so, is what I Pray to God for, and hope I shall do so as long as I Live.

Benjamin Wadsworth.

INVITATIONS to the Gospel Feast: OR, Free Offers of Salvation through, CHRIST.
SERMON I.
LUKE XIV. 16, 17. Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper,
and bade many:

And sent his servant at supper time, to say to them that were bidden, Come,
for all things are now ready.


THESE Words here spoken by our Blessed Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ, are
the beginning of a Parable. For we have much the same Discourse as to the Scope
and Substance of it (though differing in sundry Particulars) Mat. 22.2. v. etc.
and there it is called a Parable. v. 1. Jesus answered and spoke unto them again
by Parables. The Parable which our Text is the beginning of, is of a Great Man
(there called Lord, v. 21, 22. and King, Mat. 22.2.) making a great Supper, a
great Feast, and by his Servants Inviting many Guests; the first that were
Invited made Excuses and would not come, v. 18. -- 20. Hereupon, that Lord,
whose kindness was thus despised, was Angry, and resolved that the despisers of
his offered kindness, should not taste of his Supper; and so ordered his
Servants to go into the Streets and Lanes, and to Invite others to the Feast,
even the Poor, Maimed, Halt and Blind, and those also who were in the High
ways and Hedges, yea to Compel them to come in, that his House might be
filled. It Is very probably thought, that in this Parable one thing mainly
intended by our Savior was, to set forth the Rejection of the Jews for their
refusing of Gospel Offers and Invitations, and the Calling in of the Gentiles.
However, by a Man (a Lord, or King) here making a Feast and bidding many to it,
we may understand God and Christ sending forth Ministers to Invite Sinners to
believe in Christ, to accept the Benefits Offered in the Gospel; many refuse
these Offers, they wont accept the Gospel-Blessings they are Invited to, such
shall not taste of the Feast, they shall perish for ever. But though some thus
refuse Gospel-Offers, God will make them to others, and would have his
Servants, Ministers Compel them to come in, that is, be very urgent with them
to accept the Benefits Offered in the Gospel. It seems our Savior when He
spoke this Parable about a Feast, was then Himself at a Feast, v. 1. He went
into the House of one of the chief Pharisees to eat Bread on the Sabbath Day.
It Is likely this was something more than an ordinary Meal, even a considerable
Feast or Entertainment, where many Guests were, because it is said, v. 7. He
marked how they chose out the chief Rooms; and thence cautioned them that when
they were bidden to a Wedding, not proudly to seek for chief Places. When our
Lord was thus at a Feast, He took occasion to Spiritualize the present Affair,
to set forth Spiritual things under the Notion or Similitude of a Feast. So
when He had Miraculously Fed many with a few Loaves, He took occasion to speak
of the Meat that endures to Everlasting Life, Joh. 6.27. When He asked the
Woman of Samaria for some Water to drink, He took occasion to speak about
Living-Water -- springing up unto Everlasting Life, Joh. 4.10, 14. From our
Savior's Practice herein, we should be quickened to Spiritualize the Matters
that occur, the Affairs before us; thence taking occasion to speak those things
which may be of Spiritual use and advantage. Providence gives us many fair
Handles (or Opportunities) for this, if we had but Wisdom and Grace to Improve
them. If we were prudent and careful in this matter, we might frequently and
easily do much Good, without any more Cost or Labor than that of a few Words.
Our Text, with the remaining part of the Parable, seem to be Introduced by way
of Reply, to what was said by one at Meat with our Savior. Our Lord advised
the Man who gave Him an Invitation to Eat, when he made an Entertainment, to
Invite the Poor and Indigent who were not likely to Invite him again, nor make
him any requital; if with a right Spirit he did thus, he should be Recompensed
at the Resurrection of the Just, v. 12. -- 14. Hereupon, one that sat at Meat
and heard these things, said, Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom
of God. To this saying, our Text is subjoined and annexed, Then said he unto
him, that is, then spoke Christ to him that had uttered those words (though in
the hearing also of the rest) A certain Man made a great Supper, and bade many,
etc. This Great Man Inviting many to a great Supper (or sumptuous Feast) may
signify (as was hinted before) God's Inviting Sinners to accept Spiritual,
Saving Benefits Offered to them in the Gospel. From the Words therefore we may
observe this,

DOCTRINE. GOD'S Inviting Sinners to accept of Spiritual, Saving Benefits
Offered in the Gospel; may be compared to a great Man's Inviting many Persons
to a Sumptuous Feast.
Here I shall endeavor to set forth some Parallel, or show in some General
Heads; wherein God's Offering Spiritual Saving Benefits to Sinners in the
Gospel, may be compared to a great Man's Inviting many to a Sumptuous Feast.

1. Various Sorts of Persons, are commonly Invited to a Great and Sumptuous
Feast. To such a Feast, it is common to Invite Persons of each Sex, Men and
Women: Persons of different Age, some Younger some Older ones: Persons of
different Rank or Quality, some of an Higher and some of a Lower Station. So
where the Gospel is Preached, God Offers Spiritual Saving Benefits to various
Sorts of Persons, even to all Sorts be they who they will that sit under such
Preaching: none are exempted or excluded. Col. 3.11. There is neither Greek nor
Jew, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, but Christ is all and in all. Gal.
3.28. Three is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is
neither Male nor Female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. All these various
Sorts of Persons are equally welcome to Christ, shall be equally Benefitted by
Him as to all Saving Blessings; if they will heartily accept of Him as Offered in
the Gospel. I may therefore say, that Spiritual Saving Benefits are Offered to
all Sorts of Persons, where the Gospel is plainly and Faithfully Preached. And
to mention some particular Heads, I may say, such Benefits are offered,

1. Both to Men and Women. There Is no difference between Male and Female, as to
this matter: both, as proceeding from Fallen Apostate Adam, are shapen in
Iniquity and conceived in Sin; a Seed of Evil doers, Children of Wrath by
Nature. They Are by Nature equally Sinful and Guilty, Heirs of Wrath, Obnoxious
to Hell and Damnation. They equally need Christ, that only Savior of Sinners;
and he Died to Save those of each Sex. Act. 5.14. And of Believers were the
more added to the Lord, Multitudes both of Men and Women. Both Men and Women
Believed and were Baptized, Act. 8.12. Those of each Sex, shall be equally
welcome to Christ, if they will come. Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes in him, shall
not perish but have Everlasting Life. Though according to the different Usages
and Customs of different Nations and Countries, Men and Women are not equally
capable of like Dignities and Privileges among Men; yet as to better Dignities
and Privileges than any which Men can confer, even those that are Spiritual
and Saving, there is no difference between them. Male and Female, one as well as
the other are equally Invited to accept of Christ and Salvation through Him, and
if they will accept them on Gospel Terms they shall be equally welcome to them.

2. To Persons of various Nations. The Israelitish Nation were once God's
peculiar People, distinguished by having the Divine Oracles committed to them,
while God dealt not so with every Nation. Psalm. 147.19, 20. with Romans 3.2. The
Common Wealth of Israel had the Covenants of Promise, while others had not,
Ephesians. 2.12. They had the Way of Life through the Promised Messiah made known to
them, Salvation is of the Jews, Joh. 4.22. Thus they were Priviledg'd with
these Revelations of God's Will, while other Nations (generally speaking) knew
but little or almost nothing of these things. And hence we find, all Mankind
sometimes distinguished or distributed into Jews and Gentiles. Romans 3.29. Is he
the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yea of the Gentiles
also. But now, that distinction which there once was between Jew and Gentile,
as to the Covenant Privileges, or nearness to God, is removed; The middle wall
of Partition is broken down, Ephesians. 2.14. If an Israelite, and one of another
Nation, heartily receive Christ; they shall be equally welcome to Him and
Benefitted by Him. In this case, there is no difference between Jew and Gentile;
for all have Sinned and come short of the Glory of God -- It is one God which
shall Justify the Circumsicion by Faith, and the Uncircumsion through Faith,
Romans 3.22, 23, 30. Though while our Savior dwelt in Flesh here on Earth, He
Limited the Commission of His Apostles as to their Preaching, Mat. 10.5, 6. Go
not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritanes enter ye
not; but go rather to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel; Yet after His
Resurrection from the Dead, He Enlarged their Commission saying, Mat. 28.19. Go
teach (or Disciple, as the word signifies) all Nations Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. Christ has
broken down (as was hinted before) the Wall of Partition between Jews and
Gentiles. He Is a Light to the Gentiles, as well as the Glory of his people
Israel. Luke 2.32. Wherever the Gospel comes, he now Commands all men every
where to repent, Act. 17.30. And indeed, In every Nation he that fears God and
works righteousness, is accepted with him, Act. 10.35. Therefore let Persons
be of what Nation soever, of what Color soever, whether White or Black; yet
where the Gospel comes, it Invites them all to accept of Christ and Salvation
through Him. Indians, Negroes, the blackest Ethiopians as well as any others, are
equally welcome to Christ if they will accept Him on Gospel terms. None shall be
Pardoned on Earth or made happy in Heaven, merely for their being of this or
that Nation, of this or that color White or Black; nor shall any be rejected
on any such accounts as these, Persons of all Nations whatsover, equally need
Saving benefits by Christ; and shall be equally welcome to them and vested in
them, if they will accept them as offered in the Gospel. Again, Saving benefits
are offered,

3. Both to Persons Old and Young.

1. Old Sinners need a Savior. And notwithstanding they have lived long in
Wickedness, yet if they will heartily Submit to Christ they shall be Saved. God
extends His Patience and Forbearance to some Sinners, a very great while
indeed: They Are Suffered to live Long though they live Wickedly. Wherefore do the
Wicked live, become Old? etc. Job. 21.7. Though a Sinner do evil an hundred
times, and his Days be prolonged, etc. Eccl. 8.12, 13. A Person's living to be
Old, is no sure Sign that God is at Peace with him. Isai. 65.20. -- The Sinner
being an hundred Years Old shall be Accursed. If Persons are never so Old, yet
if Unbelieving; then the Wrath of God abides on them, Joh. 3.36. Yet if even
such Old Sinners, who have spent their Youth, Health, Strength, all their many
past Years in the Service of Sin and Satan, Provoking of God and Injuring of
their own Souls; I say, if such will Sincerely Repent of Sin and Accept of
Christ as Offered in the Gospel, they shall certainly be Pardoned and Saved for
ever. It Is a Faithful Saying worthy of all Acception, that Christ came to save
Sinners, even the Chief of them, 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ is able to Save to the
Uttermost those that come to God by Him, Heb. 7.25. But is he Willing too? Yes
Indeed, for He says, Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out. Here Is wondrous Grace indeed, that even the Worst, Oldest, Vilest Sinners,
the Chief of them, if they will Heartily come to Christ shall be Freely and Fully
Saved by Him. If then there be any Old Unconverted Sinners in this
Congregation, that have spent all their past time in Neglect and Contempt of
God; if there be any such here, hearken to what I say, Full, Complete Salvation
through Jesus Christ is now once more Freely Offered to you. If you Old Sinners,
Great Transgressors, who have so long Despised the Riches of God's Goodness,
Forbearance, and Long-Suffering; will now once at last Sincerely Turn from your
Sins to God in Christ Jesus, you shall then be Welcome to Christ, and be Saved
by Him for ever. Oh, Admire at this Amazing Grace and Patience of God! Accept
the Invitation, Defer no longer. Your Time on Earth cannot be long, your Days
must needs be near their End; you will have but very few if any more Offers of
the Gospel, your Old Age will soon be ended. Therefore to Day, after so long a
Time as it is said to Day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts,
Heb. 4.7. You that are Old Sinners, pray Consider these Things, they are for
your Life, for the Life of your Souls: Therefore mind them most Seriously,
before the Things of your Peace be Eternally hidden from your Eyes. And as
Spiritual Saving Benefits are thus Offered to Old Sinners, so they are,

2. To Young Sinners also. Young as well as Old Sinners need a Christ, are
Invited to Him, and should come to Him. According to the Laws and Customs of
some Places, Persons must be of such or such an Age, so Old, before they can
Claim these or those Privileges; or in their own Persons Enter on and Possess
their Estates. Gal. 4.1, 2. The Heir, as long as he is a Child, differs
nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all: but is under Tutors and
Governors, until the Time appointed of the Father. But now, as to the best and
greatest Privileges and Benefits, even Saving Benefits; Persons as soon as
capable of making a Rational Deliberate Choice (though never so Young) are
Invited to Accept of them. Young Persons, yea Children are called upon to
Believe in Christ, Fear God, Walk in the one only Way that leads to Life. Psalm.
34.11. Come ye Children unto me, I will teach you the Fear of the Lord. Eccl.
12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. Both Young Men and
Maidens, Old Men and Children, let them Praise the Name of the Lord, Psalm.
148.12, 13. Little Children should know the Father, 1 John 2.13. It Is evident
therefore, that Young Persons, even Children are called upon to be Seriously
and Practically Godly; which they cannot be unless they Accept of Christ by
Faith; and if they so Accept Him they shall be Saved. Hearken then you Young
Men, Young Women, Boys and Girls, you Children that are capable of Serious
Consideration, and of making a Rational Deliberate Choice (do you Hearken to
what I say) the Great GOD your Maker, Lawgiver and Judge calls on you, Invites
and Commands you (even every one of you) to repent of Sin and believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ. The Great God Invites you Young Ones, to come unto Christ
for Life. He now Offers to be at Peace with you, Reconciled to you, to Pardon
all your Sins if you will accept of His Son Christ Jesus on Gospel Terms. He
Invites you to accept the best of Blessings and Benefits, that possibly can be.
He Offers to you Pardon of Sin, Grace, Glory, Durable Riches, Treasures which
Moth cannot corrupt, nor Thieves take away; an Everlasting Crown, Kingdom,
Inheritance. Oh accept these Offers by submitting to Christ, refuse them not by
neglecting Him. Young Persons are often concerned about Setting up for
themselves, about a good Settlement, about some Way or Business by which they
may live comfortably. And would you indeed have some way, course or Method
prescribed, that would be truly good, useful, profitable to you? Then I Will
direct you to a good way, a right, useful, profitable way, the best way that
can be; you will find it so if you will take it; it is this, heartily Embrace Christ
Jesus as Offered in the Gospel. Take Him for your Prophet, to teach you by His
Word and Spirit: for your Priest to reconcile you to God, and to render your
Person and all your Sincere Performances acceptable to Him: for your King, to
rule in and over you, defend, protect and save you, from all your Spiritual
Enemies. Thus submit to the Lord Jesus, and then you shall thrive and prosper
after the best manner that can be. God who is Infinitely Wise, Powerful,
Gracious, Faithful will be your God, Friend, Father, Portion, and will make all
things work together for your good, Romans 8.28. God will be to you a Sun and
Shield, will give you Grace and Glory, and withhold no good thing from you,
Psalm. 84.11. Godliness has the Promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Oh Young Ones, be thus wise for your selves. Be
hearty and speedy, in choosing and accepting these Precious Offers made unto
you. Most speedily and heartily repent of all your Sins, and Embrace Christ
Jesus on Gospel Terms. Don't think 'twill be time enough to turn from Sin to God
in Christ Jesus,

1. When you're grown Old. You don't know that you shall live to be Old, nor
that you shall live a day longer. Boast not thy self of to morrow, thou know
not what a day shall bring forth, Prove. 27.1. Your Life is a vapor that
appears for a little while, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. You that are
Young, cannot but know that you are Mortal. Cannot you remember that such and
such much about your Age, yea many younger than you, have been snatched away by
Death? You have no Assurance of your Lives, for one Month, Week or Day longer.
Again, don't defer the concerns of your Spiritual Welfare,

2. Till Sickness comes. Some are vainly apt to think, twill be time enough to
Repent of Sin and believe in Christ, when they come to lie upon a Sick Bed. But
it is unspeakable Folly and Wickedness, thus to defer present Duty. When Persons
are Sick, they have commonly enough to do to grapple with their Illness and Pain;
how do they turn, heave and throw to get a little rest and ease, and yet cannot
get it? They are scarce capable, of any serious deliberate Thoughts or
Consideration. Yea they are often out of their Senses (as we call it) deprived
of the use of Reason. It Is unutterable Madness and Wickedness, to defer the
concerns of Eternity till such a Distressed, Distracted Condition as Sickness
often occasions. But besides all this, you know not that ever you shall be
Sick; many Young Ones as well as others are taken out of the World, by some
sudden Fall, Blow or some surprising unthought of Accident or other, and you
don't know but you may thus die, and be removed from Time into Eternity in a
Moment. And will you defer the concerns of your Everlasting welfare to such
uncertainties as these are? Don't defer,

3. Till you have accomplished such and such worldly Affairs which you have in
view. Some are apt to think, Young Ones especially, that when they come to be
Settled in the World, when they are got through such or such a difficult matter
that is before them, when they are come into some good Way or Method of
Business; then they shall have more time and leisure to mind their Souls, and
then they will mind them in good earnest: but don't be so Foolish, Mad and Wicked
as to defer on any such accounts as these.

For,

1. Your Souls* are of more Worth and Value, than any other things you can be
concerned about. Things of greatest Weight and Worth, should be Firstly and
Chiefly minded, Mat. 6.33. Seek First the Kingdom of God and His Righteousness.
What shall it Profit a Man, if he should gain the whole World and lose his own
soul? Or what shall a man gave in exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.20. If we
suppose a Man to gain this whole World, and to lose his Soul while he is Busied
in doing it: he would indeed be a most Miserable Loser. The Welfare of the Soul
is of more Weight, Worth, Value than all the Wealth Honors, Pleasures which
this World can possibly afford. Surely then, you should mind your Souls
Firstly, Christly; and other Things afterward, or only in Subordination to
God's Glory and your Spiritual Welfare. If by some grievous Fall, you should
tear your Clothes to Pieces, and Grievously tear your Flesh also, and break
your Bones; doubtless in such a Case you would be more concerned to Heal your
Wounds than to Mend your Clothes. Why? Why because the Body is of more Worth
than the Clothes, the latter being only for the Service and Benefit of the
former. So your Souls being of Greatest Worth, you should be more concerned for
their Welfare, than for any or all Outward Affairs whatsoever: All other Things
are but empty Bubbles and Trifles compared with your Souls. Consider,

2. You don't know that you shall ever attain to that Seiled Composed Condition
in the World, which you aim at. You propose the minding of your Souls in Good
Earnest, after you are Settled in the World, got through these and those
Difficulties, got into some Good Way or Method of Business, etc. But Alas, you
don't know that you shall ever obtain what you thus propose to your selves.
Early Death may soon put an End to all those Proposals, which in your Mind you
Frame to your selves. Some have been taken away by Death, in the midst of great
Hurries of Business; some just as they were entering into such Business; some
just as they were about Settling, or a little before Intended Marriage; some
presently after Marriage. The Worldly Settlement which many have proposed to
themselves, has been prevented by their Settlement in the Grave. You don't know
but it may be thus with you, and then what becomes of your Precious Immortal
Souls, whose Welfare you purposely Deferred till after such Settlement as you
never obtain? I believe there are vast Multitudes now in Hell, who once as
really Thought and Designed as you do, to mind their Souls after such and such
Worldly Matters were Accomplished; but Death Snatched them away before ever
they had that Time and Leisure they promised to themselves. Therefore, Oh Young
Persons, let no Consideration whatever make you Defer minding of God and your
Souls; let nothing make you neglect the Great and Rich Offers made to you in
the Gospel. Oh you Young Persons, I am greatly Concerned for your Precious
Souls; therefore I Beseech you hearken to the Counsels of God for your Good:
Most carefully avoid, what might hinder your Speedy, Hearty Compliance with
them. Don't allow your selves in any known. Sin of Omission or Commission; Sins
against Knowledge terribly Blind the Mind. Harden the Heart, Grieve and Provoke
the Holy Spirit of God. Don't Indulge your selves in any Wicked Words. Evil
communication corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. Most carefully avoid Bad
Company. Prove. 13.20. A Companion of Fools shall be destroyed. Don't Indulge
Idleness, it is the Devils School, the Inlet to numberless dangerous Temptations.
Don't Indulge Pride and Self-Conceit, twill render you hateful to God. God hates
a Proud Look, Prove. 6.16, 17. As you should Watch against these (and ^ndeed
against all known) evils; So on the other hand be advised,

1. To maintain a constant course of seriously, diligentl^ reading the Holy
Scriptures. They are Able to make wise to Salvation, through Faith in Christ
Jesus; it was Timothy^s Commendation, that from a Christ he knew them, 2 Timothy
3.15. Be as much like Timothy in this, as ever you can. Make Gods Word, the Man
of your Counsel, the Lamp of your Feet, and Light of your Paths: meditate on it
Day and Night: hide it in your hearts that you may not Sin against Him, Psalm.
119.9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto
according to thy word.

2. D^l^gently attend on the Word Preached. Isai. 55.3. -- Hear and your souls
shall live --. Preaching of the Gospel -- is (Instrumentally) the Power of God
unto Salvation, Romans 1.15, 16. The word Preached, when seriously attended on
and accompanied with Gods efficacious blessing, begets Souls to Jesus Christ.
Begotten by the Word of truth, Jam. 1.18. I have begotten you by the Gospel, 1
Cor. 4.15. Therefore diligently attend on the Preaching of the Gospel.

3. Be Submissive to Family Order and Government. When Persons are Proud,
Stubborn, Disobedient to Family Rulers, as Parents or Masters; they then rebel
against God, highly Provoke Him, often expose themselves to shame and misery in
this Life, and sometimes to an Untimely Judicial Death. Therefore as you regard
Gods favor, your Temporal and Eternal Welfare, submit to Family Order and
Government, don't be disobedient to Parents, Masters, Mistresses. Children, obey
your Parents in all things -- Servants, obey in all things your Masters
according to the Flesh, Col. 3.20, 22. Cursed be he that sets light by
Father or Mother, and all the People shall say, Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.16.

4. Remember your Baptismal Covenant. Those of you that have been Baptized,
have been solemnly given up in Covenant to God, consecrated and dedicated to
His holy Service: you're under Covenant Obligations heartily to Repent of Sin,
believe in Christ, and lead lives of new and holy Obedience. Remember these
bonds of God upon you, for your Encouragement and Quickening to duty. Gal.
3.27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

5. Don't Resist the Stirrings and Motions of Gods Holy Spirit. Doubtless you
Young Ones in your Tender Years, have many Awakenings, Convictions, Motions of
the Spirit of God in you; Oh don't Stifle, Quench or Resist them. Don't Rebel and
Vex the Holy Spirit, as they, Isa. 63.10. Don't Resist the Holy Ghost, as they,
Act. 7.51. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. Don't Resist and Grieve
the Holy Spirit, left God say, as Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive
with Man. Lest God give you up to your own Hearts Lusts to walk in your own
Counsels, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Never Indulge any known Sin, any thing that you know
is Grievous to the Spirit of God; maintain a great Tenderness of Conscience.

6. Meditate much on Death, Judgment, Eternity. These are great Certainties and
Realities, Meditate much on them, to Awe you from Sinning, and Quicken you to
Repentance, Faith and Practical Godliness.

7. Meditate much on the Emptiness, Vanity, Uncertainty of Outward Temporary
Enjoyments. Man in honor, abides not, Riches cannot profit in the day of
Wrath. The pleasures of Sin are but for a season, and they have the sting of
Death in them too. Be not deceived and befooled with such Vanities.

8. Be earnest and constant in Secret Prayer. Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy Closet,
and when thou have shut thy door Pray to thy Father which sees in Secret. Pray
for converting Grace, that God would draw you to His Son Christ Jesus. Our Lord
says: Joh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me,
draw him. Faith is Gods gift, Ephesians. 2.8. Pray for Pardon of Sin through the Merits
of Christ. Psalm. 79.9. Purge away our sins for thy name sake. Pray for Grace to
walk with God. Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any
Iniquity have dominion over me.

I have now been much longer in Speaking to you Young Persons, than I thought
to be when I began my Meditations on this head; but I don't repent it, twill he
time well spent if you heartily submit to these counsels of God. I Will now
recommend to your serious consideration, the words of David to his Son Solomon:
1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou
seek him, he will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him he will cast thee
off for ever.

SERMON II.
TO proceed, I am yet upon this General Head, viz. That Spiritual Saving
Blessings in the Gospel, are Offered to various Sorts of Persons; as they are
Offered to Male and Female, to Persons of various Nations (all Nations where
the Gospel comes) to Old and Young, so they are Offered,

4. To Persons High and Low: To those Incircled with Honor, and those Clothed
with Contempt. Some Persons are Much, and others Little Esteemed or Honored in
the World. Men are Distinguished into High and Low, Psalm. 62.9. Surely Men of
low Degree are Vanity, and Men of high Degree a Lie. Well, both High and Low
are Invited to accept of Saving Benefits in the Gospel. Psalm. 49.1, -- 3. Hear
this all ye People, give ear, all ye Inhabitants of the World: both Low and
High, Rich and Poor together; my Month shall speak of Wisdom. The Counsels of
Wisdom are given to High and Low: They are Invited to Walk in Wisdoms Ways.
Those loaded with Honors among Men, have but a Flashy, Empty Enjoyment of it;
yet such Honors (and love to them) keeps some from accepting Gospel Offers.
They love the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God, Joh. 12.43. How can ye
Believe, who receive Honor one from another, and seek not that Honor which
comes from God only? Joh. 5.44. But Miserable will be the Case of those, who
for the sake of Worldly Honors Reject Gospel Invitations. If they now pass for
Gods, yet they shall Dye like Men; and hereafter come forth (of their Graves)
to Shame and Everlasting Contempt, Dan. 12.2. God Invites them to True Honors.
Those who Honor him, he will Honor, 1 Samuel 30. Our Lord said, Joh. 12.26. If
any Man serve me, him will my Father Honor. Though some who are highly Esteemed
and Honored in the World, Reject these Invitations, yet all of them don't. 1
Cor. 1.26. Ye see your Calling Brethren, how that not many Wise Men after the
Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are Called. When it is said, not many such
are Called, it implies that some such are And so we find when Paul Preached at
Berea, many of them Believed, also of Honorable Women which were Greeks, and
of Men not a few, Act. 17.12. Thus, some who are esteemed Honorable among Men,
do more abundantly Honor themselves in accepting the Offers of the Gospel.
Wherever the Gospel comes, the Saving Benefits of it are Offered to the High,
to those most Esteemed in the World; and they are also Offered to the Low, to
those never so meanly Esteemed or greatly Despised. Not only those in the
Streets and Lanes of the City, but also those mean Persons, who had their abode
in High Ways and Hedges (no House to dwell in) were Invited to the Feast, Luke
14.21, 23. Those who are most Overlooked, Despised, Contemned among Men, (I
say, those as well as any others where the Gospel comes) are Invited to accept
of Spiritual Saving Benefits through Jesus Christ. If any of you are meanly
esteemed or greatly despised by Men, yet God wont overlook or reject you on
that account. If Men count you the basest abjects, the filth and offscouring
of all things; yet God offers great honors, dignities, benefits to you: He
bids you believe in Christ, and if you heartily do so, then he will pardon your
Sins, make you his Adopted Children, this is a great honor. If you will receive
Christ on Gospel-termes, then you shall be his Brethren. Heb. 2.11. He is not
ashamed to call them Brethren. You shall be the Temples of the Holy Spirit. The
holy Angels, those bright Courtiers of the heavenly World who wait around Gods
Throne, shall be your Guardians. They are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to
Minister to the Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. They encamp round about them
that fear God, to deliver them, Psalm. 34.7. GOD Himself will honor you, love
you, number you among his Special Friends and Favorites, count you as his
Jewels, tender you as the Apple of his Eye; he will make you his Heirs. Romans
8.17. Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ. He will hereafter bestow
on you, not small honors but great ones, even a Kingdom, a Crown of Glory that
never fades away: a far more exceeding and an Eternal Weight of Glory: an
Inheritance Incorruptible, Undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the
Heavens for you. Thus (and much above what can be particularly expressed) shall
all those be honored, that heartily Embrace Christ Jesus on Gospel terms. The
most precious Gospel offers, are made both to High and Low.

Again, those precious offers are made,

5. Both to the Rich and to the Poor. Men are often distinguished from one
another, by their different condition as to Out-ward Possessions. Some have
much of the World, they are filled with Plenty, they Increase in Wealth, they
have more than heart can wish; while others are very Poor, empty-handed, in
strait circumstances, scarce having any thing before hand. According to Persons
different circumstances on these accounts, they are often differently esteemed
and treated among Men. Prove. 14.20. The Poor is hated even of his own
Neighbor, but the Rich has many friends. But these different circumstances of
Wealth and Poverty, don't exclude any from the Offers and Invitations of the
Gospel. As for those Rich in the World, they need a Christ as much as any:
their Riches cannot Save their Souls, cannot Profit them in the Day of Wrath:
they cannot be Redeemed with Corruptible things, such as Silver and Gold.
(Nothing but the Precious Blood of Christ can Redeem them) they will be Miserably
of it for Ever, Damned Eternally in the Unquenchible Flames of Hell,
notwithstanding all their Riches, if they Die destitute of true Faith in Christ
Jesus. But the true Riches are Offered even to such, even Durable Riches and
Righteousness. The Great GOD, commands all the Great and Rich under the Gospel,
to Believe in Christ, and if they do so He Will cause them to Inherit Substance:
they shall be Rich in Faith and Heirs of the Kingdom. You that are Prosper'd by
Providence, and are Possessed of Outward Plenty; Oh don't think that you have
enough, that you have a Satisfying Portion in these things, don't trust in them
nor be proud of them. Miserable will your Case be, if you should have no other
Portion but. Worldly Wealth. Your Riches are uncertain, you must part with them
at Death if not before; and when GOD takes away your Souls, than whose shall
those things be which you have Provided. How Doleful and Dreadful will it be,
to go from Rich, Prosperous, Flourishing Circumstances in the World, into a
Burning Hell for Ever? To be turned out of your Fine, well Finished, well
Furnished Houses; your Bodies into the Rotting Grave, and your Souls into Outer
Darkness, even the Prison, the Dungeon of Hell? No heart can concieve the
^orr^r of this change. You therefore that have Plenty of the World, Oh Hear and
Obey the Calls of GOD. Lay not up for your selves T^easu^es on Earth, where
Moth and Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and Steal: but lay up
for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither M^th ^or Rust does corrupt,
and where Thieves do not break through nor Steal, Mat. 6.19, 20. Be not high
minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living GOD, who gives us all
things richly to ^njoy. Do Good, be Rich in Good Works, ready to Distribute,
willing to Communicate, laying up in Store for your selves a good Foundation
against the time to come, that ye may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.17 --
19. Behold, this is GOD's express Call and Invitation, to you that are Rich in
this World.

Well,

Unto the Poor also, are Spiritual Saving benefits offered; even the best and
truest Riches. Mat. 11.5. Unto the Poor is the Gospel Preached. No Man's
Outward Poverty, shall ever keep him from heavenly Treasures. Though a Person is
not worth one ^arthing in the World, he is yet In^^^ed to Accept that which is
more worth ^^an the whole World. He Is Invited to Accept that, which cannot be
gotten for Gold, neither (...) ^ilver be weighed for the price thereof. It
cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the p^ec^^us Onya, or the Saphir.
The Gold and the Crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it (...) ^ot be
for Jewels of fine Gold, Job 28, 15 -- 18. It Is Wisdom, it is the true Fear of the
Lord that is thus Precious, v. 28. New the Poorest as well as Others, are
commanded to Fear God, to Depart from Evil, this is true Wisdom. The Wretched,
Miserable, Poor, Blind and Naked; are Invited to buy Gold tried in the fire
that they may be Rich, and white Raiment that the shame of their Nakedness may
not appear, Rev. 3.18. This fine Gold tried in the fire, this white Raiment,
signify Spiritual Saving blessings. Well, but how shall the Poor buy them,
those who have nothing to give, no price to offer or lay down? Why they are
Invited to Buy without Money and without Price, Isai. 55.1. They Are Invited to
Accept Salvation freely offered through Christ, though they have nothing to offer
as a price for it, though they are utterly unworthy of it. They should indeed see
themselves filthy, guilty, unworthy, perishing Sinners; and as Self-condemned,
Self-loathing and abhoring for Sin, they should come to Christ, trusting wholly
and only in his Meritorious Righteousness for Justification before God. This is
the Call and Command of God in the Gospel to them. This Invitation from the
Great GOD, is made to the Meanest and Poorest wherever the Gospel comes, as
well as to the Rich. You that are Poor, that complain the Times are Hard and
you scarce know how to live; behold the Great GOD calls to you, even to you,
and offers to you the best Riches and Treasures that can be: He offers CHRIST,
and all Saving benefits, even Unsearchable Riches in and with Him. Are you
Poor, have you no House of your Own, nor any thing to buy one with? Why the
Great GOD offers you an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens,
whose Maker and Builder is God. Have you scarce Cloths to cover you, are you
unable to buy any? God offers to you white Raiment, that the shame of your
Nakedness may not appear. Are you Poor, not able to lay up a Stock or Store of
Provision, scarce able to buy a Meals Meat? Why the Great GOD offers you that
Meat that endures to Eternal Life. We Read of, the Poor in this World, rich in
Faith and Heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Notwithstanding all your Outward
Poverty, God Offers you that which is better than all the Wealth of the World.
He bids you heartily to believe in Christ, to receive Him as Prince and
Savior; if you do it, your Faith will Enrich you, and make you Heirs of the
Kingdom of Glory. Such Faith is more precious than Gold that perishes, though it
be tried in the Fire, 1 Pet. 1.7. You that are Poor in this World, hearken to
these Offers of God. You have not wherewith to Buy and Sell, to Trade and
Increase in Worldly Goods as others can; but if it is not your own Fault, you may
grow Rich in Heavenly Treasures, God freely Offers them to you: Oh accept them
on His Terms. How Woeful would your case be, if you should neglect them? To Live
a Poor, Indigent Distressed Life in this World; and to be Eternally Poor,
Wretched, Miserable, Damned in that which is to come, no Tongue can express the
horror of this. Be Exhorted therefore to mind your best Interest, to secure
Heavenly Treasures while you may. No doubt but if one should say to a Poor
Person,

Come Friend, I Will advise you how you may Gain, Thrive, grow Rich in the World;
I say, no doubt but the Poor Person would diligently and reality hearken to
what should be proposed to him. Well, though I cannot tell you, how you may
certainly grow Rich in this World, yet I can tell you of what is a Thousand
times more profitable: I can tell you, how you may certainly, without fail,
obtain what is Infinitely preferable to all Riches, Honors, Pleasures of this
World, it is this, Sincerely Believe in Christ, Heartily Submit to Him as Prince
and Savior, and there GOD, the Infinite Unchangible Fountain of all Good will
be your Portion. He wont Suffer you to want any thing which He knows to be good
for you: He Will make all things work for your good: all shall be yours. What a
Large Catalogue, what a Rich Invoice of Blessings and Benefits is there
belonging to the Saints? 1 Cor. 3.21 -- 23. Therefore let no man glory (...)
men, for all things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the
World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Surely, the Free Offer of these
Riches, Benefits, Blessings, should Invite and Quicken you to an hearty speedy
acceptance of them. Why should you neglect these Offers, or make any demur
about accepting them? Isai. 55.2, 3. Wherefore do you spend Money for that
which is not bread? And your Labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken
Diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight it
self in Fatness. Incline your ear, come unto me, hear and your Soul shall live,
and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of
David. Again, Saving Benefits through Christ, are Offered,

6. Both to Bondmen and Freemen. So Gal. 3.28. There is neither Bond nor Free,
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. You that are Freemen, that are at your own
dispose, that are not in Servitude to Men; nay possibly are Masters and Rulers
among Men; even you are naturally the Servants of Sin, the Slaves of Satan, led
Captive by him at his will; you're under Bonds to sustain God's Wrath and
Vengeance for ever, unless by Faith in Christ you are made Spiritually Free.
Joh. 8.36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, you shall be free indeed.
You cannot be Spiritual Freemen, but by becoming the Sincere Servants of
Christ. 1 Cor. 7.22 -- He that is called being free, is Christ's Servant. You
that are Free, possibly you prize your Freedom, would not be in Servitude to
any: Well, see to it that you be not the Servants of Sin, the Slaves of Satan.
For that which you Sow, that shall you also Reap. He that sows to the Flesh,
shall of the Flesh reap Corruption, Gal. 6.8. See to it therefore that you
become the Sincere Servants of Christ, then you shall have the best Freedom,
even Freedom from Spiritual Plagues, Curses, Miseries, and shall be happy for
ever. So you that are Servants among Men, Spiritual Saving Blessings through
Christ are Offered to you: Christ Invites you into His Service which is the
best Freedom. 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is called in the Lord, being a Servant, is
Christ's Freeman. You that are Servants, of what Nation soever you are, whether
Servants by Indenture for a Term of Years, or Bought Servants, Indians or
Negro's to Serve during Life; God calls upon you all to Submit Heartily unto
Jesus Christ, and tells you if you do, you shall be Saved for ever. God Offers
you what is better than the greatest Freedom from Humane Servitude, Embrace
Christ as Prince and Savior, and you shall be Fre'd from the Guilt of Sin, the
Curse of the Law, the Tyranny of Satan, the Wrath of God, and Sin shall not
have Dominion over you; but you shall Reign with Christ for ever and ever. Oh
you Servants of Men, accept these Gracious Offers of the Great GOD. If you
Heartily Submit to Christ, He Will now accept you, and hereafter graciously
Reward you. Possibly when you serve your Masters after the best manner that you
can, they will sometimes be displeased with you (Masters as well as others, have
their failings) but the Great GOD will be pleased with you, if you Sincerely
Fear Him and hope in His Mercy, Psalm. 147.11. See to it therefore, that you
become the Sincere Servants of Jesus Christ, Trust in Him and Obey Him. And if
you will put your Necks under Christ's Yoke, and Indeed take Him for your Lord
and Master; then remember this is one thing He requires of you, namely that you
should be True, Faithful, Honest to your Masters according to the Flesh, Your
becoming Christ's Servants, Intitles you to as great Spiritual Privileges and
Blessings as your Masters can be entitled to; yet it does not at all free you
from being Servants to your Masters. No, Christ requires those of His Subjects
who are Servants to Men, to count their own Masters worthy of all Honor, that
the Name of God and His Doctrine be not Blasphemed. 1 Timothy 6.1. That they be
obedient to their own Masters, not answering again (not sawcily contradicting)
not purloining (not Pilfering, Stealing from them, or hurting their Interest)
but showing all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior in all things, Tit. 2.9, 10. You that are Servants, should be Subject
to your own Masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward,
1 Pet. 2.18. You should not be Eye-Servants, but should be Obedient and
Faithful in doing Service, when your Masters are Absent, as well as when they
are Present and looking on you. And if you are thus True and Faithful to your
Masters, out of Hearty Conscientious Obedience to Christ your Great Lord and
Master, then He Will reward you hereafter in Heaven for it. It Is said to Servants,
with reference to their obeying of their Masters, Col. 3.23, 34. Whatsoever ye
do, do it heartily as to the Lord and not to Men; knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. So
Ephesians. 6.8. Whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the
Lord whether he be Bond or Free.

Thus I have gone through the First Head of Comparison or Similitude, showing,
That the Offering of Saving Benefits to Sinners in the Gospel, may be Compared
to A Great Man's Inviting many to a Suptuous Feast, Inasmuch as various Sorts
of Persons are often Invited to such a Feast. So, wherever the Gospel comes
Saving Benefits are Offered to various Sorts of Persons, they are Equally
Offered to Men and Women, to Persons of any (...) every Nation, to Old and
Young, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, none are Excluded. This is
God's Commandment to every one of you, that you should believe in the Name of
His Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. And whosoever believes in Him, shall not
perish, but have Everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16. I Will now proceed to another
General Head of Comparison or Similitude.

2. At a great Feast, there is commonly Variety of Entertainment; Things for
Necessity and for Innocent Delight and Pleasure. So there is Variety of
Blessings, Offered in the Gospel unto Sinners. The Gospel Invites them to, or
Requires and Commands of them, those Things which are Absolutely Necessary; and
which if Complied with, will yield them the Truest, Greatest Pleasure and
Comfort.

1. Those Things which are Absolutely Necessary. When Persons are Invited to a
Feast, it is in General to Eat and Drink. Cant. 5.1. Eat O Friends, Drink; yea
Drink abundantly, O Beloved. As for Eating and Drinking, they are Absolutely
Necessary to Sustain Life: If these Actions should be Omitted, Persons would
soon Starve and Die. So what the Gospel Invites or Requires Person to do, is
Absolutely Necessary in Order to the Life and Happiness of their Souls:
Absolutely Necessary in order to their escaping Eternal Wrath, and obtaining
Eternal Glory. Thus it is absolutely Necessary for them,

1. To Repent of Sin. Saving Repentance Implies in it, Hearty Grief, Sorrow and
Shame for Sin, a Turning from it with Loathing and Abhorrence. Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent and Turn from all your Transgressions, so In^quity ^ha^l not be your
Ruin. If Persons do not thus Repent, even in Turning from all their
Transgressions, then Iniquity will be their Ruin. Luke 13.5. Except ye Repent,
ye (...) ^^kewise Perish. Men may Flatter and Deceive themselves if they will,
but unless they have such Repentance as this they cannot be Saved. It Is not a
mere Verbal Confession that is Sufficient. 1 John 1.9. If we Confess our Sins,
he is Faithful and Just to Forgive us our Sins; and to Cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness. But this Confession of Sin Comprehends a Forsaking of it too;
else there is No Mercy to be had, Prove. 28.13. It Is only the Broken and Contrite
Heart, that shall enter into the Strait Gate that leads to Life. Christ is
Exalted at Gods Right Hand, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. Act.
5.31. There must be Repentance of Sin, else there is no Remission of it. The
Obstinate Rebel goes Unpardoned. The Root and Principle of this Repentance
Insisted on, is Implanted in the Soul when it is Regenerated and Born of the
Spirit (without which there is no seeing the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3.) and is
Created in Christ Jesus. This Principle of Holiness Implanted in the Soul in
it is Regeneration, Exerts it self (as in the Exercise of other Graces so) in
the Exercise of the forementioned Repentance, nor is any Salvation to be
expected without it.

2 To Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. As a Person must Repeat of his Sins, so
he must Trust in the Meritorious Righteousness of Christ for Justification
before God, else he cannot be Saved. Whosoever Believes in him, shall receive
Remission of Sins, Acts 10.43. But he that Believes not, is Condemned already
-- The Wrath of God abides on him -- He shall be Damned, Joh. 3.18.36. Mark.
16.16. Surely, Pardon of Sin is absolutely necessary in order to the escaping
of Wrath. Pardoned Ones are Blessed, and none else: Psalm. 32.1.2. Blessed is he
whose Transgession is Forgiven, whose Sin is Covered: Blessed is the Man to
whom the Lord Imputes not Iniquity. But such Pardon of Sin is not to be
obtained but by Trusting in the Merits of Christ for it. It Is nothing but the
Blood of Christ that Cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. Therefore the Apostle
Paul desired to be found, not having on his own Righteousness which was of the
Law; but that which was through the Faith of Christ; the Righteousness which was
of God by Faith. Phil. 3.9.

3. Sincerely to Obey God. The Soul that has the True Habit and Principle of
Faith and Repentance; has also the True Habit and Principle of Sincere
Obedience to God: This is all Comprehended in the new Nature Implanted in him.
Faith Purifies the Heart, Woks by Love (Acts 15.9. Gal. 5.6.) For Faith without
Works is Dead, Jam. 2.26. That Faith will never prove Saving, which is not
Purifying; and does not Prompt the Soul Sincerely to Obey God. Well, Sincere
O^^^ience to God as the Fruit of True Faith ((...) Life be spared after the
Regenerating Change wrought) is Necessary in order to Eternal Happiness.
Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. They who Obey not the
Gospel, shall be Punished with Everlasting Destruction, 2 These. 1.9. Thus we
see, the Gospel Invites, Commands Requires Persons to Repent of Sin, Believe in
Christ, Sincerely to Obey God; and Declares that if they do so they shall be
Happy for ever, else they shall not. Therefore it Invites them to those Things
which are Absolutely Necessary for them, as Necessary for the Welfare of their
Souls, as Eating and Drinking are for the Welfare of their Bodies, Heb. 5.9.
Christ became the Author of Eternal Salvation, to all them that Obey him. If
they Heartily Obey Christ, they shall be Saved; if not, they shall be Damned.
And as the Gospel Invites Sinners, to those Things Absolutely Necessary for
them; so if they Comply with this Invitation, it will Yield them:

SERMON III.
2. THE Truest, Greatest Pleasure and Comfort. The Time of Feasting, is
commonly reckoned a Time of Joy and Gladness. When Providence Wrought
Wonderfully for the Jews, Delivering of them from Great Dangers, it is said,
Esther 8.17. The (...) had Joy and Gladness, a Feast and a Good D^^. The Gospel
Invites Sinners to the best Feast that can be, to Accept of Christ and all His
Saving Benefits; those who Comply and Accept this Invitation, thereby they are
Interested in that which is Matter of the Truest Greatest Comfort and Delight.
It Is truly Matter of great Joy,

1. That Sovereign Almighty Grace has enabled them to Accept this Invitation.
He that truly Receives Christ on Gospel Terms, has the Washing of Regeneration,
and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost: The Image of God in Righteousness and True
Holiness is Created in Him. He Is turned from Darkness to Light, from the Power
of Satan unto God. His Eyes are Opened to see his True Interest; the Tyranical
Bonds of Sin and Satan wherein he was held are broken, he is brought to Hunger
and Thirst after Righteousness, to Savor and Relish Spiritual Nourishment, to
throw of Satan's Yoke and Submit to Christ's, to Mortify Sin, and Practice
Holiness, to Forsake the Way of Destruction, and Walk in the Way of Salvation.
It Is indeed proper Matter of great Joy, to have this Blessed Change Wrought in
the Soul: To be enabled to choose the Blessings Offered in the Gospel. The
Person thus Favored, is Freed from the most Disgraceful Ignominious Tyranny
and Slavery*s He Is brought into the most Noble, Excellent, Honorable
Employment that can be, viz. Willingly and Heartily to Seek and Serve his
Glorious Creator, Preserver, only Redeemer and Benefactor. And it is Infinite
Sovereign Grace has Wrought this Change in him; even the Exceeding Greatness of
Gods Power, according to the Working of his Mighty Power, Ephesians. 1.19. By Grace
ye are Saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8.

2. That their Sins are Pardoned. They who Receive Christ on Gospel Terms, are
Pardoned through His Blood. Acts 10.43. Whosoever Believes on him shall receive
Remission of Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the
Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace. This Remission of
Sins is a great Blessing, Incomparably Greater than all Outward Prosperity
whatsoever. The Wrath of a King, is reckoned Terrible. Prove. 19.12. -- The
Kings Wrath is as the Roaring of a Lion. What then is the Wrath of the LORD GOD
Almighty? Who can stand before That? Who can Sustain or Endure it? The Earth
Trembles, the Hills melt at His Presence, Psalm. 97.4, 5. He tears to Pieces so
that none can deliver: surely, it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of
the Living God, Heb. 10.31. It must needs then be a very great Benefit, to be
delivered from the Vindictive Anger, the Terrible Insupportable Wrath and Curse
of this Almighty Jehovah. And every Pardoned one, is thus delivered. GOD the
Great Lawgiver (who alone can Save or Destroy) is at Peace with such an one,
Reconciled to him by the Death of His Son, Romans 5.1, 10. God receives him into
special Favor, and will be his God and Friend and Helper. Pardon of Sin is an
unspeakable great Benefit. From this Benefit, a Person is Denominated Blessed
or Happy. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32.1. It Is not
said, Blessed is he that has Health, Honor, Riches, all manner of Outward
Prosperity. A Man may have all this and yet be Cursed, under the Wrath and
Curse of God for Sin. But he that is Pardoned is truly Blessed. If a Man should
see an heap of strong Fetters and Chains all broken to Pieces, and think, that
he was lately Bound with them, but now they are broken and he at liberty: or if
he should look into an horrible Pit, the miry Clay, or a destructive Dungeon,
and think* that he was lately rescued from Perishing in those dreadful Places;
would not this be matter of Joy and Gladness to him? Yes indeed. But then it
must needs be matter of Inconceavably greater Joy, if he thinks of the Prison
of Hell, that Dungeon of Eternal Darkness, where the Worm never Dies and the
Fire is never Quenched, and considers with himself, that he was lately Bound by
the Condemning Sentence of Gods Law, to have his Eternal abode in those
Matchless Miseries, but now by being Freely Pardoned he is freed from those
Bonds. This deliverance from the Guilt of Sin, is Incomparably Greater, more
Glorious and Beneficial than all Outward Temporary Deliverances whatsoever.
Christ once said to a Man Sick of the Palsy, Mat. 9.2. -- Son, be of good
cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee. Our Lord designed presently to cure his
Bodily Maladies, which were so great that he could not go, he was carried by
others; yet our Lord did not bid him Rejoice on the account of such Healing
Mercy presently to be applied to his Body; but to be of Good Cheer and rejoice
that his Sins were Pardoned. Pardon of Sin, is matter of greater joy and
comfort; than curing the worst bodily Maladies, or bestowing the greatest
Outward Comforts that can be. To have a Miraculous Power to Cast out Devils, is
not matter of so great ^on; as to be Interested in the Pardoning Saving Mercy
of God, Luke 10.20. Yet every one that heartily complies with the Gospel
Invitation to Embrace Christ, is a Pardoned, and therefore a Blessed Person. To
such persons, it is matter of comfort,

3. That they are the Adopted Children of GOD. Every one who receives Christ by
Faith, is thus favored, honour^d, priviledg'd. Gal. 3.^8. Ye are all the
Children of God, by faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father to
you, and ye shall be my Sons and my Daughters, says the Lord A^mighty. This
Relation (of being an Adop^ed Child) to the Infinitely glorious GOD, is
unspeakably high, noble, honorable. For one who lately was a Child of the
Devil (by bearing his Image, Imitating his Rebellious example* doing his Lusts)
to be made an Adopted Ch^^d of the Eternal GOD; Oh how great an hono^r and
privilege is this? It Was reckoned a great thing, to be Son-in-Law to an Earthly
King, 1 Samuel 18.23. But this is nothing, compared to the honor and privilege
of being an Adopted Child of the Glorious God. Parents are commonly kind to
their Children; but God is more kind unloving to, and tender of His Adopted
Children. If Earthly Parents know how to give good things to their Children;
much more will God give good things, yea his Holy Spirit to them that ask Him,
Mat. 7.11. Luke 11.13. It Is possible for a Mother to forget her Sucking Child,
that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb; but God will not
forget His Children, Isai. 49.15. Kind Parents if able, commonly give Portions
to their Children (Children ought not to lay up for their Parents, but Parents
for the Children, 2 Cor. 12.14.) and will the Infinite GOD (who has all the
Riches and Treasures of this World and of the next too, at His dispose) ^urn
off His Children without a Portion? No, Hell never do it, He Will give them a
Goodly Inheritance. Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God and Joint
Heirs with Jesus Christ. But what are they Heirs to? Why, to an Inheritance
Incorruptible, Undefiled, that Fades not away, rese^ved i^ Heaven for them, 1
Pet. 1.4. Verily then* it is both Honorable and Profitable to be the Adopted
Children of the Blessed God. All such are the Brethren of Christ; He is not
ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. They are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost too. 1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost that is in you, which ye have of God? Thus to be the Adopted
Children of God, the Brethren of Christ, the Temples of the Holy Ghost; contain
matter of Great Joy and Comfort, and yet this is the Case of all that Heartily
Comply with Gospel Invitations. It Is matter of Comfort to them:

4. That their Spiritual Enemies shall never be able to Ruin them. Ordinarily
when Men Engage in War with one another, they know not the Event: neither the
one Party nor the other^ know whether they shall Conquer or be Conquered. The
Life of Saints on Earth is Compared to a Warfare, they are bid to Fight the
Good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. The Saints have Spiritual Enemies that would
Ruin them if they could; the Devil and their own Lusts are such Enemies; yea
Wicked Men often Seek to Ruin them. Our Lord said to his Disciples. Joh.
15.19. -- Because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the
World, therefore the World hates you. Well, though the Saints have such
Enemies, yet they shall never be utterly Ruined. Though their Enemies are never
so Numerous, Politic, Watchful, Spiteful, Powerful; yet they shall never cause
one Saint to miss of Glory. It Is possible indeed, that Saints may have many
Buffettings from some Thorn or other in the Flesh, many Smarting Wounds from
Satan's Fiery Darts, and be too often led into Captivity by the Law of S^n in
their Members, to the great Grief and Perp^^^^ty of their Souls; yet none of
them shall F^n^ (...) ^ish by their Spiritual Enemies. (...) not have Dominion
over them, Romans 6.14. Tho^^ while they are on Earth Sin Lives in them, yet it
shall not Reign in them nor Ruin them. Satan also is a Conquered Enemy, their
Redeemer is Stronger than that Strong Man Armed, has Destroyed him that has the
Power of Death that is the Devil; Christ wont Suffer that Raging Lion of Hell
to Devour any of His Sheep None shall ever pluck them out of h^s Hand, Joh.
10.28, 29. If the Saints are Wo^^ted in any Particular Combat (as they too
often are) yet they shall Overcome at the last. Their Glorious Shepherd will
Restore their Souls, and lead them in the Paths of Righteousness for his Name
sake, Psalm. 23.3. If they Fall they shall not be Utterly Cast Down, the Lord
will uphold them with His Hand. He Will never leave nor forsake them; He Will help,
strengthen, uphold them with the Right Hand of his Righteousness, Isa. 41.10.
They shall Renew their strength, Run and not be Weary, Walk and not Faint. God
has set His most Free, Unchangible Love upon them, and will never suffer them
to Perish. If their Enemies so Prevail as to Kill their Bodies, yet they cannot
Kill their Souls: But Blessed shall be the Dead who Die in the LORD. God whose
Love is Unchangible, whose Power is Infinite, whose Veracity is Steadfast; will
be to them a Sun and a Shield, He Will give them Grace and Glory, and no good
Thing will he withold from them, Psalm. 84.4. There is Matter of Comfort in all
this. It is Matter of great Comfort to the Saints,

5. That they have Free Access to God in Prayer, and abundant Encouragement to
that Profitable Duty. Men commonly reckon it a great Favor to have the King's
Ear, to have free Access when they will to some Mighty Earthly Monarch, to lay
their Requests before him: but the free Access the Saints have to God in
Prayer, is a far greater Privilege and Benefit. Through Faith in Christ they may
come with humble Boldness to God, for every needful Blessing; and He Is ready to
hear them. Ephesians 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with Confidence through
the Faith of Him. Heb. 14.6. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time of need. And
is God ready to hear the suitable Petitions of His Childrin? Yes indeed, more
ready than Parents are to hear the Requests of their Children; as was hinted
but now. Mat. 7.11. Luke 11.13. The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous,
and His Ears are open to their Cry. Psalm. 34.15. This is the confidence that we
have in Him, that if we ask any thing according to His Will, He hears us, 1 John 5.14. Well, but may the Saints only in some Special straits and
difficulties, or may they at all times and in all cases Petition to God for
needful help, with hopes of obtaining Favor? Why such is the wondrous Grace of
God, that He not only allows but commands them, as Phil. 4.6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, let
your Requests be made known to God. Well, but we Read of an unjust Judge who
being frequently sought to by a Widow, said Luke 18.5. Yet because this Widow
troubles me, I will avenge her (as she desires, v. 3.) lest by her continual
coming she weary me. And wont the Great GOD be Troubled, Burdened, Wearied and
Dissatisfied with the continual Petitions of His Children? No indeed, He Is
always at leisure to hear them, His Ears are Open to their cry: the more they
Pray to God, so much the more they please Him. The Prayer of the Upright is His
Delight, Prove. 15.8. He says to them. Cant. 2.14 -- Let me hear thy voice, for
sweet is thy voice. He bids them Call on Him in the day of Troble, in their
Affliction (Psalm. 50.15. Jam. 5.13.) cast their burdens and cares upon him
(Psalm. 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7.) bids them Pray always, Ephesians. 6.18. To bid them be
thus constant in Praying to Him, and to tell them that t^^ir Prayers are sweet
and delightful to Him, and that He Will give them whatever they ask according to
His Will; this indeed is a vast Privilege and Benefit: the Saints esteem it so,
they would not be without it for a World, it contains matter of unspeakable
Comfort and Satisfaction to them. Again, It Is matter of great Comfort to the
Saints.

6. That all Things shall work together for the^^ Good. This Present World is
full of Changes and Troubles; it is an Evil World to the Saints. They are
Plainly told, that in it they shall have Tribulation, and that it is through much
Tribulation they shall enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 16.33. Act. 14.22.
Indeed they know not what Troubles and Changes, what Reproach, Contempt,
Poverty, Sickness, Pain, Persecution, what grievous losses by the Death of
Relatives, what numerous or heavy trials they may meet with while in this
World; but yet they have that plain promise: Romans 8.28. All things shall work
together for good to them that love God, and are called according to his
purpose. This promise is full of comfort, it contains more ground of Joy to a
Saint, than his being Possessed of this whole World could yield him. God is
Infinitely wise, good and powerful; He can extract good out of evil, light out
of darkness, medicine out of poison, gain out of loss; He can call things that
are not as if they were. He can make those things profitable to the Saints,
which for the present are not Joyous but grievous to them. When God in His
Providence afflicts them, it is to purge away their Iniquity and take away their
Sin. When He purges, prunes them, Lopping off luxruiant twigs or branches,
taking away desirable Enjoyments, it is to make them fruitful in holiness, and
to keep them from being condemned with the World. When He suffers the Wolves of
Hell, to worry and affright his Sheep; it is that his Sheep may prize their
Shepherd and their Fold the better. When He brings them into great Dangers,
it is that ^^ey may not trust in themselves but in God that Raises the Dead.
Indeed their sufferings of this present time, are to Wean them more from this
World, and Ripen them more for another. Their Light Afflictions which are but
for a moment, shall work for them a far more exceeding and an Eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. The true and faithful Promises of God assure them, that
Neither Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, Famine, Nakedness, Peril, Sword,
Death, Life, Angels, Principalities, Powers, things present nor things to come,
neither Height nor Depth nor any other Creature, shall ever separate them from
the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.33 -- 39. What says the
Apostle to the Saints? 1 Cor. 3.21, 22 23. All things are yours, whether Paul,
or Apollo, or' Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present or
things to come; all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Here Is
indeed a large Catalogue of Benefits, a comprehensive Invoice of Blessings
belonging to the Saints. In all their straits and difficulties, GOD Almighty
yet stand^ their Friend. He Is their present help in time of Trouble: if Father
and Mother forsake them, yet the Lord will take them up: when they pass through
Fire and Water, he will sustain them. In matchless Wisdom, Power and Love, He Will
Order all things for the best for them; so that they may boldly say, the Lord
is mine helper, I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13.6. If they
look on their right hand, and refuge fails them, no man will know them, nor any
care for their Souls; yet they may say to God, thou art my refuge and portion
in the Land of the Living, Psalm. 142.4, 5. If the Fig Tree does not blossom,
and there is no fruit in the Vine; if all Creature helps fail them, if they
despair even of Life; yet they may Rejoice in the Lord and Joy in the God of
their Salvation, Hab. 3.17, 18. Therefore they should not be disquieted, nor
cast down in their Souls, but hope in God (Psalm. 42.11.) who can do exceeding
abundantly above all that they ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Do not these blessings
which the Saints are Interested in, contain matter of comfort and delight? Yea
verily, matter of more comfort than all Outward Prosperity whatsoever. It Is
matter of comfort to them:

7. That the Holy Angels are Employed to Minister for their good. Those bright
Spirits who excel in Wisdom and Power; who are always on the Wing to do what
their glorious Creator bids them (they do his Will, and hearken to the voice of
his Word) they are Employed to do good for the Saints. Are they not all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation? Heb. 1.14. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear him, and delivers them, Psalm. 34.7. Numberless are the benefits, which
the holy Angels by an Invisible Efficacy are Instrumental of to the Saints.
This is an honor and favor to the Saints, that God Employs the Courtiers on
Heaven who surround His glorious Throne, to promote their good and welfare.
Indeed such are the benefits belonging to the Saints, and assured to them by
the true and faithful Promises of God; that there is sufficient ground for that
Precept, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say Rejoice. It Is
marter of comfort to the Saints:

8. That great happiness is reserved for them in the future World. Whatever
they meet with on Earth whether of Health or Sickness, Ease or Pain, Honor or
Contempt, Riches or Poverty, however it is with them as to these things while
they are Pilgrims in the World, yet at and after Death great blessedness will be
their Portion. Great will be their blessedness:

1. At their Death. When their Souls are absent from their Bodies, they go to
be present with the Lord: They go to be with Christ, which is far better than
being here; and therefore for them to die is gain, 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.21, 23.
Unto them, the day of their Death is better than that of their Birth: They are
blessed, they Rest from their Labors and their works follow them, Eccl. 7.1.
Rev. 14.13. They are blessed Indeed,

for,

1. They Are for ever fre'd from all Outward Troubles and Afflictions. The most
and worst that Men can do to them is, to Kill their Bodies, Mar. 10.28. Men
cannot hurt them after this, after the Body is dead; for then their Souls will
be out of Men's reach, and if never so great Indignities are offered to their
dead bodies, they will not be sensible of any Pain or hurt thereby, but will be
safely reserved to a glogious Resurrection. When the Saints are departed; then
the Wicked cease to trouble them, and the weary are at rest, Job 3.17. The
Saints when dead, are not capable of being afflicted by Pain, Sickness,
Contempt, Reproach, Persecution, etc. nor by seeing or hearing the abominations
committed by the Children of Men. All their Tears and Sorrows are ended for
ever. It Is only while in this World that they have their Evil Things, after
Death they are Comforted, as was said of Pious Lazarus, Luke 16.25.

2. They are freed from all the Temptations of Satan. Satan's Temptations are
often Unspeakably Vexatious and Perplexing to the Saints while here on Earth:
Oh the cursed hellish Suggestions, the fiery darts he often shoots into them!
But when the Saints die, their Souls are out of the reach of these fiery darts;
they go to be with Christ, and Satan's Temptations can never reach nor assault
them there. Satan is Emphatically called the Wicked One, Ephesians. 6.16. But when
the Saints die, the Wicked (it may comprehend Devils as well as Men) shall
cease troubling them, as in the forecited, Job 3.17. When the Saints die, they
die in the Lord, die United to Christ, and such are blessed for they Rest from
their Labors, Rev. 14.13 Labors, may there signify not only Toi^some
fatiguing Work* but also Troubles and Distresses. So that when the Saints die,
they are for ever fre'd from all the perplexing Assaults of Satan, their Mortal
and Envious Adversary.

Further,

3. They Are Eternally fre'd from all Disturbance from their Own Lusts and
Corruptions. When a Person is truly Regenerated, born of the Spirit of God; the
Reigning, Tyrannizing Power of Sin is then destroyed in him: but though the
Reigning Power of sin is destroyed, yet the List and Being of sin is never
destroyed while here on Earth. There Is no such thing as perfect Sinless Purity
and Holiness, to be obtained here in this World. There is not a Just man upon
Earth, that does good and Sins not, Eccl. 7.20. If we say we have no Sin, we
deceive our selves and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. The best Saints on
Earth, have sin living and warring, though not ruling and reigning in them. This
remaining sin in them, draws back and strives to hinder them from every duty,
it inclines and prompts to all manner of Wickedness. It Lusts against the
Spirit, is contrary to it, so that the Saints cannot do the things which they
would, Gal. 5.17. When they would do good, evil is present with them. Very
often, the good which they would they do not, and the evil which they would not
that they do: they find a law in their Members warring against the law in their
Minds, and bringing them into Captivity to the law of sin that is in their
Members. This is unutterably grievous and perplexing to them, it often makes
them cry out as he, Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this Death! This holy Apostle Paul, could bear his Outward
Troubles Patiently, and say, None of these things move me, Act. 20.24. He had
learned in every State (as to Outward Prosperity or Adversity) therein to be
Content, Phil. 4.11. But his remaining Indwelling Corruption, and the cursed
effects and essays of it, made him cry out (as One earnestly desirous of
deliverance) Oh wretched man, that I am, who shall deliver me? Nothing in the
whole World is so grievous, distressing, perplexing to the Saints, as the
remains and workings of Sin in them. As for their Outward Troubles, they count
them Light comparatively, and think they could bear them easily, if they could
but find their Hearts steadfastly Meek, Humble, Penitent, Patient, Prayerful,
Thankful, Trusting and Confiding in God, Submitting and Resigning all to Him,
Rejoicing in Him at all times as their Portion: They think if they could get
and keep their hearts in such a temper as this, they could be quiet and easy as
to all Outward Events: but that contrariety they find to God in their own
Souls, that is the greatest Uneasiness they have in the World. This makes them
go mourning and bowed down, sometimes doubting that they have no Grace in them,
that they never yet took one right step in the way to Heaven; sometimes
fearing, that there is no hope for them, that their day of Grace is ended, or
that their Spiritual Enemies will finally be too strong for them. No Tongue can
tell, the Perplexities of Soul the Saints often meet with from Indwelling Sin.
Well, but when Death comes, they will be eternally fre'd from these the greatest
Perplexities of their whole Lives. As when they die, their Souls go to be
Present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. So, they shall then be, the Spirits of Just
Men made Perfect, Heb. 12.23. They shall be perfectly fre'd from all the
remains of Sin, from the very life and being of it; and being perfectly holy
shall Serve God with the greatest joy and gladness. And as at Death the Saints
shall be perfectly freed from all Outward Troubles, from Satan's Temptations,
from all their Own Corruptions; so,

4. They shall Possess that Joy, blessedness and glory which is at present
Inconceivably great. Therefore the state of their Souls after Death, is said to
be their Gain, and to be better than what it was here on Earth: Phil. 1.21, 23.
They are said to be Comforted, Luke 16.25. The whole of their Condition is set
forth by that word, Comfort, and so may Intimate that they shall have Good,
Joy, Comfort and nothing else. They shall be Present with the Lord, and in His
Presence there is fullness of joy and pleasures for ever more, Psalm. 16.11.
And, as great will be the blessedness of the Saints at their Death; so,

2. Greater will be their blessedness at and for ever after the Resurrection.
All the Dead shall live again. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both
of the Just and the Unjust, Acts 24.15. When this time comes, the happiness of
the Saints shall be greatly Increased. Though their Souls in their Separate State
were free from all Sin, Sorrow, Trouble, and entertained with Inexpressible
Joys, yet it will be an Increase of their blessedness, when their whole Man
Body and Soul shall be United in a most blissful State. Their Bodies which
consumed and rotted in the Grave, and returned to their Dust; shall be raised
Incorruptable, Glorious, Powerful, Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.42 -- 44. Though their
Bodies in this present State are liable to loathsome Diseases, and will be vile
(or in an humbled State indeed) when corrupting and rotting in the Grave; yet
these vile Bodies shall be fashioned like to the Glorious Body of Christ, Phil.
3.21. When their Bodies are thus Raised in Glory, reunited to their happy
Souls; Christ the Universal Judge of all, Seated on His Bright Exalted Throne,
Encompassed with Matchless Inconcievable Splendour and Majesty, will Openly own
them for His; will say to them (and how will their hearts leap for Joy at it?)
Come ye Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World, Mat. 25.34. He Will then Recount and graciously Reward,
all their Sincere Services performed here on Earth. Their Secret Prayers shall
then be Openly Rewarded, Mat. 6.6. No Deed of Charity, though so small as the
giving a Cup of Cold Water, shall then miss of being Rewarded, Mat. 10.42.
Their Faith which is now more precious than tried Gold, shall then be found to
Praise, Honor and Glory, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Yea, Whatsoever good thing they ever
did, the same shall they then receive of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.8. This their Future
Glory and Felicity, is set forth by things commonly much esteemed by Men in
this World; it is called a Crown, Kingdom, Inheritance, etc. But indeed their
Future Glory and Happiness, will be far greater than we can at present conceive
of. The Apostle plainly says of it, 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we
shall be. The meaning is, Future Blessedness exceeds all present Conceptions
and Apprehensions. And this Future Inconcievable Blessedness of the Saints,
will be Eternal too; 'twill never have an end nor cease to be, it is therefore
set forth by such Epithets as Eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17. Everlasting, Joh. 3.16.
Unfading, or that never fades away, 1 Pet. 5.4. All this Inconceivable good and
glory at and after Death, is reserved for the Saints, and assured to them by
the Unchangible Promises of the Lord Almighty. And it must needs be matter of
great comfort and joy to the Saints, even at present, to think of and meditate
on these things. They should Rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5.2.
No Feast on Earth is so delightful to an hungry Person, as the belief and hope
of future glory often is to the Saints. They Rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. The blessings belonging to those that accept of
Gospel Invitations, contain matter of greater joy, than any Feast on Earth can
yield to the Guests that partake of it. Yea I might further add, the more
careful the Saints are to Live according to Gospel Invitations and Precepts, so
much the clearer view they are likely to have, of their firm Title to future
Matchless Glory: 1 John 2.3. Herely do we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. The more they have of present Holiness, so much the more
ordinarily of present Joy, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, even the
testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity; not with
Fleshly Wisdom but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the
World. The more they find of the Fruits of the Spirit in them, (Gal. 5.22.) So
much the more likely to know in themselves, that they have in Heaven a better
and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. Indeed the ways of Wisdom are ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. From what has been said under this
Second General Head of Comparison, we may Infer,

1. The Saints should be thankful, for the great Blessings Divine Grace has
provided for them, and entitled them unto. It well becomes them to say, as,
Psalm. 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, Oh my Soul, and all that is within me Bless His
Holy Name. Bless the Lord, Oh my Soul, and forget not all His Benefits. 1 Cor.
15.57. Thanks be to God which gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

2. The thoughts of this Future Blessedness reserved for the Saints should make
them Patient under all their present Trials. They should imitate Moses, Heb.
11.25, 26. Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to
enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season: esteeming the Reproach of Christ
greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to the
Recompense of Reward. Yea they should imitate our Blessed Redeemer, who for the
Joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, etc. Heb.
12.2.

3. The Sai^^s should diligently seek after Assurance of their Title to Heaven,
that so they may rej^yce (as they are bidden, 1 These. 5.16.) evermore They
should endeavor to have the matter cleared up, and evidenced to their own
Souls, that they have indeed compli'd with Gospel Invitations, that so they may
rejoice in the Blessings thereby belonging to them. The Joy of such Assurance,
will more than countervail all the pains they can take for it; therefore they
should d^ligently seek it. Phil. 2.12. Work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.

4. Unutterably great is the folly of those, who suffer the vanities of this
World to make them miss of Future Glory. Unto such an one God said, Luke ^2.20
-- Thou Fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided?

SERMON IV.
WE may now proceed to another General Head of Comparison, God's Offering
Spiritual Saving Benefits to Sinners in the Gospel, may be compared to a Great
Man's Inviting many to a Sumptuous Feast.

3 Because in a Great and Sumptuous Feast, there is commonly Plenty, a
Sufficiency for all that come. In such a Feast there is commonly Store and
Plenty, enough for all that come: enough and to spare; so that it may be said
as, Cant. 5.1 -- Eat, O Friends, Drink, yea Drink abundantly, O Beloved. So
there is Saving Mercy enough in the Gospel, for all that will come and accept it
as Offered to them. The Lord Jesus Christ with His Saving Benefits, is the
Subject Matter of the Gospel Feast to which Sinners are Invited. There is
Salvation in none other, neither is there any other Name given under Heaven
among Men whereby we can be Saved, Act. 4.12. And as Christ is the only Savior
of Sinners, so He is an All-Sufficient Savior of them. He Is able to Save to
the uttermost them that come unto God by Him, Heb. 7.25. None that came to
Christ Hungring and Thirsting after Righteousness, were ever sent Empty away.
There Is a Fullness, a Sufficiency of Merit, Virtue, Power, Willingness in Jesus
Christ, to Save all that come to Him and accept of Him on Gospel Terms. Here I
might say --

1. There Is enough in Christ to Save those of all the VARIOUS AGES of the
World, that Believe in Him and Accept of Him as Revealed and Offered to them.
Soon after our First Parents had Sinned, God made a Promise, Genesis 3.15. That
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's head. This was a Promise of
Christ the Savior of Sinners, He is the Promised Seed of the Woman, Gal. 4.4.
All that were Pardoned and Saved under the Old Testament Dispensation, were
Saved by the Fullness and Sufficiency of Christ who then was to come; for there
is Salvation in none other. All the Explatory Sacrifices appointed by God
before Christ's coming, were but Types, Shadows, Representations of Christ, who
is (therefore called) The Lamb Slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev.
13.8. The Lamb of God who takes away the Sin of the World, Joh. 1.29. For it is
not possible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin, Heb. 10.4.
Though the Blood of Beasts Slain in Sacrifice could not take away Sin, yet the
Blood of Jesus cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. Therefore all that Pardoning
Saving Mercy which Old Testament Believers obtained, was in and through Christ
who was then to come. All the Prophets of the Old Testament (as well as the
Apostles of the New) bare Witness of Christ, that through His Name, whosoever
believes in Him shall receive Remission of Sins, Act. 10.43. This was the
Unanimous concurrent Testimony of all the Old Testament-Prophets. There is
Redemption though Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth for a Propitiation through
Faith in His Blood, to declare His Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God, Romans 3.24, 25. Christ by one Offering,
has perfected forever them that are Sanctified, Heb. 10.14. All the Sins of
Old Testament Believers were forgiven, for the sake of that One Offering which
according to God's Promise, Christ was afterward to Offer. So all the Sins of
Believers under the New Testament hitherto, have been forgiven for Christ's
Sake. In whom we have Redemption through His Blood, the forgiveness of (...)
according to the Riches of His Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. He lo^ed us, and washed us from
our sins in His own blood, Rev. 1.5. And the Blood of Christ still continues of
as much Force, Merit, Worth and Virtue for the Pardoning of Sin, as ever it
was: ^ea and so it will continue as long as the World stands. There will never
need any other Sacrifice besides what Christ has already Offered, to Redeem and
save Sinners even to the End of the World. Christ has Instituted a
Gospel Ministry, to continue to the End of the World. Mat. 28.19, 20. The
comprehensive Sum and Substance of their Proaching should be this, ^e that
Believes and is Baptized, shall be Saved: he that believes not shall be
Damned, Mark 16.16. So that whosoever Believes in Christ, even in any Age or
Generation of the World yet to come, shall certainly be Saved. Joh. 3.16.
Whosoever Believes in Him, shall not Perish, but shall have Everlasting Life.
There are Unsearchable Riches in Christ, (Ephesians. 3.8.) Inexhaustible Treasures of
Saving Mercy that can never be drawn Dry. He is a Fountain Opened for sin and
for Uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. He is not a Cistern but ^ Fountain, a Living
Spring that never fails; but from Age to Age, from one Generation to another
(from the Fall of Adam to the World's End) has Power and Virtue sufficient, to
Save all that come to Him. He Is thus able to Save all that come, because He
ever Lives to make Intercession for them, Heb 7.25, 26. Christ is the sun of
Righteousness, ^^al. 4.2. The Sun has inlighten'd the World from the beginning
of it, and through all Generations hitherto, and will do so to the World's End
(for Day and Night shall not cease) it is Inlightening Warming Virtue, is
nothing diminished by Time or Age. So Jesus Christ from the Fall of Adam to the
End of the World, retains full saving Virtue and Power; it never has been
Diminished in any Measure, nor ever shall it be. As to His Ability and
Willingness to Save Sinners, He is the same yesterday, to day* and for ever,
Heb. 13.8.

2. There Is enough in Christ to save Sinners of every Nation, Rank, and Quality
whatsoever. This has been spoken to, under the First General Head of
Comparison, whether Men or Women, Jews, Greeks, Barbarians, Scythians, Young or
Old, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Bond or Free; there is enough in Christ to save
them all if they will Accept Him on Gospel Terms. For He has said, Joh. 6.37.
Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Having said so much
before, I shall not Enlarge under this Head.

3. There Is enough in Christ to Save the Greatest, Worst, Vilest Sinners if
they will come to Him by Faith. Some can pay small Debts, that cannot pay great
Ones. Some possibly may Cure Slighty Superficial Wounds, that cant Cure such as
are more Inveterate, Deep and Dangerous. But as to the Saving of Sinners, there
is no Case too Hard or Difficult for Jesus Christ: if the Vilest Sinner on
Earth Heartily comes to Christ, He has Virtue enough to Save him, and will most
certainly do it. When a Woman for the Cure of a Bodily Malady, had spent all
her Substance on Physicians in vain, even growing Worse after all; yet upon one
touch of Christ's Garment, Virtue went out of Him and Perfectly Cured her, Mark
5.25, -- 29. It is said of Christ, He went about -- healing all manner of
Sickness, and all manner of Disease among the People -- and they brought unto
him all Sick People, that were taken with diverse Diseases, and Torments, and
those which were possessed with Devils, and those which were Lunatic, and
those which had the Palsy, and he Healed them, Mat. 4.23, 24. He met with no
Case too Hard or Difficult for his Divine Almighty Power. As it was thus in His
Helping and Relieving the Bodies of Men; so he is as able as Allsufficient to
Relieve and Save the Souls of all that come unto Him. Though all Persons are
equally Sinful and Guilty by Nature, as coming from Fallen Adam; yet some are
Greater Sinners than others in Practice. Some have lived more Years and Sinned
a longer Time than others; Some have been Guilty of more Open, Gross,
Scandalous Transgressions than others; Some have Sinned against more Light,
higher Means, better Advantages, greater Awakenings and Convictions than
others; but whatever have been the Sins of any, how many or great soever, how
long soever continued in, how greatly soever Aggravated; yet if they Heartily
Repent of their Sins and Believe in the Lord Jesus, there is enough in Him to
Save them, and they shall be Saved. Christ came to seek and to Save those that
were Lost. He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Mat.
9.13. The Blood of Jesus Cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. There is no Sin if
Truly Repented of, and Turned from, but it shall be Pardoned through the Blood
of Christ. Indeed the Scripture mentions a Sin against the Holy Ghost which
shall never be Forgiven, Mat. 12.31. This is not for want of Sufficient Saving
Virtue in the Blood of Christ, but those Guilty of that Sin, will never Truly
Repent and Believe in Christ Jesus. But the greatest Sins whatever, Truly
Repented of and Turned from shall be Forgiven. Whosoever Confesses and
Forsakes shall have Mercy, Prove. 28. 13. The Apostle mentions a Black and
Large Catalogue of Gross Transgressions, viz. Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of themselves with Mankind (that is, Sodomites)
Thieves, Covetuous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners. (Here is a Black List of
Satan's Followers, they were his Children doing his Lusts, they lived in
Contempt of God that made them, Trampled on His Authority, were great and
High-Handed Transgressors indeed,) yet says he to the Corinthians, Such were
some of you, but ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.9, -- 11.
Their Greatest Abominations had Contracted no Stain too Deep for the Blood of
Jesus to Wash out. God's People of Old were very Vile, They had Rebelled
against him, were a Sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, they had
forsaken the Lord, provoked the Holy One of Israel to Anger, had gone away
Backward: the whole Head was Sick, the whole Heart Faint. They were for their
great Wickedness, called, Rulers of Sodom and People of Gomorrah -- Their Hands
were full of Blood (Murder.) They were so Hypocritical in their Religious
Performances, that God said, Your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my Soul
hates: they are a Trouble to me, I am neary to bear them, Isa. 1.1, -- 15.
This surely was a very Wicked People, what might one think that God would do to
them? Might one not expect, that Terrible, Destructive Vengeance would
presently fall upon them? Yet behold what God says, v. 16, 18. Wash ye, make
you Clean: put away the evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do
evil; learn to do Well, etc. Come now, and let us reason together says the
Lord; though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they
be Red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Such is the Wondrous Mercy of God
through the Merits of Christ; therefore let none of you be Discouraged from
coming to Christ for Salvation, because of the Greatness or Number of your
sins. Whatever your sins be, yet they are but the Sins of Men, the sins of
Finite Creatures. But the Blood of Christ is the Blood of GOD. Act. 20.28. --
The Church of God which he has purchased with his own Blood. The Blood of
Christ is the Blood of GOD, of a Divine Person, and so of Infinite Merit,
Worth, Value and Efficacy. Do any of you Doubt or Fear, that there is no Pardon
to be Obtained for so great and vile Sinners as you are? Do you think there is
no Hope for you? O don't Despair, your sins are not so Many, Great or Vile, but
that if you Heartily Repent of them, they shall be Fully and Freely Pardoned
through the Blood of Jesus. Don't take this upon my Word, don't believe it merely
because I say it; but hear what the Infallible Word of GOD says: 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a Faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners, of whom (says the Apostle Paul) I am
Chief. Christ came to save even Chief Sinners, this God assures us of; it is a
True and Faithful Saying, worthy of all Acceptance, worthy to be Believed,
Credited, Relied on by all that hear it. Whosoever (though the Greatest Vilest
Sinner in the World) Believes in him, shall not Perish, but have Everlasting
Life, Joh. 3.16. Whosoever comes to Christ by Faith, shall escape Future Wrath
and obtain Future Glory; his own Repented Forsaken Wickedness (though it has
been never so Great) shall not Damn him. Isai. 55 7. Let the Wicked forsake his
Way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts; and turn to the Lord, and he will
have Mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly Pardon. If Men have
been Abundantly Wicked, Unrighteous, have Abounded Greatly in Sin; yet there is
Abundance of Pardoning Mercy for them, if they will Turn from their Wickedness,
Psalm. 51.1. -- According to the Multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my
Transgressions. There are Mercies, yea a Multitude of Mercies of Tender.
Mercies with God; to Pardon all the Iniquities of Penitent returning Sinners.
Oh Sinners, seriously consider these true sayings of God; heartily and speedily
submit your selves to Christ, there is enough in Him to Save you all if you will
heartily believe in Him. I might here say:

1. There Is virtue enough in Christ's blood to Pardon all your Sins. For, as
was said but now, His blood cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

2. There Is might and strength enough in Christ to Save you. He Is the Lord
Almighty, has all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to Him. All things are
put under his feet, He Is head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22.

3. There Is willingness enough in Christ to Save you, if you come. He has given
his Infallible Divine Word for it saying: Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out. Matt. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that Labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you Rest.

There Is enough in Christ to Save you from all following assaults of your
Spiritual Enemies, if you heartily give up your selves to Him. Christ is
stronger than Satan that strong man armed, and is able to defend and protect
from Satan's destructive Rage, all that trust in him. He has said: Joh. 10.27,
28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them; and they follow me. And I give
unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand. And as no Man, so neither shall Devils be able to
pluck Christ's Sheep out of his hand. For Christ has Suffered death, to destroy
him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2.14. Thus we see,
there is every way enough in Christ, to Save all that come to Him and trust in
Him as offered in the Gospel. As there is commonly Plenty at a great Feast,
enough for all that come; so there is Saving Mercy in Christ, and enough of it
for all that sincerely come unto him. We may now proceed to another general
head of Comparison.

4. When a Person makes a great Feast and Invites many, It Is commonly matter of
considerable Cost and Charge to him. The Feast-maker, has commonly Plenty and
Variety of Provisions. Mat. 22.4. I have prepared my Dinner, my Oxen and my
Fatlings are Killed, all things are rea^y. Here Is matter of cost and charge, to
him that makes the Feast and gives the Invitation. So the Great GOD, the
blessed Lord Jesus Christ, have been and are at great cost and charge (if we
may so term it) to provide and bestow those Matchless blessings, which Sinners
in the Gospel are Invited to.

1. It has cost God his only begotten Son. What has the Great GOD given, to
prepare, and make way for, that Provision (Soul-saving Provision) which Sinners
in the Gospel are invited to? Why He has given his only bogotten Son. Joh.
3.16. God so loved the World, as to give his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting Life. Romans 8.32. He
spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all. God laid the whole
Scheme of Man's Salvation, in his Eternal Wisdom and Love. According to the
Eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians 3.11. God
commends his Love to us, in that while we were yet Sinners Christ Died for
us, Romans 5.8. As God laid the Scheme of the Salvation (...) Sinners; so He
Called, Commissioned, Authorized his Only Begotten Son to Die for their
Salvation, Prepared Him a Body (that He might Die in our Nature to Redeem us,
Heb. 10.5. and 2.14.) and gave Him his Holy Spirit not by (but above) Measure,
Joh. 3.34. God sent His Son into the World, to Die for the saving of Sinners.
Hence, in this Affair of saving Sinners, Christ is called God's Servant, Isa.
42.1. And is said to be Appointed by God, Heb. 3.2. For Christ came not to do
his own will, but the will of him that sent him, Joh. 6.38.

2. It has cost the Son of God His own Life and Blood. The wages of Sin is
Death, Rom 6.23. Christ came to save Sinners, the Sons of Death, the Children
of Wrath; and if He would save such, He must suffer Death in their room and
stead, Satisfy Gods Justice for their Offenses, and so Purchase Pardon and
Salvation for them: And this He has done. He gave himself a Ransom, 1 Timothy 2 6.
He once suffered for sins, the Just for the Unjust that he might bring us to
God. He has bought his People with a Price, (1 Cor. 6.20.) and a Dear, Costly
Price it was to Him, even His own Blood, Act. 20.28. He suffered the Weight of
that Divine Wrath and Vengeance, which the sins of His People Deserved. He was
wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities: the
Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all. -- He made his soul an
Offering for sin, Isa. 53, 5, 6, 10. Unutterably great were the Sufferings of
our Holy Lord Jesus, and why did He Undergo them? Why to Redeem and Save
Sinners from that Wrath and Curse they had Deserved. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Tit. 2.14. He
gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Puri^^e
unto himself a Peculiar People Zealous of Good Works. Surely then, it has cost
our Blessed Redeemer very Dear, in making Provision to save Sinners, even in
Purchasing their Salvation.

3. Christ is still continually Employed to Promote the Salvation of Sinners.
As to the Meriting and Purchasing Salvation for Sinners, our Lord finished that
Work while He was here on Earth; He Purchased His Church with His own Blood
which He shed on the Cross. But though the whole of their Salvation is fully
Purchased and Paid for already; yet our Lord still Busies and Imploys Himself
for the Applying of, and Giving forth Saving Benefits. He is Interceeding with
God for the Giving forth of Purchased Saving Blessings. Our Lord Jesus is now
Exalted in Honor, Dignity, Authority, Power above all Creatures, Ephesians. 1.21,
2^. Yet He is not so taken up with all that Matchless Glory that Surrounds Him,
as to be Unconcerned about the Salvation of His People. No, their Case lies
near His Heart, their Names are Written on His Breast Plate. He appears in the
Presence of God for them. He went to Prepare a Place for them. As their
Forerunner He entered within the Vail, even into Heaven, Heb. 6.19, 20. And
there He over lives to make Intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. This is the Work
and Business our Savior is continually Managing in Heaven, even making
Intercession for the giving forth Purchased Benefits to Sinners. He is with the
Father, as a Righteous Advocate, 1 John 2.2.

4. Christ has appointed the Gospel Ministy, and Gospel Ordinances to further
the Salvation of Sinners. Christ has appointed a Gospel Ministry, to continue
to the End of the World, Mat. 28.19, 20. Gospel Ministers are His Ambassadors,
and should Pray Sinners in His stead, to be Reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. It Is
Christ by His Holy Spirit (succeeding Ordinarily the use of Proper Means) that
with Gifts and Graces Qualifies Persons for the Ministry. 1 Cor. 12.7. The
Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to Profit withal. Ministers
are made Overseers, by the Holy Ghost, Act. 20.28. Now it is the Lord Jesus (to
whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is Committed, Mat. 28.18.) that in His
Providence Raises up Men from one Generation to another, and Fits and
Qualifies them with Gifts and Graces for the Work of the Ministry: That holds
the Stars in His Right Hand; that sends them forth to Entreat Sinners to be
Reconciled to God, and that gives them all the Success they have in Preaching,
1 Cor. 3.6, 7. The Preaching of the Gospel, is a Means appointed by Christ both
for the Converting of Sinners and Edifying of Saints

1. For the Converting of Sinners. It Is therefore called the Word of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. It Is the Power of God to Salvation to every one
that Believes, Romans 1.16. Of His own Will Begat He us, by the word of Truth,
Jam. 1.18. I have Begotten you by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15.

2. For the Edifying of Saints. Acts 20.32. -- I commend you to God, and to the
word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
Inheritance among all them which are Sanctified. 1 Timothy 4.6. Nourished up in
the words of Faith, and of good Doctrine. 1 Pet. 2.2. Desire the sincere Milk
of the Word that ye may grow thereby. Preaching of the Gospel is Instrumental
to make the Saints grow in Spiritual Knowledge, Grace and Holiness. It Is the
Lord Jesus that has Appointed, and does in His All-governing Providence
Continue and Maintain a Gospel Ministry, to further the Salvation of Sinners.
So the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; are
Appointed by Christ to Promote the Spiritual Welfare of Poor Sinners. Mat.
28.19. Go and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. Of the Lord's Supper He
said, Luke 22.19. This do in Remembrance of Me. And these Ordinances are to
continue to the End of the World, as Means to further the Salvation of Sinners.
And though these Means Appointed by Infinite Wisdom and Love, are Employed and
Applied after the best Manner that can be; yet no saving Good can be wrought by
them, unless the Spirit of Christ sets in to do it. 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every High Thing that exalts it
self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to
the Obedince of Christ. Those that are Converted, they have the washing of
Regeneration, and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. It Is the exceeding
greatness of Gods power, according to the working of his mighty power, that
begets Faith in any Soul, Ephesians. 1.19. And it is nothing less than the same
Almighty Power, that Maintains true Grace in the Soul, when it is there
Implanted. They are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet.
1.5.

Thus there has been (and is) Cost and Charge (if we may so term it) on the
part of God, of Christ, to Provide and apply that great Salvation, that
glorious endless blessedness, which Sinners in the Gospel are Invited to accept
of. It Is often matter of great cost and charge to those, who make a Sumptuous
Feast and Invite many to it; but never was any at such Cost for a Feast, as
Christ has been at to purchase the Salvation Sinners are Invited to: this
Salvation cost him His own most precious Blood for the purchasing of it. Ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold -- but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet.
1.18, 19. We may now proceed to another general head of Comparison, viz.

5. What Persons are Invited to at a Feast, is at free cost as to them. Though
its commonly matter of cost and charge to him that makes the Entertainment, yet
it costs nothing to the Guests themselves; its kindness freely granted to them.
Its given them, given freely, what they are Invited to eat and drink costs them
nothing, they pay nothing for it. The Inviter has a Mind to show his Love,
Kindness, Bounty, in freely communicating his good things to those whom he
Invites. So the saving benefits offered to Sinners in the Gospel, are offered
freely. Whatever cost or charge there may have been, on the part of God or
Christ, to provide or procure these saving benefits; yet there is no cost or
charge on the part of Sinners that are Invited to receive them. Sinners as such
are worthy of Death, Children of Wrath, deserve Hell and everlasting Vengeance:
this is all they are worthy of at God's hand. They are utterly and altogether
unworthy of all that saving Mercy, that is offered to them in the Gospel.
Therefore though they are bid to buy tried gold, and white raiment, Rev. 3.18. Yet
they are bidden to buy without money and without price, Isai. 55.1. That is,
they are Invited to accept Spiritual Saving blessings, most freely offered to
them. Though they have no price, no money to lay down; that is, no Merits,
Worthiness, Righteousness of their own, nothing of their own to recommend them
to Divine favor, yet they are Invited to accept full complete Salvation freely
offered to them. The gift of God is eternal Life, Romans 6.23. It Is your Father's
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Whoever obtains Salvation,
Eternal Life, will obtain it by way of free gift as from God, from Christ; and
what can be freer than a gift? Nothing can be more freely offered, than
Salvation is to Sinners in the Gospel. Here we may consider:

1. GOD needs not the Salvation of Sinners. Men will sometimes Engage in great,
costly, difficult affairs; when they think their own real welfare calls for it:
very often necessity will make them venture hard. But God had no necessity at
all, to concern Himself about the Salvation of Sinners. God's Complete
Essential Blessedness, is Unchangible. With Him there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. God's happiness cannot be diminished by Men's
Wickedness or Misery, nor be increased by their Holiness or Felicity. Job 35.6,
7. If thou sinnest, what do thou against Him? Or if thy Transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto Him? If thou be righteous, what give thou
Him? Or what receives He of thine hand? If all Men had perished Eternally for
their Wickedness, as all the fallen Angels shall; God's Essential Complete
Blessedness would not have been at all impaired thereby.

2. From all Eternity, God of His own heart contrived the Scheme and Method of
Sinners Salvation. It Is His Eternal Purpose, Ephesians. 3.11. Men could not be first
movers in this Scheme, it was laid long before they had any being. The Motion
therefore was entirely, wholly, only from God, of His own heart, of His own
mere good Will and Pleasure.

3. It Was of mere Love, that God gave Christ to Save Sinners. Joh. 3.16. God so
loved the World, as to give His only Begotten Son, that whosoever Believes in
Him, should not perish but have Everlasting Life. It Was mere Love, Grace,
Bounty, Good Will in the Heart of God toward Sinners (and not any need of
them, or foreseen worthiness in them) that put Him on sending His Son on this
Errand.

4. It Was of mere Love, that Christ Died for Sinners. In themselves considered
they were Rebels, Traitors, Enemies, Children of the Devil, Heirs of Hell; yet
from a free Love to, and Desire of, their Salvation, Christ Dyed for them. He
loved us, and gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, Ephesians. 5.2.
Rev. 1.5. So that this great Salvation Offered in the Gospel, is the most
Gratuitous and Free that can be, with respect to those to whom it is Offered.
There Is no worthiness, merit, or good deserving required in Sinners, in order
to their accepting of it. Indeed both from the Nature of the thing, and from
the Divine Constitution, it is necessary that they should be Sick of their Sins,
Weary and heavy Laden with them, see their perishing undone Condition, their
need of Christ in order to their obtaining Salvation by Him. But if they see,
confess, bewail their own Sinful* Guilty, Perishing Undone Condition; and so
see their need of Christ; they may then come empty-handed, in their Naked
Forlorn state to Christ for the healing and saving of their Souls, and they
shall be welcome to Him. Whosoever is athirst let him come, let him take the
Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17 If any Man thirst (be he who he will,) let him
come unto me (says Christ) and drink, Joh. 7.37.

USE.
1. We should admire this Divine Love and Grace appearing to Sinners in the
Gospel. Lord, what is Man, Vile, Sinful, Perishing Man; that thou should be
thus mindful of him. When the Apostle considers poor Sinners as United to
Christ, and so made the Adopted Children of God and Heirs of Glory; he admires
at the Divine Grace herein manifested. 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of Love
the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God.
Behold this, Look, Gaze, Wonder, be surpised at this Unparrallel Love and
Grace.

2. Sinners should never suffer the sense of their own unworthiness, to hinder
them from coming to Christ for Salvation. Though you are never so mean, base,
vile unworthy in your own sight; yet be not discouraged on this account (nor
indeed on any other) from coming to Christ. Christ came to save none but the
Unworthy, none but Sinners, (1 Timothy 1.15.) and all Sinners are worthy and
deserving of Damnation, but not of any Good or Benefit from God. Your
Unworthiness can never Damn you, if you will accept the Salvation freely Offered
you.

3. Terrible will be the Condition of those, who reject this Salvation freely
Offered to them. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation? Is Salvation brought to our very Doors, as it were, and most Freely
Offered to us; and yet we neglect and reject it, what Punishment can be too
great for such ungrateful Rebels? Those who Obey not the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, shall be Punished with Everlasting Destruction, 2 These. 1.9. We may now
go on to another General Head of Similitude, and say:

SERMON V.
6. SErvants are commonly Employed in Inviting to and attending at, a Great and
Sumptuous Feast. This Practice is known to be common when a Person makes a
great Feast, he commonly sends Servants to Invite the Guests, etc. So in our
Text, he that made a great Supper and bade many, sent his Servant to say, Come
for all things are now ready. So the Great God, the Lord Jesus Imploys His
Servants to Invite Persons to the Gospel Feast, to accept the Blessings Offered
in the Gospel; and to Dispense Sacred things to those who appear to accept the
Invitation. Such Servants were, under the Old Testament Prophets, Priests,
Levites, such as were Employed by God to make known His Will to His People: and
under the New Testament, extraordinary Messengers such as Apostles, Prophets,
Evangalists; and ordinary ones, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. Our Text
speaks of Servant, only in the Singular Number, not Servants, but Servant. Some
observe from it, that all the Messengers or Ministers of Christ should be as
one, with respect to the Sum and Substance of that Message they declare from
God to Men. The Scope, Sum and Substance of all their Preaching should be, to
bring Persons to Repent of Sin, Believe in Christ and Live Obediently to God.
All his Servants the Prophets -- said, turn ye again now every one from his
evil way, and from the evil of your doings, etc. Jer. 25.4, 5. They all agreed
in their Message, as to the main Scope of it; and so should all the Ministers
of the Gospel, and so they may be collectively spoken of as a Servant. By the
Servant spoken of in our Text, we may understand God's Messengers, Ministers
sent to Invite Sinners to walk in the way of Salvation.

And here we may observe,

1. That Gospel Ministers are the Servants of God, of Jesus Christ. In a large
sense, all God's Professed People are His Professed Servants; they call Him
their Lord, Luke 6.46. So God speaks of His Covenant People Israel, Isai. 41.8.
-- Thou Israel, art my Servant. But as for Gospel Ministers, they are in a more
strict sense the Servants of God and Christ; they are so by their Office. The
Work of a Bishop (or Gospel Minister) is an Office, 1 Timothy 3.1. They are called
the Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.

2. These Gospel Ministers are obliged by Office, to Invite Sinners to accept
of Christ and walk in the way of Salvation. We showed under a preceding Head,
that Christ has appointed a Gospel Ministry and Ordinances to further the
Salvation of Sinners. And this is the comprehensive Substance of what Christ's
Ministers should declare to Men, viz. He that Believes and is Baptized shall
be Saved, he that believes not shall be Damned, Mark 16.16. They should tell
Persons of their Sin and Danger, and urge them to comply with the Terms of
Salvation Offered to them. The Word of Reconciliation is committed to them, and
they should in Christ's stead Pray Sinners to be Reconciled to God, 2 Cor.
5.19, 20. They should do their utmost, to turn Persons from Darkness to Light,
from the Power of Satan unto God: do what they can, to save themselves and
those that hear them. Therefore they should not be slothful or heedless, but
fervent and diligent in treating with Persons about their Everlasting Welfare.
So in our Text, Come for all things are ready. They should exhort, press, urge,
persuade Sinners to come to Christ, who is ready to receive all that come.
Knowing the Terror of the Lord, they should persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11. They
should persuade them to flee from the Wrath to come, to mind the things of
their Peace before they are hidden from their eves. Therefore they should deal
very openly, plainly, thoroughly with them, about their Souls and their Duty;
not shuning to declare all the Counsel of God, keeping back nothing that might
be profitable to them, Act. 20.20, 27. They should rightly divide the Word of
Truth. Not use flattering words, nor handle the Word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the Truth, commend themselves to every Man's Conscience as in
the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. More particularly, they should very plainly
declare to Persons,

1. Their Perishing Undone Condition by reason of Sin. If they don't see their
Danger they will not seek to escape it. The whole need not a Physician but the
sick. Men must see their Maladies before they will be concerned for Remedies If
they are not convinced that they are Poor, Wretched, Miserable, Blind and
Naked; then they wont come to Christ for tried Gold and white Raiment, Rev.
3.17, 18. Men should be plainly Informed of their Danger. Hearken then, the
great God, that one Lawgiver who alone can Save or Destroy, says, Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is Death. This is the Truth of God, every Sin deserves Death,
Eternal Death and Damnation in Hell. And we are all of us Sinners by Nature as
coming from Fallen Adam, and so are liable to Death. Romans 5.12. By one Man sin
entered into the World, and Death by sin; and so Death has passed upon all
Men, for that all have sinned. We are all the Children of Wrath by Nature, Ephesians.
2.3. Oh Man, Woman, did thou ever seriously Consider of this, and lay it home
to thine own Heart and Conscience? Whoever thou art, thou, even thou in
Particular as coming from Fallen Adam, art a Sinner, a Child of Wrath, an Heir
of Death, Bound over by God's Law to suffer Everlasting Vengeance, Eternal
Plagues and Punishments in Hell. This is thy State by Nature as coming from
Apostate Adam, and a Doleful Dreadful Condition it is. Nay further, all thy
Actual Personal Transgressions in Thought Word and Deed, have increas^d thy
Guilt, and deserved yet greater Measures of Wrath, greater Degrees of the
Insupportable Torments of Hell. Did thou ever seriously Consider of, this thy
Sinful Guilty, Perishing, Undone Condition?

2. Without True Repentance of Sin and Faith in Christ, there is no possibility
of escaping this Endless Inconceivable Misery. GOD the Judge of all has
Declared His Mind in this Matter. Luke 13.5. Except ye Repent ye shall Perish.
Mark 16.16. He that Believes not shall be Damned. We must be heartily Ashamed
of our Sins, Grieve and Mourn for them, turn from them with Abhorrence, and
Trust in the Blood of Christ for Pardon, else we cannot be Saved. Be not
Deceived, GOD is not Mocked, that which a Man Sows, that shall he also Reap.
You must Repent and Turn from all Your Transgressions, else Iniquity will be
your Ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30. You must be Converted, else your Sins will not be Blotted
out: Born Again, else you cannot see the Kingdom of God. You must be
Practically Holy, else you cannot be Happy. Believe what God Himself says, it is
His Word not Mine. Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without
which no Man shall see the Lord. They are the Pure in Heart that shall see God,
Mat. 5.8. Your Hearts must be Purifyed and Sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus,
else you must Perish forever. Have you felt, found, experienced a Regenerating
Sanctifying Change in your Souls? If not, then the Guilt of Sin and Wrath of
God still abide upon you. Whoever you are, whatever Character you bear, or Show
you make among Men; though possibly you were Born ^ Professing Parents, Baptized,
well Catechized and Instructed, have lived Blamelesly to Outward Appearance,
have made the Highest Profession, and have been often at the Lord's Table; if
all this be True of you, yet if you have not had a Converting, Sanctifying
Change wrought in you, rendering Sin Hateful, and Christ and Holiness Precious
to you, then you still abide Enemies to God, Condemned by His Law, and so you
are every Moment in Danger of dropping into Hell-Strait is the Gate, Narrow is
the Way that leads to Life. Your Sins or your Souls must Die. Romans 8.13. If ye
live after the Flesh ye shall Die.

3. The Lord Jesus is ready to Save all Sinners that will come unto Him. The
Servant in our Text was bid to say, Come, for all things are now ready. So I
say, Come to Christ, for all things are now ready; they are ready now,
therefore come now, make no Delays. Behold, now is the accepted Time, behold,
now is the Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. To Day if you will hear his Voice
harden not your Hearts, Heb. 4.7. As you should be plainly told of your Sin and
Danger; so you should be as plainly told, where Help and Relief may be had:
Well, there is enough of it in Christ. There is enough in Him to Save all your
Souls, to supply all your Wants, to heal all your Wounds, to cover all your
Unworthiness, to wash away all your Sins, if you will but come to Him as your
Prince and Savior. He Is able to Save to the Uttermost all that come to God by
Him: His Blood Cleanses from all Sin. And he has said, Joh. 6.37. Him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. So, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all you
that Labor and are Heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest. Oh what a sweet and
blessed Invitation is this? Are you sensible of your Sin, Guilt, liableness to
Wrath and Misery? Are your Sins a grievous Load and Burden to your Guilty
Consciences? Would you fain be rid of your Sins, and escape the Wrath Deserved
by them? Why, behold the Blessed Jesus Invites you, to accept such Needful
Deliverance. He bids you come, promises Rest, Peace, Deliverance, Salvation if
you will come. Then come, for all things we now ready. The Arms of a Merciful
Redeemer are Open Ready to Receive you; His Blood is a Fountain Opened, Ready
to Wash and Cleanse you; nothing shall be wanting on His Part, if you will but
come unto Him. Come then to this Blessed Savior, there is Salvation in none
else, there is no Savior like Him. Indeed none besides Him; therefore needs no
other* for it has Pleased the Father that all Fullness should Dwell in Him. He
is, Truly, the Chief of Ten Thousand, the Altogether Lovely and Desirable One.
Nothing can hinder the Full Complete Salvation of any of you all, but your
Unwillingness to have Christ as Prince and Savior. Heartily Receive Christ as
Offered in the Gospel, and He will most Readily and Certainly Save you from Sin
and Misery, and make you Holy and Happy for ever. This Blessed Redeemer will be
Abundantly Pleased with you, if you thus come to Him, Trust in Him for
Salvation. He takes Pleasure in those that hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 147 11.
He Is Glad when you (as it were) put Him upon doing His Office, upon doing the
Work of a Savior for you: It Is His Office-Work to save His People from their
Sin, to Bless them in Turning them from their Iniquities, to Purify them and
make them Zealous of Good W^^ks, to save them from Wrath to come, and bring
them to Endless Glory. You cannot possibly Please, Gratify, Honor the Lord
Jesus Christ in any thing like Firmly Trusting in Him for such Blessings as
these, for this great Salvation. Therefore come to Him, for all Things are
ready on His Part. But if you Refuse and Reject all such Offers and Invitations
as these, this will Abundantly Displease, Dishonor, Provoke this most Glorious
Redeemer He was Grieved for the Hardness of their Hearts, Mark 3.5. He Wept
over Jerusalem, for not minding the Things of their Peace in the Season
thereof, Luke 19.41, 42. God has Made you, Preserves you, Loads you with all
the Benefits you receive (though you deserve none of them) you lie under
Numberless Indispensible Obligations to Please and Glorify Him; but this
Blessed and Glorious God, you Disobey, Dsplease, Affront, Provoke after the
worst manner that can be, if you refuse the Gracious Invitations made to you in
the Gospel. God is Wonderfully Provoked with the Sin of Unbelief. The Lord was
Wroth, so a Fire was kindled against Jacob, and Anger also came up against
Israel. This was Terrible indeed, What is the meaning of it? To find God
Provoked with Idolatrous Heathen, would not seem strange; But what could it be
that could thus Incense Him against Israel, against His own Professing Covenant
People? What means the Heat of this Anger, this Fiery Wrath and Indignation,
against that People whom He had favored more than any other in the World? What
was it that was thus Provoking? Why the next Verse tells us, viz. Because they
Believed not in God, and Trusted not in his Salvation, Psalm. 37.21, 22. This
Sin, this Unbelief, this not Trusting in Gods Salvation; this was the Crime
that kindled such Fiery Wrath in God against his own Professing People. And if
any of you Finally Persist to Reject the Invitations of the Gospel, then be it
known unto you, that Endless Eternal Miseries will be your Portion. That
Merciful Redeemer who now waits to be Gracious to You, will count and treat you
as Obstinate Rebels. He that Made you, will not have Mercy on you, and He that
Formed you, will show you no Favor; but will Glorify His Justice in your
Eternal Ruin. He Will say, As for those Mine Enemies that would not that I should
Reign over them, bring them hither and Slay them before me, The Wicked shall he
turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. Thus, Gosp^^
Ministers should Invite Sinners to come to Christ for Savation.

So,

4. They should Dispense Sacred Things, to those who appear to Accept the
Invitation. Ministers should Endeavor, as to Convert Sinners, so to Edify and
Build up Saints. They should Endeavor, that those who Profess to Accept Gospel
Invitations, should live as becomes the Gospel; Walk Worthy of the Vocation
wherewith they are Called: Walk Worthy of God unto all Pleasing, being Fruitful
in every good Work: that they should grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. They should strive to Confirm the Souls of the
Disciples, exhorting them to continue in the Faith; and with full purpose of
heart to cleave to the Lord, Act 11.23. and 14.22. They should dispense the
sincere Milk of the Word (as well as administer Sacraments) that the Saints may
grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Indeed they should Preach the Word, be Instant in
Season, out of Season, Rebuke, Reprove, Exhort with all long Suffering and
Doctrine, (2 Timothy 4.2.) Comfort the Feeble Minded, support the Weak, (1 These.
5.14.) Exhort the Saints to run their Race with Patience, to Fight the good
Fight of Faith; to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, forasmuch as they know that their Labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. Thus Gospel Ministers as the Servants of God, of Christ,
should Invite Sinners to come to Christ for Salvation; and as Faithful Stewards
should dispense the Mysteries of God, to build up Saints in holiness. I have
now according to my Office Duty, Invited you to come unto Christ that you might
have Life, showing you, that all things are ready on His part. I have this Day
set Life and Death before you, I have delivered my own Soul: if you Perish,
your Blood will be on your own Heads, you wont Perish for want of Faithful
Warning. I should be glad to see all of you without Exception at Christ's Right
Hand, in the Last Day; if any of you appear at His Left, twont be for want of
Faithful Warning given to you. For I have told you of your Sin and Danger, of
your Malady, and of your Remedy too; that Christ is altogether Able and
Willing, to Save to the Uttermost all that come unto God by Him. Therefore turn
you, turn you from your evil Ways, for why will you Die? Now from the Office
Work and Duty of Ministers, refering to Gospel Invitations, we may Infer a few
things, viz.

1. We should count it a great Favor, to have the Ministers of Christ
Faithfully Dispensing His Word to us. To have His Ministers plainly Declaring
His Mind to us, telling us of our Danger and of our Only and Alsufficient
Remedy, Inviting us to Escape the worst of Evils, and to accept the best of
Blessings; this we should esteem a very great Favor indeed: we should be glad
of it and thankful for it. Paul and Barnabas said to the Blaspheming Jews, Lo
we turn to the Gentiles -- it is added -- When the Gentiles heard this, they were
glad, Act. 13.46, 48. They were Glad, they Rejoiced when those Heralds, those
Ambassadors of Peace would Preach the Everlasting Gospel to them. Oh count it a
very great Mercy, that your Eyes may see and your Ears hear your Teachers, that
they are not driven into Corners, Psalm. 89.15. Blessed is the People that hear
the joyful Sound. Prize and Value the Preaching of the Gospel, yea Obey the
Gospel lest God be Provoked to take it away.

2. We should not wonder that Ministers are in Earnest, that they are Pressing
and Urgent with Sinners to come unto Christ. If Ministers even Travail in
Birth, if they are most Earnest, Urgent, Pressing with you to Turn and Live; yet
don't think strange of it. Their Office Duty obliges them to this: Christ sends
them to Invite Sinners, yea, to Compel them to come in. They cannot be Faithful
in their Office, not Faithful to God, to their own Souls nor to yours, if they
don't do their utmost to save themselves and those that hear them. If a Person
saw a Blind Man walking Dangerously, within a few steps of falling into some
Destructive Pit; would he not earnestly Cry aloud, stop, stop, or you will kill
your self? Well, Sinners are in Danger of tumbling into the Unquenchible Flames
of Hell; don't wonder then if Ministers are Earnest and Urgent with them, to
make them stop, not to go on in Wickedness, but that they would turn to God in
Christ and live for ever. The Charge God has laid on Ministers, the Worth of
Precious Immortal Souls, the Account Ministers must quickly give of their
Stewardship, all these require them indeed to be in good Earnest, mighty
Sollicitous for the Salvation of all under their Ministry.

3. It Is Ungrateful and Abominable, to abuse Gospel Ministers for the Faithful
Discharge of their Office Work. Some cannot bear to have Ministers Preach
against and Condemn their Evil Practices. Ahab hated Micajah for thus
testifying against his Wickedness, 1 King. 22.8. But it is Abominable to Abuse
Ministers, for Faithfully Witnessing against sin. What, would you have them
speak flattering Words, dawb with untempered Mortar; Cry, Peace, Peace, when
their is no Peace? Would you have them thus deceive you, in the most Weighty
Important Affars that can be? Would you have them heal your Wounds slightily,
skin them over, and suffer them to fester at the Bottom to your Eternal Ruin?
Would not this be the highest Unfaithfulness in them, and the greatest wrong
they could do you? Would you not have them Obey God? His Command to them is,
Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my
People their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their Sin. Would you have
Ministers Disobey this Command of God? God threatens them with the Guilt of
Blood, to punish them as Guilty of the Blood, the Murder of those Souls, who
perish for want of Faithful warning from them, Ezekiel. 33.8. When therefore
Ministers Faithfully tell you of your sin and danger, Faithfully warn you to
forsake your Intemperance, Uncleanness, Profaneness, Coveteousness, Lying,
Promise-Breaking, Fraud, Deceit, Oppression, Pride, Reviling, Backbiting, etc.
When they tell you that for these things sake, the Wrath of God comes on the
Children of Disobedience: when they tell you, that if you live after the Flesh
you shall Die: when they testify to you, Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ; declaring the absolute necessity of holiness in
Heart and Life, of having clean Hands and a pure Heart in order to your getting
to Heaven; I say, when they deal thus plainly with you, will you be Angry and
Displeased with them? Will you Revile and Reproach them, for condemning your
beloved ways of Wickedness? Oh it is Abominable Ingratitude, thus to Abuse your
Faithful Reprovers and Instructors. Those who most Faithfully endeavor to
bring you off from all ways of Wickedness, and to quicken you in the Ways of
holiness; are the best Friends you have in the World: they show you the truest
kindness, and for you to hate and abuse them for this, is to return Evil for
Good, and that is a black and vile Crime indeed. Again, another General Head of
Comparison may be,

7. Those Bidden to a Feast, should be Civil and Social in their Carriage one
to another. Much of the Comfort of those Bidden to a Feast, does consist not
only in Eating and Drinking, but also in their Free, Kind Converse with one
another. If they should be Jealous and Suspicious, Grudging and Contending,
Watching for one another's Halting; they would have little or no True Comfort.
But the more Open, Free, Kind Cordial they are in their Carriage to one
another; so much the more Pleasure and Comfort they would have. So, those
Invited to Accept of Christ and all Saving Benefits with Him, and who do Accept
the Invitation; they should be very Kind, Loving, Courteous to each other. This
is the Duty of all Christians. They should love God with all their Heart, Soul,
Mind and Strength, and their Neighbors as themselves, Mat. 22.37, 39. They
should Love one another, be Concerned for one another's Welfare, as they have
Opportunity doing Good to all Men, especially to those of the Household of
Faith, Gal. 6.10. There should be no Grudging or Envying between them. Let all
Bitterness and Wrath, and Anger and Clamor, and Evil Speaking be put away from
you, with all Malice: and be ye Kind one to another, Tender Hearted, Forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has Forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
They should have Compassion one of another, Love as Brethren, be Pitiful,
Courteous, not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing, but contrariwise
Blessing, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9. And from a Principle of Love and Kindness, they should
Watch over one another, Instruct, Counsel, Exhort, Reprove, Comfort each other
as there is Occasion. Exhort one another Daily, while it as called to Day; lest
any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.13. Surely,
Christians should Love one another with a Pure Heart Fervently. Brotherly Love
should Continue among them. Our Lord said, Joh. 13.35. By this shall all Men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another.

The last General Head is,

8. Those who being Invited to a Feast, do Accept the Bounty of the Inviter;
should be ^ery Thankful to him for it. This Truth will be readily Granted, by
every one of any Common Ing^nuity. So those who Accept of Gospel Invitations,
should be most Thankful to God, to Christ for the Bounty, Grace, Salvation they
are Favored with. All Men should be Continually Thankful to God, for the
Unwearied Instances of His Common Bounty unto them. Unthankfulness to God for
the Bounties of Common Providence is mentioned as a very great Sin in the very
Heathen, Romans 1.21. But the greater Benefits any receive, the more Thankful
they should be Surely then, of all Persons in the World, those United to Christ
by T^u^ Faith, should be the most Thankful. The Gospel, Covenant Blessings they
are in Part Possessed of, and further Entitled to, are Incomparably Preferable
to all the Crowns, Kingdoms, Riches, Honors which can be Enjoyed in this
World. Surely then, they have Reason to say, What shall I render to the Lord
for all his Benefits? Bless the Lord, Oh my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord, Oh my soul, and forget not all his
Benefits. Who Pardons all thine Iniquities, Heals all thy Diseases,
Crowns thee with Loving Kindness and Tender Mercies, Psalm. 103 1. -- 3. The
whole Life of a Christian, should be a Life of Holy Gratitude unto God. ^ These.
5.18. In every thing give Thanks, for this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you. Ephesians. 5.20. Giving Thanks always, for all things, to God and the
Father, in the Name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. They should be always
Thankful to God, and Joyful in God, for His manifold Grace Vouchsafed to them.
Phi^^. 4.4 Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say Rejoice.

Thus I have mentioned sundry General Heads of Similitude or Comparison,
wherein God's Inviting Sinners to Accept Spiritual Saving Blessings in the
Gospel, may be likened to a Great Man's Inviting many to a Sumptuous Feast.
Would to God, that all who have heard these Things, would speedily and heartily
Accept the Invitations God makes to them. God Invites you to a Noble Feast, A
Feast of Fat Things full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well Refined, Isa.
25.6. He Invites you to the best Feast that can be, to Accept the best Offers
that were ever made to Poor Mortals; O^ be so Wise for your selves as to Accept
them. There is a Price in your Hands to get Wisdom, be not such Fools as to
Neglect it. You may come and Welcome, come and receive Freely the best of
Blessings. You may come and Feast here without any Danger of being Grudged what
you are Invited to, without any Danger of Surfeiting: The more Readily, Fully,
Speedily you Accept the Offers made, so much the more it will be to your own
Advantage. But if you should Finally Neglect and Refuse these Gracious Offers,
'twould have been good for you that you had never been Born. Therefore Heartily
submit to Christ on Gospel Terms without any Delay; Oh come, for all Things are
now Ready. Our Lord Jesus said, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the Door and
knock: if any Man will hear my Voice and open the Door, I will come in to him,
and will sup with him and he with me. Since Christ thus stands Knocking at the
Door of our Hearts, let none be so Foolish and Wicked as to Bolt the Door
against him. I Will now end with that Scripture, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the
Bride say, come, and (...) that hears, say, come. And let him ^ha^ is Athirst
come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely.

SERMON VI.
LUKE XIV. 18, 19, 20. And they all with one consent began to make Excuse: The
first said unto him, I have bought a Piece of Ground, and I must needs go and
see it: I pray thee have me Excused.

And another said, I have bought Five Y^ke of Oxen, and I go to Prove them: I
pray thee have me Excused.

And another said, I have Married a Wife; and therefore I cannot come.


THESE Words contain a denial, or a Negative Answer made to the Invitation that
was given them to the Feast, v. 16, 17. As these Objections against going to
the Feast when Invited, or Desires to be Excused from going, may intimate the
Unbelief of the generality of the Jews, they Rejected Christ, Denied the Holy
One and the Just, and Desired a Murderer, Act. 3.14. Christ came to His own
(those of His own Nation, His own by Covenant and Visible Profession) and His
own received Him not, Joh. 1.11. I say, as these Objections may Intimate, the
Unbelief of the Generality of the Jews; so they may Intimate also, the
Backwardness, Unwillingness of all Men in General Naturally, to Accept Gospel
Offers and Invitations. Wherever the Gospel is Faithfully Preached, God Invites
all to accept of Christ and Salvation through Him; but they are Naturally
backward to accept the Invitation. From the Objections and Excuses here made,
sundry Doctrines might be observed, viz.

DOCTRINE I. Men are Naturally apt to make Objections against accepting Gospel
Invitations, Naturally backward and Unwilling to accept them.
An Invitation to Eat and Drink, is commonly acceptable to the Hungry and
Thirsty: an Offer of Wealth, would be acceptable to the Poor and Beggarly: an
Offer of Healing, would be acceptable to the Sick and Wounded. But, an Offer of
Christ and Salvation to Poor Sinners, is more needful than all these Offers now
mentioned; and yet Sinners are Naturally Backward and Unwilling to accept this
best of Offers that can possibly be made. Our Lord Jesus said to the Wicked
Jews, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have Life. He said to
Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. -- How often would I have gathered thy Children
together, as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings; and ye would not?
It Is thus with all Men Naturally, they are Unwilling to have Christ on Gospel
terms. It Is said in our Text, They all with one consent began to make excuse.
They all agre'd in this, that they were Unwilling to come, though they made
various particular excuses for not coming.

Here we may Inquire,

Quest. Whence is it, that all Men are naturally backward and unwilling to
Accept of Gospel Offers and Invitations?
Answ. 1. It proceeds from the depravation and corruption of their Natures,
from the prevalency of Sin in them. Our Lord Redeemer is called Jesus, because
he Saves his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. He was sent on this great
errand, to Bless Men in turning them from their Iniquities, Act. 3.26.
Therefore when Persons are called upon to accept of Christ and Salvation with
him; they are Indeed required, not only to trust in his Meritorious
Righteousness for Justification before God, but also to deny themselves, take
up their Cross and follow Christ whethersoever he goes. They Are required to
conform to Gods Preceptive Will, as the only unalterable Rule and Measure of
all their Thoughts, Words and Deeds. They Are required, to yield up themselves
Entirely, Universally, Continually, and without reserve to God, to Christ, to
be for Him and for none other; to make his Word their Rule and his Glory their
end in all they do. Now nothing can be more contrary than this is, to the
depraved, corrupted Nature of fallen Man. Adam in his first Apostasy, turned
away from God a^ his Sovereign Lord and his Supreme Portion. He practically
despised and trampled on Gods Authority, and this cursed temper and disposition
is natural to all his Posterity as they proceed from him. They Are shapen in
Iniquity and conceived in Sin, Psalm. 51.5. Their hearts we deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, J^^. 17.9. In them, that is in their Flesh
(their corrupt part, and they have nothing else naturally) there dwells no good
thing. They Are prone to back slide, to hold fast deceit and not to let it go.
Their carnal Minds are enmity against God, not subject to his law, nor indeed
can be, Romans 8.7. So that all mere Men as coming from fallen Adam, have in them
a root and principle of enmity against God and contempt of Him. Now this Root
principle and habit of Sin Natural unto them, is a contrary to the calls,
commands, offers and invitations of the Gospel as any thing can be. This root
and habit of Sin, is a Principle and Spring of Unbelief (an evil heart of
Unbelief in departing from the Living God, Heb. 3.12.) that is quite contrary to
Faith. It Is a Principle of Hating God* that is quiet contrary to the Loving of
Him: a Principle of Rebellion, that is quite contrary to Obed^ence: This corrupt
depraved Principle reigning in the Soul, is in general the cause of Men's
backwardness and unwillingness to accept of Gospel Invitations. This depraved
disposition of Soul, is it self very Sinful; and is the root and spring from
whence all Actual Sins in Thought, Word and Deed do flow, Out of the heart do
proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Theifts, false Witness,
Blasphemies, etc. More particularly, this backwardness and unwillingness in
Men, to accept of Gospel Invitations, does proceed:

1. From their Blindness and Ignorance. All the faculties of the Rational Soul,
are wonderfully depraved and vitiated by Sin. The Understanding is wonderfully
weakened, darkened, blinded. The Holy Ghost in describing the depravation of
fallen Men, says, Romans 3.11, 17. There is none that Understands, there is
none that Seeks after God -- the way of Peace have they not known. And so
Unregenerate men are said to be in darkness; and Conversion is called an
Opening of their Eyes, a turning them from darkness to light: a calling them
out of darkness into mavelous light, Act. 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.9. Unregenerate
Persons are so in the dark, that they have not a right view and understanding
of things: they have not a right view and sense of the cursed nature and
tendency of Sin, of their own Slavery to it, and liableness to misery for it.
They don't rightly see and consider their own danger and hazard, the
Suitableness and All Sufficiency of Christ to Save them, their absolute need of
an Interest in Him by heart-purifying Faith. If they had a right understanding
of these things, they would not be so easy, quiet, joyful in their Sinful
Perishing Condition, as they often are. If they had a right, clear, realizing
view of the endless Torments of Hell which wait for the Impenitent, and of the
endless Matchless Glories which shall be the Portion of Sincere Saints; then
they would not be so easy and quiet while liable to the former and
uninterrested in the latter, as they often are. It Is said, Psalm. 9.10. They that
know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken
them that seek thee. Therefore it is very much from an Ignorance of God and
Christ, and the absolute need of an Interest in his favor, that Sinners are so
backward and unwilling to accept of Gospel Offers and Invitations.

2. From the Hardness of their Hearts. They not only have a great Ignorance of
God, and of the things of God, of the duties they owe to him, and the need they
have of his favor; but there is also in them a base, vile contrariety of heart
to that which they do know of God. Their hearts are so hard, so strongly set
against Gods Authority, so bent to wickedness; that they often neglect to do
what they know is Duty, and commit what they know is Sin. And so they are said
to Love darkness rather than light -- to hate the light, Joh. 3.19, 20. They
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness -- when they knew God, they glorified him not
as God -- Though they know that such and such things are worthy of Death, yet
they not only do them, but take pleasure in those that do them, Romans 1.18, 21,
32. They say unto God, depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, Job 21.14. It Is after their hardness and impenitent heart, that they
treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of
Gods righteous Judgment, Romans 2.5. This backwardness to accept of Gospel
Invitations, is often furthered:

3. By their accustoming themselves to Sin. The root, habit, principle of Sin
in the Soul, which is commonly called Original Sin: is often strengthened,
increased, confirmed and established (as it were) by a continued customariness
in Sinning. The longer men live in Sin, the more they use and accustom
themselves to it: so much the more they commonly love it: so much the more
unwilling they usually are to leave and forsake it. He that has been long used
to Drunkenness, is not easily brought to forsake it. He that has been long used
to filthy Unclean Practices, is not easily brought to be chaste and pure. So
those habituated to Lying, ^tealing, Cheating, Defrauding, Blaspheming, etc.
are not easily brought to forsake such Hellish Practices. Jer. 13.23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good,
that are accustomed to do evil. So that in general, Men's backwardness and
unwillingness to accept of Gospel Offers and Invitations. proceeds from the
depravation and corruption of their Nature by the Fall, by Adam's Apostasy
from God. It Is a great evil, to refuse Gospel Offers; but the depravation of
Man's Nature is the cause of all Moral evils, both of Omission and Commission.
Indeed it is great part of the work of Gospel Grace, to cure this depravation in
the Soul; but this Malady naturally resists the remedy, till conquered, and
subdued by Sovereign Almighty Grace. And again, this backwardness and
unwillingness:

2. Is often much furthered by Satan. All the fallen, Apostate Angels are often
comprehended in this Collective Name, Satan, or the Devil. The Devil was the
first Sinner. By his Temptations he drew Mankind into Sin which deserves Death;
and so he is justly called a Murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. And as at
first, Satan thus drew Mankind into Sin and Misery; so he does all he can to
obstruct their Recovery and Salvation. He Is an Enemy of all Righteousness,
strives to pervert the right ways of the Lord. He does all he can to blind and
darken the Minds of Men, to fill them with Errors, and with Prejudices against
the Truths and Ways of God which lead to Salvation: 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost; in whom the god of this World
(that is, the Devil) has blinded the Minds of those that believe not, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine
into them. When the Seed of the Gospel is Sown, -- when the holy Saving Truths
of God are Preached; Satan catches them away as much as possibly he can: he
does his utmost to hinder the good efficacy of them, Luke 8.12. He is the
Tempter, the Enemy, the Wicked one, the Abaddon and Apollyon (that is,
Destroyer) emphatically so; who uses all his Subtlety, Power and Unwearied
Malice, to hinder Persons from understanding the one only way of Salvation, and
from walking in it.

USE. We may hence infer,
1. We ought to consider and deeply bewail the Depravation and Corruption of
our Nature. As we come from fallen Adam, we are woefully depraved in all the
Faculties of our Souls; our Understandings woefully darkened, our Wills
perverted, our Affections disordered. We Are prone to put light for darkness and
darkness for light, good for evil and evil for good, sweet for bitter and
bitter for sweet: and God denounces a Woe against those that do thus, Isai.
5.20. We Are Naturally prone to hate God, whom we should love above all things;
and to choose and love the ways of Sin, which we should hate above all things.
Indeed we are Naturally in a very depraved, woeful, degenerate Condition. And
though God of His Infinite Grace, has given His Son to save Sinners, and Invites
us to accept this Salvation; yet such it our Ignorance and Wickedness
Naturally, that we are prone to neglect and reject this great Salvation. We are
prone to reject this only and All-sufficient Remedy which is Offered us. We are
Naturally Dead in Trespasses and in Sins. Surely we have abundant cause, to
bewail and lament our wretched depraved state by the Fall. If Men lose their
Credit, their Estate, their Business; if they lose their Health and Strength,
especially if they lose the use of their Limbs, their Sight, their Hearing,
they are apt greatly to bewail these Losses. But the loss of the Image of God in
our Souls, and to have our Souls so darkened and corrupted by Sin as they are,
is a much greater loss and much more to be lamented and bewailed.

2. Those should be very thankful to God, who are made willing to come to
Christ. Has Powerful, Victorious Light broke into your Souls, showing you your
sin and misery; convincing you of your Guilty, Perishing, Undone Condition;
bringing you to grieve and mourn for your past Transgressions, heartily to
hate, loath and strive against all known sin? Have you been persuaded and
enabled to cast the burden of your Souls on Christ, to trust wholly and only in
His Meritorious Righteousness for Justification before God; to give up your
selves to Him, sincerely and constantly to Obey all His Commands? Has it been
thus with you? If so, it is God of His Infinite Sovereign, Almighty Grace has
done these things for you. By Grace ye are Saved, through Faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the Gift of God: not of Works lest any Man should boast,
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. It Is the exceeding greatness of Gods Power, the working of His
Mighty Power, that has enabled you to believe, Ephesians. 1.19. You have nothing of
your own to boast of in the matter, you are wholly Indebted to Sovereign Grace.
Oh be thankful for this wonderful Gift of God. For deliverance from
distressing, dangerous Bodily Sickness, it is said, Psalm. 107.21. Oh that Men
would Praise the Lord for His Goodness, and for His Wonderful Works to the
Children of Men. How thankful then should you be, for deliverance from the
Reigning Power and Damning Guilt of Sin? This is a greater deliverance, than
any outward deliverance whatsoever; and loudly calls for the greatest and most
constant Gratitude.

3. Sinners should Pray to God for Converting Grace. Though Unregenerate ones,
have not such Knowledge and Understanding of Spiritual things, as true Converts
have; yet by seriously Reading and Hearing Gods Word, and considering what that
says, they may by the help of God's common Grace be convinced that they are
Sinners, that they deserve Eternal Vengeance in Hell Fire, that Christ is the
only Savior of Sinners, that they must heartily believe in Him and obey Him as
ever they expect Happiness: these things they may come to be convinced of, and
being so, they should Pray that God would help them to trust in Christ and live
unto Him. God can do what He will, nothing is to hard for Him. He Is the
Fountain of all Good and Grace, can inlighten the blindest Minds, humble and
soften the proudes^ and hardest Hearts. He opened the Heart of Lydia, to give
heed to the things spoken by Paul, Act. 16.14. He can open the Hearts of whom
He will, to understand, approve and conform to His Holy Revealed Will. He can
give unto Persons to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 13.11. He
can by the exceeding Greatness of His Power, according to the working of His
Mighty Power, beget Faith in whom He pleases, Ephesians. 1.19. And such Faith is
absolutely necessary in order to Eternal Salvation, for he that Believes not
shall be Damned. Since these things are so, surely Sinners should Earnestly
Pray to God for Converting Grace, they should Pray that He would cure their
Spiritual Maladies, take away their Blindness of Mind, their Hardness of Heart:
that He would Open their Eyes to behold wondrous things in His Law; Open their
Understandings more clearly to understand the Scriptures, and that He would
Conform their Hearts to His Holy Revealed Preceptive Will therein: that He
would create a Clean Heart, and Renew a R^ght Spirit within them. They should
Pray that God would renew His Holy Image in them, in Knowlegde, Righteousness
and true Holiness; that He would draw them to Christ; turn them and they shall
be turned. They should Pray, that He would save them from Sin and Misery, make
them Holy and Happy forever. If you were in Great, Eminent Outward Dangers, by
reason of Enemies, Sickness or the like; would you not Cry Mightily to God for
Deliverance? How Earnestly will many Cry and Pray in Dangerous Storms at Sea?
But surely you should be yet more Earnest and Sollicitous, in Praying for
Converting Saving Grace. Make that Prayer, Hos. 14.2 -- Take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously -- Psalm. 116.4 -- O Lord, I beseech the deliver my
Soul.

We now proceed to a

DOCTRINE II. When Persons Neglect and Reject Gospel Invitations; it is
commonly because they are more Desirous of, and Affected to, some other Things.
So in our Text, those who Refused coming to the Feast when bidden, did not
Directly and Absolutely say, I will not come; they were not thus Peremptory,
but pretended they had other Affairs which they must attend to, and would be
Excused from coming. One had Bought a Piece of Land, and must needs go see it.
Another had Bought Oxen, and would go and Prove them. Another had Married a
Wife, and said he could not come. Their Minds were more taken up about other
Things, than about the Invitation given them (...) the Feast. They preferred
other Things to the Feast they were Invited to. It Is not here mentioned as
Criminal for Men to Buy Land, Oxen, or to Marry Wives; but the Fault was, their
Minds were so taken up with these Matters, as that on the Account of them they
Neglected the Invitation given them to the Feast. So under the Gospel, many
have their Minds so set upon, so taken with, some Things in themselves Lawful
to be Regarded, that thereby they are Hindered from Accepting Gospel Offers.
They have a much greater Fondness for, Love to, and Desire after, Worldly,
Temporary Enjoyments, than they have to those Things the Gospel Invites them
to. Some are so much Concerned about their Lands, Fields Meadows, their Farming
Affairs; about their Oxen, their Cattle, about Proving and Improving them to
their Worldly Profit; some about their Trade and Merchandise, that they Neglect
the Great Salvation Offered them in the Gospel. Some are so Concerned about
being Married, about the Comforts and Pleasures they Propose to themselves in
that State, that they Neglect getting an Interest in Jesus Christ. Union to
Christ by True Faith, is the Best Match that any Soul can ever make. All thus
United to the Son of God, are fre'd from the Tyranny and Guilt of Sin, the
Slavery of Satan, the Wrath and Curse of God: They are brought into the Liberty
of the Sons of God, Advanced to High Honor and Dignity, Entitled to an Eternal
Crown, Kingdom and Inheritance. Yet many are so taken with Sensual Pleasures
and Delights, as to Reject an Invitation to, and Offer of, these Best of
Blessings. Many Reject Gospel Invitations, because their Hearts are more taken
up with, and desirous of, other Things.

1. Some have their Hearts more taken up with Worldly Profits. They esteem
Earthly Treasures above Heavenly, Gold above Grace and Holiness. Some have
their Minds so Hurried and Concerned to get and manage Lands, Oxen, Ships,
Shops or other Matters of Worldly Profit; that they can spare no Time, get no
Leisure seriously and thro'ly to mind their Souls, and secure to themselves a
Durable Substance, an Incorruptible Inheritance. Thus it was with the
Thorny-Ground Hearers; Mat. 13.22. The Cares of the World and the Deceitfulness
of Riches, choke the Word, and it becomes Unfruitful. Their Hearts and Minds
are so chok'd, stuffed, filled with Worldly Cares and Concerns; that they
Neglect the Welfare of their Precious Immortal Souls. They mind Earthly Things.
Phil. 3.19. They so mind Earthly Things* as to neglect Heavenly Ones. Love to
the World Ruins them: Their Hearts are so Glu'd to Worldly Things, that they
Neglect Salvation, and Hurry themselves into Endless Destruction. 1 Timothy 6.9,
10. They that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a Save, and into many
foolish and hurtful L^sts: which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. For
the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some have coveted after,
they have erred from the Faith, and Pierced themselves through with many
sorrows.

2. Some have their Hearts more taken up with Worldly Honors. Some esteem the
Honor which comes from Men, above that which comes from God. It seems in our
Savior's Time, some were Convinced that He was the Messiah, the promised
Savior, and so are said to Believe on Him; yet they did not Heartily Receive
Him by Faith Unfeigned; nor did they openly Own and Acknowledge Him, because
their so doing would have been Inconsistent with that Worldly Honor, which
they esteemed above an Interest in Christ. Joh. 22.42, 43. Nevertheless, among
the chief Rulers also, many Believed on him: but because of the Pharisees they
did not Confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue: for they
loved the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God. So our Lord said to some;
Joh. 5.44. How can ye Believe, which receive Honor one of another, and seek
not the Honor that comes from God only? They had an higher esteem for Honor
and Reputation among Men, than for that Honor that comes Only from God and is
Peculiar to the Saints. Pride, Ambition, Desire of Humane Applause, is the
Tyrannizing, Domineering Lust in some, and therefore all their other Affairs
must buckle, bend and give way to the Gratifying of that Lust. If any Duties of
Religion stand in the way of their Ambition, they shall for that Reason be
Neglected and Discarded. Nay, Religion it self shall be used as a Tool or
Medium, to Gratify their Ambition. So the Pharisees Fasted, Prayed, gave Alms,
when their main Aim and Design in all was, to be seen of Men, and obtain Humane
Applause. Mat. 23.5. All their works which they do, they do to be seen of Men.
Some are so set upon Pleasing Men to be Applauded by them, that they Neglect
God, Christ, their Souls and Eternity, rather than forego any of their
Ambitious Designs. They are more Desirous to please Men than God, and to Enjoy
the Good Will of Men than the Reconciled Favor of their Glorious Maker and
Judge.

3. Some have their Hearts more taken up with Worldly Pleasures. True Religion,
yields the truest and greatest Pleasures that can be; even Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. But many prefer Worldly, Carnal, Sensual Delights to
all the Comforts and Pleasures to be Enjoyed in the Favor of God. We Read of
some, 2 Timothy 3.4. That are Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God. They
prefer the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season, to the Pleasures of
Piety, that last forever. Therefore they will not quit their Pleasures of
Intemperance, Uncleanness, Bad Company, etc. No, though they Damn their Souls
in pursuing of them. Thus it is evident, that many Refuse to Accept Gospel
Offers and Invitations, because their Hearts are more Earnestly set upon, and
desirous of, other Things. But herein they show Unutterable Folly and
Wickedness: They Prefer Lying Vanities to their own Mercies. They have a Price
in their Hands to get Wisdom, but have no Heart to it: They Feed on Ashes, a
Deceived Heart turns them aside. They Prefer broken Cisterns, to the
Inexhaustable, Unchangible Fountain of all Good. They Are for the Fallacious
flashes of Temporary Deceitful Honors, Profits, Pleasures; rather than for
Solid, Substantial Realities of Eternity Let none of us be so Foolish and
Wicked; nor suffer any of the short lived empty Enjoyments of time, to obstruct
our pursuing and securing a better and an enduring Substance. Let us therefore
make it our chief care, to secure Treasures, that cannot be lost, and to lay a
good Foundation against the time to come that we may lay hold on Eternal Life.
This is the Grand Affair, which our Souls should be most Earnestly and
Constantly concerned about. Phil. 2.12 -- Work out your own Salvation with fear
and trembling.

SERMON VII.
We now proceed to another Observation, viz.

DOCTRINE III. Persons are apt to make excuses for their Sins.
WE find here, that when those bidden to the Feast refused coming; they did not
directly say they would not, or ought not to come, but made Excuses for their
neglect, some pretending one thing and some another for their not coming. So
those that are Instructed in the Doctrines of the Gospel, and urged to accept
of Christ as Offered therein, and yet refuse so to Receive Him; they are apt to
have Excuses in their own minds for not coming, or secretly (if not openly) to
Object something or other, against their present, hearty submitting to Christ
as they are in duty bound. It Is Natural to the proud Hearts of Sinful Men, to
make Objections against their Duty and Excuses for their Sins. When God came to
deal with Adam about his eating the forbidden Fruit, Adam did not take any
direct blame to himself for his Grand Rebellion, but rather excused himself
laying the blame on his Wife: yea he seems to have remotely reflected on God
Himself, saying to Him, Genesis 3.12. The Woman whom THOU gave to be with me,
she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. The Woman also Excused her self saying,
v. 13. The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. Though both confessed the Fact,
that they did Eat the forbidden Fruit; yet they seem both to throw off the
Fault and blame from themselves Personally, the Man blaming the Woman, and the
Woman blaming the Serpent, as the Tempting Instrument. Thus they made Excuses,
instead of taking shame and blame to themselves for their Offense. It Is very
Natural to the Proud Hearts of Sinners, thus to Excuse themselves (as Adam and
Eve did) for their past Offenses: so they are apt also, to Object against, and
Excuse themselves from, present Duty. Such were the Excuses in our Text, for
not doing what they were bidden to do. They pretended necessity, I have bought
Land (says one) and I must needs, (...) ^e it, etc. They were Invited to a
Supp^^^* What, was the Evening, was Supper time, a proper Season to view Land,
and to prove Oxen? These were vain, frivilous Excuses indeed. Well, it is very
Natural for the sinful hearts of Men, thus to Object against and Excuse
themselves from their Duty. If they are moved and urged to Duty, not utterly
thoughtless of it; yet they are prone to make some Excuses or other (at least in
their own minds) for the neglecting of it. Since it is thus, the things
contrary hereto should be Prayed for. Therefore we should Pray,

1. That God would give us an Openness, Readiness and Freeness of heart to
confess our Sins. It Is an ill thing to Deny the Sins we are guilty of, to
pretend to hide them from God, to extenuate or lessen them in his Sight. Isai.
29.15. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and
their works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who knows us?
God pronounces a Woe against those, who pretend to hide their Sins from Him:
and when they try to Excuse them, this is a sort of Essay to hide them. Men
will gain nothing by such Methods, Prove. 28.13. He that covers his Sins shall
not prosper. But the more free and open Men are in confessing their Sins to
God, taking the blame and shame thereof to themselves, and trusting in His
Mercy in Christ for Pardon, so much the better twill be with them. The Psalmist
express^d a laudable Temper when he said, Psalm. 38.18. I will declare mine
iniquities, I will be sorry for my Sin. When a Person is free, hearty and open
in confessing his Sin to God, and in relying on his Mercy; then he is in the way
of ^ ^lessing. Psalm. ^2.5. I acknowledged my Sin unto (...) and mine Iniquity
have I not hid: I said I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. We should Pray therefore, that God would
Inlighten our Minds, Convince our Hearts and Consciences of our Offenses, make
us free and ready to confess them, and that He would help us to hope in His
Mercy for Pardon. We should Pray like Him: Psalm. 51.10. Create in me, a clean
heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. Job 34.32. That which I see
not, teach thou me: If I have done Iniquity, I will do so no more. Psalm.
139.23, 24. Search me, O God and know my heart; try me and know my thoughts.
And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way Everlasting.
We should Pray

2. That God would incline and strengthen us to Duty. God is the Giver of every
good Gift, Jam. 1.17. He Is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, He has all
hearts in His Hand, and can turn them which way he will; I say, since it is so,
we should Pray, that God would not leave us to our selves, to make vain
frivolous Excuses, or Objections against Duty, but that He would incline and
enable us to do duty. We should therefore Pray, Turn me and I shall be turned,
draw me and we will run after thee. So Psalm. 25.4, 5. Show me thy ways teach me
thy paths: lead me in thy truth and teach me. Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O
Lord, I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart to fear thy Name. Psalm. 119.133.
Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. Let
us thus Pray to God that He would keep us from making vain Excuses; that He
would make us truly Penitent for past Sins; and strengthen us to great
Sincerity, Constancy and Diligence in Duty for time to come.

DOCTRINE IV. Persons are apt to make VARIOUS Excuses for their Sins, or for
Neglecting the Duties they are Obliged to.
Our Text tells us concerning those bidden to the Feast, they all began to make
Excuse. Though all in General agre'd in this, even in making Excuses, yet every
one did not make the same Objection: they did not all insist on one and the
same Thing to Excuse their not coming. One made one Excuse and another made
another; One had Bought Land another Oxen, another had Married a Wife; and
their Concerns about these things hindered their coming. So that there was a
Variety of Impediments and Obstructions, some hindering one Person and some
another from their Duty. And thus it is, as to the Grand Affair of Coming to
Christ. Many Neglect it, some on one Pretense and some on another. Yea possibly
the same Particular Person, may have Various Pretenses in his own Mind, to
hinder him from Heartily Closing with Christ on Gospel Terms. Indeed Man's
Heart Naturally is Deceitful above all Things and Desperately Wicked, who can
know it? Jer. 17.9. There Is no knowing all the Deceit and Wickedness that is
Naturally there. Who can Number up the Various Objections and Pretenses they
secretly have or make against the most Necessary Important Duty that can be?
Besides the Natural Deceitfulness of their own Hearts, Satan makes use of
Numberless Wiles, Methods, Stratagems to Blind their Minds, and Hinder them
from Duty. It Is doubtless impossible to reckon up, the many and various Excuses
and Pretenses Sinners often have (partly from their own Hearts, partly from
Satan's Temptations) to hinder them from heartily receiving Christ as Offered in
the Gospel. However I Will mention some of them, and endeavor some Reply or
Answer thereto. Possibly some will secretly think to Excuse themselves,

EXCUSE I. Because of the Difficulties and Hardships they must expect, if they
Heartily Submit to Christ as Offered in the Gospel.
Strait is the Gate, Narrow is the Way that leads to Life. Those who would be
the Sincere Disciples of Christ, and obtain Salvation through Him; They must Deny
themselves, take up their Cross and follow him, Mat. 16.24. Our Lord said, Luke
14.26 If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters; yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. This Hating of his nearest Relatives and his own Life too, signifies
his Loving of Christ more than them, as it is Explained, Mat. 10.37, 59. He that
loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me. -- He that finds
his Life shall lose it. The plain meaning is, we must Love Christ above all
Creature Enjoyments whatever; so as to part with Liberty, Estates, all our
Outward Comforts, our Dearest Relatives, and Life it self too, rather than Deny
Christ, Sin against or Displease Him. It means that we must Deny our selves,
our most Beloved Lusts, though they have been Dear to us as a Right Hand or Right
Eye; we must Deny and Forego all manner of Self-Interest, that is Inconsistent
with Obeying and Honoring of Christ. We must cleave Close to Christ through
Thick and Thin, through all Difficulties, Reproaches, Sufferings though of
Death it self, that lie in the way of Obeying and Honoring Him. Thus must we
do, if we would Approve our selves the Sincere Disciples of Christ. Now some
are apt to Object against the Hardness and Difficulty of these Terms. They are
ready to say with the Slothful Man, Prove. 22.13. There is a Lion without, I
shall be slain in the Streets. And as, Joh. 6.60. This is an Hard Saying, who
can hear it? If none can be the True Disciples of Christ and Obtain Salvation
through Him, but on the Forementioned Terms; they are then ready to say as the
Disciples (when our Lord told them, It Is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye
of a Needle, than for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God) Who then can
be Saved? Mat. 19.24, 25. Indeed it is in the Wicked Hearts of Men to say,
God's Ways are not Equal, Ezekiel. 18.29. And to charge Him with being an Hard
Master, Mat. 25.24. They Reckon it Hard, Difficult, Unreasonable to comply with
the Terms which God proposes. They would be Excused from being Heartily,
Thoroughly, Practically Religious; because of the Difficulties and Hardships
which do or may attend such a Course of Life. Now to these Things I would say
Two Things by way of Concession; and then more Directly Reply or Answer to the
Objection.

1. It is truly an Hard Difficult Thing, to be a Sincere Practical Christian. A
Christian Life is compared to Wrestling, Running a Race, Fighting; which Imply
Difficulty and Opposition, and a Person's Exerting his Skill and Strength to
the Uttermost. It is no easy Thing for a Person to be sincerely and steadily
Watchful against his Spiritual Enemies, to with stand Satan's Temptations, to
subdue and m^^^ify his own Corruptions. Those most acquainted with Practical
Christianity, with the Power of Godliness; do know it is Difficult to Fight the
good Fight of Faith. A Sleepy, Sluggish, Careless Frame of Spirit, is not fit
for such Work as this. No, Persons must Watch and Pray, Watch and be Sober;
Gird up the Loins of their Minds, put on and manage the whole Armor of God:
They must steadily Resist their Spiritual Enemies. And indeed it is no easy
Thing, to be in such a Temper as this, to Maintain it and Act accordingly.
While we are here Clothed with Flesh, it is no easy Thing to have our
Affections Mortified to, and W^^ned from Outward Enjoyments; and to get and
keep our Hearts Close with God, making His Word our Rule, and His Glory our End
in all we do. This truly is Difficult Work, and requires Abundance of Care,
Prayer, constant Watchfulness and Diligence.

2. Those who will live as becomes True Disciples of Christ, may expect to meet
with more or less of Difficulties and Sufferings from without. 2. Tim. 3.12.
All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. Though no
doubt many Saints live long in the World, and Quietly go out of it at last,
without suffering Bonds, Imprisonments, Banishments, loss of Goods, much less
of Life for Christ's sake; yet there are no True Saints but what suffer
something more or less, for the sake of the True Religion. If they are not
Persecuted by the Hands, yet they are by the Tongues of some or other of the
Wicked. It is common for the Wicked to Hate, Revile, Reproach Godly Persons and
Practices too. Our Lord said to His Disciples, Joh. 15.19. If ye were of the
World, the World would love his own: but because ye are not of the World, but I
have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. The Holy
Prophets were Reviled, and had all manner of Evil spoken against them falsely
for Christ's sake, Mat. 5.10, -- 12. All therefore that will make Conscience of
their Ways, Walk Humbly and Closely with God, may expect to meet with
Sufferings more or less for Religion's sake: they may expect (to say the least)
to be Mocked, Jear'd, Scoffed at, if not grievously Slandered and Belyed by
some or other of the Wicked. Having mentioned these two Concessions, we may now
Answer directly to the Objection we are considering of, and say

1. Those who do not become the sincere Disciples of Christ, are yet liable to
meet with Difficulties and Sufferings even here in this present World. Piety is
not the only Practice, that meets with Difficulties and Sufferings. Those who
are never Pious, often meet with great Difficulties and Distresses. Evil
pursues Sinners -- the way of Transgressors is hard, Prove. 13.15, 21. Those
who think to escape Troubles, by being irreligious and regardless of God, are
much mistaken: they have no Promise of God to exempt them from Troubles, but
are indeed under His terrible Threatenings. They Are liable to and often meet
with great Troubles, both Outward and Inward.

1. Outward Troubles. The irreligious Neglectors of God, are as liable as other
Persons are, to be greatly Afflicted by Bodily Sickness and Pain, by the Death
of Relatives, by Disappointments in Business, by Outward Losses in their
Estate, whether it be by Fire, Storms, Unseasonable Weather, Common Thieves,
Robbers, Public Enemies, etc. As to things of this Nature, Gods Providence
often verifies that Word of His, Eccl. 9.1, 2. All things come alike to all,
there is one Event to the Righteous and to the Wicked. And then further, an
irreligious neglect of God, often pulls down heavy Outward Troubles on those
guilty of it. Romans 1.18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
When the Apostle had mentioned Fornication, Uncleanness, Covetousness, etc. he
adds, for which things sake the wrath of God comes on the Children of
Disobedience, Col. 3.5, 6. Though God sometimes suffers the Wicked to flourish a
while in great Prosperity; yet on the other hand, He often witnesses against
their Sins, by pouring down His Wrath, even heavy Judgments for them. Nay
further still, those who irreligiously neglect God, often take those Courses
which naturally tend to bring Outward Troubles and Mischiefs on them. Thus when
they give themselves up to Idleness, Gaming, Intemperance, Uncleanness, etc.
Such a course directly tends to Impoverish them; besides the disgrace and sting
of Conscience which they have into the Bargain. The Glutton and the Drunkard
shall come to Poverty, and Drowsiness shall cloth a Man with rags, Prove. 23.21.
Yea many Practices of the Wicked, tends not only to bring Poverty and Disgrace
among Men, but also Bodily Pains, Sicknesses, and Immature Death. Prove. 5.11.
And thou mourn at the last, when thy Flesh and thy Body are consumed. So that
such Sinners, are often Martyrs (as it were) for the Devil and for their own
Lusts; their serving of Sin and Satan, does as it were in a natural way bring
these Evils on them. Are they afraid, lest Persecutors should spoil them of
their Goods and impoverish them for their Piety? Why their sinful Practices
bring them to the same want and Poverty. Their Idling, Gaming, Drinking to
excess and other vile Practices, wast and consume their Estates that they are
not worth a Groat. Are they afraid, that if they should be seriously and
practically Godly, they should be meanly esteemed, nay reviled for being so?
Why their vile Practices render them mean and contemptible, in the esteem of
all who have any common Honesty or Sobriety. Are they afraid lest they should
suffer Bodily Punishments, Pains, Confinements for Religion sake? Why their
vicious Practices often bring those Bodily Pains, those Confinements by
Sickness which are very heavy and grievous. Nay, for their vicious wicked
Practices they are often justly Imprisoned, Fined, Whipped and otherwise
corporally Punished, yea sometimes put to Death. Thus many suffer Martyrdom (as
it were) for their Lusts: their Endeavors to gratify their Lusts, bring these
Miseries on them. For the sake of gratifying their Lusts, they rob and spoil
themselves of their Health, Ease, Credit, Liberty, Estate, yea and often of
their Lives too. Persons often procure to themselves by their wickedness, as
grievous Sufferings (in themselves considered) as the Godly almost ever meet
with from cruel Persecutors. And as the Wicked are thus liable to (and do often
meet with) great Outward Troubles; so they are liable to and often meet with,

2. Great Inward Troubles. Indeed some Sinners by long Practicing of
Wickedness, have in a Sort benumbed and stupifi'd their Consciences. Their
Consciences are seared as with an hot Iron, 2 Timothy 4.2. Being past feeling,
they give themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. But Sinners don't presently arrive at such a degree of
Stupidity, and Insensibility of Conscience as this is: they often meet with
many a rub and sting of Conscience, as they go on in their evil courses. The
very Heathen sometimes had their Thoughts accusing of them, Romans 2.15. Nor is
it easy to express the great Terrors of Soul, the amazing disquietments and
horrors of Conscience, which the wicked often meet with for their Sins. Isai.
57.20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. Indeed the wicked often have a Sort of War between their
own Lusts; though they have not grace and corruption opposing one another, (as
the Saints have) yet their Lusts do sometimes so struggle with one another, as
to occasion great disquietment to them. Griping Covetousness, pleads for
Holding fast what they already have of the World; and love to vain Company,
humane Applause, Uncleanness, Intemperance and other vicious Practices, pleads
hard for disbursing what they have, for it is gratification. So that there is
often a disquieting tumultuous War, even between their own Lusts. Again,
they are often Discontent, Murmuring, Repining, Fretting at the dispensations of
Divine Providence; Env^^ng the Prosperity of others: now these things fill them
with uneasiness and disquietment. And the reflections of Conscience they often
have, the Self-condemnings for their ill-Practices: these are unutterably
perplexing to them. They Are often so disrested by their accusing Consciences,
that they are afraid of themselves (as it were) afraid to be alone, afraid to
give way to any serious thinking. Nay they often get into vain Company, take to
excessive Drinking, and to other ill Practices; on purpose to stiffle the
noise, still the din, and dull the anguish and pain of their own Consciences.
And yet all the Methods they use, sometimes cannot give them any rest within;
their amazing horrors are unutterable, and sometimes wickedly put them upon
laying violent hands on themselves, as did the Cursed Traitor Judas. Now these
things which I have mentioned plainly show, that if any think to escape
Difficulties and Troubles by neglecting to be seriously Religious, they greatly
deceive themselves: for those who irreligiously neglect God, are liable to and
often meet with great Troubles Outward and Inward, even in this present World,
besides what they justly may look for in the next. Wherefore another Answer to
the Objection, about the Difficulties and Sufferings of a Religious Life may be,

2. We are not sure, that we shall meet with great Outward Sufferings for the
sake of Religion. Though if we are Seriously and Practically Godly, we may expect
Scoffs and Jears (at least) from some of the Ungodly and Profane; yet we don't
know that ever we shall be Persecuted in our Liberties, Persons or Estates. God
can grant to His Churches, such Rest as shall be for their Edifying and
Multiplying, Act. 9.31. God can restrain the Wrath of Men, and often does so.
If a Person becomes Practically Godly, and leads a long Life of true Piety, yet
possibly God may preserve him from bitter and heavy Persecutions all his days.
Or possibly Death may sometimes remove the endangered Saint, and so take him
away from the evil to come: Death puts the Godly beyond the reach of all
Persecutors. So that although we should Love Christ above all Outward
Enjoyments, and should be willing and ready to part with all of them rather
than displease Him; yet we don't certainly know that God will ever call us to
such a Trial. The Holy Ghost does not testify to all the Saints, as it did to
Paul; that Bonds and Afflictions abide them in every City, Act. 20.23.

3. If we should suffer never so much for Religion sake, yet those Sufferings
will be but very short. In general, our whole Life on Earth is but very short,
it is a Span, an Hand's Breadth, our days pass away like a swift Ship, like a
Tale that is told, like a vapor that appears for a little while and then
vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. If our whole Life should be filled with grievous
Persecutions for Christ's sake, yet they would be but very short. They are
called the Sufferings of this present time, (Romans 8.18.) and said to be but for
a Moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. What if our Houses, Lands, Estates should be taken away
by Persecutors? Why if they were not thus taken away, yet Death would soon
separate us from them. If our Lives should never be in Danger by Persecutors;
yet Death would soon end them. We must soon part with all our Outward
Enjoyments, and Life it self too, whether Persecutors ever molest us or not; so
that if Persecutors should take these away, we are only deprived of them but a
little sooner than otherwise it might have been. However, all Persecutions for
Christ's sake, will be but very short; therefore we should by no means be
frightened from Duty thereby.

4. When the Saints meet with great Sufferings for Religion, they commonly have
great Inward Consolations at the same time. The Soul is the chief part of Man.
It Is very certain, that Inward Distresses are more Grievous than Outward ones:
and so, Inward Rest, Ease, Quiet in the Mind is far preferable to any Outward
Prosperity whatever. Now when the Saints meet with Outward Sufferings for
Religion's sake; they often have great Inward Ease, Quiet, Holy Joy and
Satisfaction. The Apostles Rejoiced, that they were counted Worthy to Suffer
Shame for the Name of Christ. Act. 5.41. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. We Read of
Persecuted Saints, who took Joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, knowing in
themselves that they had in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance, Heb.
10.34. Though Paul and Silas were (for the sake of Religion) in Prison, with
their Feet fastened in the Stocks; yet such Inward Joy they had, that even at
Midnight they could Sing Praises to God, as well as Pray unto Him, Act. 16.24,
25. Persecuted Saints, have Gloried in Tribulation, Rejoiced in their Grievous
Sufferings. All the Scoffs, Jeers, Reproaches, Losses of Estate, Imprisonments,
Banishments, Bodily Pains and Punishments they can possibly meet with for
Piety's sake, are not so Grievous and Afflictive to them, as it is Pleasant and
Joyful to their Souls, to have their Consciences Testifying, that they have had
their Conversation in the World in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity; and their
knowing in themselves, that they have in Heaven a better and an Enduring
Substance. Hence they Choose the Ways of Piety, with all the Sufferings that can
possibly attend them; rather than all the Profits and Pleasures of an
Irreligious Life. This was Moses's Choice, Heb. 11.25, 26. Choosing rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season: esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt; for he had respect to the Recompense of Reward. This was
the Choice that Moses made; he Preferred a Life of True Piety with all the
Sufferings that could attend it, to a Life of Wickedness attended with the
Pleasures of Sin, the Honors of a Court, and the vast Treasures of Egypt.

5. It is Absolutely Necessary to be Seriously and Practically Religious, in
order to escape Future Endless Miseries, and to obtain Future Endless Glories.
There can be no reasonable Doubt or Dispute, about what is here Asserted. For He
that Believes not shall be Damned, Mark. 16.16. Without Holiness no Man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Why do any Object against being Religious, because of
the Difficulties that attend such a Life? Alas, if they are not Sincerely
Religious they must be Damned Eternally. Now all the Sufferings and
Persecutions Persons can possibly meet with in this World, are mere Nothing
compared to the Eternal Burnings of Hell, the Endless Torments of the Pit
below, the Unquenchible Flames of the Wrath of God: Yet we must be Practically
Godly, else we cannot possibly Escape Endless Inconceivable Miseries in the
Future World. We have showed but now, that when the Saints suffer for
Righteousness sake, they often have great Inward Joys at the same Time; but
besides all these present Joys, they shall have Rewards and Glories in the
Future World too. Great shall be their Reward in Heaven, Mat 5.10, -- 12. If
they suffer with Christ, they shall reign with Him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Now all the
Persecutions any can possibly sustain in this World are Small, Light, Trivial,
compared to the Happiness they shall have hereafter. Romans 8.18. For I reckon
that the Sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with
the Glory which shall be revealed in us. So 2. Cor. 4.17. For our Light
Affliction which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding and
an Eternal Weight of Glory.

These Things which I have mentioned show, that the Objection, Excuse or
Pretense against being Practically Religious, because of the Difficulties that
do or may attend such a Course, have no Weight in them: they are Empty and
Vain. It is our Wisdom and Interest to be Truly and Practically Godly,
notwithstanding all the Sufferings we can meet with for being so. Mat. 5.10, --
12. Blessed are they which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you, and Persecute
you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice
and be exceeding Glad; for great is your Reward in Heaven: for so Persecuted
they the Prophets that were before you.

SERMON VIII.
NOw to proceed, another Excuse or Objection which possibly Persons may
secretly have in their own Minds against Heartily Accepting of Christ on Gospel
Terms, may be:

EXCUSE II. They think they are safe and well enough already.
They are so Righteous in their own Conceit, that ^^ey see no need of Really
and Heartily submitting to Christ on Gospel Terms. I don't here suppose, that
any Ordinarily who sit under the Faithful Preaching of the Gospel, and call
themselves Christians, will directly Believe or Profess that they have no need
of Christ, of Faith in Him, of Repentance of Sin, and the like; No, for they
Profess to Repent of Sin, to Believe in Christ, to Obey God: And though they
never Heartily Received Christ on Gospel Terms, yet they Ignorantly Think they
are so Righteous, as that they are Entitled to Salvation and shall surely
Possess it. In a Word, the Fond, Ignorant Conceit they have of their own
Righteousness, keeps them from seeing their need of Christ's Righteousness. The
Conceit they have of their own Religion, keeps them from being Sincerely and
Practically Religious. Those mentioned in our Text who Refused to come to the
Feast, had enough of their own as they thought: One was Able to Buy Land,
another Oxen, another had Married a Wife and might think of Feasting at Home.
They made Light of the Invitation, one having a Farm, and another his
Merchandise, (Mat. 22.5.) they were so well Supplied themselves, that they did
not see their Need of what they were Freely Invited to. Alas, Self-Ignorance,
Self-Conceitedness, Ruins Multitudes. The way of a Fool is right in his own
Eyes, Prove. 12.15. There is a way that seems right unto a Man, but the end
thereof are the ways of Death, Prove. 16.25. There is a Generation, that are
Pure in their own Eyes, and yet is not washed from their Filthiness, Prove.
30.12. Some Trust in themselves that they are Righteous, Luke 18.9. They think
themselves something when they are nothing, and so Deceive themselves. On one
Account or other (though they never Really Embraced Christ on Gospel Terms)
they think themselves safe and going to Heaven. Possibly they are thus
Conceited of themselves, because they are the Children of the Covenant, were
Born of Professing Parents. The Jews were apt to Trust in this, They had
Abraham to their Father, Mat. 3.9. Or because of their Doctrinal Knowledge.
Romans 2.17, 18, Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make
thy ^oast of God; and know his Will, and approvest the things that are more
Excellent, being Instructed out of the Law, etc. Or because of their Freedom
from Gross, Scandalous Immoralities, like the Pharisee, God I thank thee that I
am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this
Publican, Luke 18.11. Or because of their Outward Acts of Piety and External
Obedience to the Law; they are ready to Plead, that they Pray, Fast, give
Tithes, etc. Luke 18.10, 12. So the Generality of the Jews had a Zeal for God
though not according to Knowledge, and being Ignorant of God's Righteousness,
and going about to establish their own Righteousness, they submitted not
themselves to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.2, 3. The Apostle Paul in his
Pharisaical State was, Touching the Righteousness of the Law Blameless, Phil.
3.6. And on this Account, he thought himself safe for Heaven. Therefore he
says, Romans 7.9. I was alive without the Law once. That is, before the Law in
it is Spiritual Extensive Nature, came Powerfully, and Efficaciously home to his
Conscience (showing him his great Sinfulness and Guiltiness) he thought himself
alive to God, and in the way to Eternal Life. It Is very likely that many who
Perish under the Gospel, do Split upon this Rock. They Build much upon their
Profession, upon calling Christ Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.21. They Profess the True
Religion, they Pray to God, Read His Word and Hear it Preached, keep Sabbaths,
attend on Ordinances, are free from Scandalous Immoralities; and they think,
surely they are in the Way to Heaven, surely God will save such Righteous
Persons as they are; and yet possibly they never Heartily Embraced Christ on
Gospel Terms. Indeed they do not see their Real Absolute Need of Christ, but
think themselves Well as they are. Now that Persons may no longer Deceive
themselves, no longer be thus Obstructed from Heartily Receiving Christ on
Gospel Terms; the Way to be taken with them is, To Endeavor their Conviction,
the Inlightening and Instructing of them, that they may not be Ruined by
Self-Deceivings.

To this End let it be Considered,

1. That all mere Men are Sinners, and so are liable to Eternal Death and
Misery. All have Sinned and come short of the Glory of God. By one Man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death has passed upon all
Men, for that all have Sinned, Romans 3.23. and 5.12. All Men as coming from
Fallen Apostate Adam, are Born Sinners, Sharers in the Guilt of Adam's First
Sin, have Hearts full of Enmity and Rebellion against God: They are Children of
Wrath by Nature (Ephesians. 2.3.) Condemned by God's Holy Law to sustain Eternal
Miseries.

2. Men cannot possibly be Justified before God, and Saved, by any Inherent
Personal Righteousness of their own. They Deserve Death by the Righteous Law of
God, and are not able by any Works of their own whatsoever, to Satisfy His
Justice for the Crimes they are Guilty of; nor to Purchase, Merit or Deserve
His Favor. By the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be Justified in his
sight, Romans 3.20. Indeed we Owe our selves, all that we are and have to God,
and should Glorify Him with our Bodies and Spirits, with all our Inward and
Outward Abilities, with our Whole Man we should (...) Romans 4.^, 6. But to him
that Works not, but Believes on him that Justifies the Ungodly; his Faith
is counted for Righteousness. -- Unto whom God imputes Righteousness without
Works.

Therefore,

4. A Person must be Convinced that his own Righteousness can never Save him,
else he will not Trust in Christ's Righteousness for Justification. Christ came
not to call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance: the Whole need not a
Physician but the Sick. Every Month must be stopped, and all the World become
Guilty before God, Romans 3.19. Men must see Sin to be a Load and Burden, else
they will not come to Christ for Rest, Mat. 11.28. They must see themselves in
Danger of God's Devouring Vengeance, else they will not fly for Refuge to the
Hope set before them, Heb. 6.18. If they are not Convinced, that they are
Wretched, Poor, Miserable, Blind and Naked, they will not come to Christ for
Tried Gold, and White Raiment, Rev. 3.17, 18. Indeed Particular Persons must
see themselves Sinful, Guilty, Obnoxious to Divine Revenging Justice, that
their own Works or Righteousness can never Justify or Save them, else they
will never go out of themselves, Renounce all Confidence in the Flesh, count
their own Righteousness as Flthy Rags, and Trust Wholly and Only in Christ's
Righteousness for Justification before God. The Gospel Way of Saving Sinners,
takes away all Matter of Boasting and Glorying from Men, and Ascribes the whole
Glory to the Sovereign Grace of God in Christ. It Is of God's mere Mercy and
Grace, that He Imputes Christ's Righteousness to us, on our Believing in Him,
and so Justifies and Saves us. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.5. By Grace ye are saved,
through Faith; and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. Not of
Works, lest any Man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. If Abraham had been Justified
before God by his own Works, he would have had whereof to Glory, but the
Scripture tells us, He had not whereof to Glory before God, Romans 4.2. Boasting
is excluded -- by the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. No Man has any Personal Works or
Righteousness of his own to Boast or Glory of before God; but to the Believing
Sinner, Christ is of God made Wisdom Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption; that he that Gloryeth might Glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
These things do prove, that a mere External, Religious, Blameless Course of
Life, a Freedom from Gross Scandalous Immoralities, is no sure Evidence of a
Person's being Interested in God's Reconciled Favor, and so Entitled to
Eternal Life. Some Outwardly appear Righteous before Men, who are Inwardly full
of Iniquity and Hypocrisy, Mat. 23.28. Therefore notwithstanding all our own
Works (the best of which are Imperfect, and have Sin mixed with them)
notwithstanding all our External, Religious Privileges or Performances; we
must yet see, that in and of our selves we are Sinful and Guilty, that we
Deserve Eternal Damnation, that our own Works can never Justify or Save us;
and that we must Heartily Repent of Sin, Trust in Christ's Righteousness alone
for Justification, as ever we expect to be Saved. Thus we must Receive Christ,
or we cannot be Happy. And if we have long since thus Trusted in Him, yet we
ought to continue so doing as long as we live. And if we have such Faith as is
True and of the Right Kind, 'twill Purify the Heart, -- and work by Love,
(Act. 15.9. Gal. 5.6.) and put us upon yielding Steady, Unfeigned Obedience
unto God. And yet if we have performed never so many Acts of such Obedience,
they are not to be Trusted in, but Christ's Righteousness Only, as Meritorious
of God's Favor. When we have done our Best, we must count our selves
Unprofitable Servants. Again, some are ready to Excuse themselves from coming
to Christ, or Object against their Receiving of Him on Gospel Terms:

EXCUSE III. Because they Doubt there is no Saving Mercy to be had, for such
Vile, Abominable Sinners as they are.
They Reckon the (...) Sinned so much, so long, so grievously, that there is no
Mercy for them. They Despair of Salvation, they Think it would be in vain for
them to Hope or Trust in Christ, Reckoning they should Gain nothing by it if
they did; and so they Think they had as good take their Pleasure in their own
Sinful Ways as long as they can. Thus it is said of some, Psalm. 78.22. They
Believed not in God, they Trusted not in his Salvation. So we Read of others
who said, Jer. 2.25. There is no Hope, No, for I have loved Strangers, and
after them I will go. Jer. 18.12. They said, there is no Hope, but we will walk
in our own Devices, and we will every one do the Imagination of his Evil Heart.
Now to Answer and Remove this Wicked Despairing Objection, the Best Way is,
Plainly to set forth what the Scripture says, about God's Readiness to Save the
Worst of Sinners that Penitently Believe in Christ Jesus. We have already
showed, that wherever the Gospel is Faithfully Preached, Salvation is Offered
to all Sorts of Sinners that will come to Christ; all Things are Ready on His
Part. Yet in Reply to the present Objection, we may here Distinctly Consider,

1. That Christ Died on Purpose to save Sinners. The only Begotten Eternal Son
of God, took our Nature into Personal Union which Himself, and in our Nature
Died on the Cross a Sacrifice to God's Justice, on purpose to save Sinners. He
gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. He once suffered, the Just for the
Unjust that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. The Apostle Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
came to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. It Is a most true and faithful saying
(as well as most weighty) worthy to be Credited, Believed, Relied on by all
that ever hear it, that Christ came to save Sinners, even chief Sinners. Christ
came into the World and Died, on purpose to save poor, vile, abominable
Sinners, such as deserved no favor, such as deserved nothing but terrible
destructive Wrath and Vengeance from God. Do you Doubt whether Christ will save
vile Sinners? Why He Died on purpose to save such.

2. God sent His Son Christ Jesus into the World on this very Errand, even to
save Sinners. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World, as to give His only Begotten
Son; that whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, but should have
Everlasting Life. God was justly Offended with Sinners, yet of His own Heart He
had pity on them, a love for their Welfare: therefore that He might without any
reflection on His Justice and Holiness make them happy, He sent His own Eternal
Son on purpose to purchase Salvation for them. As to Sinners, this was God's
End and Design, the thing He aimed at, even their Salvation; though as to
Himself, the Supreme End He aimed at was, the Glory of His own Sovereign Grace.
Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of His Grace. Now since it was God's
declared End, Aim, Design in sending His Son into the World; Namely, that all
who Believe in Him should be Saved, why should any Doubt of His Willingness to
save such? Even Men, don't care to be put by what they studiously aim at and
design; and surely God does not.

3. The Scripture plainly declares Christ's Ability and Willingness, to save
all those that trust in Him. Heb. 7.25. He is Able to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by Him. Christ is an Able Savior, a Mighty
Savior, an Almighty Savior. There Is no Case can come before Him, that is too
difficult for Him. There Is Virtue enough in His Blood, to cleanse from the most
heinous Transgressions that are truly Repented of, even from Scarlet
Crimson-coloured Sins, Isai. 1.18. His Blood cleanses from all Sin, 1 John
1.7. And He is as Willing as He is Able, to save all that trust in Him. He has
expressly said, Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
Him that comes, be he who or what he will, if the greatest Criminal in the
World; if he comes to Christ by true Faith, shall by no means be rejected, but
shall most certainly be Saved. Why then should any Doubt in this Case?

4. Great Sinners are strongly Invited to Christ, and Mercy promised to them if
they will come. Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters,
and he that has no Money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come buy Wine and Milk
without Money and without Price. This is an Invitation to Sinners, to come to
Christ and accept Salvation freely Offered to them; though they have no Money
(nor Money's worth) no Price to lay down for the Blessings Offered. Our Lord
Redeemer said, Joh. 7.37. If any Man thirst (any Man, any Sinner whatsoever,
though never so Vile and Criminal; if he thirst, thirsts after Salvation in the
Gospel way) let him come unto me and drink. So, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. All whose Sins are
grievous and burthensom to them, are Invited to come unto Christ by Faith; and
He promises them rest if they will come. Rev. 22.17. -- Let him that is athirst
come. And whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely. What
Invitation can be more Kind, General or Extensive? Whosoever will, though never
so great a Sinner, yet if he will come to Christ he shall be fully and freely
Saved. Does not this Invitation reach to the worst of Sinners, that will accept
it? Yes indeed. If one should say to you, Here Is Gold enough, Silver enough,
whoever will let him come and take of it, and supply himself; I say, If any one
should seriously make such an Offer, Doubtless none of you would think your
selves Excluded. Well, the Gospel Invitation is as General and Extensive, and
it is an Invitation to better things than Gold and Silver. Why then should any
Despair? If the worst of Sinners will heartily come to Christ, they shall
certainly be Saved. Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way and the
unrighteous Man his thoughts; and let him turn to the Lord, and He will have
Mercy upon him, and to our God for He will abundantly pardon. The Wicked, the
Unrighteous, (without any Limitation, and therefore) though never so grossly and
scandalously Wicked and Unrighteous, are called upon to turn to God. And here is
God's Word for it, that He will abundantly pardon such if they do turn. And the
God who says these things, is a God of Unchangible Truth, He cannot Lie, Tit.
1.2.

5. Very great Sinners have found Mercy and Favor with God, upon their turning
to Him. Manasseh was a very great Sinner, scarce any like him for wickedness,
and great Afflictions were brought on him for his wickedness; yet when he
humbled himself greatly and besought the Lord, the Lord was Entreated of him, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. Paul was a very great Sinner, a Blasphemer, a fierce and
bloody Persecutor; yet upon his Penitently trusting in Christ, he obtained
Mercy. He admires the Saving Mercy of Christ to himself a chief sinner, 1 Timothy
1.15. Great Sinners among the Corinthians, such as Idolaters, Adulterers,
Thieves, Drunkards, etc. obtained Pardoning Saving Mercy with God through Christ,
1 Cor. 6.9. -- 11.

6. None were ever known to be Rejected, that came to Christ for pardoning
Mercy. The Lord has said, He would cast out none that come, Joh. 6.37. And it was
never known that He acted contrary to this. There was never known so much as
any one Person, in any Place, or Nation, or Age of the World, that ever came to
Christ; that came Repenting of Sin and Trusting in Him, and was yet Rejected
and sent away Unpardoned. There cannot be given so much as any one Instance, of
any Person thus Rejected, among all the Millions of Persons that have been from
the beginning of the World to this very day.

7. God is greatly pleased with those that Trust in Him, and pleased in showing
Favor to them. God is so far from Rejecting any, that Penitently Trust in His
Mercy through Christ; that indeed He is Pleased which them, and takes Pleasure
in doing them Good. He takes pleasure in them that Hope in his Mercy, Psalm.
147.11. God is Angry with those who Trust not in His Salvation, Psalm. 78.21,
22. But He is most Pleased with those who most Humbly and Firmly Hope in His
Mercy in Christ. Abraham's strong Faith Glorified God, Romans 4.20. God takes
Pleasure and Delight in Extending of His Grace and Goodness in a Gospel Way; He
Glorifies Himself in doing it. When Moses Prayed to God saying, I beseech thee
show me thy Glory; God said, I will make all My Goodness pass before thee, and
will Proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee; and will be Gracious to whom I
will be Gracious: and will show Mercy on whom I will show Mercy, Exodus 33.18,
19. Moses desired to see God's Glory, and God tells Him He will make all His
Goodness pass before Him, and will be Gracious, etc. God Glorifies Himself
Abundantly, in Extending of His Grace and Goodness to Returning Sinners.
Therefore when God Proclaimed His Name to Moses, 'twas this, Exodus 34.6, 7. The
Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin. This is God's Name, Men are commonly known by their
Names; God would be always known by this Name of His, even by His readiness to
forgive Iniquity Transgression and Sin, to all Penitent Believing Sinners. God
will not deny His Name, He would be known by it. To say, that God will not Pardon the
Penitent Believing Sinner; is to Blot and Raze out His Name, and to hinder Him
from being known a-right in the World. God will never Deny His Name, nor will
He ever Break His Word, or Act contrary to His Oath. He has given His Word and
His Oath, th^^ He will Pardon and Save all Penitent Believing Sinners. Heb.
6.18. That by Two Immutable things, in which it was Impossible for God to Lie,
we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge to lay hold on the
Hope set before us. The Apostle says, He that Believes not God, has made him
a Liar, because he Believes not the Record that God gave of His Son, 1 John
5.10. And as such an one makes God a Liar, that is, carries it to Him as if He
were a Liar; so he makes Him False to His Oath too, that is, carries it as if
He really were so. Oh how Vile is this! No, God will not Deny His Name, Break His
Word or Oath, but will surely Pardon all True Penitents. He takes Pleasure in
doing it. Micah. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that Pardons Iniquity,
and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage; he retains
not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. Zeph. 3.17. The Lord
thy God in the midst of thee is Mighty: He will save, he will ^ejoyce over thee
with Joy: He will rest in his Love, he will Joy over thee with Singing. Thus
Pleased, Satisfied, Delighted God is, in Extending of His Saving Mercy to those
who Sincerely Trust in Him. Men cannot possibly Please and Glorify God in any
thing, like Penitently Hoping in His Mercy through Christ for Salvation: When
they do thus, they Approve, Acknowledge and Glorify His Wisdom, Righteousness,
Holiness, Grace, Faithfulness, even all His Attributes Shining in the Great
Affair of Redemption; God takes Abundant Pleasure in Extending His Saving Mercy
to such.

These Things being Seriously Considered and laid together, may suffice to
show, that there is no Ground at all for Sinners (even the Chief of them) to
Despair of God's Pardoning Mercy in Christ, if they will Penitently Trust in
Him for it. They have no reason to fear, but that if they Penitently Trust in
Christ for Salvation, they shall surely have it. To proceed, some would Excuse
themselves from coming to Christ:

EXCUSE IV. By Pleading their own Inability.
They say, they cannot by any Power of their own Convert themselves; no Man can
come to the Son except the Father draws him. They Plead their own Inability,
and so think to Excuse themselves from Heartily Submitting to Christ.

Answ. Though Sinners cannot by their own Power Convert themselves; yet,

1. They may if ^^ey will, avoid many things which tend to (...) their
Conversion. When Persons allow themselves in Gross Crimes, in Bad
Company-Keeping, in Repeated Acts of known Sin, etc. This tends to Harden them
in Sin more and more. Now they may avoid such Things as these if they will.

2. They may if they will do many Things which have a Tendency to promote their
Conversion. They may if they will, Diligently Read God's Word, and hear it
Preached: Diligently Examine themselves, Consider how Matters are between God
and their Souls, and how it is like to fare with them. They may carefully choose
Good Company, and shun bad, may studiously promote Pious Discourse, Speaking
about the Nature and Necessity of Faith, Repentance, forgiveness of Sin; about
the glories of Heaven and the torments of Hell. They may diligently and
studiously do these things if they will, and these have a proper Tendency to
promote their Spiritual Saving Good.

3. They should Pray earnestly to God for Concerting Grace. He can take away
the heart of Stone, and give an heart of Flesh: can create a clean heart and
renew a right spirit within them: God can give them true Faith and Repentance.
Surely then, since their Eternal Salvation is a matter of the greatest weight
that possibly can be, all other Matters are mere nothing compared to it; I say,
since it is thus, they should most Earnestly and Importunately Pray to God for
Converting Grace. They should Pray, as Hos. 14.2. Take away all iniquity and
receive us graciously. Yea they should continue Praying till they do obtain. If
they have Prayed several times and not obtained, yet they should not give over
Praying. Those who sought Corn of Joseph in time of Famine, they must wait his
leisure for their obtaining it. If they had waited sometime and were not
supplied, yet they must not go away in a pet, and think they would wait no
longer. What would they have got by this? Why they must have gone without Corn,
and starved and perished, for none but Joseph could supply them. Genesis 41.53 --
57. So Sinners should keep waiting on and Praying to God, for His Grace. Our
Lord spoke a Parable to this end, that Men ought always to Pray and not to
faint, Luke 1^.1. Surely then, Sinners should never Excuse their neglecting of
Christ, under a pretense of their Inability to Convert themselves. Whatever
they pretend of their Inabillity, yet they have Unwillingness at the bottom.
Christ said to the Jews, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have
Life. Well, Pray to God, that He would work in you both to will and to do of
his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Was it ever known that any Sinner who did
all he could for the saving of his Soul, and Importunately and Unweariedly
Prayed to God for Coverti^^ Grace; did yet miss of Salvation? There Is (...)
Instance can be given of this. Be Encouraged therefore to Pray. God has said,
Prove. 8.17. They that seek me early shall find me. Mat. 7.^. Ask and it shall
be given you: seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened to you. From
the readiness of Parents, to give good things to their Children that ask them;
Our Lord says, Luke 11.13. How much more, shall your heavenly Father give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Do these Scriptures stand for Ciphers in your
Bibles? Is there no encouragement in them? You say you cannot Convert your
selves, Well, the more you see your need of the Strength and Grace of God, so
much the more Importunately and Incessantly Pray for it; and don't neglect Duty
under a pretense of Inability. Surely if you perish, your destruction will be
of your selves: God and His Throne will be fear for ever. If you would do as
much for the saving of your Souls, as you do to get Outward good things, your
case would look hopeful. By all your Contrivance and Diligence, you cannot
obtain an Harvest from the Seed you sow, nor indeed can you obtain one Meals
Meat, or have any good by what you do Eat, without the Blessing of God. And yet
you will Think, Plot, Contrive, Labor and Toil for Outward good things; though
you cannot get one of them without Gods blessing. Surely then, If you should
neglect Christ under a pretense of your own Inability, and so perish for ever;
You will be condemned out of your own Mouths. Samson Prayed for Strength to
overthrow the house on which the Philistines were; and then tried to exert the
Strength Prayed for, Judge. 16.28, 29. So, Pray that God would help you heartily
to Repent and Believe; and then in his Strength set about these Duties. Ezekiel.
33.11. -- Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house
of Israel.

SERMON IX.
LUKE XIV. 21, 22, 23, 24. So that Servant came, and showed his lord these
things. Then the Master of the house being angry, said to his Servant, Go out
quickly into the Streets and Lanes of the City, and bring in hither the poor,
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.

And the Servant said, Lord, it is done as thou have commanded and yet there is
room.

And the lord said unto the Servant, Go out into the high ways and hedges, and
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.

For I say unto you, that none of these men which were bidden, shall taste of
my Supper.


IN the three Verses Immediately preceding these, we find, that those Invited
to the Feast excused themselves, and refused to come: they mentioned their
excuses to the Servant that Invited them. In our Text now read, we find, that
the Servant who received their Negative Answer (or Excuses) came and told his
Lord of it, Informed him of what he had met with. Here upon, the Master of the
house was angry, and resolved that those who refused his kind Invitation,
should never taste of his Supper: he also orders his Servant to Invite others,
since those first bidden refused to come. Though doubtless (as was hinted before)
one principle scope or design of this Parable was, to set forth the Rejection
of the Jews upon their refusing to believe in Christ, and the Calling of the
Gentiles (whom the Jews esteemed as Poor, Lame, Blind despicable wretched
Creatures) Yet this part of the Parable now read, may furnish us with various
distinct and profitable Observations. viz.

DOCTRINE. I. Servants should Obey, and are accountable to their Masters.
The Servant mentioned in this Parable was ready to Go at his Master's Sending,
and Do at his Bidding. v. 22. Lord, it is done as thou have commanded. As he
thus did what he was bidden, so he as readily gave an account to his Master, of
what he had done, and what he had met with in the business he was managing.
Though what is said about the conduct of this Servant, seems to be added to fill
up the frame of the Parable, and to render the Parts of it harmonious and
agreeable; Yet it may plainly Intimate to us the behavior that becomes
Servants, Yea the behavior of Gods Messengers, Ministers who seem to be
Principally Intended by the Servant here spoken of. We may therefore under this
Doctrine take notice:

1. That Servants ought to Obey their Masters. All Persons are not on a Level;
order must be upheld in the World. The Superiors in a Family, should be Obeyed
by their Inferiors: Parents, and Masters, by their Children and Servants. The
Centurion witnessed for the ready Obedience of his Servants: Mat. 8.9. I say --
to my Servant, do this, and he does it. And truly such ready Obedience of
Servants to their Masters, is no more than what Gods word plainly requires.
Col. 3.22. Servants, Obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh.
Tit. 2.9. Exhort Servants to be Obedient to their own Masters, and to please
them well in all things. Thus, God the Maker and Master of all Men, requires
Servants to Obey all the Commands of their Masters; that is all lawful
Commands. For if Masters or any Superiors among Men, should command their
Servants or Inferiors to Lie, Steal or commit any wickedness; such commands
ought not to be obeyed. It Is a standing rule for ever, concerning all Persons
in the World, that they ought to obey God rather than men, Act. 5.29. But on
the other hand, the lawful commands of Masters ought to be Obeyed by their
Servants; and of those Servants who Obey them not, we may say as in another
case: 1 These. 4.8. He that despises, despises not Man but God. Those Servants
who are Proud, Stubborn, disobedient to the lawful commands of their Masters;
they despise God, trample on His Authority, trample on that order that He has
set up among Men: they deserve not only the displeasure of their Masters, but
also the wrath of the Lord God Almighty.

2. Gospel Ministers should faithfully convey the Message, and do the business
that God Orders them. Those employed by God, to declare his Mind and Will to
the Children of Men; are especially Intended by Servants in this Parable. God
requires Ministers to Invite Sinners to the Gospel-Feast, to Invite them to
Christ, and Exhort them to live as becomes such. Ministers should faithfully
Obey God, in delivering his Important Messages unto Men; they should deliver
his whole Counsel to them, withold nothing from them that might be profitable
to them, testifying both Repentance toward God and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. They should teach them to deny Ungodliness and World ly Lusts,
and to live Soberly, Righteously, Godly in this present evil World, Tit. 2.12.
They should plainly tell Men from Gods word, That it shall go well with the
Righteous, they shall eat the fruit of their doings; but woe shall be to the
wicked, for the reward of their hands shall be given them. Isai. 3.10, 11.
Indeed they should plainly tell Men of their Sin and danger, of their Duty and
Encouragements to it: they should faithfully declare Gods Mind and Message to
them, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear, ( Ezekiel. 2.7.) And
it is at their Peril if they neglect thus to warn them.

3. Servants are accountable to their Masters for what they do. As they ought
to go where their Masters send them, do what they bid them, so they should as
readily make a return, and give an account of what they have done. The Servant
in our Text did so, v. 21. He showed his Lord these things. So, Ministers of
the Gospel are accountable to God for the whole of their management. Indeed God
is the Maker, Lawgiver and Judge of all Men, and therefore every one of us must
give an account of himself to God, Romans 14.12. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of God, that every one may receive the things done in the Body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. Every
humane Person is thus accountable to God, for the whole of his Behavior. So
Ministers as well as others are accountable to God for the whole of their
Behavior; yea for the whole of their management in their Office-work. They are
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and it is required of Stewards that a Man be
found faithful, 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. And they must also give an account of their
Stewardship; must be tried by their Great Lord and Master whether they have
been Faithful or not, and must be dealt with accordingly. If they have been
Faithful in their Office-work, they have delivered their own Souls, and shall
receive a gracious Reward. If they are Faithful, they are unto God a sweet
savor of Christ, in them that are Saved and in them that Perish, 2 Cor. 2.15.
But if any Souls Perish for want of Faithful warning, the Blood of those Souls
will be required at the hands of their Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.8.

And since Ministers are thus accountable to God for their Office Acts, all
their Official Admin^strations; surely they should diligently obs^^v^^ ^hether
their Endeavors for the Spiri^^^ good of Men are Successful or not. If they
find them Successful, they should be thankful to God for it. 2 These. 1.3. We
are bound to thank God always for you Brethren, as it is meet, because that
your Faith grows exceedingly, and the Charity of every one of you all toward
each other abounds. And if their Endeavors are Unsuccessful with Sinners,
this also they should take notice of, mourn for it, and bear the Matter still
on their hearts before God. Our Savior was grieved for the hardness of Men's
hearts, Mark 3.5. He Wept over Jerusalem, for their not minding the things of
their Peace in the Season thereof, Luke 19.41, 42. The Apostle said, Romans 10.1.
My hearts desire and Prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be Saved.
Thus he Prayed for them, although when he had Preached to them, some believed the
things that were spoken by him and some believed not, Act. 28.24. Some were
bettered by his Preaching, and some not. And doubtless it is thus, with most if
not all the Faithful Ministers of Christ; some submit to the Divine Message
they deliver, and some submit not. But Oh, how doleful and dreadful will be the
case of Unbelievers, when even their own Ministers must make such a report of
them to God, as the Servant in our Text did, concerning those who being Invited
to the Feast refused to come? How doleful when their Ministers thus testify to
God of them,

Lord, I Invited these Persons to come to the Gospel Feast (as thou did Order
me) I urged them from thy Word to come to Christ, told them that all things
were ready on His part; but yet they would not come: they made Excuses, they
made light of the Invitation, and went away one to his Farm and another to his
Merchandise* I did all I could to save their Souls, but they were so taken up
with the Profits, Pleasures, Honors of a sinful World, that they would not
comply with thy Message which I Faithfully delivered to them: as to any good
done to these Sinners, I have labored for naught and spent my strength in
vain.

Oh how terrible will it be to Sinners, to have Faithful Ministers thus
testifying against them to the Great God! The Apostle says, Heb. 13.17. Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your Souls as they that must give an account; that they may do it with joy and
not with grief, for that will be unprofitable for you. It Is matter of Joy to
Faithful Ministers, when their Endeavors are blessed for saving good to Souls.
1 These. 2.19, 20. For what is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? Are not
even ye in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His coming? For ye are our
Glory and Joy. With what Triumphant Joy and Gladness will Faithful Ministers
give up their account of such Pious Souls at last? But when Persons refuse
their wholesome Counsels, and go on obstinately in ways of Wickedness; this is
very grievous to them, and the account they must give to God will be
unprofitable to such Sinners. Unprofitable indeed, when their Faithful
Ministers, as well as their own Consciences shall testify against them for
their Wickedness. Hearken, Oh Sinners, the Great God sends His Ministers, His
Messengers to you with this Message, viz.

Oh Repent of all your Sins, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, give up your
selves entirely and continually unto Him, that you may obtain Eternal Salvation
by Him.

This is Gods Message to you by His Ministers, and what return would you have
them make to the Great GOD that sends them? When the Prophet brought a Message
from God to David, he said to him, 2 Samuel 24.13 -- Now advise and see, what
answer I shall return to him that sent me. So, Oh Sinner, let thine Heart and
Conscience say, what Answer shall Ministers give to God, what Account
concerning thy entertaining or refusing the Messag^ (...) sends by them unto
thee. Would you have them make unto God such a return as this? viz.

Lord, I faithfully declared thy Mind and Message, to these Sinners, but they
would not hear. In thy Name I called to them, but they refused; I stretched out
my hand, but they regarded not; they set at naught all my Counsels and would
none of my Reproof. I did beseech them to be Reconciled to God, to turn and
live; but yet they turned a deaf Ear, they continued regardless of God, of
Christ, of the Everlasting Welfare of their Precious Immortal Souls. They gave
more heed to the Temptations of Satan, than to the sweet alluring Invitations
of Christ: they always chose the Paths of Sin, would not be Reclaimed: they
were always more concerned to gratify a Lust, than they were to Save their
Souls; this, O Lord has been their Carriage.

Well Sinner, would thou have Ministers give to the Great GOD such an Account
as this concerning thee. If they should be able (through thine obstinacy) truly
to give such an Account of thee in the Judgment Day; sure I am, 'twould be
Unprofitable to thee. For then thy Glorious Judge will treat thee as an
obstinate unreclaimable Rebel. He will say of thee, as for that mine Enemy who
would not that I should Reign over him, bring him hither and slay him before
me. He Will say to thee, Depart thou Cursed one, into Everlasting Fire prepared
for the Devil and for his Angels. Oh Doleful Sentence!

DOCTRINE II. If some Sinners Refuse the Offers of Christ and Salvation through
Him, this cannot hinder God from making the like Offers to others.
When the Servant in our Text told his Lord, that those Bidden to the Feast
Refused to come; his Lord then sends him to Invite others, even the Poor,
Maimed, Halt and Blind. God's Grace is Free, He may Offer it to whom He will:
He may do what He will with His own. God may take away His Vineyard from those
who will not yield Him the Fruit of it, and may let it out to others. If the Jews
Refuse Christ (He came to His own and His own Received Him not, Joh. 1.11.) God
may Offer Him to the Gentiles. Through their Fall Salvation is come unto the
Gentiles -- The Fall of them is the Riches of the World -- The casting away of
them, is the reconciling of the World, Romans 11.11, 12, 15. Is he the God of the
Jews only; is he not of the Gentiles also; yea of the Gentiles also, Romans 3.29.
Paul and Barnabas said to the Contradicting Blaspheming Jews, It was necessary
that the Word of God should first have been spoken unto you; but seeing ye put
it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of Everlasting Life, lo we turn to
the Gentiles, Act. 13.46. One Nation's Refusing the Gospel, cannot hinder God
from sending it to another: One Town or Family Refusing of it, cannot hinder
it is being sent to another. If Salvation through Christ be Refused by Parents
or Masters, this cannot exclude Children or Servants from the Offer of it: If
Children or Servants Refuse it, this cannot hinder the Offer being made to
their Parents or Masters. If Salvation be Refused by Sober, Civilized Persons,
this cannot hinder the Offer from being made to Publicans and Harlots, to the
most Gross, Scandalous Transgressors: If it be Refused by one Neighbor, this
cannot hinder the Offer of it to another.

And therefore,

1. Let none think that God would be really Obliged or Indebted to them, if
they should Heartily Acce^t the Offers of the Gospel. God is Self-sufficient,
A^sufficient, He needs none of His Creatures, nor any of their Services: They
cannot possibly give to Him any thing but His own, but what He had a previous
Unalienable Right to. It Is of His Pleasure, that all Things are and were
Created, Rev. 4.11. It Is of His Free, Sovereign, Overflowing Goodness that He
has Made Men, that He Preserves them, bestows many Outward Benefits on them;
and that He Offers to some of them Free Salvation through Christ. Let none think
therefore, that God can be Really or Properly Beholden or Indebted to them, for
any Submission or Obedience they can possibly Yield to Him. Indeed He is
Pleased with those who Heartily Submit to Christ: Takes pleasure in them that
hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 147.11. But it is of His Infinite Sovereign Grace that
He does so, not that He is Really or Properly Benefitted by their Hoping aright
in His Mercy. O Sinner, if thou do Heartily Receive Christ as Offered in the
Gospel, thou art properly the Gainer (really Bettered and Benefitted) and not
God; thou art Inconceivably Indebted to Him, He not at all to thee. And don't
think on the other Hand, that God would be Really and Properly a Loser by thee,
if thou should Refuse Christ. For if thou should be thus Wicked, though God
would be Dishonored and Provoked thereby, yet He would Eternally Glorify His
Justice in thine Inconceivable Misery. And as for His Sovereign Grace in
Christ, if that be not Glorified in thy Salvation, because thou do Wickedly
Refuse it; yet God can and will Glorify it in the Salvation of others. Thy
Refusing His Offered Grace and Salvation, cannot hinder Him from Glorifying His
Grace in the Salvation of many others. If thou will not come to Christ when
Invited, don't think that God must therefore lose the Glory of His Grace. No,
No, He can Offer it to others, to the Poor, Halt, Blind (and cause them to
Accept it too if He will) He will not be Really and Properly a Loser, a Sufferer
by thee, if thou should Refuse His Gracious Offers. If thou should be thus
Foolish and Wicked, He Will Damn thee for it; but He Will find other Objects on
which to Glorify His Sovereign Grace.

2. Let not any Neglect coming to Christ merely because others Refuse Him. In
this Parable containing our Text, when some Refused the Invitation given them
to the Feast, the Servant was bidden to Invite others. Oh Sinner, are there
such and such of thy Neighbors who Refuse Christ, do they refuse the Calls of
God, the Gracious Invitations of the Gospel; going on still in their
Wickedness, Profaneness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Dishonesty, or any Unholy
Practice? Do they thus Refuse Christ? yet let not this hinder thee from coming.
If they Finally Refuse Christ, they shall not Taste of God's Supper, of the
Feast of Salvation they are Invited to, but shall Perish for ever; howbeit, God
calls on thee to come. Their Refusal cannot Excuse thee, if thou should
Neglect coming Their ill Example, cannot Excuse thee if thou do Imitate it.
Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a Multitude to do Evil. If great Multitudes
should Neglect Christ, yet do not thou follow them, do not thou Act like them.
Have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness. If none in the same
Seat or Pew with thee should Submit to Christ, yet God bids thee Submit to Him.
If those of the same Neighborhood with thee, of the same Family with thee; yea
if the Wife of thy Bosom should Refuse to Accept of Christ; yet God bids thee
Accept of Him, and their Refusal cannot possibly Excuse thee if thou Neglect
Him. If none in an whole Town or Congregation should Heartily Accept of Christ,
but only one Person; then that one would be in the right though alone, and all
the rest though never so numerous, in the wrong. Therefore, Oh Sinner whoever
thou art, Man or Woman, Young or Old, Rich or Poor; the Great GOD Calls,
Commands, Requires thee, even thee in particular heartily to submit to Christ
as Prince and Savior. And whether all or any about thee, do submit to this
Call or not, yet it is thine indispensable Duty to Obey it. If they should all
Refuse, yet this cannot Excuse thee if thou should Refuse: if they should all
Perish for their Unbelief, yet if thou do heartily submit to Christ, thou
shall surely be happy for ever. Whosoever believes in Him, shall not Perish
but shall have Everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16.

DOCTRINE III. God is very ready and earnect to offer unto Sinners Salvation
through Christ.
When the Master of the House (in our Text) was Informed, that some Refused the
Invitation to his Feast; he bade his Servant to go Quickly, and bring in
others, call others to the Feast. Though he was Angry with those who refused
his Offered kindness, yet he seems resolved to communicate his Bounty: he had
made great and costly Provision, was unwilling it should be lost, and seems
uneasy and in have as it were, till he could find those who would accept his
Offered Bounty. Indeed (as we showed but now) God needs not any of His
Creatures, cannot be properly Indebted to those who accept Gospel Offers, nor
really and properly a Loser by those that refuse them. And further, we should
not entertain unbecoming Conceptions of God, not think Him subject to any
Uneasy, Restless, Troublesome Passions or Affections as Men are. His Essential
Glory and Felicity is always the same. It cannot be Interrupted, Diminished, or
Increased. He is the Lord and changes not -- There Is no variableness nor
shadow of turning with him, Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. Yet many things are spoken of
and by God, after the manner of Men; the better to help our Conceptions of Him.
So when the Master of the House (mentioned in our Text) says, go Quickly and
call others to the Feast, it seems to Intimate,

As though Gods Heart were full of Love and Grace, as though He were Earnestly set
and bent to communicate of His Salvation to poor Sinners; as though He could
scarce find Ease or Rest in Himself, till he could find some vent for His
overflowing goodness and Bounty, and find some who would open the Doors of
their hearts, to let Christ and Salvation into them. Go Quickly, as if He
should say, Though some Refuse my Gospel Grace, yet it shall not be in vain, I
wont have it lost, it shall take Effect somewhere, go Speedily and make the
Offers of it: I Am even in Travail and Pain, as it were, till I am extending and
diffusing of my Gospel Grace to some or other.

And indeed this is but agreeable to other Scripture Expressions, which tell us,
God delights in Mercy, Mic. 7.18. He Is greatly delighted and rejoiced, in the
Communications of His Mercy. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning His
Promise, as some Men count slackness, but is longsuffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. Isai.
30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait that He may be Gracious unto you, and
therefore will He be exalted that He may have Mercy upon you; for the Lord is a
God of Judgment, blessed are all they that wait for Him. The Lord waits that He
may be gracious, watches and longs as it were, for an Opportunity to extend of
His Saving Grace to Poor Sinners. And therefore those who Refuse it, are
represented as grieving and troubling of Him. He Is grieved for the hardness of
their Hearts, (Mark 3.5.) vexed when they rebel, Isai. 63.10. He is pressed
under them (by reason of their Sins and Rebellions) as a Cart is pressed that
is full of Sheaves, Amos 2.13. Oh the amazing Love, Grace and Patience of God!
Lord, what is Man that thou art thus mindful of him! How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation, thus Freely and Frequently Offered? Let us
therefore Speedily and Heartily submit to God's Call, Heb. 4.7 -- To day, after
so long a time as it is said, to day if ye will hear His Voice, harden not your
Hearts.

SERMON X.
DOCTRINE IV. Ministers should be SPEEDY and URGENT in Inviting Sinners to
Christ.
1. THey should be SPEEDY in this Work. We here find, v. 21. The Master of the
House said to his Servant, go out Quickly into the Streets and Lanes of the
City, and bring in the Poor, Maimed, etc. He must go Quickly, Speedily without
any delay on this Important Business. It may Intimate, that after the Jews
generally refused Christ, the Gentiles were Quickly, Speedily Invited to accept
Salvation through Him. And so it was. The Jews denied Christ, preferred a Murderer
to Him, they Crucified the Son of God. Act. 3.13. and 15. Soon after this, the
Apostles were Commissioned to Preach to the Gentiles. Mat. 28.19, 20. -- And
the Gentiles were Soon, Quickly, entertained with Gospel Invitations; and many
of them accepted the Call, (Act. 5.7, 19.) and that very gladly too, Act.
13.46. -- 48. And as this Phrase, go Quickly, may Intimate the Speedy Calling
of the Gentiles, after the Apparent Unbelief of the Generality of the Jews; so
it may also Intimate to us in General, that Ministers should be Speedy and
Vigorous in Inviting Sinners to Christ, and to live as becomes such, that they
may obtain the happy Fruits of such a most reasonable Submission to the Son of
God. There Is great reason why they should be very Speedy and vigorous in this
Work.

1. The more they are so, so much the more they themselves do Please and
Glorify God. The Great GOD sets them about this Work, their Hearts should be
Intensely Engaged in it; the more they are so, so much the more speedy they
will be in it, Abhorring of all Negligence and Delays. God loves to see them in
Good Earnest and Speedy in what He sets them about; that they don't do the Work
of the Lord Negligently, but Willingly and of a ready Mind, 1 Pet. 5.2. They
should be, not Slothful in Business, but Fervent in Spirit serving the Lord,
Romans 12.11. When Paul was Converted (and Commissioned by God) he straightway
(that is, speedily) Preached Christ, Act. 9.20. Immediately, he Conferred not
with Flesh and Blood, but set about his Work of Preaching, Gal. 1.16, 17. In
this Speed and Diligence, he showed his Love to God, Zeal for God, as well as
Compassion to the Souls of Men: And this must needs Please and Glo^ifie God. We
should not be Dull and Sluggish* ^old or Backward in any Work God sets u^
about. The Slothful Servant is a Wicked Ser^ant, Mat. 25.26.

2. The Weight and Importance of the Work, requires Speed and great Activity.
In Matters of the greatest Weight and Importance, greatest speed and Diligence
should be used. Now the bringing of Sinners to obtain Salvation through Christ
is a Matter of the greatest Weight that can be.

1. The Glory of God is Greatly concerned therein. While Sinners are Estranged
from Christ, they continue Despising of God, Rebelling against Him, Trampling
on His Authority, Dishonouring and Provoking of Him. But when they Heartily
come to God on Gospel Terms, then they give Him the Glory of His Wisdom,
Holiness, Grace, Faithfulness, etc. God is greatly Dishonored by their
Impenitence and Unbelief, and greatly Honored by their Repenting and
Believing. Since it is so, surely Ministers should use Utmost Speed in Inviting
Sinners to Christ. They should do their Utmost, that Sinners may no longer
continue Dishonouring and Provoking of God, but that ^hey may forthwith come
into those Ways that Please and Honor Him.

2 The Everlasting Welfare of Sinners is concerned therein. This also is a
Matter of very great Weight. It Is not a Matter of mighty Weight or Importance,
whether Persons are Rich or Poor, Honored or meanly Esteemed in this W^^ld;
because they are to continue in this World but a very little Time. But it is a
Matter of the greatest Importance that can be for Sinners to escape Eternal
Inconceivable Torments in Hell, and to obtain Endless Inconceivable Glories in
Heaven: Yet they cannot Escape the former nor Obtain the latter of these,
unless they Heartily Embrace Christ on Gospel Terms. Verily then, since this
Work is so Weighty and Necessary, Ministers should use Utmost Speed and
Diligence to promote it.

Again,

3. The longer Sinners stay away from Christ, the more Difficult (Ordinarily)
their coming to Him will be. It Is true, if the best Means are Diligently used
with Young Sinners, before they are Accustomed to any open Way of known
Wickedness, yet this cannot Convert them without the Cooperating Renewing
Grace of God. Though the Word of Truth be never so Speedily and Diligently
Preached to them, yet it is God of his own Will that must beget them (Jam. 1.18)
if ever they are truly Converted. On the other Hand, if Persons have been long
Accustomed to evil Practices, and much Hardened therein, yet God can Convert
even such Chief Sinners if He Will. But notwithstanding these things thus
Granted, it is still true, that the longer Sinners stay away from Christ,
Ordinarily the more Difficulty there is in their coming to Him. Continuance and
Customariness in Sin, tends to Blind the Mind, Stupify the Conscience, Harden
the Heart: I^ tends to render the Soul less Thoughtful of Spiritual Duties, of
Eternal Concerns, and to strengthen it more in Wicked Practices which lead to
Hell Torments. The longer Sinners continue Impenitent so much the Worse they
grow: They grow more Averse to God and Godliness, more Prone to continue and go
on in Sin. It Is hard Healing an Old Sore, a Deep Wound of long Continuance.
It Is Difficult breaking off from long Continued ill Customs. When Israel had
been long Accustomed to ill Practices, it was no easy Thing to Divert and Reform
them, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots?
Then may ye also do Good that are Accustomed to do Evil. Nay, the more Persons
are Accustomed to Sin and Hardened in it, so much the more Backward they
commonly are, so much as to Hear Good Counsels or come in the way of them: They
are ready to Hate those that would Faithfully Counsel and Advise them for their
Good. Abab Hated Micajah, for Testifying against his Wickedness, 1 King. 22.8.
It Is plain therefore, that as to Men and Means and the usual Process of Things;
that the longer any continue in Sin, ^e more Difficult it is to draw them to
Christ. And since it is so, Ministers should use utmost need in endeavoring
their Conversion to God: ^or the longer it is Deferred, ordinarily the more
Difficult it is, if ever it be at all.

4. The Shortness and Uncertainty of Life, shou^^ ^icken Ministers to use great
speed in this Work^ No Man has any lease of his Life his Life's ^ vapor that
appears for a little time and ^hen vanishes away. No one knows what ^^all be
on the Morrow.

1. The Lives of Ministers are Uncertain. In ^eneral, their Lives are as short
and uncertain as any others. Besides this, if they have a due and deep sense on
their Hearts, of the great Weight and Importance of their work; and are
suitably Studious, Prayerful, Laborious in their Office-Imployment; this tends
greatly ^ exhaust their Spirits, weaken their Bodies and shorten their Lives,
more than many other Callings do. Inasmuch therefore as they know not how soon
they may be taken off their work, or out of the World; this should quicken them
to greatest speed and diligence in their work. The Apostle Peter, considering
that he must Shortly put off his Tabernacle, his Body; said, Wherefore I will
not be negligent to put you in remembrance of these things, etc. 2 Pet. 1.12,
-- 14. When Ministers are Praying among, or Preaching to their People, they
don't know but it may be the Last Time, the Last Opportunity they may ever have
for such work. And should they not then diligently take Every Opportunity, when
it First comes into their hands, to do all the good they can for Souls? Yes,
surely they should. And if they always bore on their hearts, a due sense of the
Shortness and Uncertainty of their Lives; this might give wings to their Zeal
and Diligence, and might abundantly Inliven and Invigorate their Studying,
Praying, Preaching, and Privately Discoursing; and so by the blessing of God,
they might be more eminently useful in promoting the good of Souls. To Study,
Pray, Preach like Dying Men, who expect but little time more, and don't know
that they shall have any more for such work; how greatly would this quicken
them?

2. The Lives of their Hearters are Uncertain. As Ministers done know how soon
Death may take them away; so neither do they know, how soon Death may remove
any of their Hearers. Those whom they see at Public Worship on One Sabbath,
they know not whether ever they shall see them there again. The Elder Ones or
Younger Ones which are now attending Gods Public Worship, none knows who of
them shall ever come here again. It would be no strange thing, not at all
uncommon; if some that are now here, whether Old or Young, should be speedily
seized with Sickness, or impaired by some Accident, and removed out of the
World by Death, so as never more to have one opportunity of hearing a Sermon.
This consideration also, should quicken Ministers to greatest speed and
Diligence in their Work. They know not how soon any or all their hearers may be
removed by Death, and then they will have no more opportunity forever, of doing
any good to them. Therefore they should use utmost speed and Diligence in
endeavoring the saving good of Souls, since it is a matter of the greatest
Importance, and they know not how little time they have for it. Since it is thus,
Ministers should walk circumspectly not as Fools but as Wise, Redeeming the
time. They should go quickly, should wisely embrace and improve every
opportunity for doing good to Souls. And as they should be very speedy in this
Work, so

2. They should be very URGENT and Earnest in it. The Servant is here bidden,
v. 23. to compel them to come in. Ministers should compel Sinners to come to
Christ, that is, be very Sollicitous, Pressing, Urgent with them to come. It
does not mean, that they should use any Outward means of Force, Violence or
Compulsion. Christ came to save men from their sins -- to bless them in turning
them from their iniquities, Mat. 1.21. Act. 3.26. No Outward Force or Violence
can do any thing in this Work. If by Outward Penalties, Fines, or any External
Violence, Persons should be frighted and forced to Read God's Word, hear it
Preached, to attend Prayer, or any other Religious Exercises; yet all this
Outward Force could not of it self effect any real change in their Souls, any
Repentance of Sin, Faith in Christ or Union to Him. Neither are Ministers
Authorized by Christ, to use any Outward Forcible means at all in this matter.
The General Method they are to take, is to Preach the Gospel, Preach the Word,
2 Timothy 4.2. They are to tell Sinners plainly from God's Word, that if they
Believe and are Baptized they shall be Saved, if they Believe not they shall be
Damned. So their Commission runs, Mark 16.16. When Christ sent forth His
Ministers to Preach, and any refused to receive them or their Doctrine, even in
that case they were not to use Outward Violence, but to leave them, Shaking off
the Dust of their Feet as a Witness against them, Mat. 10.14, 15. This Method
Paul and Barnabas took, when the Jews outragiously opposed them, Act. 13.51.
They used no Outward Violence, the Apostle therefore declares, 2 Cor. 10.4. The
Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Mighty through God to the pulling down
of strong holds, etc. They used no Carnal Weapons, or Outward Violence to
spread the Gospel and win Souls to Christ; but only declared the Revelations of
God's Will, Urging Men to comply therewith, which Spiritual Means God blessed
(when He saw meet) to pull down the strong holds of Sin and Satan in the Souls
of Men, and so to the Converting of Sinners to Christ. So that no Outward Force
or Violence can be meant, by the Compulsion here spoken of. The Word here
rendered Compel, comes from a Word that signifies necessity: Ministers should
necessitate Sinners to come to Christ; that is, they should endeavor to show
them the absolute necessity of it, and so be Urgent and Sollicitous in
Reasoning with them, in Exhorting and Persuading of them to come to Christ for
Life. We have already mentioned several Reasons, why Ministers should be speedy
in Exhorting Sinners Heartily to give up themselves to Christ; the same Reasons
should quicken to be very Earnest, Pressing, Urgent in the Work. Therefore

1. They should plainly show Sinners the absolute necessity of their coming to
Christ. They should from the Scriptures, plainly declare to them the Holiness
of God's Law, that it requires Perfect, Spotless, Constant Obedience in Heart
and Life; and threatens Death, even Eternal Misery for the least Offense. The
Wages of Sin it Death. Romans 6.23. Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. They should strive
fully to convince them, that they are sinful by Nature and Practice, and so do
most justly deserve Eternal Plagues and Punishments from God. That God, the one
Lawgiver who alone can Save or Destroy, has given His Son Christ Jesus, to save
Sinners; and has plainly stated the terms, declaring that Persons must
Heartily Repent of their Sins, Believe in Christ Jesus, trust in His
Righteousness alone for Justification, give up themselves to be constantly and
heartily Obedient to Him, as ever they expect to escape Hell and enter into
Heaven. And therefore Ministers should declare to them, how absolutely,
Indispensibly necessary it is for them to be Born again. Born of the Spirit, to
become New Creatures, and to commence and maintain a constant Mortal War
against all their Lusts and Corruptions; and to become Sincerely, Diligently,
Constantly Holy in Heart and Life, showing them the absolute necessity of these
things, they should Exhort, Urge, Persuade, Entreat them to be reconciled to
God, to flee from the Wrath to come and lay hold on Eternal Life. To this end,
they should set forth the Fullness of Christ, the All Sufficiency of His
Meritorious Righteousness to save all that Penitently trust in Him, the
Freeness and Readiness of Divine Grace to receive all such. They should
Urgently Exhort and Direct them, to attend all proper means for their Spiritual
Good, to avoid as carefully what tends to Blind Harden and Destroy them; and to
Pray most Earnestly and Constantly to God, for the efficacious saving
Influences of His Good Spirit.

2. They should think no Pains too much, in this urging Sinners to come to
Christ. They should nor grudge or think much of, Hard Laborious Reading,
Studying, Praying, Preaching to promote the good of Souls. They should be
willing to Spend and be Spent in this most Noble Excellent Work, 2 Cor. 12.15.
They should give themselves wholly to their Work that their Profiting may
appear to all Men, 1 Timothy 4.15. They should Study to show themselves approved
unto God, Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth,
2 Timothy 2.15. They should carefully Teach the good Ways of God, by their Lives
as well as by their Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.12. -- Be thou an Example of Believers,
in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. And
besides their Public Labors in Praying, Preaching, and other Administrations;
they should not grudge to take all Opportunities they can in Private to promote
the Good of Souls. The Apostle Paul at Ephesus, Taught Publicly and from House
to House, Act. 20.20. The Servant in our Text was bidden to go into the
Streets, Lanes, Highways and Hedges and bring in Persons to the Feast. If they
would not come to him, he must go to them, seek them out and Invite them.
Ministers should be as ready to look after Sinners, to go from Street to
Street, from Lane to Lane, to go to them, and seek an Opportunity (if it cannot
otherwise be gotten) to speak to them and Counsel them for their Spiritual
Good. They should not grudge to go into the meanest Houses, the meanest
Cottages to do Good to Souls. Neither should they grudge to take care of the
poorest, meanest, vilest Sinners, (such as have no Place but Highways and
Hedges to abide in) if they can do any thing for the Benefit of their Souls.
The poorest Servants, yea the most mean Abject Slaves, have Immortal Souls, in
their own Nature as Precious and Valuable as the Souls of any in the World. And
Ministers as they can get Opportunity, should be as ready to do good to the
Souls of such as to any other. As to their Ministerial Office-Work, they should
not Prefer one before another, they should do nothing by Partiality, 1 Timothy
5.21. The Servant in our Text, was bidden to Invite the Poor, Maimed Halt and
Blind; if any are really in such Decrepit, Afflictive Circumstances, Ministers
should (notwithstanding their Outward Meaness) be as ready to promote the Good
of their Souls, as the Souls of any other: Their Souls are in themselves as
Precious as any. They should indeed grudge no Pains, for the bringing of Souls
home to Christ. Nay, they should desire and endeavor that many may come to
Christ. When the Servant in our Text was bidden to bring in the Poor, Maimed,
etc. He soon said, Lord, it is done as Thou have Commanded, and yet there is
room, v. 22. Though many were already brought in, yet the Servant of his own
accord says, Yet there is room. It seems to Intimate, that the Servant himself
Desired that his Master's House might be Filled with Guests, that more might
come till empty vacant Places were filled up. So Ministers should desire and
Endeavor, that many might come to Christ and be Saved. Notwithstanding all
that have come to Him already, Yet there is room for more. There Is room enough
in the open Fountain of Christ's Blood, for more Sinners, many more to come and
be Cleansed. There Is room enough under Christ's Saving Wings, for many more
Sinners to come and find Shelter from the Scorching Heat of Divine Vengeance.
If many thousands of Millions of Sinners will yet come to Christ by Faith;
there is room enough for them in Heaven, notwithstanding the many Believers
there already. Heaven is a Large Place, there are many Mansions there: There is
room enough for all that will come to Christ, let them be never so many. Oh
Sinners, be persuaded all of you without Exception to come to Christ; there is
room enough for you to be received into his Tender Arms, room enough to be
received into the Number of his People, to partake of special Ordinances, room
enough to receive you into the Heavenly Mansions for ever. Oh come, for there
is yet room, room enough for all the Sinners in the World if they will Heartily
Submit to Christ. But inasmuch as this Servant said to his Lord, there is yet
room, told his Master of it: it may Hint to us, that Ministers should Pray to
God that He would bring more Sinners to Christ. May they not Expostulate with
God in Prayer, and say,

Lord, thou have bidden us Invite Sinners to Christ, we have done it, some have
accepted; but yet there is room for Multitudes more, Lord, let that room be
filled up; therefore by thine Almighty Grace (without which, our Invitations
will be ineffectual) draw many more Sinners unto Christ.

DOCTRINE V. No meaness of Outward Circumstances, can exclude or hinder any
from Gospel Benefits, and Blessings.
Our Text tells us, the Poor, Maimed Halt and Blind were bidden to the Feast;
yea those Destitute, Miserable Persons, who had no certain Dwelling Place, who
when Evening (Supper-Time, v. 16.) came, were to be looked for in the Highways
and Hedges, v. 23. It Is very likely, that by these Persons thus Described by
their Outward, Mean, Miserable Circumstances the Gentiles may be firstly and
chiefly intended. The Jews were apt to Trust in, and Boast of their External
Privileges, their Visible Covenant Relation to God, their being the Children of
Abraham, Mat. 3.9. They rested in the Law, and made their Boast of God, Romans
2.17. As they were thus Self-Conceited, many of them on the Account of their
External Visible Privileges, without seeking after Heart-Circumcision,
Conformity of Soul to God's Preceptive Will; so they were as ready to Despise
and Contemn the Uncircumcised Gentiles, counting them Blind, Poor, Miserable
Wretches. They looked on themselves as God's Children, counting the Gentiles to
be as Dogs: That this was a known, common Sentiment or Opinion among them,
seems evident from our Savior's Saying to the Canaanitish Woman, It is not
meet to take the Children's Bread, and cast it to Dogs, Mat. 15.22, 26. Well,
however mean and vile the Gentiles were, either Really in Themselves, or in the
esteem of the Jews; yet our Savior, soon after His Resurrection Commissioned
His Disciples to Invite them to the Gospel Feast, to partake of Saving
Blessings: He sent His Apostles, to Teach (or Disciple) all Nations, Mat.
28.19, 20. Now though this Calling of the Gentiles (who were esteemed Mean and
Despicable by the Jews) may possibly be chiefly intended in this Invitation
given to the Poor, Maimed Halt and Blind; yet it may intimate to us also, that
the Persons really in such Mean Outward Circumstances, are not thereby at all
Exempted from Gospel Invitations and Blessings. Our Lord Himself Preached the
Gospel to the Poor, and extended of His Powerful Goodness to the Blind, Lame,
etc. Our Lord said to the Messengers sent to Him by John Baptist; Mat. 11.5.
The Blind receive their Sight, and the Lame Walk, the Lepers are Cleansed, and
the Deaf Hear, the Dead are raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel Preached to
them. Since then our Lord Himself Preached the Gospel to such Miserable
Creatures (Mat. 4.23, 24.) Surely such Outward meaness in any cannot hinder them
from Gospel Saving Benefits.

1. Their Poverty cannot ^inder their obtaining Saving Benefits. Their Poverty
cannot hinder their Piety on Barth, nor their Felicity in Heaven. Though they are
never so Poor, yet Heavenly Treasures may be offered to them and accepted by
them. Jam. 2.5. God has ch^sen the Poor of this World, Rich in Faith and Hens
of the K^n^dom. If any are never so Poor in this World, this cannot hinder them
from obtaining an enduring Substance, an Eternal Crown of Glory.

2. Bodily Blindness, cannot hinder the obtaining such Blessings. If they are
Blind, this cannot hinder their hearing the Gospel, nor their accepting the
Salvation therein Offered. If they have no Bodily Sight, yet their Minds may be
Illuminated, their Souls turned from Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan
unto God: they may have an Eye of Faith to see Him that is Invisible, to look
on the things that are not seen and are Eternal; and may hereafter come to see
God, that is, to be Eternally happy in His Favor. The pure in Heart shall see
God, Mat. 5.8. And the Blindness of the Eyes cannot hinder the Purity of the
Heart.

3. If any are Maimed or Halt; if they were Born with any remarkable Defect or
Deformity of Body, or have since met with any such thing through Age or by any
Accidents; yet these things cannot exclude them from Gospel Benefits. If they are
so Maimed or Halt that they cannot Go, or Walk, this cannot hinder them from
Coming to Christ by Faith. If they are so Crippled that they cannot Work with
their Hands, (1 These. 4.11.) this cannot hinder the Working out their Salvation
with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. If they are as Poor as the Beggar Lazarus,
and as full of Sores as he; this cannot hinder them from the Duties of Piety in
this World, nor keep them out of Abraham's Bosom in the next, Luke 16.20, 22.

4. If Persons have no certain Dwelling Place, no better Place than Highways
and Hedges to abide in; this cannot hinder them from Gospel Saving Benefits.
Though the Foxes had Holes, and the Birds their Nests; yet our Lord Jesus had not
where to lay His Head, Mat. 8.20. Those who wander about in Mountains, Deserts,
Dens and Caves of the Earth, may yet be such as the World is not worthy of, and
may be Entitled to an House not made with Hands Eternal in the Heavens, Heb.
11.38. 2 Cor. 5.1. Indeed no Outward meaness can exempt from any Gospel Duties,
nor exclude from any Gospel Privileges. And since it is so

1. Let us never despise or contemn any, for their Outward meanness, their
Poverty, Blindness, Lameness, or any Bodily Infirmity or Deformity whatsoever.
Who makes thee to differ? Notwithstanding their Outward meaness, yet they may
be far preferable to us on many accounts.

2. None should be Dejected or Desponding, merely on the account of Outward
meaness. The greatest Adversity on Earth, cannot hinder them from matchless
endless Felicity in Heaven.

3. Those Outwardly mean, should make sure of Gospel saving Blessings. Since
they are Outwardly Poor, or otherwise Afflicted or Distressed; this should
quicken them to secure for themselves true Prosperity in the Future World. Mat.
5.20. Lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust
does corrupt, and where Theives do not break through nor steal.

SERMON XI.
DOCTRINE VI. Ministers of the Gospel should be well Acquainted with the
Fullness and Alsufficiency of Christ.
THis Observation I make from those Words in our Text, v. 22. Yet there is
room. This was spoken by the Servant and by this Servant (as was hinted before)
are chiefly meant God's Ministers, Messengers whom He sends to declare His Mind
to the Children of Men. After many were brought in to the Feast, the Servant
said, Yet there is room, q. d. Though there are so many come already, yet there
is room for many more. So, Ministers should be so well acquainted with the
Fullness and Alsufficiency of Christ, as to be able to say, Though many Sinners
are already brought to Christ, and delivered from the Guilt of Sin and Wrath of
God, yet there is room enough in Christ for more, room enough still to Receive
all that will com^. A Living Spring is not Diminished or ^mpoverished by Daily
Supplies it yields to those that come. So, though Christ has Communicated
Saving Benefits to many, to vast Multitudes yet He Is not at all Exhausted, He
has yet an Infinite Fullness and Sufficiency in Himself. Our Lord once said,
Luke 8.46. I perceive that Virtue is gone out of me. Though He perceived, that
Virtue went out to Heal that Woman that touched Him; yet He did not perceive
that there was any thing less of Virtue remaining in Him. It Is said, Luke 6.19.
The whole Multitude sought to touch him: for there went Virtue out of him and
he Healed them all. He had Virtue enough to Heal All that touched Him, yet this
Virtue was nothing Diminished by it is Healing of Multitudes. Christ is full of
Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14. Many Things that are Full are capable of being
Emptied; but Christ cannot be at all Emptied of Grace and Truth. Col. 1.19. It
has pleased the Father, that all Fullness should dwell in him. It Dwells,
Abides, Continues in Christ; so that though He saves many, yet there is still as
great a Fullness to save more, as ever there was to save any. Joseph in Egypt
had vast Stores and Treasures of Corn, yet they were bounded limited Treasures,
though they lasted long and fed many, yet they could not last always nor feed
all: The more was taken out of those Stores, so much the less remained in them.
It Is not so with Christ, who has Stores of Food for the Souls of Men. There are
Unsearchible Riches in Chrict, Ephesians. 3.8. There Is no searching out the Complete
Height and Depth, Length and Breadth of the Fullness and Sufficiency of Christ.

All Old Testament Saints, all New Testament Saints hitherto have been Washed,
Justified, Sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our
God; and yet Christ is still as full and Able for such Work as ever He was. His
Blood is as full of Saving Merit, Worth and Efficacy Now, as on the Day it was
Poured forth on the Cross; or as it was when Three Thousand were Converted in
one Day, Act. 2.41. The Blood of Jesus Cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. This
was a Truth in the Apostles Days, and it is as much a Truth now as ever it was:
The Virtue of that most Precious Blood is nothing Diminished. Christ is able to
save to the Uttermost, those that come to God by Him, Heb. 7.25. It may
signify, not only His Ability to save a Sinner Perfectly, to Begin His
Salvation and Carry it on till it is Completely Finished; but also the
Continuance of His Ability to save. He is fully able Evermore, or as long as
the World stands, Completely to save all that come to God by Him, be they who
they will, or never so many. His Blood is the Blood of God, it Purchased the
Church, Act. 20.28. Not only a few Particular Sinners, but the Whole Church,
the whole Number of all that ever have Believed or ever shall Believe in Him.
If all Persons now in the World, would Heartily Repent of Sin and Believe in
Christ, all their Sins should be fully Washed away in His Blood. Joh. 3.16.
Whosoever Believes in him, shall not Perish but have Everlasting Life. As
there is Virtue enough in Christ's Blood, to Wash away the Sins of all True
Believers; so Christ has Wisdom and Knowledge enough, to Lead and Guide all His
Sheep through all the Darkness and Difficulties of this World, till he brings
them to Glory. In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col.
2.3. He also has Power and Might Sufficient, to Vanquish all His and His
Peoples Enemies. He has Destroyed him that had the Power of Death, that is the
Devil, -- and Triumphed over Him ( Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15.) He is stronger than
the strong Man Armed. The Gates of Hell shall never prevail against His Church:
None shall ever pluck His Sheep out of His Hand. He can make the Weakest of His
Saints, to be more than Conquerors. He can out of the Unsearchible Stores of
Grace in Himself, give forth unwearied Recruits and Supplies to all His Saints,
to all the Branches that are in Him. Paul could do all Things through Christ
that strengthened him, Phil. 4.13. So the same Lord Jesus can strengthen all
His Saints to Duty. They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength, they
shall run and not be weary, walk and not faint, Isa. 40.31. Their Redeemer can
strengthen them with strength in their Souls; if they are ready to fall he can
uphold them. He gives Power to the Faint, and to them that have no Might he
increases strength, Isa. 40.29. He has all Power in Heaven and Earth committed
to Him, and therefore can Guide His Saints by Counsel till he brings them to
Glory. Yea, He has a fullness of Love, Grace, Good Will thus to do for all that
come to Him. He Loved them and Washed them from their Sins in His own Blood,
Rev. 1.5. This most Free Love of His to them is Unchangible. Having loved His
own, he loved them to the End, Joh. 13.1. He will never leave nor forsake them,
but help, strengthen and uphold them by the Right Hand of his Righteousness,
Isa. 41. 10. He can find Motive enough in Himself, in His own Bowel-Compassions
to do this for them. He will restore their Souls, and lead them in Paths of
Righteousness for his Name sake, Psalm. 23.3. Oh the Amazing, Unsearchible
Fullness and Sufficiency of Jesus Christ! Ministers should strive to be as well
acquainted therewith as possibly they can; and that for their own Support and
Comfort as Christians; for their Support and Comfort in their Difficult Weighty
Work as Ministers; and that they may be the better Fitted to Persuade Sinners
to come to Christ, and to Comfort those under all their Troubles who have
accepted of Him, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort; who comfort
us in all our Tribulation, that we may be able to Comfort them which are in any
Trouble, by the Comforts wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

DOCTRINE VII. God would have MANY Sinners come to Christ.
Verse 23. Compel them to come in, that my House may be filled. Though many
were come already, yet there was room for more; and as the Servant desired that
room might be filled with Guests, so did the Master too: They are the Master's
Words, That my House may be filled. So there is room for many more to come to
Christ, and God would have them come till Christ's Mystical Body is filled up.
The Church is called Christ's Body, The fullness of him that fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1.23. Christ's Mystical Body that shall be Eternally Glorified, consists
of all that ever have Believed and ever shall Believe in Him. All who thus
Believe in Christ, were given to Him by the Father. All that the Father gives
me, shall come unto me; and him which comes into me, I will in no wise cast
out. -- This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last Day, Joh.
6.37, 39. When all that the Father has given to Christ to be saved by Him, are
brought home to Him by True Faith, then His Mystical Body will be filled up as
to the Parts and Members of it; and then shall the End come. Well, but it is not
filled up yet, there is still room for more to come to Christ, and God would
have many come that his House, His Church, the Mystical Body of His Son may be
filled up. Indeed (as we showed before) wherever the Gospel comes, God Commands
all that hear it to come unto Christ. 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment,
that we should believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. God Commands All
that hear of Christ (though they are never so Many or Numerous) to submit to
Him. Our Lord said to His Disciples, Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye into all the World,
and Preach the Gospel to every Creature; he that believes and is Baptized
shall be Saved, he that believes not shall be Damned. It Is evident therefore
that God would have many to come unto Christ, none are Excluded where the
Gospel comes unless they Exclude themselves by Unbelief. Oh Sinners, if any of
you Neglect coming to Christ, you cannot say, it is for want of Room, nor for want
of an Invitation neither: You cannot say, that every Place is filled up, or
that Christ would not receive you if you should come: You cannot say any such
Thing as this.

DOCTRINE VIII. Those who refuse to come to Christ shall Perish for ever.
We find in our Text, when the Master of the House heard, that some who were
Invited to his Feast, made Excuses and would not come; he was Angry, v. 21. and
said of them, v. 24. None of those Men which were bidden shall Taste of my
Supper. Since they would not accept the Invitation to his Supper, he resolved
they should not Taste of it. So those who Refuse the Gracious Offers of Christ,
shall not Taste of that Eternal Salvation, Blessedness and Glory they were
Invited to. When the Master of the House said, They shall not Taste of my
Supper, it is as if he had said, They shall have no Share nor Interest, no Part
nor Portion in that Bounty and Kindness of mine, which I Offered them, but they
Rejected. So those who Reject God's Offered Grace, and Utterly Refuse coming to
Christ, though God Invites and Commands them; they shall have no Share,
Interest, Part or Portion in that Complete Blessedness which the Saints shall
Enjoy in God's Favor for ever. God is Angry with them for Rejecting His
Offered Kindness, He will never bestow on them that Salvation that they Refuse
and Neglect. They shall Eternally Perish and be Undone. He that Made them will
have no Mercy on them: He that Formed them will show them no Favor. Their
Woeful, Perishing, Undone Condition is set forth, sometimes Negatively and
sometimes Affirmatively. It Is set forth Negatively in our Text, They shall not
Taste of my Supper. So, Heb. 10.38. -- My soul shall have no pleasure in him.
Those in whom God's Soul takes no Pleasure, whom He is not pleased to Favor
with the Endless Enjoyment of Himself; they are Undone, Miserable Creatures
indeed and that for ever. Joh. 3.36. He that Believes not on the Son, shall
not see Life. It Is Everlasting Life, Eternal Blessedness that is spoken of in
the next preceding Words; but he that Believes not on the Son, shall never See,
Taste, nor Enjoy that Life. Oh Wretched Miserable Creature, that is thus
Destitute! But their most Wretched Miserable Condition, is likewise set forth
Affirmatively. Joh. 3.36. The Wrath of God abides on them. God is Angry with
all those, who will not be persuaded to submit to Christ; and His Terrible
Insupportable Wrath will Abide and Continue on them for ever. If they draw
back, His Soul has no Pleasure in them; and therefore they draw back to their
own Perdition or Destruction, Heb. 10.39. As to Outward Things and
Circumstances in the World, many are in a Middle State, not vastly Rich nor
Extremely Poor. But there is no Middle State in the Future World: The True
Believer shall be Saved, the Unbeliever Damned. Every Particular Person, will
be Eternally and Inconceivably Blessed, or Eternally and Inconceivably
Miserable. Christ will say, Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom, or else,
Depart ye cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
Mat. 25.34, 41. Therefore all that Reject Gospel Invitations, and will not come
to Christ, they shall not Taste of that Supper, that Feast of Salvation Offered
in the Gospel: They shall certainly Perish and be Damned Eternally. And surely,
this Future State of the Damned, will be most Terrible, Doleful, Dreadful; we
cannot but think so, if we seriously Consider and Believe,

1. How it is Described in Scripture. The Future Misery of the Damned is set
forth in Scripture, by sundry Things which in our present Animal State, are
looked on as most Afflictive, Terrible and Distressing. As it is a Pleasant
Thing for the Eyes to behold the Sun, so mere Darkness is Terrible and
Afflictive: The Egyptians found it so. Well, the State of the Damned is set
forth, by their being cast into outer Darkness, Mat. 8.12. Never to see the
Light, but to be in the Disconsolate, Distressing Horror of Darkness, is
Terrible indeed. Oh how Dreadful will be the Execution of that Sentence? Mat.
22.13. Bind him Hand and Foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer
Darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. It Is Terrible to have
Worms continually Gnawing and Eating of us; yet it is said of the Damned. Mark.
9.44. Their Worm dies not, and their Fire is not quenched. It Is very Painful
and Tormenting to be Burnt with Fire, how Grievous do we find a small Burn when
it happens to us? But as for the Damned, they shall go into Hell, into the Fire
that shall never be quenched, Mark. 9.43. Fire that is fed with Brimstone, is
very Fierce and Terrible. Yet the Damned shall have their Part in the Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone which is the second Death, Rev. 21.8. To suppose
a Lake or Sea of Fire, continually fed and Flaming with Brimstone, and a Person
cast into it, Encompassed and Wrapped all round with those Tormenting Penetrating
Flames; this must needs be Unutterably Grievous and Terrible: No Tongue can
Describe this Misery.

2. The Damned in Hell, will be Destitute of all Good and Comfort. Persons in
this World though under sore Afflictions, yet often (yea always) have some Good
mixed with their Evil; some Sweet with their Bitter. But the Damned in Hell,
shall have no Good, no Comfort at all. God's Soul will have no Pleasure in
them, therefore He will bestow no Comfort on them. The Wicked Rich Man, who in
this World lived in Plenty, and Fared Sumptuously every Day; yet when cast into
Hell, he had no Comfort at all. When Scortch'd in the Flames of Hell, he
desired that Lazarus might dip the tip of his Finger in Water, and therewith
cool his Tormented Tongue; yet he could not obtain so small a Refreshing
Comfort as that was. No, 'twas said to him, Thou in thy Life Time receivedst
thy Good Things, now thou art Tormented, Luke 16.22. -- 25. All his Good
Things, Comforts Benefits he had received in his Life Time, while he lived on
Earth; after Death he had no more any Good Things, he was utterly Destitute of
every Good Thing whatsoever, could not obtain so much as one Drop of Water to
cool his Inflamed, Tormented Tongue. He had no Comfort, but was filled with
Torment.

3. The Damned will have the worst Companions that can be in their Misery. The
Damned will be ill Companions to one another, and Doubtless (one way or other)
help to promote each others Misery. The Wicked often love one another's Company
in this World, but Doubtless they will rather dread it in Hell, but cannot
avoid it. Will they not Dread to hear the Doleful Groans, Piercing Cries and
Screetches of Damned, Tormented Wretches; and to hear the Curses and
Upbraidings of their former Wicked Companions? But Damned Men must not only
Company with one another which Doubtless will increase their Misery; but must
also be Plagued and Tormented with Devils forever. The Devils are Apostate
Spirits, Apostate Angels, Implacable Enemies to God and Men; they are full of
Murder, Malice, Spite and most Cursed Rage; these Tigers, these Roaring Lions
of Hell; Damned Men must be with for ever and ever. The Sentence to be
Pronounced against them is that, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye Cursed, into
Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. When the Angels Sinned,
God was so Provoked with them that He spared them not; He presently put them
into Chains of Darkness reserving them to the Judgment of the Great Day. And
these Cursed Rebels, from the very first of their Apostasy till the Great Day
of Judgment comes; are with all their Might, Power, Policy opposing the Honor
and Glory of God as far as possibly they can: And has not (think you) the
Infinitely Holy and Powerful GOD, prepared Terrible Torments for such Early,
Obstinate long Continued Rebels as they are? Yes most certainly. Well, with
these Damned Devils, Damned Men must have their part for ever. How far these
Tormented Devils will be Instrumental in Tormenting of Damned Men, no Tongue of
Man can Declare. Doubtless these Devils full of all Spite Malice and Rage, will
Inconceivably Vex, Plague and Torment them. When Satan was permitted, how
Grievously did he Torment the Body of Holy Job for a while? When he was
permitted to to take Possession of some Persons, he made them Wander about
Night and Day, in Mountains and Tombs, crying and cutting themselves with
Stones, Mark. 5.5. He often threw them into the Fire, and often into the Water,
Mat. 17.15. And if his Limited, Chained Rage wrought such Terrible Effects as
these; what will he do to the Damned in Hell, when all Restraints are taken
from his Malice, and Damned Men entirely given up to suffer Vengeance?
Doubtless, when God gives up the Wicked to the full Blow of His Holy Wrath and
Vengeance, He Will suffer exasperated Devils, to be Instrumental of Inconceivable
Perplexity and Vexation to them. And as for those who Parish from under the
Gospel, how Terribly may the Devil Twit them, Upbraid them, and Triumph over
them? May they not say to them?

By our own Folly we have brought our selves into this Misery, but you are
greater Fools than we. When are Sinned, no Remedy was proposed to us, no
Salvation was ever Offered us; but you had Salvation through Christ Offered to
you, and you would not Accept it. God waited to be Gracious to you, He used
long Patience; He often called on you by you Parents, Masters, Neighbors,
Ministers, by the checks and awakenings of your own Consciences, by the Motions
and Strivings of His Spirit; but you refused all these. Salvation stood long
(as it were) Knocking at your Door for Entrance, yet you would not Open and let
it in, yet you Refused. We Devils never showed such Folly as this, we never
Refused Salvation for it was never Offered to us. Oh you Fools, you that missed
of Salvation, of a Glorious Crown and Kingdom for the sake of empty Trifies;
now reap the fruit of your own Folly, the fruit of your own doings, etc.

If the Devils should thus upbraid Damned Men, and their awakened Consciences
bear the same testimony, and as a never dying Worm graw upon them, filling them
with such Self-condemning Reflections; how unutterably Tormenting must this
needs be?

4. They shall be Tormented in their whole Man, both Body and Soul. When the
wicked die, their Souls go to Hell Torments, Luke 16.22, 23. But after a while,
the Resurrection of the Dead and Day of Judgment shall come; and then both Body
and Soul together shall be Punished. Mat. 10.28. -- Fear Him who is able to
destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. As for the obstinately Wicked and
Impenitent, they shall have their Bodies and Souls thrown into Hell: they shall
be Tormented in their whole Man in all their Parts and Powers. The Worm of
Conscience gnawing within, and nothing but Vengeance from without; how terrible
will this be? In this World, great extremity of Pain if in but one Tooth, one
Finger, one Toe, any one Part or Joint of the Body; it is counted almost
intolerable; what then will it be, when all the Parts of the Body and all the
Faculties of the Soul shall be quite filled with Misery and Torment? The Damned
are called, Romans 9.22. Vessels of Wrath fitted (...) Destruction. Vessels, as
Pots or Cups are often denominated from what is put into them, or the use that
is made of them (as a Wine-Cup, a Beer-Glass) so the Damned will be Vessels of
Wrath, filled up with the Wrath of God. In this World they were Vessels of Sin,
full of Sin, the Servants of it, their Members being Instruments of
Unrighteousness (Romans 6.13, 17.) wholly Employed in Sin's Service: in the next
World, they will be Vessels of Wrath, filled brim-full with the Tormenting Wrath
and Vengeance of the Lord God Almighty. And when thus Tormented in all their
Parts, Powers, Faculties, how inconceiveably terrible will it be!

5. God will Glorify Himself in Punishing and Tormenting of them. On the
Judgment Day and for ever after, God will Eminently Glorify His Mercy on the
Vessels of Mercy; and His Wrath on the Vessels of Wrath. That time therefore is
called with respect to the Wicked, The day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the
Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.5. God will then fully, clearly, evidently
Reveal Discover, Manifest to the whole World; that He Is Infinitely Holy, Just
Righteous in pouring out His most terrible Wrath and Vengeance on the Wicked.
They shall be Punished with everlasting destruction, from the Presence of the
Lord and from the Glory of His Power, 2 These. 1.9. God will then Display and
Glorify, His Infinite Justice and Power too, in Punishing the Unbelieving and
Disobedient. In this World, He Glorifies His Patience and Forbearance to them;
but then He Will Glorify His Justice and Power in Tormenting of them. And when
the Great ^^d sets Himself on purpose (as it were) to show the greatness of His
Revenging Justice, and of His Power, will He not do it wonderfully beyond all
we can conceive of? Yes indeed He will ^ When Men have a mind to give the
brightest discoveries of their Strength, Ingenuity, Skill in any matter; then
they commonly stretch their Faculties (as it were) and exert themselves to the
uttermost. Surely then, when God designs eminently to discover and glorify, His
Revenging Justice and Great Power in Punishing the Wicked; their Punishment
must be Inconceivably terrible indeed. He Will remember against them all their
Sins in Thought, Word and Deed; all the Aggravations of them: and He Will Inflict
the full weight of Wrath for every Sin. He Will abate them nothing, He Will Punish
them according to their ways, and according to the fruit of their doings. When
the promoting and manifesting His own Glory, is thus concerned in Punishing,
Plaguing, Tormenting of them; Surely He Will render them Inconceivably Miserable.

6. Their Punishment will be Eternal. In this World, it is often a relief to
those in great Pain or Trouble, to hope that it wont last long: if it were not
for hope the heart would break. Well, but the Torments of the Damned, will
never have any end at all: they will have no Intermission, Mitigation, nor
Cessation for ever. Their Misery is called, Everlasting Punishment, Mat. 25.46.
Everlasting Destruction, 2 These. 1.9. They must go into Everlasting Fire, their
Worm never dies, their Fire is never quenched.

Thus I have endeavored in some Measure to show, that the Future Misery of the
Damned will be exceeding great; but how Great, how Terrible, no Tongue of Man
can tell. The Scripture sets it forth by those things, which are most Terrible
to the present apprehension of our Senses; but twill be never fully understood
till fully endured. The Scripture sometimes sets forth the Future Glory of the
Saints, by those things which are commonly most valued and esteemed by Men in
this World, as by a Crown, a Kingdom, an Inheritance, etc. and yet it says, 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we shall be. Notwithstanding all that is
said about the Future Glory of the Saints; yet it does not fully appear at
present, how Great and Eminent it will be. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
has it entered into the Heart of Man fully to conceive at present; the good
things God has prepared for them that love Him, 1 Cor. 2.9. So, notwithstanding
all that is said about the Future Misery of the Damned; yet it does not fully
appear at present, how Great and Terrible it will be. Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor can the Heart of Man at present fully conceive, what Rivers, what
Tormenting Floods of Divine Vengeance will forever be poured out on the
Ungodly. Yet all this Inconceivable Misery, will most certainly be the Portion
of all that refuse Christ, and neglect the Great Salvation Offered to them.
Surely then we should bethink our selves, we should flee from this Terrible
Wrath which is to come. If we should Perish from under the Gospel, our
Condition will be more terrible than theirs of Sodom and Gomorrah. If we should
Perish, how terrible will it be, to consider of and reflect on our own Folly
and Wickedness. To consider how long we lived under the Gospel, how many
Precious Offers of Salvation we had, how frequently and fervently we were urged
to mind the welfare of our Souls, and yet that we Foolishly and Wickedly
neglected the things of our Peace in the time of them; Surely, no Heart can
conceive the Anguish, Terror, Horror that will be produced by such reflections.
To think, if we had heartily Obeyed the Gospel as many others did, we should
now have been in Glory as well as they, with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Holy
Prophets and all Sincere Believers; but Fools, Wretches, Self-Destroyers,
Self-Murderers that we were, we gave way to the Temptations of Satan, the
Corruptions of our own Hearts; were more fond of Shadows, Trifles, Momentany
Vanities, than of Eternal Blessedness; by this our Folly and Wickedness, we
have lost Inconceiveable Eternal Glories, and brought on our selves these
Intolerable Plagues that can never be got rid of; I say, such Reflections as
these will be Inconceiveably Tormenting. Let all of us therefore be in good
Earnest about our Souls, search and try our ways and turn to the Lord. Let us
with utmost Speed, Sincerity and Diligence, Repent of all our Sins, Submit to
the Lord Jesus Christ on Gospel Terms, Employing all that we are and have for
Him: if we thus do, it shall be well with us for ever. If we thus do, then,
When Christ who is our Life shall appear, we also shall appear with Him in
Glory, Col. 3.4. But if we neglect Christ, our Doom is that, Psalm. 9.17. The
Wicked shall be turned into Hell, with all the Nations that forget God.

FINIS.
The Principal HEADS in this Book.
LUKE XIV. 16, 17.
THe Text Opened. p. 1. DOCT. God's Inviting Sinners to accept of Spiritual
Saving Benefits Offered in the Gospel, may be Compared to a Great Man's
Inviting many to a Sumptuous Feast. p. 4. 1. Various Sorts of Persons are
commonly Invited to a Great Feast; so, Saving Benefits are Offered in the
Gospel. p. 4. 1. Both to Men and Women. p. 5. 2. To Persons of Various Nations.
p. 6. 3. To Persons Old and Young, p. 8. 1. To Old. p. 8. 2. To Young. p. 10.
Young Ones Advised and Directed in Thirteen Particulars. p. 12.
4. To Persons High and Low. p. 19. 5. To Rich and Poor. p. 22. 6. To Bond and
Free. p. 28.
2. At a Great Feast there is commonly Variety of Entertainment, Things for
Necessity, and for Innocent Delight and Pleasure: So the Gospel Invites Sinners
to what is Necessary for them, and if they Comply they shall have the Truest and
Greatest Pleasure. This set forth in Seventeen Particulars, and Applied in
Four. p. 31. 3. In a Great Feast, there is commonly Plenty, a Sufficiency for
all that come: So there is enough in Christ to Save all that come to Him. This
set forth in Six Particulars. p. 54. 4. When a Person makes a Great Feast and
Invites many, it is commonly Matter of Cost and Charge to him: So it is Cost and
Charge to God and Christ, to provide the Blessings Sinners are Invited to in
the Gospel. Here are Six Particulars. p. 64. 5. What Persons are Invited to at
a Feast, is at Free-Cost as to them: So Salvation is Freely Offered in the
Gospel. Here Seven Particulars. p. 69. 6. Servants are Employed in Inviting to
a Feast: So Ministers are Employed in Inviting Sinners to Christ. Here Nine
Particulars. p. 74. 7. Those Bidden to a Feast, should be Civil and Social in
their Carriage one to another: So Christians should be Kind and Loving to each
other. p. 87. 8. Those who come to a Feast, should be Thankful for the Bounty
of the Inviter: So Christians should be most Thankful to God and Christ for
Saving Benefits. p. 88.
LUKE XIV. 18. -- 20. p. 91.
DOCT. I. Men are Naturally apt to make Objections against accepting Gospel
Invitations. p. 92. This proceeds from the Corruption of their Nature, their
Ignorance, Hardness of Heart, Customariness in Sin, from Satan's Temptations. p.
93. USE. We should Bewail the Depravation of our Nature. p. 98. Saints should
be Thankful for Renewing Grace, Sinners should Pray for it. p. 99.
DOCT. II. When Persons Neglect Gospel Invitations, it is commonly because they
are more desirous of some other Things; as Worldly Profits, Honors, Pleasures.
p. 103. DOCT. III. Persons are apt to make Excuses for their Sin. p. 107.
Therefore we should Pray, (1) That God would give us an openess and readiness
of Heart to Confess our Sins. (2.) That He would incline and strengthen us to
Duty. p. 109.
DOCT. IV. Persons are apt to make VARIOUS Excuses for their Sins, or the
Neglect of their Duties. p. 111. Some would be Excused from coming to Christ
and Living to Him, 1. Because of the Difficulties and Sufferings attending such
a Life. This Replied to in Nine Particulars. p. 112. 2. They think they are
safe and well enough already; this hinders their coming to Christ. p. 125.
Answered in Four Particulars. p. 128. 3. Because they Doubt there is no Saving
Mercy for such Abominable Sinners as they are. p. 132. This Answered in Seven
Particulars. p 133 4. They Excuse themselves by pleading their own Inability.
This Answered in Three Particulars. p. 140.



LUKE XIV. 21. -- 24. p. 144.
DOCT. I. Servants should Obey, and are Accountable to their Masters. p. 145.
Here Three Particulars. p. 146. DOCT. II. If some Sinners Refuse the Offers of
Salvation, this cannot hindder God from making the like Offer to others. p 152.
Therefore, (1.) Let no^^ think that God would be really Obl^^ed or Indebted to
them, if they should Heartily Accept the Offers of the Gospel. (2.) Let not any
Neglect coming to Christ, merely because others Refuse Him p 153 DOCT. III. God
is very ready and earnest, to Offer unto Sinners Salvation through Christ. p.
156. DOCT. IV. Ministers should be SPEEDY and URGENT, in Inviting Sinners to
Christ. p. 159. Eight Reasons why they should be SPEEDY in this. p. 160. They
should be URGENT too, Compel them to come in; therefore they should show them
the Absolute Necessity of coming to Christ, and think no Pains too great in
Inviting them. p. 165. DOCT. V. No meaness of Outward Circumstances, can
exclude or hinder any from Gospel Benefits. p. 172. They cannot be hindered by
Poverty, Blindness, Lameness, or want of a Settled Habitation. p. 173. Applied
in three Articles. p. 175. DOCT. VI. Ministers of the Gospel should be well
Acqainted with the Fullness and Alsufficiency of Christ. p. 176. DOCT. VII. God
would have MANY Sinners come to Christ. p. 180. DOCT. VIII. Those who Refuse to
come to Christ, shall Perish for ever. p. 182. Their Misery must needs be great
if we Consider, 1. How it is Described in Scripture. p. 184. 2. The Damned in
Hell will be destitute of all Good and Comfort. p. 185. 3. They will have the
worst Companions that can be in their Misery. p. 186. 4. They shall be
Tormented in their Whole Man, both Body and Soul. p. 188. 5. God will Glorify
Himself in Tormenting of them. p. 189. 6. Their Misery will be Eternal. p. 191.


