God's Conduct of His Church Through the Wilderness, With His GLORIOUS ARM, To
make Himself an Everlasting Name.

A SERMON Preached by Order of the Honorable Representatives, of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England. On May the 25 th, 1715.

Being their Anniversary Day for Election of His Majesty's Council for that
Province.

By JEREMIAH SHEPARD, A. M. Pastor of the Church of Lynn.

Deuteronomy. 8. 2. And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord the God led
thee these forty years in the Wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee,
and to know what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his
Commandments o^ ^o^. Boston, Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the
Sign of the Bible in Cornhill. 1715.

To the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, in New England.
T HE Mercies showed by the God of Israel, to his People in this Wilderness,
deserve a lasting Memorial; And the Glorious Arm of Divine Conduct in the
several passages thereof to be Recorded, that they may be transmitted to
Posterity to Read and Admire; and that the Lord may obtain an Everlasting Name.

I have been honored so far as to utter something of the Memory of Gods great
Goodness, (by your Choice) before a Great and Honorable Audience; you were
pleased to Command my Service on that Public Exercise, (on your Day of
Election) which when performed, I justly expected might have perished as some
immature Abortive, and never more have seen the Light: But since your pleasure
is to make Public what my weakness then delivered, your Order has not le^t me
at liberty (without unmannerliness) to deny the Publication thereof.

Obedience to your desires, I hope may serve for an Apology, and help to make
it the more facile unto all Ingenious Readers, what of my weakness is here
exposed to Public View.

I gratefully acknowledge your acceptance of my weak and indigested Labors;
Praying that Gods Glorious Arm may yet be our Conduct in this Land, and your
selves improved as Instruments to advance our Religious Interests; believing
and hoping, that no other Interests and Advantages will in the least warp your
Spirits from Espousing the Interest of Christ among us, and the Welfare of the
several parts of this Province you stand Related unto, who have betrusted you
with their greatest Interests; not doubting of your Fidelity therein.

I Remain Your Devoted Servant Jeremiah Shepard.

God's Conduct of His Church With His Glorious Arm.
Isaiah LXIII. 12. That led them by the Right Hand of Moses and Aaron, with his
Glorious Arm, dividing the Water before them, to make Himself an Everlasting
Name.
IT has been an Ancient, Laudable, Celebrated Custom, on our Anniversary
Elections, (formerly of Governors, but always of Assistants in Government) to
Invocate the Divine Presence, and Consult the Sacred Oracles for Direction in
so Weighty an Affair.

By the dispose of Divine Providence, it has fallen to my Allotment, and at
the Pleasure of those Worthy and Honorable Gentlemen, the Representatives of
this Province, I find my self exposed, and have this task put upon me; which I
am very sensible, might have been better performed and accepted by some other
Person, better acquainted with the present circumstances and state of Affairs
amongst us.

But since it cannot be prevented, that I would crave, is only a candid
Interpretation of what may be very plainly, but sincerely offered; it not being
presumption, but obedience, that makes me comply in my present offerings, who
have reason to account my self the weakest and most unworthy of my Brethren
that minister at the Altar.

That which I have to offer to this Great and Honorable, the General Assembly
of this Province; and in the Audience of the Reverend Elders, and all good
Christians now Convened: Let it be some brief and suitable Reflections on the
Divine Providence, in the Lords Conduct of his Church through the Wilderness of
this World, or from one part of the Wilderness of this World to another.

This is admirably Exemplified in our Text, by the famous Instance of God's
Conduct of Israel of Old (the only Church upon Earth, the National Church of
the Jews) through the Red Sea; and into, and in the Wilderness by the Right hand
of Moses, with Gods Glorious Arm (for forty years together) to make himself an
Everlasting Name.

Which may be improved as a parallel Instance, and may put us upon a Reflection
of Gods Conduct (...) People (our Fathers) over a far greater Sea (the vast
Atlantic Ocean) into this American Desert, this vast howling Wilderness; and
his Conducting us here by faithful and excellent Guides and Governors, as it
were by the Right hand of Moses and Aaron, with his Glorious Arm, for more than
twice Forty Years, whereby he has made to himself an Everlasting Name.

But lest I should in ipso limine impingere, and forget the limits of time
allotted; I must mind you, that our Text is a brief Compendium, or an
Abridgement of that Famous Celebrated History of Gods Conduct of his Church
from Egypt through the Wilderness, and in the Wilderness: In which Conduct, four
things are pointed out in our Text.

1. The Divine Power and Providence of God, figuratively set forth by the
Metaphor of his Arm, his Glorious Arm; (who led them by the Right hand of Moses
with his Glorious Arm) the Arm of God in Scripture Language, denotes the Power
of God: Brachium ponitur pro Robore, Fortitudine, Potentia.

2. The Instrument improved in this Glorious Conduct, scil. Moses: Famous for
his Preservation in his Infancy, taken out of an Ark of Bulrushes, in his
Education in Ravennel, in the Court of Egypt, Exodus 6. 6, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 4. 34.
And also the Lords honoring him to be King of J^sh^un, Captain General of the
Tribes of Israel, to lead them by his Right hand, with Gods Glorious Arm, (that
led them by the Right hand of Moses, with his Glorious Arm) i. e. Gods Glorious
Arm marched gallantly at Moses's Right hand, which made the Conduct so much the
more Illustrious and Glorious.

3. We have the Glorious Arm of God's Conduct exemplified in one particular
Instance, instead of all others, soil. in leading his People miraculously through
the Sea; intimated in that expression in our Text, (dividing the waters before
them, the Red Sea, and also Jordan, Exodus 14. 21. Josh. 3. 15, 16.

4. The ultimate end of this Divine Conduct is pointed to in the close of our
Text, soil. Gods Glory, the Glory of his Name; (to make himself an Everlasting
Name) with reference both to his Power and Providence, as respecting either his
Aim and End in doing what he did; or the effect of it when it was done, it got
him Renown: Who led them by the Right hand of Moses, with his Glorious Arm, to
make himself an Everlasting Name.

You may take up this Doctrine from the words, as the ground of our Ensuing
Discourse.

DOCTRINE. To make Himself an Everlasting Name, is the prime and ultimate end
of Gods Exerting his Glorious Arm of Divine Power and (...) Conducting his
Church and People through the Wilderness of this World; or from one part of the
Wilderness of this World to another.

For Confirmation hereof, I might lead you through the whole History of the
Scriptures; wherein we may trace the footsteps of the Wonder Working
Providence of God in his Care and Conduct of his Church, and Judgments upon
their Enemies, which have remarks put upon them every where by Gods Holy
Prophets; And by way of Imitation in treating the Subject under our present
Consideration, I might improve their method.

Our Prophet Isaiah in our Text, points out unto us the Ancient way of
Preaching in Old Testament times, which was an Historical Narration of
Memorable Mercies and Remarkable Judgments relating to Gods Church, or his
Churches Enemies: Mercies and Judgments were the Texts they Preached on; hence
is that of the Psalmist, I will Sing of Mercy and of Judgment unto thee Oh
Lord, Psalm. 101. 1.

But let it suffice to Confirm this Doctrine from the particular Instance in
our Text, wherein as in a Glass we may behold the Providence of God, his
Wisdom, Glory, Power and Goodness exercised toward his People at all times.
Now that there was so much of the Praiseworthy Excellency and Goodness of God
Discovered in this Conduct of his People, the Scriptures do frequently declare:
Hence so many Psalms of Praise made concerning it: After Ages transmitting down
to their Children the Glory of God appearing therein. Psalm. 106. 1, 7, 8.
Praise ye the Lord etc. Our Fathers understood not thy Wonders in Egypt but
provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea, nevertheless he saved them for
his Name sake, that he might make his mighty Power to be known Psalm. 78. 4.
Oh God when thou wentest forth before thy People, when thou did march through
the Wilderness, the Earth shook, 12. 17. 68. 7, 8
the Heavens dropped at the Presence of God! Sinai it self was moved at the
Presence of the God of Israel. Jer. 32. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. 10, 11 1 31.
Gods Conduct of them is elsewhere observed and commemorated: Hence are those
frequently repeated Commands at their arrival at Canaan to Remember and never
Forget the works of God which they had seen in the Wilderness: No place so much
Discovered the Wonderful Works wrought for them by the Glorious Arm of God, as
that, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
Thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty
years in the Wilderness, to Humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what is in
thy Heart, whether thou would keep his Commandments or not.

Very memorable were the Wonders wrought for Gods Israel in the Land of Ham, in
the Field of Zoan, the Royal City of Egypt, an ancient City. Psalm. 78. 12.
Mavelous things did he in the sight of their Fathers, in the Land of Egypt,
in the field of Zoan. But especially very memorable was the Lords bringing them
out of Egypt by the Right hand of Moses with his Glorious Arm, for it was with
a strong Hand, and outstretched Arm, with signs, wonders, and very great
terror, Jer. 2. 31.
And have brought forth thy People Israel out of the Land of Egypt, with signs,
and with wonders, with a strong Hand, with a stretched out Arm, and with great
Terror.

No less then Ten Plagues did God send upon Egypt one after another, before
Pharaoh would let them go; and after he had dismissed them, and they were
marched forth, they were as Hotly pursued by that Dragon Phoraoh, and his
formidable Army of Chariots and Horsemen, who soon overtook the unarmed Tribes
of Israel, Encamping by the Red Sea, besides Phihahiroth, at the mouth of
Hiroth, or entrance or straits of Hiroth; where were two great Mountains,
betwixt which Israel marched; and were enclosed on both sides, between Migdall,
and Baalzephon, two strong Garrison Cities of Egypt: And thus was Israel
Entangled, the Red Sea before them, and strong Garrisons, and Inaccessible
Mountains on each side, and Pharaoh with his Enraged Army of Chariots and
Horsemen on their backs. Exodus 14. 9, 19.
Oh the Distress that Israel was now in! Why s:aith Moses, stand still, and see
the Salvation of the Lord; they cry, Heaven hears and Commands the march, the
Sea Divides; The Lord discovers to them the Worlds Foundations. The Tribes of
Israel they march into the Sea as on Dry Ground, the Sea is made fordable, the
waters stand on heaps on each side: The Angel of God, that went before the Camp
of Israel, soil. The Angel of Gods Presence, the Lord Jesus Christ, removed and
went behind them, betwixt Israel and the Host of the Egyptians; so the Glory of
the Lord was their Rere-ward. Isai. 5. 12. and 58. 8.

Pharaoh and the Egyptians pursue them into the midst of the Sea; And now was
the time that God cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon, and made the Depths of the
Sea a way for the Ransomed of the Lord to pass over. When the Church of God is
upon their motion, all things Conspire for their happy March; their pursuers
are destroyed, Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea, the Sea divides, the
Heavens Conduct by the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and of Fire by Night when they
march into the Wilderness every thing is moved in extraordinary wise; The
Mountains Skip'd like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs; Sinai, and Horeb
are moved* Psalm. 114. 4.
All supplies shall be afforded them? Do they want Bread, they shall have Corn
from Heaven, Manna, Angels food? Do they want meat, they have flesh rained upon
them as Dust, and Feathered Fowl as the sand of the Sea? Psalm. 78. 27.
Do they want water in a Droughty Desert? rather than fail, the Flinty Rocks
shall yield it; the Flinty Rocks one would think would yield fire rather than
water, but God works for his People in mediis oppositis, by contrary means; he
turns the watery Ocean into a Pavement, and the Flinty Rock into streams in the
Wilderness; the Rock Rophadim is set a br^^ch, and it made not only a stagnum,
a standing Pool, but a running River in the Desert; hence is it said, the Rock
followed them: When they Approach the swift swelling streams of Jordan, the
waters run Retrograde, the Sea saw them and fled Jordan was driven back: Here
is another miraculous passage over the Hoods, they pass over Jordan on Dry Land
and take up the stones of the Channel for a Memorial.

When they enter Canaan, the Nations tremble, their Cities t^^mb^^, as when
Joshua encompassed Jericho, its impr^^^able Walls fell down flat at the shout
and sound of the Rams horns; but we are led into a maze of Miracles: Oh the
wonders that God wrought for his People, but all this was to make himself an
Everlasting Name: This indeed was the end of all Gods Wonderful Works, both of
Creation and of Providence, but especially of his Churches preservation, and
most especially of the Glorious Work of Redemption; the foundation whereof was
Everlasting Love, and the Topstone shall be laid with shouting, Grace Grace
unto it, Zach. 4. that hereby the Lord might make to himself an Everlasting
Name.

1. To make himself an Everlasting Name, was the great end of the Works of
Creation; therefore God called up this great World out of nothing, for this end
he framed the stately Fabric of this vast and beautiful Universe; he has
planted the Heavens, that stately Superstructure, that vaulted Roof, and
bespangled Canopy over our heads; wherein he has set a tabernacle for the Sun,
and appointed the Ordnances of Heaven, with the influential Constellations
thereof, and guides Arcturus with his Sons, and has made Orion, the Pleides,
and the Chambers of the South; and all this to make himself an Everlasting
Name: Hence that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 1. The Heavens declare the Glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork. And he has also laid the Beams
of his Chambers in the Waters, and fixed the Groundsels and Foundations of the
World, and hangs the Earth upon nothing, Job 26. 7. he stretches out the
North over the empty place, and the Earth hangs equally poized with its own
weight, which made the very Heathen to admire: Hence that of Ovid, Terra pilae
similis nullo fulcimine nixa,
Aere sublato tam grave p^ndet onus.


This is wonderful, that the vast Globe of the pondrous Earth and Sea, should
thus hang without some solid thing to uphold it? This makes the Lord an
Everlasting Name; who laid the Foundations of the Earth, that it should not be
removed for ever.

2. To make himself an Everlasting Name, is the end of all Gods wonder-working
Providence in the World; ordering all things to his own Glory, and for the
good of his Church, and the destruction of all the implacable Adversaries
thereof; as Pharaoh is a special example, yielding to us a fair demonstration
of a Revenging Deity, and of a Divine Nemesis.

But to come up to the present purpose from the Instance in our Text, to make a
parallel of it, in order to Application, we may Enquire,

Quest. Wherein was Gods Glorious Arm so Illustrious in his Peoples Conduct
through the Wilderness, as to make himself an Everlasting Name.

Answ. In general, the sum or principal of it is, in that he brought his People
Israel, by and through Travels unto Rest, Troubles unto Peace, Wants unto
Supplies, Distresses unto Deliverances; yea, through and from great wants unto
great supplies; and from great and eminent dangers and distresses unto great
Salvations, which he wrought for them; he turned all things to the best, even
his Churches Bricks made in their Bondage, were turned into Saphires.

Now in this way of the Lords Dispensation, was made bare the Arm of three of
Gods Glorious Attributes; the Glorious Arm of his Power, of his Wisdom, and of
his Goodness.

1. The Glorious Arm of Gods Power, above the Power of man, in helping when
means failed, when they could not help themselves; in working in oppositis
mediis means, and commanding light to shine out of darkness, turning evil into
good to them, and doing things when at the greatest difficulty; fetching Waters
out of Rocks, making Rivers to run in the Dasart, etc 1 Kings 18. 33, 34, ^8,
39.


The Lord does often make things difficult that he may the more show his Power;
so often it was with Israel in the Wilderness, things come to the extremity, and
beyond the though it of man, how they should have help; and then the Lord shows his
Power.

When Moses despaired of Provision (and Moses said) The people among whom I am,
are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou have said, I will give them flesh,
that they may eat a whole month. (Says Moses) Shall the stocks and the herds
be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be
gathered together for them, to suffice them? And the Lord said unto Moses, Is
the Lords hand waxed short? thou shall see now whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee, or not.

2. The Glorious Arm of Gods Wisdom appeared, in making curious contrivances of
his Works, and bringing things about wonderfully, above the reach of man;
leading in a Wilderness: He is a wise Guide that can lead and guide through a
Wilderness, and find the way out. So these Wilderness Leadings and Salvations
are works, wherein Mercy imployes all the Attributes of God, and so Wisdom; in
special, Wisdom in bringing things about in a most wonderful manner when at
wits end; making Dejection the way to Exaltation; also in using fit means to do
his People good, in doing many things at once; taking vengeance on their
Enemies, chastising, humbling his own People Saving in fit seasons by wonderful
ways and means.

There is an extraordinariness in Gods Wilderness-works, they are not
accomplished in a plain and ordinary manner; but there is therein a discovery
of Infinite Wisdom.

3. The Glorious Arm of Divine Mercy and Goodness appeared, in making his
Peoples Numb. 11. 22, 23. Exodus 14. 13,
misery his opportunity; in coming in the hour of Difficulty, in the article of
Distress, when help was sweet and precious, when mercy would be most
illustrious; in remembering in their low estate, as he often did.

The sweetest help is help in Distress, and then most of the goodness of God is
tasted. A Mercy in the Wilderness is the sweetest Mercy of all.

But more particularly, His Glorious Arm of Divine Goodness appeared in Leading
His People, if we consider the Terminus a quo ead quem.

1. In regard of the Term from which he brought them, soil. from Egypt, an
House of Bondage, a Furnace of Iron, from under Taskmasters, from out of the
Brick-kilns, from the midst of Idolatry. That he brought them out of Egypt, we
know how much is spoken of in Scripture. Better be in the Wilderness, than in
Egypt: Better be serving and following the Lord in a Wilderness, in a Land that
was not sown, than serving cruel men, and defiling themselves with the
Abominations of Egypt; now the Lord led them, and there was no strange God with
them. Egypt was a Type of the state of Sin and Misery, out of which God leads
his own People.

2. In regard of the Term to which he was leading them; namely, to Canaan,
Rest, that is the end; the Wilderness is the way to Canaan, and there they
arrive at last; the hope of that makes Travel easy and sweet, the Journeys end
makes amends for all; and the enjoyment of it at last, is the more sweet; we
say, All is well that ends well.

But the Wilderness, though a place of Affliction, was a place of much mercy;
they were in the Wilderness, but God led them there, was with them there, and
did great things there for them. Particularly, let me Instance in some of the
special Mercies of God in his Glorious Arm of Conduct of his People by the
Right hand of Moses in the Wilderness, which may be of use in the Application.

1. The Lord set up RELIGION among them, gave them Statutes and Judgments, and
Rules to walk by; the Lord gave them his Word, this was a distinguishing
favor: He showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto
Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation.

Never had the People of God so much of his Word given to them, as now since
they came into the Wilderness. Moses the first Writer of Holy Scripture, was
given them to be their Leader in the Wilderness, and to deliver the first
Scriptures in writing; and it is like he writ not only the four last, but
Genesis also, in the Wilderness. He acted as an Extraordinary Prophet; and then
also by his Ministry, the Law was given on Mount Sinai. In the Wilderness God
gave them both Law and Gospel; the Law was delivered on the Mount, and the
Gospel was Preached in the Renewing Gods Covenant with them; and in the
extraordinary Types of the Brazen Serpent, which Moses in the Wilderness lifted
up. vid. Par. Prol. in Gen Joh. 3. 14.
And of the Rock, whose waters followed them; and of the Manna, etc. In a word,
in the wilderness God opened his mind and heart to them; now they were alone,
he revealed both Law and Gospel in a larger and fuller manner than ever he did
before.

Again, the SABBATH had been Instituted from the Beginning, and the Law of it
had always been in force, as other Moral Laws, but much neglected and
forgotten; therefore God solemnly made it known, and called them to Remember it
on Mount Sinai; this was his great mercy, to give them the clear Rule of the
Sabbath in the Wilderness, and to reduce them to the careful Observation of it.

2. He set up his TABERNACLE among them in the Wilderness, he gave them
Ordinances and Institutions, and Priests and Levites to Dispense all the
Ordinances of God to them, according to that Mosaical Paedagogy; having also
caused them to Renew their Covenant with him, their Church Covenant; for so
that is, Exodus 19. being a Social Covenant, wherein many People together, did
engage themselves to the Lord; thus God brought them near to him, and Set up
his Tabernacle among them.

3. The Lord set up Government among them, Civil Government; he gave them Laws,
so also Magistrates with Power to execute these Laws. Not only Moses, an
extraordinary Person to be King of Jeshurun, whom the Lord raised up to bear
their lumber, and to manage the Difficult work of Leading that People as in our
Text. He led them by the Right hand of Moses. -- But also others were appointed
according to Jethro's Council for ordinary standing Rulers. Exodus, 18. 21, 22,
25.
Thou shall provide out of the People able Men, such as fear God, men of trust,
hating Covetousness; and place such over the People to be Rulers of thousands,
and Rulers of hundreds, also of Fifties and of Tens, and let them Judge the
People at all seasons. And also afterward the settled seventy Elders to be
Moses's Assistants (which were after the settled Council and chief Court,
called the Sanhedrin or the Synedrion) of which we Read Numb. 6. 11, 16, 17 26,
30.
Hence we so often Read of the Elders of Israel and the heads of the People and
their Judges and Officers, all sorts of Rulers.

The Lord did not bring them from under their Taskmasters in Egypt, into the
Wilderness to turn Libertines, and to do what is Right in their own Eyes, to
despise to be Ruled by any of their Brethren -- Although some of them rose up
against that Order and Government the Lord had set them under; but the Lord did
solemnly and dreadfully declare himself against them, as he will sooner or
later show that he will not bear with those that refuse to submit to Order,
either in Church or Common Wealth: And Oh what a Mercy is it to Enjoy
Government, this was a favor to Israel in the Wilderness, the Lord appointed
Government for them and Officers of all sorts, and this was his great Mercy to
them; and so he also in the Wilderness gave them a Militia, and ordered the
same Bands of Soldiers and Armies to be ready for Defense; as in the beginning
of Numbers we read at large.

4. In the Lords Conduct of them with his Glorious Arm, he delivered them from
their Enemies, and gave them peace in the Wilderness. He delivered them from
Pharaoh that pursued them, and wrought wonderful Salvation; and so he delivered
them from the Amalekites, who set on them in the Wilderness in their weakness.
The Lord was their Ba^^er, the Lord was offended at their Enemies, so he
delivered them from Sihon King of (...), and Og King of Bashan; he suffered no
hand of violence to oppress or overcome them.

5. In the Wilderness God provided for them, and supplied their wants; their
outward wants and (...) wonderfully; they were in wants sometimes, and brought
to distress, and unbelieving Hearts failed them, and they cried out they must
perish with Hunger and Thirst; yet the Lord (...) and confounded their
unbelief, and prov^^ed for them wonderfully, and fully supplied them, gave them
Bread; spread a table for them in the Wilderness, gave them water in the Dry
and (...) Desart^* Jer. 2. 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18, 19. Exodus 16. 3, 4.
caused the Rocks to yield it; and made their old clothes last till provision
of new came. And though they were in a Wilderness, yet God sent them seasonable
supplies; he provided for them in his own way, and by his own means; Bread
which their Fathers knew not.

6. The Lord wonderfully and mercifully spared them, notwithstanding their
Murmuring and manifold Sins and Provocations. Unbelief, Rebellion,
Forgetfulness of God, Impatience, Discouragement, Distrust, Idolatries; after
so many great works and wonders the Lord wrought among them, and manifestations
of himself to them.

One would wonder that God spared them. And when we read the Story, we Marvel
that they should be so unbelieving, and refractory, and so soon running after
one evil or other. Oh we may Read our selves in it; were a story written of the
turnings of our Hearts and ways, it would be as bad.

7. The Lord did them good in the end by all their greatest evils, he humbled
them by their Afflictions; yea, by their Corruptions, brought them acquainted
with their own Hearts; and their Wilderness troubles prepared them for Canaan.

8. The Lord heard their Prayers in the Wilderness. Were they in any want, it
was but ask and have; and how often did he hear Moses for them; often God heard the
cries of their Necessities, yea, Murmurings; and when in time of Affliction for
their Sins, they cried to the Lord* he heard them though vile.

9. In the Wilderness the Lord always Remembered them in their low estate. Deuteronomy.
4. 7. Psalm. 106. 41, to 45. In the time of trouble and need, and in the
extremity thereof, as at the Red Sea, and in the time of their extreme wants of
bread and water.

But my time is scanted, I find my Preparations too teadious; I must therefore
proceed to some Application, which the Premises afford abundant matter of

Use 1. I might apply this Truth to the Church and People of God in General,
and then to our selves in this Wilderness in particular.

1. Relating to the Church and People of God in General, and Gods Conduct of
his Church through the Wilderness of this World with his Glorious Arm. Gods
Church may be said to be in a Wilderness while in this World* the World we live
in is a Desert Vale, a time and place of Changes, Sorrows, Straits, yea of Sin
and Unbelief too.

We read of the Woman i. e. the Church that fled into the Wilderness where she
had a place prepared of God, and that she should remain there one thousand
three hundred and threescore Days, Rev. 12. 6. And this is asserted, and seems
to be fairly intimated by those that affirm, that the forty two months, or the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days, mentioned in the preceding Chapter,
Chap 11. 3. Of the witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, not to be yet expired;
for it is evident, that Contemporary therewith, and of the same length of time
is the Woman's, that is the Churches being in the Wilderness, mentioned, Rev.
12. 6, 14. That these speak of the same thing, is the Judgment of the best
Expositours: But whether that Interpretation of these Prophetical numbers and
time be undoubted or no; yet surely we need no more then experience to tell us,
that the late and present times, have been times of many Changes, Travels,
Trials, Difficulties to the Church and People of God and fitly compared to a
Wilderness Condition Oh the Church is yet in the Wilderness, and has been
these two last Centuries past, Traveling through that horrid part of the
Wilderness, the depth of the Antichristian Darkness toward Reformation.

Let us but instance in our own Nation: Oh the Difficulties and Discouragements
and Oppositions that the first Reformers in the last Age passed through; but
there is still the Glorious Arm of Divine Conduct carrying on the Reformation.
God has Gloriously delivered our Nation from Papal Superstitions and
Idolatries: Oh the torch of the truth of the Gospel that has been lighted up
in both Englands! And notwithstanding the many Oppositions to quench it, it
has been kept burning to this Day.

And Oh the Mercy of God to our Nation! wherein the Glorious Arm of Divine
Conduct is remarkable in two famous Revolutions fresh in memory, the former
Anno 1689. The latter in the happy Accession of so Illustrious a Protestant
Prince to the British Throne, as at this Day; and we his Loyal Subjects in
New England Bless our selves with the pleasing Prospect of sharing in his Royal
Favors; as thinking our selves secure from a Despotick or Arbitrary
Government, or having our Liberties Invaded by Papal Usurpations and Tyrannies.
Long let our King live to be the Honor of this present, and the Imitation of
future Ages; and never let there want a Successor to that Protestant Line, to
Sway the Scepter of Great Britain.

The second branch of the Use is to our selves in this Wilderness; we are, and
have been in a Wilderness in propriety of speech so called: But O Generation,
may the Lord say, Have I been a wilderness unto you, as Jer. 2. 31. No, but the
Lord has been as a shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Oh the mercies of
this Wilderness, have exceeded those of other Plantations in America! A work
never to be forgotten, is the Lords preparing this Wilderness for his People,
when he swept away thousands of those Salvage Tawnies (those cursed Devil
worshippers) with a mortal Plague, to make room for a better People, (I mean
our Fathers) that came into this Wilderness to plant the Gospel, and to
enlighten these dark Regions. Pardon me, I compare not the place they came
from, to Egypt, God forbid I should; it was a Goshen, in comparison of Egypt;
yet to speak freely, the time was, when the People of God had their
Taskmasters, which they sighed under; and the power and purity of Religion was
in the House of Bondage; and heavy burdens were imposed on the necks of many of
the Lords precious Servants; from which, and for the contrary Liberty and
Purity, they were glad to fly into this Wilderness; if happily in a Wilderness
they might Worship and Sacrifice to the Lord their God. And Oh the powerful
calling voice of God to gather his People into this Wilderness! And they were a
choice select Number, whom God with his Glorious Arm did bring hither to lay
the foundations of the Everlasting Gospel; so that we may glory in it, when we
behold the Lord laying our Stones with fair colors, and our Foundations with
Saphires.

And God has granted Prosperity to these blessed Enterprises, he has caused the
Gospel to flourish in this Land; and we have not only brown bread and the
Gospel, but the Bread of Life; Manna in plenty, Angels food. Oh how has God
prospered our small Beginnings, and given us Towns and Buildings, and Blessings
of all sorts, and has sown our Land with the Seed of Man and Beast; so that we
can now tell of the Beasts of our Forests, and the Cattle upon a thousand
hills, and of our Oxen strong to labor, of our Sheep that bring forth
thousands and ten thousands in our streets, Psalm. 144. The time would fail me
to enumerate the passages of Gods goodness in his Conduct of his People in this
Wilderness with his Glorious Arm: But take a taste in a few parallel Instances
by a Reflection on the premises.

1. The Lord has given us his Everlasting Gospel in this Wilderness. God has
set up the true Religion among us, and this has been our safety and security.
Religion is the Palladium of a People, or Nation; therefore God has made the
World to take notice, that New England has been a People Saved by the Lord. Oh
we have had the true Religion among us! Oh the Glory of the Gospel that has
shined in this Land! Oh the Lively Oracles that have been delivered to us, the
Gate of Heaven has been here opened; the Gospel has been here spread in its
beauty, plainness and glory! Oh the Bethels, the many Bethels God has Erected
and Set up in this Wilderness!

2. The Lord has furnished us with glorious Ordinances and Ministries; he has
set up his Tabernacles among us, the Orders of his House; he has laid before
us a Platform of Discipline, and blessed us with a Gospel Order in our
Churches; so that were Balaam himself here, he could not curse, but bless and
admire to see the comely Order in the several Flocks of the Lords Sheep, folded
together in so many Companies. Vid. Numb. 24. 2, 5. And Balaam lift up his
eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in Tents, according to their Tribes; and the
Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he said, How goodly are thy Tents Oh
Jacob! and thy Tabernacles, Oh Israel! as the Valleys are they spread forth, as
Gardens by the River side. Even such has been the Blessing of our good God to
his Heritage in this Land.

3. The glorious Arm of Divine Conduct, has fenced us with the hedge of
Government. Oh what a favor is this! to give Government, to Establish
Authority, to have a Wall of Magistracy set and kept about a People; this is a
thing of unspeakable concernment; otherwise a people would be left to Anarchy
and heaps of Confusion. Oh! it is through the love of God to Israel, if he sets a
man over them, that will do Justice and Judgment, 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Exodus, 18. 21.
To see those that fear God Exalted, Oh how great a Blessing! And we are to
acknowledge the Sovereign and Holy Counsel of God therein; and know that the
Most High Rules in the Kingdoms* of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.
God has granted us Excellent Guides and Governors in this Land; he has not
left us to turn Libertines, but has set up his Government among us, has
walled us about with Magistracy; and he has made our Officers Peace, and our
Exactors Righteousness. And there has been the Execution of wholesome Laws, a
testimony born against prevailing Sin: If it had been otherwise, Plectuntur
Achivi, the poor People would have paid for it.

4. The Lord with his Glorious Arm has been our Protection, and delivered us
from our Enemies in this Wilderness, as he did Israel from those Amalekites; so
God has delivered us from those Amalekites, the Pequets, the Narragansets,
that set upon Gods People when they were weak and tender; but how did the Lord
crush and blast them, and blot out their Names from being a People as at this
day; so let our Enemies perish that have committed their Outrages in this Land.

5. God has set up a School of the Prophets among us; a College, a Seminary
of Learning; this has made New England preferable to all the American
Plantations; to the Silver Minerals, those glittering Entrails of the Spanish
West Indies. Let the pre^ent good Conduct of ^t, be continued and encouraged,
and Schools of Learning advanced, for the renewed Supplies of such Streams as
may rejoice the City and Church of God.

6. The Lord has spread a Table for us in this Wilderness and supplied our
wants from year to year, and every year; the year last past, was an eminent
Instance of this; in the time of that lasting scorching drought, when our
Hearts and our Hopes failed us: God did secretly and unaccountably (I had
almost said Miraculously) Reserve a Blessing for us, that there was Bread to
the sower, a supply for our necessities; this was the Lords doing, and it is
Mavelous in our Eyes, it was Gods Glorious Arm that effected it; Oh let His
Everlasting Name be Magnified.

Oh how has the Lord provided for us from year to year, and sometimes
plentifully; this is indeed to rain Bread in a Wilderness. Oh the Thousands of
poor Creatures among us, whose Loins and Bowels do bless the Lord! Very Nature
teaches us Gratitude for this, who else in their Poverty might have fainted and
perished for want of Bread.

7. God has done all this for us, notwithstanding our many Sins and
Provocations. We have been a sinful People. Oh the Lords sparing Mercy in the
midst of our Sins, great crying Sins. Profaneness among the Wicked, Contentions
among the Godly, Errors among others, woeful incorrigibleness in most under the
Lords dealing, we may apply to our selves those words of the Psalmist, Psalm.
78. 40. How often have we provoked him in the Wilderness, and grieved him in the
Desert; and yet being full of Compassion he forgives our Iniquity, and Destroys
us not. How many times has he turned away his Anger, and has not stirred up all
his Wrath. We in this Wilderness can speak this Experimentally.

8. God has heard our Prayers in our straits and plunging difficulties, how
often has he heard Prayers and been found of his People in their
Supplications, and how often has he come in the nick. Oh the many sweet
returns of Prayer we have had! and God has made his Arm Glorious for our
relief. When we Prayed for Rain, for fair Weather, for removal of Devourers,
for Provision, for Health, for Peace, for continuance of our Civil and
Sanctuary Enjoyments; God has made his Arm Glorious, and Glorified that Title
among us that he is, A God hearing Prayer.

Use 2. Beware of those Sins that may provoke the Lord to withdraw the Glorious
Arm of his Conduct. I shall hint only at some that are more obvious.

1. Take heed of despising a Glorious Gospel, or ill treating the Dispensers of
it. When Israel mocked the Messengers of God, despised his Words, and misused
his Prophets, the Wrath of God arose against his People; and there was no
Remedy.

God expects his Ministers should find suitable entertainment every where, and
that they should be so provided for, so as to serve the Lord without
distraction. There are many Townships and Precincts readily Granted, and
supplied with burning Lamps, which are like to be extinguished for want of Oil
to feed them; the Gospel starving in some Places, and the Dispensers of it fain
to work with their own hands, to administer to their Necessities.

It would be pleasing to God, and more Credible for our Christian Profession,
if some Methods could be taken for Relief in this case.

Be assured that an impoverished starved Ministry, will not only induce the
Contempt of the Clergy, but also introduce a despised Gospel; and if the Gospel
be once despised, God will soon withdraw the Glorious Arm of his Conduct.

2. Take heed of the Sin of Worldliness. This our Savior cautions against,
Luke 12. 15. This eats out the very heart of Religion; the sweets of the World,
eat out the savor of the Gospel; neither the Dread of God is feared, nor the
Grace of God prized by the worldly sensual Heart. Oh the strange alteration in
the spirits of men! Our Fathers left the World, for the Enjoyment of Religion
in this Wilderness; but the Designs of most are Inverted: Most in these days
are leaving Religion in pursuit of the World. They have that, that contents
them in this world; hence they are regardless of God, and the World to come.
Oh! we came hither for Religion, for the Gospel; but the world has engrossed
our affections, our love, delight, desires, our whole thoughts. Oh, take heed
of the World! this caution the Lord gave to Israel of Old, when they had plenty
and fullness, Houses full of all things, and Vineyards, and Olive Trees, etc.
Deuteronomy. 6. 11, 12. Now beware lest thou forget the Lord; so Christ gives caution,
take heed of your Farms, Merchandise, Yokes of Oxen, and pieces of Ground, left
you make light of the Call of the Gospel; the world is full of Irritamenta
malorum; it proves a snare to new and flourishing Plantations; when the world
comes in, and they have a plentiful increase, they abuse the good Creatures of
God to Sensuality.

Noah became an Husbandman, planted a Vineyard, drank of the wine, and was
drunken, Genesis 9. 20, 21. The things of the World are incentives to Lust.

There is at this day among us, a great outcry after the World, and after a
Medium of Trade, to carry on worldly Interests; it is well if our overreaching
after the world in too unadvised and bold attempts, have not marred our worldly
Interests.

We live in a good Land, did we but walk humbly with our God, keep his Statutes
and his Judgments; were we but industrious and frugal, did we avoid all
excesses; we should mount up with wings as Eagles, our peace would be like a
River, and our prosperity like the waves of the Sea; and instead of lying among
the pots, we should be like David's Dove, whose wings were covered with silver,
and her feathers with yellow gold, Psalm. 68. 13.

3. Take heed of the Sin of Pride. It Is though it there is more expended on that
one lust, than goes to the defraying our Public Charges, ten times told; This
Sin is an abomination to the Lord: And sure I am, it is ill-becoming a
wilderness Condition, to be poor and proud.

4. Take heed of the Sin of Oppression. That Sin has its rounds among us; it
is a crying sin, Isa. 5. 7. I looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression, and
for Righteousness, but behold a Cry.

Caution 5. Take heed of Sensuality and Intemperance, in all the branches of
it; Unchastity, Gluttony, Drunkenness, the prevailing Sins of this Land.

Caution 6. Take heed of the Sin of Murmuring and Discontent, under our
Privileges and Enjoyments. We are a People for changes and alterations, well
if God does not make us smart for it before he is done.

7. Take heed of advancing private Interests, under a gilded pretense of
promoting a Public Good. There is too much of Self-interest, playing its part
on Public Stages.

Caut. 8. Take heed of the Sins of the tongue, 1 Pet. 3. 10. Oh the mischief
that is done by that one member! that sets on fire the course of nature, and is
set on fire of Hell; forging, fomenting false reports, speaking evil of
Dignities, Jude 8. severely reproved. All Detraction is positively forbidden;
thou shall not raise a false report, Exodus 33. 1.

Use 3. Has the Lord led us so long in this Wilderness with his Glorious Arm,
to make himself an Everlasting Name. Oh then, let New England be a Name and a
Praise to our God! Oh let us be according to our Profession, and our
Privileges! Our Profession runs very high. The name of a New England man has
sometime been wont to carry a sound of Sanctity along with it. Most surely our
Obligations are very great, that call us to Holiness. Our Sins therefore have
an Emphasis upon them, as theirs had of Old, when it was said, All their
wickedness is in Gilgal, Hos. 9. 1^. A place where God had done much for their
Forefathers.

Men's offenses are increased by their Obligations: The Quality of the place,
adds much to the greatness of the Sin; as such places as have been formerly
eminent for Gods sincere Worship as Gilgal once was, the Ark of the Covenant
was there; and they had their Sacrifices there; they were a Priviledg'd People,
a People near to God, and God can better bear with Aliens then with his own
People when they offend.

The Philistines may Cart the Ark of God, but if David do it, woe be to Uzza, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 15. The Place, the People, the Profession adds ^n Aggravation. Oh
to Sin in New England, is ^o Sin in Gilgal. I verily believe, God ^s more
dishonored by our Sins, then by the Sins of any People in the World.

Use 4* Let us be exceeding thankful to God for his Glorious Arm of Conduct of
us to this Day in this Wilderness. Oh Magnify the Lord, and his ever enduring
Mercy, this Day even for ^is Mercies, his Wilderness Mercies, and his Gracious
Dispensations to us; The Lord has found us in this Desert Land, and wast
howling Wilderness, and has led us, and fed us, and kept us, and done
wonderfully for us here; so that ^t may be said of us, as Deuteronomy. 32. 10. 11, 12,
13. He found him in a Desert Land, and the wast howling Wilderness: He led him
about, he Instructed him, he kept him as the Apple of his Eye. As an Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her Wings,
takes them, bears them on her Wings; so the Lord alone did lead him, and
there was no strange God with him. He made him ride on the high place of the
Earth, that he might eat the increase of the Fields, and he made him to suck
Honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the flinty Rock. Butter of Kine, and Milk
of Sheep, with fat of Lambs, and Rams of the Breed of Bashan, and Goats with
the fat of Kidneys of Wheat, and thou did Drink the pure blood of the Grape.
The particulars applicable from the Explication, have been hinted at, and every
one of these things is verified here, as if appointed to be a Pattern a Glass
for us to see things in. Oh let us Bless God for our Wilderness Mercies, and
Preservations, and know our Duty; murmur not in this Wilderness, forget not the
Works of God; Deuteronomy. ^. 2, 3.
and let us be Humbled in this Wilderness, let every thing humble us; and let
us still be in the exercise of Faith; we know not yet what God may do for us;
Unbelief was their Bane, Heb. 3. 17. And let us keep Traveling in the
Wilderness, till we come to our Journeys end, to Canaan, to Heaven Psalm. 106, 13
and then think but what matter of Everlasting Hallelujahs in Heaven when you
come thither to be able to reflect and say as in Isa. 63. 9. In all our
Affliction he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved us, in his
Love, and in his Pity he Redeemed us, and he bare us and carried us all the
days of old.

God has done great things for us in this Wilderness, in his Conduct of us as
by the hand of Moses and Aaron, faithful Guides, who have Served their
Generation, and are fallen asleep, Mat. 13. 32.
and now we may say, as Zech. 1. 5. Our Fathers where are they? And the
Prophets do they live for ever? And God is yet thinning our Glory; I cannot
pass over without paying affectionate Obsequies, on the late loss of one of our
Renowned Worthies; I mean the Honorable ISAAC ADDINGTON, whose Name ought to
be Embalmed in lasting Memorial: Laying us under Lamentations, for the loss of
the Prudent and the Ancient, the Honorable and the Counselor, the Wise, and
the Scribe; a Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus our Glory is
departing, and the turn must come when Moses must be called up to mount Nebo,
and Aaron to mount Hor, to Dye there, and come down no more: Our Fathers have
passed through this Wilderness to another World, to a Glory above the Sun, to
move in a Sphaere above the Star^, to those Glorious Mansions of Crowned Saints
above, while we remain in a fluctuating Condition, tossed upon the troubled Sea
of this World, Subject to Changes and Alterations, in all our States and
Conditions: But yet let not these things make us forget our Duty, to Bless God
for what we have enjoyed, and for our present Privileges and Enjoyments
continued, putting an high valuation upon them lest God be provoked to make us
know the wor^^ of our Enjoyments by the want of them.

FINIS.

