RULERS Feeding and Guiding THEIR PEOPLE, WITH Integrity and Skilfulness.

A SERMON, Preached, To the Great and General COURT of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, Convened at Boston in N. E. on May 30. 1716. the Stated day
for their Anniversary Election of COUNSELORS.

By B. Wadsworth, A.M.

Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

2 Samuel 23.3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me; he that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Isai. 49.23. And Kings
shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queen thy nursing Mothers. BOSTON:
Printed by B. Green. 1716.

PRINTED by the Honorable Lieutenant Governor's Command, at the Desire of His
Majesty's COUNCIL.

Samuel Woodward Secr.
BOSTON, June Is It. 1716.
RULERS Feeding AND Guiding their PEOPLE, WITH Integrity and Skilfulness.
PLALM LXXVIII. 72. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and
guided them by the Skilfulness of his bands.
GREAT Accomplishments are needful, for the right managing of Great Affairs.
The well Governing of a Professing People of God, is a very great Affair
indeed; and very eminent Qualifications are needful for it. Our Text gives an
Instance, of the well Governing of a Professing People of God; and of the
Qualifications needful thereto, and exerted therein. For it tells us concerning
David, who was King over Israel God's Professing People, that he fed them
according to the Integrity of his heart, and guided them by the Skilfulness of
his hands. This Psalm whereof our Text is the close, gives us an account of
God's wonderful Appearances for, and merciful Dealings with, His People Israel
in Egypt; of His Mercy in bringing them thence, protecting and supplying them
in the Wilderness, bringing them into Canaan and possessing them of that good
Land; and of His kind Dispensations to them for a considerable time after. It
also gives an account, of the unsuitable returns which Israel made, to the God
and Giver of all their Mercies: it relates their ungrateful, disobedient
carriage to God. This History, which briefly relates sundry Grand Articles of
Divine Conduct toward Israel, and of their behavior toward God, for the
space of between Four and Five Hundred Years, (1 King. 6. 1.) I say, this
History seems to present us, with a sort of Contest between the Bounty, Mercy
and Kindness of God; and the Ingratitude and Disobedience of His People, as
though there were a strife which should overcome. And if we may look on this
matter as a sort of Contest, then God ( who is merciful and gracious, slow to
anger and plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 103. 8) comes off Conqueror at last. For
though He several times sorely and sharply chasten'd them, and in His Providence
plainly testified against their gross Transgressions; yet on the other hand, He
being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; yea
MANY a TIME turned be his anger away, and did not stir up all his Wrath. ver.
38. Tho'God often made them smart for their ill carriage, yet their Punishments
were not so severe as their Sins deserved. He dealt not with them after their
Sins, neither rewarded them according to their Iniquities, Psalm. 103. 10. He
did not yet utterly cast them off from being His People, nor utterly take His
loving kindness from them; but His Mercy triumphed over their unworthiness. For
the History in this Psalm is closed, in relating a great and remarkable
Instance of God's kindness to His People; even in setting an Able, Faithful and
Godly Ruler ever them. This is mentioned (and that very justly) as a plain,
evident Instance of his abundant care of, and goodness to, his People, ver. 70,
7I. He chose David also his Servant, and took him from the Sheep folds; from
following the (...) great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his People,
and Israel his Inheritance. The Person chosen was David, here called God's
Servant; and an eminent Servant of God he was, to whom God himself gave
testimony saying, I have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after mine own
heart, which shall fulfill all my will, Act. 13.22. Note by the way,

The more any Person is after God's own heart, the more Inclined to fulfill his
will; so much the more fit he is to be a Ruler. This David, had been a Shepherd
in a proper and literal sense, he had kept his Father's Sheep, 1 Samuel 16.11,
19. and 17.15. God calls him from this work, to be a Political Shepherd to
Israel his covenant Professing People. God's People, are sometimes compared to
Sheep, to a Flock of them, (2 Samuel 24.17. Psalm. 80.1.) and so David's being
called to govern them, is called a Feeding of them. And whom must David, Feed?
Why Jacob, Israel, God's People, God's Inheritance. They were a People near and
dear to God; in a peculiar, fingular, distinguishing manner God's special
Propriety, His Inheritance, Possession, his Peculiar treasure above all People,
Exodus 19.5. For the Lord's Portion is his People; Jacob is the Lot of his
Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Psalm. I.35.4. It was an high and honorable, weighty
and important work, to govern a People thus distinguishingly near to God; His
peculiar treasure, portion and inheritance. Well, our Text tells us, how, David
managed himfelf in governing this People; he fed and guided them. The Phrase is
Metaphorical, it alludes to the practice of Shepherds who consult the good of
their Sheep; and therefore endeavor to lead and guide them in right ways, to
keep them from straggling and straying, from walking in paths that would be
dangerous and hurtful to them. This feeding them, signifies also a kind, tender
care to see them well provided for; a making them to lie down in green
pastures, a leading them by still waters, (Psalm. 23.2.) a taking care, that
they may go in and out, and find Pasture, Job. 10.9. Feeding and Guiding them
imports, a thoughtful, sollicitous, industrious care, for the good and welfare
of God's Sheep, his professing People. Further still David did thus Feed and
Guide them,

I. According to the integrity of his heart. It seems his Heart was engaged in
the work, the weight and importance of it came home to his heart, it lay close
and near to his Spirit. He looked not on it as a work by the by, as a trivial
business of small concern; but his very. Soul was indeed engaged in it. And
truly, since such a valuable Depositum, such a peculiar Treasure as Gods
Covenant People were committed to him, and betrusted with him; 'twas highly
reasonable and needful, that his very heart, his Soul should be diligently
employed in caring for them, and in promoting their welfare. Rich Jewels and
Treasures, should be diligently and carefully looked to, that they may be kept
well and safe; but there are no Jewels or Treasures in the World, of so high a
price and value as God's Covenant People are. They are dear to God as the Apple
of his Eye, Zech. 2.8 Well, David employed his Heart, yea Integrity of heart in
feeding God's People in governing of them. Integrity, the word signifies (as
Critics observe) Upright, Perfect, Sincere, Honest and without Guile: such was
his Heart in Feeding them.

2. According to the Skilfulness of his Hands, Skilfulness, The Word signifies
Knowledge, Understanding, Prudence Tebunoth, The Hebrew Word here rendered
Skilfulness, is in the Plural Number; and may Intimate the very great or
manifold Skilfulness which David had, and exercised in Governing Israel. He had
great Skill and Understanding in Religious, Civil and Military matters: he was
quick Sighted, very knowing, Wise, Judicious, he had a very penetrating Thought
and Sagacity. The Woman of Tekoa said to him, 2 Samuel 14.20. -- My lord is wise,
according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all things that are in the
Earth. David was very Skilful and our Text ascribes this Skilfulness to his
Hands, because the Hands are the common Instruments of Action: he manifested
great Skill, Wisdom, Prudence in his Administrations. Hands, It Is in the Plural
Number, he laid both hands too; he had work enough to fill them both. It may
also Intimate, that he was Laborious in his work, spared no pains, was willing
to exert all his Powers and Abilities to make his People easy and happy. David
was remarkable for his Skill, his Wise, Judicious Conduct, even while his
Predecessor Saul was living, 1 Samuel 18.5. 14, 30 And the main course of his
Conduct after he came to be King, was not less remarkable for the Wisdom and
Prudence, of it; only there must be a saving as to the matter of Uriah the
Hittite, 1 King. 15.5. What our Text relates about David's Conduct as a Civil
Ruler among God's professing People; is recorded as an Instance of God's great
Favor in setting such an one to Rule them; and also as an Example to be
Imitated by those, who may be concerned in Governing such a People. Our Text
therefore may afford us this,

DOCTRINE. Those who are in Civil Government among a Professing People of God,
should Feed and Guide them with Integrity and Skilfulness.

There are Three Propositions contained in this Doctrine. viz. (I.) Those who
are in Civil Government among a Professing People of God should Feed and Guide
them. (2.) They should do it with Integrity. (3.) They should do it with
Skilfulness.

PROP. I. Those who are in Civil Government among a Professing People of God,
should Feed and Guide them.

Here it would be easy (and possibly, not altogether unnecessary) to premise,

That there are various forms of Civil Government among Men, as Monarchical,
Aristocratical, Democratical, and some of a mixed nature. I shall add nothing
by way of Comparison, to say which of these is most or least eligible.

Persons concerned in the Government of a People, may have various or different
business assigned to them: some may be concerned in the Ligislative part, to
make Laws for the good of a People, and some in the Executive part, to (...)
good Laws well Executed: and some, possibly; (though under different
considerations) may be concerned in both. Again,

There are different Posts or Stations in Government, some Superior and some
Inferior. Thus we read of the King as Supreme, and of Governors as sent by
him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. So, there are other different Ranks, Stations, Degrees
besides these two here mentioned. Consequently.

Those Abilities or Endowments may competently fit or qualify a Person, for one
Part or Station in Government, which may not for another. There were in Israel,
Rulers of Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers of Tens,
Exodus 18 22, 25, 26. Those may possibly be qualified for some Inferior place in
Government, which are not for a Superior. The like degree of Skill, Wisdom,
Prudence is not needful to qualify a Person for one Station or Business in
Government, which is needful for another that is much Superior and more
difficult.

Therefore what I shall say concerning the Qualifications and Duties of those
in Authority, is to be understood generally and extensively; and so to be
particularly applied according to the different Stations any sustain in
Government: for that may be the proper business of some, which others are not
immediately at all concerned to meddle in.

These Things being premised, we may again assert,

Those who are in Civil Government among a professing People of God, should
Feed and Guide them. This Feeding and Guiding of them, must needs signify and
comprehend in it (as was hinted in opening the Words) their endeavoring the
true Good Welfare and Prosperity of their People. Plato could say, The People
were not made for the Governor, but the Governor for the People. And this
seems agreeable to Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God to thee Good. Those who
Govern among a prosending People, should very carefully endeavor the true
Welfare of their People. Therefore they should endeavor, (I.) That their
People may do Good. (2) That they may enjoy Good. (3) They should endeavor to
make Good Laws, and to see them well Executed, in order hereunto. Rulers should
Endeavor,

1. That their People may do Good. Their doing Good, I here take in a general
comprehensive sense, to signify their Living obediently to God's revealed
preceptive will (as the Gospel teaches, Tit. 2.12.) their denying ungodiness
and worldly lusts; and living soberly, righteously, godlily in this present
world. Mic. 6.8. He has showed thee, O man what is good; and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God. It is good for Persons, to turn from Sin to God in Christ Jesus, to
live holily: this is good in a moral sense, it is the duty of all under the
Gospel, it is what God requires of them. And their thus doing duty, their being
sincerely and practically religious and virtuous; has a direct natural tendercy
in many regards, to promote their outward good and welfare (as well as their
inward comfort and joy) here in this present World. And further still, their
obedience to the Gospel, their conforming to God's revealed preceptive will,
has a moral or federal tendency to promote their truest Welfare, both in this
World and in the next. Isai. 3.10. Say to the righteous, that it shall be well
with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. 1 Timothy 4 8. Godliness
is prositable to all things, having the promise of the life that now is and of
that which is 'to come. He that is wife, is prositable to himself. If a Person
or People heartily obey God, the advantage will be their own. Moses said to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.24. And the Lord commaded us to do all thise Statutes: to fear
the Lordour God, FOR OUR GOOD always, that he might preserve us alive as it is
this day. And God said of them, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there Were such an heart in
them that they would fear me and keep all my commandments always, that is might
be well with them, and with their children forever. The Prophet said to God's
People, 2 Chronicles. 15.2, -- The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; if ye
seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
For a People to be Pious, is the way to be Prosperous. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Keep
therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them that ye may prosper in all
that ye do. 2 Chronicles. 24.20. -- Thus says God, why transgress ye the
commandment of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have for saken the
Lord, he also bath forsaken you. When a man's ways please the Lord, be makes
even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove, 16.7. This is as true of a
People as of a Person.

It Is undeniably evident from these things, that it is Good, Prositable,
Advantageous to a prosessing People, to live obediently unto God. God Is the
Supreme, Sovereign Maker, Owner and Ruler of all things. His Kingdom rules
over all; and His Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion. Nothing but his bounty
and kindness, can make a Person or People easy and comfortable, in Body or
Soul, in Time or to Eternity. It Is therefore Heathenish, or rather Atheistical,
to deny that it is prositable for a People to obey God. That cuning or policy,
those contrivances or alliances which put them upon doing things provoking to
God; will sooner or later appear to be, senseless folly, or mischievous craft
(like Gideons Ephod, Judge. 8.27.) 'twill prove a Snare to them. For whatever
Men's cuning or policy may suggest, yet their iniquities will separate between
them and their God: their sins will bide away his face that he will not bear,
Isai. 59.2. Righteousness exilteth a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any
People, Prove 14.34. Now inasmuch as it is for the good and advantage of a
prosessing People, to do God, to know and do God's Will; therefore those in
Authority should endeavor, to encourage and further such Knowledge and
Obedience in them. They are true Feeders and Leaders of their People, when they
do their utmost to make them know and obey God. Those in Authority therefore
should encourage those things, which tend to promote in their People, the
Knowledge and Practice of God's holy Will I might briefly Instance in a few
things having such a tendency among us, viz The encouraging (I.) Good Order in
Families. (2.) Schools. (3) The College. (4) A Learned and Godly Ministry.
(5.) A Sanctifying the Sabbath.

I. Good Order in Families. Heads of Families, should instruct their young ones
in Holy Scripture Truths and Precepts; diligently teach them God's Law, (Deuteronomy.
6.6, 7.) and command them to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. They should
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, (Ephesians. 6, 4.) Train
them up in those ways of virtue they ought to walk in as long as they live, tho
they should live to be Old, Prove. 22.6. They should bring them up religiously,
virtuously, diligently; govern them well, keep them under proper restraints and
discipline. Children should not be left to their own giddy unbridled humors,
but should be under Tutors and Governors, (Gal. 4.I, 2.) for they need a Guide
for their Youth. Children should be brought up, not Idly, but Diligently. It Was
once a Law in Egypt and afterward in Athens: that every Man should once a Year
give a Satisfactory Account, what Course he took for a livelihood, else he
should be put to Death. This shows how necessary they thought Industry and
Diligence were, for the good of the Public. And further, Family Prayer should
be constantly attended Morning and Evening in our Houses. Heads of Families
should resolve like Joshua, As for me and my house we will serve the Lord,
Josh. 24.15.

These things in their place and order, tend as directly as any thing can do,
to promote good knowledge and holy obedience in a prosessing People. And on the
other hand, the neglect of Family Instruction, Religion and Government, tends
directly to introduce in a shourt time, an overflowing deluge of Ignorance,
Wickedness, and wasting Judgments.

2. School. A Person or People cannot do God's Will, unless they know it: if the
Understanding does not see the right way, the Will cannot choose and walk in it.
That the Soul be without knowledge it is nor good, Prove. 19.2. Therefore
(besides family Instruction but now hinted at) Schools for the Instructing of
Children in Reading (that they may Search the Scriptures, the only rule of
Faith and Life) Writing, Cyphering, are very needful to promote a Peoples well
doing and well being. Grammar Schools also, for the fitting and training up
Persons for the College, are very needful to promote Knowledge and holy
Obedience among a prosessing People. It seems needless so much as to Essay a
Demonstration of these things. Any one that seriously considers the State of a
People, that the grownup Generation are dying and droping off; and that the
Children growing up, must soon bear all the sway and influence in all Public
Affairs, I say, any one that seriously weighs these matters, cannot but see,
That Good Order in Families, and Schools for the well Educating of Children,
are unspeakably useful and needful for a Peoples welfare. Every Child that
grows up will be a useful or hurtful Member of the body Politic. And persons
thus growing up, are most likely to prove useful or hurtful, according to the
good or bad Methods taken in their Education. Those well Instructed Governed,
Employed in their Youth; are most likely to be harmless and sericeable in their
Generation. Those brought up in Ignorance and Idleness, Pride and Luxury; are
likely to prove Vicious themselves, and to be Personous, Infectious Plagues to
the Public. A little Leaven, Leavens the whole lump; what will one Scabby
Sheep do? Those who through coveteousness or, brutish carelessness, are
unwilling ta Encourage Schools and the well Educating of Children; seem really
to be Enemies to Christ's Kingdom, and friends to the kingdom of darkness and
wickedness. Since the well Educating of Children, tends so much and so directly
to a Peoples well doing and well being, surely those in Authority should by all
proper Methods Encourage it. And whether Authority, besides providing proper
Laws for the Encouragement of Schools, should not also appoint Inspectors, to
see whether Children hare such Education as tends to render them Pious and
Useful Members of the body Politic; is a thing (as I humbly concieve) not
unworthy of consideration.

3. The College. Our Fathers showed great regard to the Glory of God, to the
Spiritual and Temporal good of their Posterity in early Founding a College in
this Wilderness, to Educate and qualify Persons (so far as such Endeavors can
do it) for special and eminent Stations and Services both in Church and State.
Agreably to these good purposes, God has been pleased to make this Nursery even
from the beginnings of it hitherto, a great blessing to this Province and to
the Neighboring Colonies. Yea, Streams from this River, have also made glad
other parts of the City of God. Notwithstanding our cold Climate, severe
Winters, and hard Labor for a livelihood; yet I reckon our College has been a
greater blessing, a more enriching Fund and Treasure to us, than all the Gold
and Silver Mines of the Spanish West Indies, have been to those that possessed
them. May God long continue the College, and make it a greater blessing than
ever to His People. All proper Methods to countenance and encourage it,
agreably to the Pious purposes for which it was Founded; I think must needs be
reckoned very beneficial to this People, by all who desire that they may know
and do God's will.

4. A learned and godly Ministry. Though whoever plants or waters, it is God only
gives the Increase, (1 Cor. 3.7.) The best means cannot Infuse saving Light or
Grace, without the efficacious cooperation of the Spirit of God; yet that a
Learned godly Ministry, tends much to promote holy Knowledge and Obedience in a
People, is so evident, that I think none who deserves to be called a Christian,
dare to dispute or deny it. To have able, faithful Ministers, plainly teaching
God's Will and Men's Duty, and with the strongest Arguments and Motives urging
Men to a compliance therewith; to hate them duly administering the Seals of
God's Covenant, and maintaining the holy Discipline of His House according to
the rules of his Word, tends greatly to the welfare of a prosessing People. It
therefore tends much to their advantage, that such a Ministry should be
Encouraged Countenanced, and suitably Maintained and Supported. The granting
unto faithful Ministers, such an outward Support, as that they need not
Entangle themselves in the Affairs of this Life, (2 Timothy 2 4.) but may give
themselves wholly to their Evangelical work, (1 Timothy 4.15.) is not a matter of
Alms or Charity, but a piece of Justice, a plain commanded duty. Gal. 6.6. Let
him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all good
things. 1 Cor. 9.14. So has the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel. To withold a sufficient Support from
Ministers, unless where Inability is the real cause, might easily be proved to
be Sa^riledge. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed (...); but ye say,
wherein have we robbed thee? In ^^hes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a
curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation, Mal. 3.8, 9. That pions
Governor Nehemiah, took care that God's Ministers should have a just Support
granted to them, Neb. 13.10 -- 13.

5. A Sanctifying the Sabbath. God expressly says, Exodus 20. 8. Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy. So to improve the Sabbath as God directs, is it
self one evident part or instance of holiness, and it greatly tends to promote
holiness in other regards too. It has been long since remarked, that Religion
commonly thrives or decays among a People, according as the Sabbath, the Lords
Day, is strictly Observed and Sanctified, or basely neglected and profaned. To
keep holy the Lords Day, and to take all proper measures to prevent the
Profanation of it, tends much to promote the holiness and happiness of a
prosessing People. For the divine Oracles plainly testify, That a People are
exposed to heavy Judgment, by abusing and prosaning Gods holy day. Neh 13, 17,
18. -- What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? did not
your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon
this city? Yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath, Jer.
17.21 -- 27. I think these things that have been mentioned, evidently tend to
promote good Knowledge and holy Obedience, in a prosessing People. And as
Rulers should endeavor, that their People may do Good, may Obey and please
God. So they should Endeavor,

2. That they may Enjoy Good. That is, they should Indeavonr that their People
may be safely protected in their Persons Liberties, Properties; that they may
not be Molested, Disturbed, Injured in any of the Rights. Possessions, Comforts
belonging to them. They should Endeavor, that they may be thus Protected, not
only from open and Common Enemies; but also from being Injured by one another.
It was sad with Israel, when there was no peace to him that went out, nor to
him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the
Countries, 2 Chronicles.15.5. On the other hand, it is mentioned as a great blessing
of wise King Solomon's Reign: 1 King.4.25. And Judah and Israel dwelt safely,
every man under his Vine and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to Beer^^^^a,
all the days of Solomon. Throughout the whole Kingdom, the People dwelt in Peace
and Safety; under their Vines and Fig Trees, that is, they peaceably followed
their own business, Improved and Enjoyed their own Estates, none disturbing
them in any of the Rights and Privileges belonging to them. Long after this,
'twas Prophesi'd and Promised as a great blessing, Mic.4.4. They shall sit
every man under his Vine and under his Fig Tree; and none shall make them
afraid. Indeed, civil Rulers should Endeavor, that their People may be thus
safe and quiet: That they may lead a quiet and peacealle life; in all Godliness
and Honestly, 1 Timothy.2.1. Rulers should Endeavor, that their People may live in
all Godliness and Honesty, ('it is their duty so live,) and that they may Enjoy
Peace and Quietness (be undisturbed, unmolested) in their so living, this is a
benefit and privilege that of right belongs to them.

And as Rulers should Endeavor, that their People may both Do good and Enjoy
good; so,

3. They should Endeavor to make good Laws, and to see them well Executed, in
order here-unto. The having and well executing of good Laws, is absolutely
necessary in order to a Peoples welfare. 'Twas good advice given to Moses by
his Father-in Law, concerning IsraeL Exodus.18.20. And thou shall teach them
Ordinances and Laws, and shall show them the way wherein they must walk and the
work that they must do. When there was no King in Israel, but everyone did what
was right in his own Eyes; then great Iniquities prevailed among them, as
appears from the 17, 18, 19 Chapters of Judges. When the People of Laish were
without Government, had no Magistrate to put them to shame in any thing, then
they became in easy Prey to the Aggressor, to those who were pleased to assault
them, Judge. 18.5, 27. History tells, us, That 'twas usual a'mong the Persians
at the death of their King, to be some few days without any Government at all,
every one doing what he pleased; that by the great Villainies committed by the
more prosligate in that short space, the People might the more highly prize
Order and Government, and the more readily submit thereto. Though Tyranny is
burden some and bateful, yet it is counted a smaller evil than mere Anarchy, and
confusion. Such are the Lusts and Corruptions of Men's hearts, that it is not to
be supposed any considerable number of them, should live peaceably and
vertuosly in Society, without having good Laws and them well Executed. It Is
therefore much for the good and welfare of a processing People to have good
Laws, and to have due care taken to see them well Executed; even Laws, (I) To
Encourage Piety and Virtue. (2) To discounge all manner of Vice and Wickedness.
(3) To maintain Justice and Equity between man and man. (4.) To protect the
Subject, in their Liberties and Properties.

I. To Encourage Piety and Virtue. It Is the undeniabie Duty and Interest of
particular Persons, and so of an whole prosessing People (as we showed before)
to understand Gods revealed preceptive Will, and heartily and practically to
conform thereto. Humane Laws therefore among such a People should Countenance
and Encourage, the spreading of good Christian Knowledge, the owning and
prosessng of Gods Truths and Ways; the Serving and Worshipping of God in all
the Ways, Means. Ordinances of His appointment. The Laws should countenance and
encourage, the duties of Sobriety, Temperance Chastity, Deligence and lndustry,
Honesty, Justice, Righteousness, Charity; Indeed they should countenance every
thing that is various and praiseworthy: every thing that is Holy, Just and Good.
The Apostle speakjng of Civil Rulers, says, 1 Pet. 2 14. They are for the
praise of them that do well. Romans 13 3, 4. Do that which it good and thou shall
have praise of the same, for he is the Minister of God to thee for Good. The
Civil Magistrate is called God's Minister, God be trust him with Power; surely
then such Power, should be Employed for God, to promote His Interest and Glory;
and therefore to promote Goodness, Piety, Virtue in Men. Virtuous actions, and
the doers of them, are to be countenanced, praised, commended. The King's
favor is toward a wise Servant: but his wrath is against him that canseth
shame, Prove. 14.35. David said, Psalm. 101.6. Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect
way he shall serve me.

2. To discourage all manner of Vice and Wickedness. Men cannot look
immediately, into one another hearts, and so cannot punish the sins that are
there, unless they break forth in Words of Actions. But humane Laws among
prosessing People, should as much as possible; dlscourage all known Vice and
Wickedness in Words and Actions, Such as prosane Cursing and Swearing,
Blasphenning God's Holy Name prosaning His Holy Day; Disobedience, Parents,
Masters and other lawful Superiors; Murders, Adulteries, Fornications
Drunkenness, Thests Robberies, Injustice, Opression, Ejing, Slandring,
Perjuries, etc Indeed every thing that is Vicious and Wicked, should to the
utmost be Discouraged by Authority. If gross Offenders are not suitably
punished, this neglect is dangerous to them and others. Eccl. 8.11. Because
sentence against an evil work, is not executed speedily, therefore the bears of
the sons of the men is fully set in them to do evil. And a little Leaven,
Leavens the whole lump. God's Word says concerning the Civil Magistrate, He is
for the punishment of evil Doers, 1 Pet. 2.14. He is a terror to evil works --
for it thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for be bears not the Sword is
vain: for he is a Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, Romans 13.2, 4. The Civil Magistrate is God's Minister, God has put a
Sword of Power and Justice into his hand, to protect Well doers, and execute
Wrath and Vengeance on evil doers. Surely he that has this Sword of God in his
hand, should employ it against God's Enemies, against the works of the Flesh
and of the Devil; against all open Vice and Wickedness, which are Enemies to
God's Authority, Crown and Dignity. A King that sits in the throne of
judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes. A wise King scatters the
wicked, and brings the wheel over them, Prove. 20.8, 26. Moses once said,
Exodus 32.26. -- Who is on the Lords side? Verily, those who have God's Sword in
their hand should be on God's side and so against Sin. The Inhabitants of Meroz
were bitterly Cursed, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the
mighty, Judge. 5.23. Verily, those who are armed with God's Sword, should help
against His Enemies, against the works of Darkness and Wickedness; and they will
greatly endanger themselves if they do not. For Cursed is he that does the work
of the Lord deceitfully, Jer. 48.10. What* have thou God's Sword in thine hand,
and yet wilt suffer the open Profanation of God's Name and Day, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Murders, Fraud, Injustice, Oppression, Slandrings, Defamations,
etc. to go unpunished? Then fear, left God take away His Sword which thus
rusteth in thine hand, and sheath it in thine own Bowels, for thy suffering His
Enemies (these mighty Sins) to escape Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap, Gal. 6.7. Thou art false to
the charge God gives, and to the trust He reposeth in thee, if thou do not
employ his Sword against His daring Enemies, even gross Transgressions. Indeed
the primary intent of Penalties threatened in the Law, is not that they should
be Executed, but to Prevent the Crimes which deserve them; but if Persons will not
be afraid of the Civil Power, (Romans 13 3. Will thou not then he afraid of the
Power?) but will dare to Transgress; then the Sword is to be unsheathed to
punish them. Such Punishments on Offenders, are needful for the Public good;
that others may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 13.10, 11.
Unpunished Crimes are hardening to the Guilty, insnaring to the Innocent.

3. To maintain Justice and Equity between Man and Man. Good Laws and a due
Execution of them, are needful for this end. Right and Equity should be
maintained between Man and Man, none should be suffered to wrong or injure
others. The Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, 1 King. 10.9, -- Because the Lord
loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King, to do Judgment and Justice.
It Is a token of God's favor to a People, when He sets over them such as will
see Judgment and Justice executed among them. Jer. 22.15, 16, -- Did not thy
Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with
him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him: was
not this to know Me, says the Lord? (...) should know God, and acknowledge Him
to be the Author of their Power, and Him to whom they are accountable; by doing
Justice and Judgment among all their People, even to the Poor and Needy as well
as to Others. In matters of dispute and controversy, Justice and Equity should
take place, without any partial regards to high or low, rich or poor. Doing
nothing by partiality, 1 Timothy 5.21. The Wisdom which is from above, is without
partiality, Jam. 3.17. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment: thou shall
not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in
righteousness shall thou Judge thy neighbor, Lev. 19.15. When matters come to
be tried, a rich or mighty Man should not be favored for fear of displeasing
him, nor injured or fined because he is better able to bear it than some others;
nor should a poor Man be crushed, because he is weak and possibly incapable of
revenge, neither should he be pitied and irregularly favored because he is
low: no, but Justice and Equity should run in a right line. There should be no
respect had to persons, but only to causes, in matters of Judgment. Deuteronomy. 1.16,
17. -- Hear the causes between your Brethren, and Judge righteously between
every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger that it with him. Ye shall not
respect persons in Judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great;
you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the Judgment is God's. Prove
18.5. It is not good to accept the person of the wicked (whether he be high or
low) to overthrow the righteous in Judgment. He that Justifies the wicked, and
be that Condemns the Just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord,
Prove 17.15. Amos 5.24. Let Judgment run down as waters, and Righteousness as a
mighty Stream. Justice, Righteous Judgment, should be as a mighty Scream or
Torrent of waters, that bears down all before it; that wont be stopped or
diverted in it is course.

4. To protect the Subject in their Liberties and Properties. Such Protection
(as we have showed already) is implied in Feeding and Guiding them; and good Laws
and the due Execution of them, are needful in order to it. All should be
protected in the Liberties, Privileges, Properties belonging to them; if any
are Injured therein, the next best thing is, to have them righted and relieved
as far as possible. Therefore those who craftily or violently wrong others,
should be punished; and the Injured should be relieved. God said to Civil
Rulers: Psalm. 82.2, 3, 4. How long will ye Judge unjustly; and accept the
persons of the wicked? Defend the poor and fatherless: do Justice to be
afflicted and needy. Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of
the wicked. Isai. 1.17. Learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed,
Judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Jer. 22 3. Thus says the Lord,
execute ye Judgment and Righteousness, and deliver tie spoiled out of the band
of the Oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the Stranger, the
Fatherless nor the Widow, neither shed Innocent blood in this piece. Agreably
hereto, we find that Job speaking of himself as Judge, say, Job 29.17. I brake
the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. He compares
Injurious Oppressors to Beasts of prey, and declares that he brake their strong
Jaws, and so rescued those that were likely to be devoured by them. Deuteronomy.
27.19. Cursed he be that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless
and widow, and all the People shall say, Amen. But there is a Blessing for the
contrary: The King that faithfully judges the poor, hit throne shall be
established for ever, Prove. 29.14

These things may suffice for the First Proposition, viz. Those who are in
Civil Government among a Professing People of God, should Feed and Guide them.
They should do their utmost, to promote their good and welfare. When Nehemiah
was come as Governor over the Jews, after their return from Babylon, it is
said, Neh. 2.10. -- There was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of
Israel. So when Mordecai the Jew had great Power and Authority, it is said, he
was accepted of the multitude of his Brethren, seeking the Wealth of his
People, Esth. 10.3.

And as Rulers should Feed and Guide their People, So,

PROP. II. They should do it with Integrity.

This refers to the Internal Qualifications of those in Authority, and plainly
Imports, that they should Sincerely, Heartily, Unseignedly Endeavor so to
Govern their People; as to promote their true Obedience to God, and so their
Safety and Happiness in His Favor. For happy is that People whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 144.15. But, for Rulers to have, exert, manifest Integrity of Heart
in Governing their People, may more particularly imply in it,

1. Their being the true Fearers of God. It Was good Advice given to Moses, Exodus
18.2I. Thou shall provide out of all the People, able Men, such as FEAR GOD --
and place such over them to be Rulers. 2 Samuel 23.3. The God of Israel said, the
Rock of Israel spoke to me, he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God. The great Creator, the supreme Lawgiver and Judge of all requires,
that those who Rule Men, should do it in the Fear of God. Though they are as
Gods, being Superiors among Men ( Psalm. 82.1. Job. 10.34, 35) yet they are
Inferior to God, Empowered by Him, Act for Him, are Accountable to Him;
therefore they should act agreably to the Rules He gives, and should Fear to
Transgress them.

Bishop Reinolds says, Plato would have the Palaces of Princes joined unto
Temples, to note, that Government and Religion, Prayer and Justice, the Word
and Sword should never be severed.

We find that Nehemiah advanced a Person to a considerable Trust and Charge,
because he was a faithful Man, and feared God above many, Neh. 7, 2. The more
any have of the Fear of God in their Hearts, so much the more Faithfully they
will discharge the Trust, and perform the Duties of the Post or Station they
are placed in. Serious and Solemn were the Words of that Godly King Jehosaphat,
to those appointed to be Judges among the People, 2 Chronicles. 19 9, 10. And be
charged them saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord faithfully, and
with a perfect heart. And what cause soever shall come to you of your Brethren,
that dwell in their Cities, between Blood and Blood, between Law and
Commandment, Statutes and Judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass
not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your Brethren: this
do and ye shall not trespass. He urges them to Fear God, as the best Motive to
make them Faithful to Men. Our Saviors Parable tells of a Judge, who feared
not God, neither regarded Man, Luke 18.2. If he did not Fear God, fear his own
Supreme Judge, it is no wonder that he did not Regard Men, so as to do Justice
unto them. You that have any thing to do in this Days Election, in this Session
of the General Court, or in any Station of Government at any time; See that you
do it in the Fear of God; heartily aim at his Glory, and His Peoples Good, for
he observes all your Actions, your Aims and Ends in them, and you are
Accountable to Him therefore. Rulers then should be Fearers of God, Men of
Religion, Men of Principles and Conscience; such as by the holy Awe and Fear of
the Great GOD, are restrained from gratifying their own Lusts and Humors,
though they have Power in their hand to do it. They should be as much for
Ethics as politics. That Godly Governor Nehemiah, did not follow the Ill
Examples his Predecessors had set before him; and he gives this Account of the
matter, Neh. 5.15. -- So did not I, because of the Fear of God.

2. Their being Men of TRUTH. Such are Recommended as fi^ to Rule, Exodus 18.21.
They should Love the Truth, love to Know the Truth; or the true, right and
proper State of those matters they are to act in. Therefore, the Cause which
they know not, they should search out, Job 29.16. The honor of Kings is, to
search out a matter, Prove. 25.2. The Judges shall make diligent Inquisition,
Deuteronomy. 19.18. Solomon heard both Parties, searched into the Cause, endeavored
to know the true State of the Controversy, before he gave Sentence about the
Harlots Child, 1 King 3.23. -- 27. Prove. 18.13. So, they should be Men of
Truth, that is, Men of Fidelity and Veracity; not so False and Deceitful in
their Words, as that there is no depending on what they say. David was such a
Man of Truth, such a Lover of Honesty, Fidelity, Veracity, that he said, Psalm.
101.7. He that works Deceit, shall not dwell within mine house: he that
tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. He would not have such paltry Fellows
about him. Solomon says, Prove 29.12. If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his
Servants are wicked. Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: but they that
deal truly, are his delight. Prove. 12.22. Righteous lips are the delight of
Kings, and th^^ love him that speaks right, Prove. 16.13. Excellent speech
becomes not a Fool: much less do lying lips a Prince, Prove. 17.7. Those in
Authority should be Men of such Honesty and Fidelity, as that what they say may
well be depended on; they should be as good as their Word. The Public Faith
should be always strictly kept: This is much for the Honor and Safety of the
Public.

3. Their being Sober and Temperate. Intemperate or Excessive Drinking, renders
Persons unfit indeed for any rational Managements or Undertakings; especially
for such Weighty and Important ones, as those of Rule and Government are.
Persons had need be entirely in their Wits, in the most lively, vigorous use of
right Reason, who are engaged in the weighty Affairs of Government. Gluttony
and Drunkenness must needs unfit Persons for such Business. Part of the Advice
of King Lemuel's Pious Mother, was that, Prove. 3I.4, 5. It is not for Kings, O
Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes, strong drink; left
they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the Judgment of any of the
Afflicted. So Eccl. 10.16, 17. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child,
and thy Princes eat in the morning. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is
the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength and not for
Drunkenness. It Is mentioned as a great Unhappiness and Wickedness, Hos. 5.7. In
the day of our King, the Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine, he
stretched out his hand with Scorners. If Rulers (of what Rank or Degree soever)
indulge themselves in Excessive Drinking, no wonder if they soon act as
Scorners, Proudly, Foolishly, Wickedly, as mean, base and vile Creatures.
Intemperance unfits Persons not only for the Pulpit, but also for the Council
Board, the Seat or Trybunal of Justice, and indeed for every thing that is
Great, Noble and Generous.

4. Their being Just, and hating of Covetousness. I put these two together, as
being necessarily connected; for it is almost, if not altogether impossible, for
Men to be Just and Righteous in Ruling and Governing, unless they are
Self-denying, and haters of Covetousness. These Qualifications in Rulers, are
abundantly Recommended and Required in Scripture, Exodus 18.21. -- Men of Truth,
hating Covetousness. If Men don't hate Covetousness, it is not to be expected
they will be Men of Truth, Just and Faithful to their Word; for they will Trick,
Falsify and Deceive, for the sake of Money; the love of which is the root of
all Evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. He that rulethover Men must be Just, 2 Samuel 23.3. The
Prince that wants understanding, is also a great oppressor: but he that
hates Covetousness, shall prolong his days. Prove. 28.16. Job speaking of
himself as Judge says, Job 29.14. I put on Righteousness and it clothed me: my
Judgment was a Robe and a Diadem. Righteousness Clothed and Encompassed him,
appeared in his whole Conduct as a Ruler; it was as conspicuousin his Conduct,
as the Raiment he wore; he reckoned it his Crown and Diadem, Honor and Glory,
to do Justice and Judgment impartially, in all Cases he had to do with. But if
Rulers are Covetous, greedy of Filthy Lucre, hungring and thirsting after all
they can get of the World; this will probably prompt them, to various methods
of Injustice and Unrighteousness. What vile, griping oppressive Tricks are
often used by Officers (in various Stations) when they have no Principle of
Justice to sway them? The Scripture is abundantly plain in this matter, Exodus
23.6.-8. Thou shall not wrest the Judgment of thy poor in his Cause. Keep thee
far from a false matter: and the Innocent and the Righteous slay thou not; for
I will not justify the wicked (and that they might comply with these Precepts,
God further says to them) and thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds
the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteons; Prove. 17.23. Samuel, as a
Ruler and Judje, observed these things, and Appealed to the People, and was
Justifed by them. 1 Samuel, 12.3, 4. Behold, here I am, witness against me before
the Lord, and before his Anointed; whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I opressed? or of whose hand have I
received any Bribe to blind mine Eyes there with? And I will restore it. And
they said, thou have not defrauded (...) nor oppressed us, neither have thou
taken ought of any Man's hand. Happy Ruler, that could thus appeal to God and
Men, and ba Justified by his People and his own Conscience! His Sons did not
imitate him, they walked not in his ways, but turned aside after Lucre, and
took Bribes, and perverted Judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3. They soon made the People
Justly weary of their Managements, And no wonder, when they acted so plainly
contrary to God's express Commands: Deuteronomy. 16.18 -- 20. Judges and Officers
shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee,
thro'cut all thy Tribes: and they shall judge the People with just Judgment.
Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall not respect Persons, neither take a
Gift; for a Gift does blind the eyes of the Wise, and pervert the words of the
Righteous. That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may
live and inherit the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Their not taking
Gifts and Bribes, their doing Justly and Righteously, was proposed as a method
to prolong their Prosperity; but the contrary hereto, procures Judgments. It
was part of God's Charge against his Prosessing People the Jews, Isai. 1.23.
Thy Princes are Rebellious and Companions of Thieves; every one loves Gifts,
and follows after Rewards: they judge not the Fatherless, neither does the
Cause of the Widow come before them. The Poor, the Fatherless and Widow, that
could bring no Bribes or Gifts, could have no Justice done them. There Is much
the like Charge, Amos 5.12. For I know your manifold Transgressions, and your
mighty Sins: they affict the Just, they take a Bribe, and they turn aside the
Poor in the Gate from their right. These things provoke God's Wrath, but the
contrary leads to the obtaining of His Favor. Prove. 15.17. He that is greedy
of Gain, troubles his own house: but he that hates Gifts shall live. It is an
abomination to Kings to commit wickedness: for the Throne is established by
Righteousness, Prove. 16.12. Prove. 24 4. The King; by Judgment stablisheth the
Land: but he that receives Gifts overthrows it. Isai. 33.15, 16. He that
walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that despises the Gain of
Oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of Bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing of Evil, he shall
dwell on high: his place of defense shall be the Munitions of Rocks, Bread
shall be given him, his Waters fall be sure.

It seems needless to add any thing further on this Head, only just to hint;
That the more Just and Righteous Rulers are, so much the more likely the People
will be, to fear and obey (as well as love) them. When Solomon acted Justly as
well as Wisely in the contest between the Two Harlots, it is said, 1 King. 3.28.
And all Israel heard of the judgment which the King had judged, and They FEARED
the King: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do judgment.

5. Their being Courageous and Magnanimous. They should be Able Men, ( Exodus
18.21) Bold and Courageous to stand up for what is Good, Just and Right, and to
promote it; whatever difficulties or oppositions may lie in the way. When
(after the Death of Moses) God Commissioned Joshua to take the Government of
Israel, he said to him, Josh. 1.6, 7 Be strong and of a good courage -- only be
thou strong and very courageous; that thou may observe to do according to all
the law which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right
hand or to the left. If Rulers will at all times and in all cases, observe what
Gods Law requires, standing up for what is Holy Just and Good (as in duty
they are bound to do) then they had need be hold and coragious (not fearing the
face of man, Deuteronomy. 1.17.) of a firm and steady mind, not easily dashed or
daunted by difficulties, oppositions or dangers. So dying King David's charge to
his Son and Successor, was, 1 King. 2.1, -- 3. -- Be thou strong therefore, and
show thy self a Man: and keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his
ways, to keep his statutes, and his commandments and his judgments, and his
testimonies, us it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in
all thou do, and whithersoever thou turnest thy self. For Rulers to keep
strictly to what God requires, is the best way for them to Prosper in all they
do; and they had need be Strong and Courageous in order hereto. King Jehosophat
said to the Judges, 2 Chronicles. 15.7. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be
with the good. Rulers should be of such a firm, steady resolution, as not to be
allured or affrighted, from doing what is just and proper. When some would have
frighted Nehemiah the Governor, to do an unbecoming thing, his Courage forbad
his compliance; he said, Neh. 6.11. -- Should such a man as I, flee? Laws
should not be like Spiders webs, to catch small flies, and let the great
escape. Rulers therefore should have Courage to punish the Great, Rich, Proud,
when they Offend, as well as the Poor and Weak: They should break the strong
Jaws, and cut off the lofty horns of the wicked, (Job. 29.17. Psalm. 75.10.) and
not suffer themselves to be browbeaten by Men of Belial (who are like throns;
and need to be guarded against with Iron and the staff of a Spear, 2 Samuel
23.6, 7.) or huff'd by Sons of violence: no, they should dare to punish the
stoutest Trasgressors. Though Zimri was a Prince, yet being a great transgressor,
Phineas with Zeal and Courage slew him, and was commended for it, Numb. 25.
chap.

6. Their being Kind, Merciful, tenderly concerned for the good of their
People. Prove. 20.28 Mercy and Truth preserve the King: and his throne is
upholden by Mercy. Job as clothed with Authority, sets forth his great pity and
mercy to the People. Job 29.12, 13, 15. I delivered the poor that cried, and
the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me: and I caused the Widows heart to sing for Joy, --
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. Rules are sometimes set
forth in Scripture, as Parents and Nurses, to show the tender love and
compassion they should bear to their People. Isai. 49.23. Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers. Moses, once when
fatigued with the burden of Government, expostulated with God: Numb. 11.12.
Have I conceived all this People? Have I begotten them, that thou should say
unto me, carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing Father bearing the sucking
Child? 'Twas the saying of Cicero (an Heathen) Those who rule should level all
their Essays at this, That their People may be most happy; nay it is the duty
not only of one who rules his Companions and Citizens, but even of one who
rules Servants, yea Dumb Beasts, to endeavor their good and welfare.

As Rulers are compared in Scripture, to Parents and Nurses, so they are to
Shepherds too, Psalm. 77.20. and 78.71. Moses and David, were Gap-Men in the
time of God's Anger against Israel, they chose rather to die and be taken out
of the World themselves, than that their People should be destroyed, Exodus
32.32. 2 ^^m. 24.17. These things plainly show, that Rulers should be heartily
and tenderly concerned for the real Good, Welfare and Prosperity of their
People; and should not be as devouring beasts of prey unto them. Prove. 28.15.
As a roaring Lion, and as a ranging Bear; so is a wicked Ruler over the poor
people. Very sad was the case of God's People, when the Prophet made those
complaints, Isai. 22.17. Her Princes in the midst thereof, are like wolves
ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy Souls to get dishonest gain.
Zeph. 3.3. Her Princes within her are roaring Lions; her Judges are evening
wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

7. Their being Diligent and Laborious for the Peoples Good and Welfare. They
should think no labor, care, pains too great to be taken, to promote the good
of their People. Moses sat all day from Morning till Evening to Judge the
People, Exodus 18.13. This showed his Laborious diligence for their good; though
indeed herein he somewhat exceeded; 't was harder Service than he could long
bear. The Apostle argues the reasonableness of paying Tribute, or giving a
Reward to Civil Rulers; Romans 13.6. For they are God's Ministers attending
CONTINUALLY on this very thing. They do, or should attend continually to that
work or business in Government which properly belongs to them. He that Rules
should do it with Diligence; there is no Rule or Government can be well managed
without it. Enquire diligently, Deuteronomy. 17.4.

8. Their being Patient. Those who make it their business to Govern a People
well, will probably meet with many rubs, difficulties, thwarting occurrences of
one nature or other, that may greatly try and exercise their Patience.
Sometimes the People themselves have their Humors and Distempers. How often
did Israel Murmur against Moses, and against Aaron too; even those best
Friends, who often stood in the Gap and turned away Wrath from them? Moses once
said to them, Deuteronomy. 1.12. How can I my self alone bear your cumbrance, and your
burden, and your strife? Rulers are compared to Pillars, ( Psalm. 75.3.) and
Foundations, ( Psalm. 82.5.) and 't is not fit that these should shrink or give
way, merely because heavy burdens and difficulties lie upon them. He that
stands at Helm, must not throw up all and quit his Stearing, for every Jirk,
Rub, or Difficulty he meets with. Those who have great work to do, had need
have great Patience to go well through it.

9. Their being Prayerful Persons. If Rulers among a Professing People are
rightly concerned for their Welfare, they will then Pray to God for it: nor will
they show such Integrity of Heart as they should, unless they do so. How often
did Moses Pray to God for Israel, turn away His Wrath from them, and obtain
Favor for them? Psalm. 106.23. Therefore he said he would destroy them, had not
Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach; to turn away his wrath, lest
he should destroy them. King David's Prayer, prevailed for the obtaining of
Mercy to Israel, 2 Samuel 24.17, 25. King Solomon also Prayed for the Good and
Welfare of his People, 1 King. 8 chap. The more Prayerful Rulers are for the
good of their People, so much the more they manifest that Integrity of heart
which well becomes them.

These Particulars that have been mentioned show, that Rulers should be
Examples in Virtue and Goodness; and if they are not so, they are the less
likely to promote the true Welfare of their People. Regis ad exemplum, etc.
People often imitate the Examples of their Rulers. If Rulers themselves are
Irreligious, Profane, Intemperate, Unclean, Unjust, Oppressive, etc. it is to
be feared, such vile Examples will poison, infect and hurt the People, more
than all the Laws they can make, will benefit them. Judah, commonly walked
with, or contrary to, God, according as their Kings were Good or Bad. Rulers
should show what is Good, Virtuous, Praiseworthy, by their own Practice and
Example, as well as by Laws and Precepts. Joshua who exhorted Israel, to Serve
and Worship God; set them his own Example in doing it, saying, As for me and my
house we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. King David by his Example as well as
Counsel, showed regard to the Ark (and to the Worship) of God, (2 Samuel 6.14,
17.) and also furthered the building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29 chap. If Rulers
are vicious in their Practice, it is not very probable that their good Laws
should do much good; they should set good Examples as well as make good Laws.
Alphonsus was wont to say, Those who Govern, ought to be as much better than
Private Persons, as they are above them in Honor and Dignity; reckoning, that
then the Manners of the People would be well formed, when Rulers are of a
blameless Behavior, and are a living Example of all Virtue.

And as Rulers should Feed and Guide their People with Integrity; So,

PROP. III. They should do it with Skilfulness.

This Skilfulness comprehends that Understanding, Wisdom, Prudence which Rulers
should exert and manifest in Governing. They had need (like the Men of
Issacbar) to have understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do,
1 Chronicles. 12.32, Joseph's Wisdom and Discretion, recommended him to a Place of
very great Trust and Power in Egypt; where he also taught their Senators
Wisdom, Genesis 41.39. Psalm. 105.22. It was a Saying of Aristotle, Ubi Praeses
fuerit Phylosophus, ibi Civitas erit Foelix. When the Ruler is Wise, the People
will be Happy. Scornful Men bring a City into a Snare: but wise Men turn away
Wrath, Prove. 29.8. By a Man of understanding and knowledge, the state thereof (
viz. of a Land or People) shall be prolonged, Prove. 28.2. Moses appointed Wise
Men, to be Heads and Rulers in Israel, Deuteronomy. 1.15. When Solomon was made King,
he Prayed that God would give him Wisdom and Knowledge, to manage the great
Work of Government; and God was Pleased with his Petition, and granted it, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. -- 12. The Rulers of a People, should chase out their Way for
them, (Guide and Lead them) Job 29.25. And great Wisdom, Skill, Prudence are
needful thereunto. Their being Skilful, and so, Governing the People with
Skilfulness, may more particularly imply,

I. Their being well acquainted with the Religious Interests of their People.
We have plainly proved already, that it is both the Duty and Interest of a
Professing People, to obey God, to walk in His Ways, to serve and worship Him
according to the Directions He has given in His Word. Rulers should quicken and
further their People, in thus Serving and Worshipping God; therefore they
themselves had need be well acquainted, with what God's Word requires as to the
Worship and Service to be yielded to Him. God therefore required, that the King
of Israel should write out a Copy of the Divine Law, and read therein all his
days; that he might learn to fear the Lord, and keep all the words of his Law,
Deuteronomy. 17.18. Joshua and Solomon were required(the former immediately by God,
the latter by David the Man after God's own Heart) to act according to what
written in the Law of Moses, that so they might prosper, Josh. I.6 -- 8. 1
King, 2.I. -- 3. The more strictly a professing People adhere to the Rules of
God's giving (and not of Men's) in Worshipping God (as well as in other parts of
their conduct) so much the more they are like to prosper. Rulers therefore
should be well acquainted with the true Religious Interests of their People,
and should encourage and promote them as much as they can. It Is well known,
that the main design of our Fathers coming into this Wilderness was, that they
might peaceably and quietly Worship God, and manage the affairs of His House,
(as to Particular Churches, Councils, Synods,) according to their best
understanding of the Rules of His Word ( without humane Inventions and
Impositions) and that their Posterity might do so after them: and I verily
believe, that the more closely we adhere to the plain Rules of Scripture in
these things, so much the more God will bless us; and that the more we deviate
herefrom, so much the more God will depart from us. And here, whether on some
General Yearly Fast or Thanksgiving, a General Contribution through the Province,
to promote the Gospel, in Small, Poor or Destitute Places, would not be for the
glory of God, for the honor and furtherance of our holy Religion, I humbly
submit to serious Consideration. And will yet say, Moneys so Collected, wisely
Employed, and faithfully Accounted for, would be no burden on voluntary
Contributors, but might probably do abundance of good.

2. Their being well acquainted with the Civil Interests of their People. They
should be well acquainted with the Fundamental Constitution of the Government,
that no Injurious breach be made on that; with the Relation the Government has
to, or dependence on, other Powers; with the good Laws that are already in
being, and are to be acted on and executed. They should be well acquainted with
the various sorts of Trade, Business, Employment to be followed by the People;
that so the same may be the better Directed, Protected, Encouraged. And the
more they know of the Situation, Strength, Trade, Designs of Neighboring
Nations or People; so much the better able they will be, to care for and promote,
the good and welfare of their own People. Indeed the more thro'ly acquainted
they are with all the Circumstances of their People; so much the more easily
they may observe, what would be for their Public and General Advantage or
Disadvantage. For Rulers should always consult the Public and General good of
their People; and prefer it to the consideration of all particular, private, or
personal Interests whatsoever. Topping Favorites or Particular Interests,
should never be cherished in any regard, to the Damage of the Public. He that
prefers any private advantage to the Public good, deserves rather to be called
Proditor, than Pater patria, he is rather a Traitor than a Patron, a Betrayer
than a Father of his Country.

3. Their due observing the general Temper, Disposition and Behavior of their
People. The knowing of Men, the observing their usual Temper, Inclinations,
Abilities, Practices; renders it the more easy to take proper steps to promote
their true Welfare and Advantage.

4. Their being Studious, Wakeful, Watchful to promote their Peoples Welfare.
Rulers are called Gods, (Psalm 82.6.) and surely they should not slumber nor
sleep, so as to neglect their Duty or their Peoples Good. Indeed thePublick
Welfare should lie upon their Hearts, their Minds, they should study, think,
contrive how to promote it. They should be wakeful, and watchful as far as may
be to foresee Evils and prevent them. (This is one Instance of Prudence, Prove.
22.3.) to foresee Advantages for the Public Good, and to lay hold of them.
They should be watchful, when a Gap is made (in one regard or other, as to the
Peace and Welfare of the People) to have it well stopped as soon as may be,
least it grow wider. Watchful in a time of Peace, and when they have leisure,
to prepare and provide for their own safety, if War should arise. King Asa,
thought 'twas good Policy to do so, 2 Chronicles 14.6, 7. Rulers should be Watchmen,
and keep a constant careful look out, to prevent the damage and promote the
advantage of the Public They should be skilful wary Physicians, to observe
what Symptoms attend the Body Politic; to observe critical Junctures, that
they may make proper Applications.

5. Their being Cautious, Inquisitive, ready to ask and take good Advice. Though
it is good to have a great presence of Mind, wife and proper sometimes to act
speedily upon sudden Emergencies; yet nothing should be done rashly. Our
Savior plainly intimates (instancing in the matters of Building and Warring)
that serious deliberation should preceed great undertakings, Luk 14 28. -- 32.
Therefore to ask, inquire, hear what can properly be said in weighty matters,
seems one wife and good step toward the right managing of them. With the
well-advised is wisdom, Prove. 13.10. He that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise,
Prove. 12.15. Better is a poor and wise Child, than an old and foolish King who
will no more be admonished, Eccl. 4.13. Without counsel, purposes are
disappointed: but in the multitude of counselors they are established, Prove.
15.22. Every purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice make War,
Prove. 20.18. And as it is wisdom in Rulers, to ask and take good advice; so it is
weakness and folly to follow wicked advice and counsel. It Is said of Ahaziah
King of Judah, his Mother was his counselor to do wickedly. Wherefore he did
evil in the sight of the Lord, like the house of Ahab: for they were his
counselors after the death of his Father, to his destruction, 2 Chronicles. 22. 1,
-- 4

6 Their Praying to God for Direction, as well as for Assistance and Success in
their Affairs. Such Prayerfulness, shows their Skill as well as Integrity. God
is the Father of Lights, Wisdom and Counsel are His; and He has said, Jam. 1.
5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him. Rulers therefore (as
well as others) should Pray, that God would Counsel, Direct and Guide them in
all their Affairs; especially in such as are most weighty, intricate and
difficult: when they know not what to do, their eyes (like King Johosophat's)
should be unto God, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We find that Skilful David, in his arduous
and difficult cases, prayed to God for direction, for leading and guidance; so
he did concerning his danger at Keilah, 1 Samuel 23. 10, -- 12. So he prayed,
that God would show him what course he should take, when he had heard of Readiness
Death, 2 Samuel 2. 1. So, again and again he prayed to God for direction, about
fighting against the Philistines, 2 Samuel 19. 22, 23. If Rulers would act
Skilfully, then let them fervently Pray to God for guidance and assistance, in
all their managements; more especially in those most weighty and perplexed.

7. Their being sollicitous to maintain the Honor of Government. If Rulers by
their own vicious and Scandalous practices, or by knowingly indulging the like
in others; if by their Supine sloth and negligence, their unwatchfulness their
ungoverned passions, their partiality, their trampling on the Poor, and fawning
on the Rich, their severely punishing those Crimes in the Small which they wink
at in the Great; their suffering the Laws to be violated, themselves tamely to
be buff'd and insulted by bold, daring, insolent Transgressors; I say, if by
these or any such Methods, they lay themselves open to despised, contemned and
meanly esteemed of, then indeed they show but little Skilfulness in their
Station. If Rulers once come to be generally despised amp; slighted, then the
whole Fabric totters, and forebodes a total overthrow and universal confusion
then (like the croaking Frogs in the Fable) every huffing Bullie will strive to
get uppermost, fearless of any check or danger. Those therefore in Authority
(however meek and humble personally as Christians) should endeavor to keep up
the Honor, Dignity and Reverence due to the Character they wear, and to the
Post and Station they are fixed in. And the best way to do this, is by a
religious, sober, virtuous life; by showing great and steady prudence, zeal,
justice, uprightness, and vigorous Application in the work of those Stations
they are fixed in. To keep a strait rein, and a steady moderate pace, is the
likeliest method to avoid stumbling and to bring the Traveller seasonably to
his Journey's end. If they would be rightly Honored in their place, then they
should despise vile Persons (frown on, not so much as Company with the lewd
vicious and profane though never so great or rich) and honor them that fear the
Lord, Psalm. 15.4. They should Honor God, then He Will Honor them; but if they
despise Him, they shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30.

8. Their being Sollicitous to prevent Parties, Factions, Divisions among their
People Rulers should consuly the good of the whole, the Public Universal
welfare of their People; and therefore should endeavor to prevent what they
can, Siding, Party making Factions and Divisions among them, because these
greatly weaken a People, and expose them to great inconveniences. Vis unita
fortior. Good Union and Agreement in a Body Politic, is their Strength and
Glory; and renders them more formidable to their Adversaries. Our Blessed
Redeemer tells us, that a Kingdom, City, or House divided against it self, is
not like to stand, but come to desolation, Mat. 12.25 When Parties and
Divisions prevail among a People, that time, strength, vigor (and often Money
too) which should be employed for the good of the whole; are employed to
weaken, cross and disappoint one another, and so the Public is hurt, it is
threatened with great damage if not utter desolation. If ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another, Gal. 5.15. Be of one
mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor.
13.11.

USE.

We may now proceed to some Use of these things, in a few Inferences. From what
has been said, we may Infer,

I. These concerned in choosing or appointing Rulers among a Professing People,
should Conscientiously endeavor to choose and appoint Persons of Integrity and
Skilfulness. All by and finister ends, should be entirely rejected and laid
aside in these matters. Persons should not be promoted or advanced, to Places
of Trust or Power merely because they are nearly Rela^ed, or because of special
Intimacy or Friendship, or because they are of this or that particular Party in
any Affair; but the thing aimed at should be, to get Persons that are most Able
and Capable, most Faithful and Upright, most likely to promote the Glory of God
and the good of His People; I say, the thing aimed at should be, to get such
Persons into those Posts of Stations that are to be filled up. It Is dangerous
to put Power into the hands of vicious Persons. Psalm. 12.8. The wicked walk on
every side, when the vilest men are exalted. Pythagoras (an Heathen) could say,
Its as dangerous to commit Power to a wicked Man, as to put a Sword in a mad
Man's Hand.

2. Those in Authority among a Professing People, should make Conscience of
rightly employing the Power betrusted with them. God has put Honor on them,
(Psalm. 75.6, 7.) in betrusting His People, His Sheep, His Jewels, His peculiar
Treasure, His Children, to their Care and Government; and they cannot make
returns suitable to this Honor put upon them, unless they do their utmost that
the People under them, may both do and enjoy Good. They Are obliged to such
endeavors from that general Precept, that as they have opportunity, they
should do good to all men; but especially to those of the household of faith,
Gal. 6.10. They Are obliged to it by their Office, for they are God's Ministers
for good to a People; and have the Sword of Power from God betrusted with them,
to promote the Peoples welfare, Romans 13.4. Notwithstanding their high Station
among Men, yet they are but Stewards under God (Mortal ones too) and must give
an account to Him of their Stewardship. And happy and joyful will their account
be, if they wisely and faithfully employ their Talents and Betrustments, for
the furthering of God's Glory, and the true welfare of His People: but dolesul
and dreadful will their account be, if instead of minding these things, they
neglect their Duty, and chiefly aim at gratifying their own Lusts and
Corruptions.

3. Good Rulers among a Professing People, are a great Blessing to them. To
have Persons of Integrity and Skilfulness, Feeding and Guiding of them; must
needs be much for their advantage. When the righteous are in Authority, the
people rejoice: but when the wicked bears rule, the people mourn, Prove. 29.2.
It was a token of God's Love to Israel, that He made Solomon their King, to do
Judgment and Justice among them, 1 King. 10.9. It was Prophesi'd and Promised
as a Favor to God's People, Isai. 1.26. I will restore thy judges as at the
first, and thy counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be
called the city of righteousness, the faithful city. On the Other hand, the
case of a People is set forth as very deplorable and wretch, when evil Men are
their Rulers. When there are thrones of iniquity which frame mischief by a law,
and decree unrighteous decrees, Psalm. 94.20. Isai. 10.1. Eccl. 10.16. Woe unto
thee O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. In
the very sinful and miserable times of the Jewish state, we read of their
Princes which devised mischief, and gave wicked counsel, Ezekiel. 12.2. So Mic.
3.1. -- 3. -- Hear I pray you, O Heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of
Israel; is it not for you to know judgment? Who hate the good and love the
evil, who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their
bones: who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them,
and they brake their bones, and chop them it pieces, as for the pot, and as
flesh within the Cauldron. Surely these were sad and sorrowful times indeed,
when they were under such wicked and cruel Rulers. It was threatened as a sore
Judgment, They that hate you shall reign over you, Lev. 26.17. It was another
terrible threatening, Behold the Lord of Hosts does take away from Jerusalem and
from Judah -- the Mighty man, the man of War, the Judge and the Prophet, and
the Prudent and the Ancient; the Captain of Fifty, and the Honorable man, and
the Counselor, and the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator. And I Will
give Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. And the
people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his
neighbor, Isai. 3.1. -- 5. When this is the case of a People, it is very
wretched, wosul and miserable indeed. And therefore good Rulers, Persons of
Integrity and Skilfulness, must needs be reckoned great Blessings to a People.

4. People should highly value, and carry it well to such Rulers. They should
highly value them because they are Ministers of God to them for good; and they
should carry it suitably and becomingly to them. And therefore,

I. They should Honor their Rulers. Rulers are Political Fathers, as such,
Honor is due to them from their People. Render therefore to all their dues --
Honor to whom honor, Romans 13.7. Fear God, Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Dutiful Respect, Honor, Reverence are to be paid to them; nor should they by
any means be Reproached, Slandred, Reviled, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile
the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. Eccl. 10.20. Curse not the King,
no not in thy thought. God himself looked on it as a daring Crime in Aaron and
Miriam, that they vented their hard words against Moses who was King in
Jesurum, He said to them, Numb. 12.8. -- Were ye nut afraid to speak against my
servant Moses? The Spirit of God numbers among very great and heinous
Transgressors, those who despise Government, and speak evil of Dignities, 2
Pet. 2.10. It Is very criminal to lay false charges on any, especially on those
in Authority; this is very criminal in its self, and tends to do abundance of
mischief. Nay further still, those in Authority are but Men (though called God's,
they shall die like Men, Psalm. 82.6, 7.) they are liable to failings and
infirmities; and if through inadvertency they do slip, and take some wrong step,
yet if it is evident that their main endeavor is to promote the Peoples good,
and not to hurt them in any thing; even such slips should not be needlessly
published or aggravated: Children should rather strive to cover, than expose
their Fathers nakedness.

2. People should obey the lawful Commands of those in Authority over them. God
is the God of Order and not of Confusion: Civil Government is of Divine
Institution; I don't now mean any one particular form of it, so as to exclude
others. But it is necessary for the good of Mankind, that Civil Government be
upheld among them: and God requires, that Civil Authority should be Obeyed. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God;
the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation. -- Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath
but alfo for conscience sake, Romans 13.1, 2, 5. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors as to them that are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. My son, fear
thou the Lord and the King; and meddle not with them that are given to change,
Prove. 24.21. A Mutinous, Mobbing, Rebellious spirit, is hateful in any, and
should be hateful to all, Christians. Yea, Ministers of the Gospel should
Exhort their People, to such an obedient carriage and behavior toward their
Rulers. Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers,
to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work.

3. People should readily grant an honorable Reward, to Rulers who faithfully
and diligently endeavor their good and welfare. When Rulers faithfully exert
themselves, employ their time and abilities for the good of the Public; it is
but a piece of natural Justice and Equity, that the People should give them an
Honorable Reward for it. It Is true in this case, as well as in others, the
Labourer is worthy of his reward, 1 Timothy 5.18. Render therefore unto Caesar,
the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22 21. For this cause pay you Tribute also,
for they are God's Ministers attending continually upon this very thing. Render
therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, Romans 13.6, 7.

4. People should make Conscience of Praying for their Rulers. The work of
Rulers, is Great, Weighty, Important; it is hard and difficult, often attended
with many Discouragements, as well as with dangerous Snares and Temptations;
indeed much Wisdom and Grace, Integrity and Skilfulness are needful for them,
in order to their right employing the Power betrusted with them. Sometimes,
wrong steps, mismanagements in Rulers, may bring great inconveniences, yea
heavy Judgments upon the whole People. King Readiness slaying the Gibeonites,
procured a Famine on the Land, 2 Samuel 21.1. David's numbering the People,
procured a Plague that destroyed Scores of Thousands of them, 2 Samuel 24.15. Yea
the Sins of a People, may provoke God to leave their Rulers to take such
unhappy steps. The Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved
David against them, to say, go number Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel 24.I. Seeing
these things are so, surely People should make Conscience of Praying for their
Rulers, that God would not leave them to any wrong steps or managements; but
that He would fill them with Wisdom, Courage, Conduct, with Skilfulness and
Integrity, with great steadiness of Mind; and that He would help them rightly
to employ their betrusted Powers; that He would Bless them, and make them great
Blessings to their People. If there were less Reviling of, and more servent
Praying for, Rulers; 'twould often be much better for a People. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
I will therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and
giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty.

And as People should make Conscience of Praying for their Rulers, so, which is
another Inference,

5. They should make it their chief care to please and obey God, that He may
always favor them with good Rulers. Such Rulers are truly a great Blessing,
and none but God ( the giver of every good Gift Jam. 1.17.) can bestow or
continue such a Blessing. It Is God alone who can qualify and ^ssist Persons to
Rule well; or in His Providence vest them with Authority therefore. It is by Him
that Kings reign and Princes decree justice, Prove, 8.15. Promotion comes not
from the East, West or South; but God is Judge, he puts down one and sets up
another, Psalm, 75.6, 7. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of water; he turns it whither soever he will, Prove. 21.1. He changes
the times and seasons: he removes Kings, and sets up Kings: he gives
wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding, Dan. 2.21.
Indeed it is with God in His Sovereign Providence, to bring whom He will into
Authority and Government; He also can cause the Wisdom of the Wise to perish,
and make them grope at noon day as in the dark; or He, can give Wisdom and
Grace for the right discharge of incumbent Duties. Surely then, if People would
enjoy the great Blessing of good Rulers, they should strenuously endeavor to
obey and please God, who alone can favor them with so rich a Mercy. Whatever
Rulers are whether good or bad; yet if the People generally are stubborn,
disobedient, rebellious against God, unreclaimable in ways of Wickedness; they
may then expect destroying desolating Judgments from God. Though Noah, Daniel and
Job were among them; they could not deliver or protect them, Ezekiel. 14.14, 20.
If they had Angels to Govern them; yet if they obstinately transgress; they may
expect that God will reveal his wrath from Heaven, against their ungodliness
and unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. The Prophet Samuel said to Israel, 1 Samuel
12.25. If ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King. Therefore let this whole People be Exhorted, to fear God and keep His
Commandments; this is the best Method they can possibly take for their own
Welfare on all accounts. Isa. I.I9, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall
eat the good of the Land. But If ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with
the Sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

I shall add but one thing more, and that is,

6. When a Prosessing People are favored with good Rulers, they should Bless
God for it. Such Rulers are Gods Gift, the Receivers therefore of the Blessing,
should thank God for it. Then surely, our whole Nation should heartily Bless
and Praise God, in that He did so Seasonably, Wonderfully, Mercifully place our
Sovereign Lord KING GEORGE on the British Throne; A Prince of such Superior.
Distinguishing, Excelling Wisdom, Justice and Equity; so true, powerful, steady
and resolute a Friend to, and Protector of, the Protestant lnterest; a Prince
firmly and servently tender (of the just Liberties of Mankind, and) of the true
Liberties, Safety and Prosperity of His Subjects. We should Bless GOD for
setting such a Good and Great KING over us, and for continuing Him on the
Throne, notwithstanding the Cursed Rebellion raised against Him. When we in
these remote Parts first heard of that Rebellion, we Prayed (and continued to
do so) that God would Blast and Suppress it; That He would bring the wickedness
of the wicked to an and, but establish the Just; and now God has so far heard
our Prayers in that matter, we should offer (as indeed we have often done
already) Praises and Thansgivings to Him for it. Pray GOD Establish and Long
continue our Sovereign Lord KING GEORGE on the British Throne, as a Great and
Rich Blessing to all His good Subjects, and to the whole Protestant Interest;
and let His remaining Enemies be covered with Shame and Confusion. And Pray GOD
Confirm the Succession as by Law Established, in the Illustrious House of
HANOVER, that His Majesty's Royal Issue may from Age to Age in their several
Generations, be rich Blessings on the Throne, and to the Subjects, of Great
Britain. We also in this Land, should be Thankful to GOD, for the good
Government and Rulers we are (through His good Hand upon us) favored with. Those
immediately in Authority over us, desire our Good and Welfare; and under their
Government (if it be not our own fault) we may lead peaceable and quiet Lives
in practicing of godliness and bonesty. It Is no small kindness of Heaven, that
we are thus favored, I wish we may rightly prize and value, the smiles of
Divine Providence in this regard, and walk more worthy of such Mercies. GOD
Bless those now in Government over us, and make them Blessings, filling them
more and more with Integrity and Skilfulness, to Feed and Guide this People.
And let GOD be graciously pleased so to Bless and Assist those, whom He may at
any time set in Authority and Government among this People. Oh that GOD would
always Bless us with good Rulers, and help us to walk as becomes a People so
favored. Let the Lord graciously be with us as He was with our Fathers; still
own us to be His People, always Grant us favor in the Court of Great Britain,
and with our Sovereign Lord the KING, that so our CHARTER, our Civil and
Religious Liberties and Privileges may be Mercifully continued to us. Let GOD
graciously supply all our wants, protect all our valuable Interests, succeed
all our laudable Endeavors; especially pour down abundantly of His good Spirit
on us, and make us unfeignedly obedient to His Holy Gospel; Let Him always be
pleased to dwell among us, and appear for us, and then we may well say as he,
Romans 8.3I -- If God be for us, who can be against us?

FINIS.

