A brief ACCOUNT of the STATE of the Province OF THE Massachusetts Bay IN
New England, Civil and Ecclesiastical.

By a Lover of his Country.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Crump, for Gillam Phillips, and Sold at his Shop, over
against the West End of the Townhouse. 1717.

A brief Account of the State of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, Civil and Ecclesiastical.
IT was not very long after the beginning of the former Century, That a
considerable Number of the Subject of the Crown of England, by the Allowance,
and under the Countenance and Protection of the Supreme Authority, did
Transplant themselves, Families and Estates into the remote Regions of America.

THESE first Planters were known to be Persons not only of approved Piety to
GOD, but of exemplary Loyalty to the Throne and Government they belonged to,
and brought these Principles of affection and duty to their Prince into these
His distant Dominions, and their care was to transmit the same Loyal Principles
and Spirit to their Posterity.

TO encourage and strengthen them to submit to the many Toils, Hazards and vast
Expense in Subduing and Planting a Wilderness. They were favored with the
Royal Grant of a CHARTER, by which they were vested with several Powers,
Liberties, and Privileges for their good Order and Government.

UNDER the Protection of the Royal CHARTER, in which they entirely confided for
the security of the Liberties therein granted, they were animated cheerfully to
undergo, unknown Perils and Hardships, which were unavoidable in their first
Plantations: By which a valuable accession has been made to the British
Dominions, and the Commerce of Great Britain enlarged, without any Charge to
the Crown.

IN the latter end of the Reign of King Charles the Second, this Charter was
vacated by a Judgment in the High Court of Chancery, which Judgment was
respited till the Reign of King James the Second, when this Corporation were
disfranchised, and actually divested of all the Powers, Liberties and
Privileges that had been granted to them.

AFTER the happy Revolution those Glorious Princes King WILLIAM and Queen MARY
of Immortal Memory, were pleased in their Princely Wisdom and Grace, by their
Royal CHARTER to Unite, and Erect into One Province the Colonies of the
Massachusetts Bay, New-Plymouth, etc. by the Name of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, which was to be Governed by a Governor,
Council and Assembly.

BY this Royal CHARTER many valuable Privileges and Immunities are vested in
the Body of the People inhabiting said Province, their Properties secured, and
all the Immunities and Liberties of natural Subjects born in the Realm of
England, are granted and affirmed to them.

HEREBY also Powers are vested in the General Assembly of Electing Annually
such as shall assist in Council, to Constitute and Settle all Civil Officers,
under certain Restrictions and Reservations: To Erect Courts of Judicature, To
Levy Taxes upon said Inhabitants for the Support of the Government, and Defense
of the Province. And to make Laws from time to time not repugnant to the Laws
of England, for the good Government of the Subjects.

IN the present Constitution of the Government of the said Province by its
present CHARTER, effectual Provision is made to maintain their entire
dependence on, and to secure in all points the Rights and Prerogatives of the
Crown.

THE Nomination and Constitution of the Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
Secretary, and all Officers of the Admiralty, is wholly reserved to the Crown.

THE Power of the Militia is wholly in the hands of His Majesty's Governor, as
Captain General.

ALL Judges and Justices, of a Superior and Inferior Order, and Sheriffs, to
whom the Execution of the Laws are Entrusted, are nominated and appointed by
the Governor, with the Advice and Consent of his Majesty's Council.

THE Governor has a Negative upon all Laws, Elections, and Acts of Government
of the General Assembly and Council.

ALL Laws Enacted by the General Assembly and approved of by the Governor are
to be transmitted Home for the Royal Approbation and if disallowed within the
space of Three Years, to be utterly void.

HIS Majesty's Liege People of this Province have since the Enjoyment of their
present CHARTER been exposed to many inconceivable Hardships by two long and
bloody Wars with the barbarous Salvages, in which with great Unanimity and
Alacrity, they have defended these His Majesty's Dominions with great Expense
of Blood and Treasure.

THE Inhabitants of this Province have always had a just value for their Civil
Liberties. But the free and secure Enjoyment of their Religious Privileges,
has ever been most dear to them: and esteemed a plentiful Reward of all the
Dangers and Difficulties they have been struggling with, from their first
Plantation to this Day.

THE first Planters of these His Majesty's Territories, were as to their
Persuasion in Religion, such as in the English Nation were called Puritans, who
desired and sought, what was in their apprehension a further Reformation, in
point of Discipline, and Worship.

THAT they and their Posterity after them might Enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences in these Points, and Worship GOD according to their best Light,
with less hazard to themselves and less offense to others, They sought a place
of rest in these remote Regions.

NOTWITHSTANDING their conscientious dissent from the Church of England in some
lesser Points, yet in their Removal they paid all just Regards to Her, they
dutifully asked her Prayers and Blessing in their Settlement, and heartily
prayed for the Prosperity of Religion in her Communion.

BY the Care and Zeal of these first Planters, the Kingdom of CHRIST was first
Planted in these His Majesty's distant Dominions, Churches Erected in their
several Towns and Plantations, in which the Gospel is Dispensed, and the
Ordinances of GOD's House, Administered, without any Terms of Communion, but
what according to their best Light, were plainly prescribed in the Word of GOD.

THE Doctrines of Faith professed in these Churches are entitely Protestant,
most agreeable to the Doctrinal Articles and Homilies of the Church of England,
and to the Confessions of the Reformed Churches abroad.

THESE Churches in point of Discipline and Mode of Worship are mainly
Congregational and Presbyterian, of one Profession and Principle, with the
United Brethren the Protestant Dissenters in South-Britain.

THE Use and Power of Ecclesiastical Councils and Synods is here acknowledged,
and the Right not only of the Churches, but also the Power of the Civil
Government to Convocate such Assemblies, when the necessities of the Churches
shall call for them, is Asserted.

IT is required that the Pastors of these Churches, be Persons of approved
Sanctity of Life, Orthodoxy in the Faith, of good Learning and known
Ministerial Abilities: These are Elected by the People, They take the Charge
of; and are set apart to the Pastoral Office, by the Imposition of the hands of
the Presbytery.

TO provide for a Succession of such an Orthodox and Learned Ministry in these
Churches, Grammar-Schools were Erected in the most considerable Towns through
the Province, and a College early was Founded, where the Liberal Arts and
Sciences are publicly taught, and nothing required to qualify for Academical
Honors, and Privileges, but a proficiency in Learning and good Morals.

BY the Favor of Heaven upon this Seminary of Piety, and good Literature,
these Churches, have hence been fully supplied from time to time to this Day,
with a well qualified Ministry, who have taught them the good Knowledge of GOD.

THESE Churches, though not formed in all points, in exact Conformity to the
Established Church of South-Britain, yet have their Constitution and Privileges
secured to them, not barely, by an Act of Toleration, but a Legal Approbation
and Establishment.

MANY good Laws have been Enacted by the Governor and Assembly, by which these
Churches are Protected and Encouraged in the peaceable and regular Profession
and Practice of their Religious Privileges, their Form of Worship, Church
Order and Discipline. By which also the Method of Calling and Settling Ministers
in the several Congregations through the Province, is Legally stated and
established, and Legal Provision made for the Honorable Support and
Maintenance of the Ministers thus Called and Settled.

ALL which Laws have been Confirmed, by the Approbation and Sanction of the
Crown in the Glorious Reign of King WILLIAM of Blessed Memory.

THROUGH the Blessing of Heaven these Churches under their present Securities,
have greatly flourished and increased, That at the present Time, there are
above an Hundred Religious Assemblies and Congregations in this Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, besides about Thirty Assemblies of Christianized Indians,
who profess the Faith, Order and Worship herein acknowledged.

AND at the same time there are through the whole Province not above Three
Congregations that in their Form of Worship and Discipline, profess themselves
of the Persuasion of the Church of England; Though Persons of that persuasion
are under no Restraints, or Discouragements, but are ever Treated with all
Christian Respect.

IT must in Justice be affirmed to the Honor of these Churches of the
Congregational and Presbyterian Denomination, that there is not one Minister or
one single Person known in their Communion, but what are full of Duty, Zeal and
Affection to the Succession of the Crown in the Illustrious Protestant House of
HANOVER, and do account themselves under the strongest ties, to Bless GOD for
the happy Accession of His present Majesty King GEORGE, to the Throne of his
Ancestors, and both Pastors and People do utterly abhor the late Impious and
Rebellious attempts, to disturb His Peaceable Government. They Adore and Praise
the Hand of Heaven in giving such a signal Blast to the designs of those wicked
Sons of Violence. And their Prayers are ever going up, for the long Life and
Prosperity of His Majesty, and the whole Royal Family.

FINIS.

