THE Triumphs of Grace: OR, THE Last Words AND Edifying Death OF THE LADY
Margaret de la Musse.

A Noble French LADY, Who Dyed when but Sixteen Years of Age.

Englished by P.L.

LONDON Printed: Reprinted at Boston by T. Crump, for Daniel Henchman, at his
Shop over against the Brick Meeting House. 1717.

Imprimatur.

Hen. Maurice Rmo Dom. Christ. P.D. Wilhelmo, Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.

TO The most Pious AND ^^rtuous Gentlewoman MADAM ANN HEWER.
Madam,

AS I was casting in my mind to present you with something in token of my high
Esteem for your Virtue, I happily met with these Last Hours of a Young French
Lady; in which I found so many things rare and admirable, useful and edifying,
divinely transporting and inflaming, that I concluded it a Gift most agreeable
and comporting with your Pious and Devout Inclinations; and therefore was soon
determined in my thoughts to Dedicate this Translation to you, as judging it
(setting aside my own Faults) most word thy of your Acceptance. For what (...)
imagined more strange and wonderful, (...) to see so tender an Age, so weak a
(...) so dedicate an Education, not only (...) the most formidable of all
things (...) King of Terrors, but Triumphing and trampling on him? What more
Edifying, that to behold the Power of Grace so gloriously enthroned amidst the
Infirmities of Nature, raised to their highest pitch, and making them all serve
as foils to its Divine Luster? What more transporting, than to hear a Soul
wounded with Divine Love, send forth its flaming Desires to the Glorious and
All-Beautiful Object of them? Or what can be thought more engaging and inciting
to Virtue, than to see not only the Peaceful, but Joyful Latter End therefore;
and what great Triumphs and Exultations attend it, even in the most difficult
and affrighting Circumstances of the last Scene of Life? In a Word, MADAM, you
may see here the miraculous and powerful (...) of the RELIGION you profess,
(...) the GRACE you entertain and have (...)

All the Night long she was rehearsing the most pathetical Verses of the
Psalms; (...) in the morning (being Monday) (...) Catholic being come to see
(...) out Nine of the Clocks, and (...) his grief upon the score of her
^^ckness, she answered his Civility, and withal gave him an account of her
Faith, and the Hope that was in her; assuring him, she was resolved to Die in
that Religion, which she was brought up in, and always had professed. Some few
days after this, a Divine, by name Monsieur Boursault, being come to visit her,
discoursed her a little while, and then Prayed with her; she instancing to him,
after his Prayer was ended, what part of it had most affected her. This whole
day (as the foregoing). she passed in continual sighs and tears; often cried
out, Oh! how much weakness and infirmity, O my God, am I sensible of! Oh! how
unworthy am I to appear before thee! If thou, O Lord, mark my transgressious, I
shall not be able to abide it. B ut, O my God, I beseech thee speak peace unto
me, and say to my Soul, I am thy Salvation.

Incline thine ear to hear my voice,
And pity on me take:
As thou wast wont, so help me, Lord,
Lest life should me forsake.
Psalm. 119.149. Old Translation Since my Sins do abound, O Lord to make thy
Grace much more abound toward me, Romans 5.20. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving
kindness is good: turn unto me according to the multitude of thy mercies, Psalm.
69.16, 17, 18. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble. O
haste thee, and hear me. Draw nigh unto my Soul, and save it, for thy mercies
sake.

WITH these she rehearsed also several admitable Sentences she had learned out
of a Book Entitled, [ Comforts against the Terrors of Death;] which being
slipped out of our mind, are not mentioned here.

SHE having been from the Sabbath Morning in continual frights and disquiets,
occasioned by the sense of her Sins, and her apprehension of God's Judgments
found her Spirit calmed, and her mind much composed, about Seven of the Clock
in the Evening, when she felt the Comforts of the (...), and was filled with
that (...) Joy and Glory which God (...) their hearts, who are struck (...) a
lively sorrow for having offended Him

NOW at the time of these happy inspirations it was, that she hearing them, who
were about her, talk of giving her something to refresh her Body, said to them,
All that is done to me, is to no purpose; for from my God I have received the
only Remedy my Soul so much longed for. I called upon the Lord in my trouble,
and the Lord heard me at large. I feel my God is on my side: therefore I will
fear no evil. For the right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the
Lord brings mighty things to pass, Psalm. 118.5, 6, 16. The Lord has inclined
his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long as I breath. The snares
of Death compassed me about, and the pains of Hell gat hold of me. I found
trouble and heaviness; but I will call upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord, I
beseech thee, deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our
God is merciful. The Lord preserves the simple: I was (...), and he helped me.
Turn (...) unto thy rest, O my Soul: for the (...) dealt bountifully with thee,
Psalm. 11^ (...) 4, 5, 6, 7.

HERE she making a stop, they gave her that which was prepared for her; and
some of the Company telling her she should endeavor to take some rest, she
answered, That the Rest and Peace she felt in her Soul, was her sole joy and
happiness. And when it was further said (...) her, that she ought to take
courage, there being yet hopes of Recovery. Ah! (replied she) tell me no more
of living here on Earth again, now all my thoughts are fixed upon Heaven.
Neither does Death affright me at all: for though I know it is the Wages of
Sin, I know also that the Gift of God is Eternal Life, Romans 6.23. Only Pray to
God for me, that he would be pleased to strengthen me more and more against the
fears, which the sense of my Sins may raise in me, to the end I may be enabled
to fight the good fight, and so obtain the Crown of Life, 2 Timothy 4.7. (...)
which one saying to her, (...) fears occasioned from Sin, ought (...) much less
in her, than any body (...) she having always liv^d a most (...) retired life;
she made this answer: How do you know I would not have loved the World, if I
had been brought up as other people of my Quality are? Am not I more happy now,
that my Savior will take me from it? Let us therefore pray Him, that he would
so dispose my Heart, that I may go to Him with a full assurance of his Mercy. O
Lord, this is the needful time; help me, my God, haste thee to my relief.

THEN another saying to her, But, Madam, suppose God would spare you to us --
Here she replied, without giving the party leave to go on, Not my will, O Lord,
but thy will be done, Mat. 26.39. Nevertheless it is far better for me to
depart and be with my Savior, Phil. 1.23. But, O my God, Thy will be done on
Earth, as it is in Heaven. And so proceeded to the end of the Lord's Prayer;
and afterward rehearsed also the Apostles (...). Which having done, she sats
up in her Bed, and looking on (...) Hands, said, This poor Body must (...),
Genesis 3.19. But I knew (...) my Redeemer (...), and that he shall (...) at the
latter day* And though after my skin, (...) this Body, yet in my flesh shall I
be God, Job. 19.25, 26. For this corruptable must put on incorruption, and this
mortal immortality. And there shall Death be swallowed up in Victory. O Death,
where is thy Victory? Where is that sting wherewith thou would pierce me? My
Savior has broken it, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54, 55. After which, she making a little
pause, did seem to fall asleep; but presently turning her self toward the Lady
her Mother, with a cheerful countenance said to her, Dear Mother, give me up to
God again, who thus long has lent me to you. Whereupon the Lady her Mother
lifting up her Eyes to Heaven, with sighs and tears cried out, O Heavenly
Father, into thy Hands I commend both my self, and this poor Child thou have
given me: Make us (I beseech thee) partakers of thy Holiness, that we may be so
of thy Happiness wise.

WHEN the Patient answered, I know (...) I have believed, and am persuaded
(...) he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. 2 Timothy 1.12. And looking on the Lady her Mother, with a tender look, she said to
her (upon occasion of a Dream she had) Dear Mother, give me to drink again of
your Consolations. Whereto the Lady her Mother answered, It is the Lord shall
do that for you my Child. Aye, (replied she, (...) have I received some by your
(...). Th^^ ^he Lady her Mother went (...). With joy shall you draw water (...)
wells of Salvation, Isai. 12.13. To which the Patient answered, Yea, verily, I
am drinking already of those Waters springing up into Eternal Life; and my Cap
does overflow. Lord, break this Vessel of Earth that the Treasure may appear
which thou have laid up in it. Take unto thee again the Breath wherewith thou
have animated this my poor Body.

THE next Night after, she Dreamed that she saw two Lamps fasten d to Heaven,
which gave a most glori^^^ Light, and that at last one of them (...) caught up
and hid in Heaven. (...) Dream she having told the Lady (...) Mother the next
Morning, she said (...) her, My dear Child, thou Virgin of Israel, Mystical
Bride, go to meet thy Bridegroom, with thy Lamp full of that Oil thy Savior
has given thee. Then the Patient cried out, Father, into thy hands I Commend my
spirit, Luke 23.46. Yea, I am now going to the (...) of the Lamb, who has (...)
in his tender mercies, (...) at his Table with Abra^^^ (...) Jacob; in the
Kingdom of (...)* At which Conversation the Chaplain being present, was going
to Conclude it, with these Words: [ Well done, good and faithful Servant, enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25.23.] But the Patient interrupting him,
cried out, Oh! this Joy of the Lord is my joy: adding, That Mercy rejoiced
against Judgment, in her behalf, Jam. 2.13. After this, the Lady her Mother,
and one of her own Sisters, who remained alone with her. heard her most
fervently Pray to God, and rehearse several Sentences of (...) 6.51 and 143.
Psalms; which she (...) either in Prose or Verse, sometimes according to the
Old, and at other times according to the New Translation. And thus applying her
self to God, with a Zeal beyond expression, all her thoughts were now so
raised, that she felt such ravishing Joys, as no Tongue can utter. How happy am
I: (repeated she often.) How surpassing (...)* How can I express it? It Is (...)
that it exceeds all comparison. (...) to return to my good God! You, (...)
(speaking to her (...)) help me to ascribe the Glory due to his name, and to
set forth his wor^^y Praise.

THE Lady her Mother seeing her in this happy condition, called those in,
again, who were gone out of the Room, that they might be Witnesses of this her
Joy and Consolations, as they had been Of her Sorrows. She was at this time
sitting up in her Bed, with her hands joined together, and her Eyes listed
toward Heaven; her looks being very lively and cheerful, and her co^^tenance
brisk, though modest. (...) the space of Six Hours she spoke (...) a loud
voice, and did express much (...) few words; using terms very emphattical to
represent, sometimes her Happiness, and sometimes the Joy she was filled with;
interlacing her discourse with several Sentences both of the Old and New
Testament, which she uttered so fast and fluently, that it was impossible to
remember them all; and mixing her inspir^d thought (...) those written Dictates
of the (...), sometimes made her (...) our Lord for the Redemption (...)
vouchsafed to her; and then again humbled her self before him. At another time
she congratulated her own happy state, and lastly, she returned a thousand
times her hearty thanks to God for the accumulated savours she had reciv'd at
his hand.

BESIDES, she paraphrased several Chapters of the Holy Scripture, as the 5th,
8th, and 12th of the Epistle of St. Paul (...) the Romans, and the 17th of St.
John's ^ospel; applying them to her self, ^^ch after this manner: My God, ^^ere
is now no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS: I have: therefore
nothing to fear, for I do with all my heart lay hold of his Merits, who is the
Redeemer of the World. I am made free from the Law of Sin and Death, which does
no more at all affright me; and I see the Spirit of Eternal Life communicated
(...) me by my Savior. Yea, O my God, (...) know I am one of thy Children,
since this thy Spirit so powerfully comforts me.

Arise, my Soul, and to the Almighty King, Sprightly, and cheerful Halleluiahs
sing. Psalm. 104.35. Woodsord, OH! how great is my happiness, who have not
received the Spirit of Bondage, But the Spirit of Adoption, whereby I can call
Him Father, (Romans 8.15.) 'who is the Great God and Master of the World. Thou
Holy Ghost, shall always bear witness to my Spirit, that I am the Child of God,
and Coheir with Christ O the depth of the riches both of the Wisd^^ and
Knowledge of God! How unsea^^^^ble are his Judgments, and his ways (...)
finding out! For of him, and through (...) and to him, are all things; to whom
be Glory for ever. Amen. Lord Jesus (added she) 'thou said in that 'Prayer
thou did put up for thine Apostles, Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall 'believe on me through their words.I have
believed on thee, through their words: Thou did therefore, O Lord, even then,
pray for thy poor Handmaid. Lord, thou did say, [ Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am.] O grant (I beseech thee)
that where that art, I may be also, to the end I may behold thy Glory to all
Eternity. Then hearing some of the Company say, that she spoke well; It is not
I (answered she) that speak, but the Holy Ghost that speaks in me, to(...)

of, one day, in a more abundant manner, according to the Riches of his
infinite Goodness and Mercy. And particularly she prayed for the Church of
Nantes; making it her hum^^^ suit to God, that He, who is the ^^^d of Peace,
would be pleased always to be with her, and keep Unity and Concord, Love and
Charity in the midst of her.

THEN she rehearsed the 133 Psalm; Behold, how good, and how pleasant is it for
Brethren to dwell in unity: And so on. And after that, this Exhortation of St.
Paul: Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another, Romans 12.10. Which having said, she turned toward the
Lady her Mother, and spoke to her thus: Dear Mother, give thanks and praise to
God all your life long, for his great goodness and bounty to you, in giving you
a Daughter, whom (though she be but a wretched Worm) he has made the Temple of
his Holy Spirit May He, that good God, bless you with his choicest Blessings;
may He also bless your Posterity, and establish his Covenant with them for all
Generations, as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. Then the proceeded (...)
give her Blessing to the young ^^dies her Sisters, (whom the call'^ (...) her)
and likewise to her Brothers, ^^^thers-in-law, Sister-in-law, and Niece, though
they were absent. And after this, desiring they would all come near her, who
were in her Chamber, and had (in company with the Chaplain) watched with her
the Night before, she in a most tender manner embraced and blessed them all;
speaking to every one of them according to their respective conditions, and
that so pertinently and proprly, that she was the admiration of all.

AND in a particular manner she shwe'd a great deal of respect to Monsieur de
la Colombrie, (who was Steward of the House) expressing her acknowledgment to
him for his great concern and affection for their Family, desiring him to
continue the same. Then speaking to his Wife Mrs. de la Colombroe, said to her,
Come and rejoice with me, and take your share of these delights I am filled
with, as feeling my self the most satisfied and happy Person in the World. And
afterward directing her Speech and ^^hortation to the whole Company, (...), My
dear Friends, leave off sinning, I pray you: You see what cruel disquiets mine
have caused me: Let us, according to our Calling, edify the Church of God, and
show good Examples in our Lives and Conversations. Let us (as the Apostle
advises) live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World: Tit. 2.12.
And whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are good report; if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, let us think on these things,
Phil. 4.8. O how great is my love for you, my dear Friends; I love every one of
you alike in JESUS CHRIST, for I have no more affection to my own Mother,
Brothers, and Sisters, than all other persons I know. I am in charity with all
the World, would e'n love my Enemies, if I had any.

NOW she hearing some body weep about her Bed, said, Don't y^^ mourn for me,
but mourn for y^^^ Sins. Then presently recalling (...) words, she thus
expressed her self: 'Oh, let us lament and bewail our Sins! And for a proof she
was not moved at all with the Tears they shed on her account, added, That now
she knew no body after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Which saying of the Apostle she
had learned of Monsieur Royer, to whom a pious Lady spoke it on her Deathbed.
Whereupon she calling him to mind, wished him all happiness, and gave him the
Character of a real Good Man; saying, He is a person whom I have always
observed to be most piously and charitably inclined. I pray God bless him, and
more and more increase his Gifts in him. Would I could see him, I know he would
speak comfortable words to me, and we would edify one another. Here she
repeated her earnest wishes for a Blessing upon Monsieur de Malnoe, whom she
always called her good Pastor, and her dear Pastor, and embracing him, heartily
prayed, that he might ever live quietly and in peace with his Brothers, and
Prosperity never depart from his Family; saying to him, 'I heartily beg of God
to bless 'you and your Ministry. And she at the same time expressed also a
great desire to see Monsieur de Brissac, praying God likewise to bless both him
and his. Thus having spoken for a while to the Standers-by, she began again to
return her thanks to God, with the same zeal and servency as before; saying
with David.

O God, the spring of all my joys,
for thee I long, to thee I look,
No chased Heart does pant so much,
after the cooling water-brook.
Blessed be the Majesty above,
Whom all true Worshippers adore;
Let every Age consen, and say,
Amen, till time shall be no more.
Psalm. 42.1. Patrick, Psalm. 41.13.

Which latter part of the 41 st. Psalm, she often repeated in Verse. And here
remembering her Aunt the Lady de la Suse, who had taught her the sam^* she
mightily longed to see her, sayin over and over, O my dear Aun^ how much do I
love you! How great would my Joy be now, had I you here with me; for you would
assist me in giving thanks to God for his Goodness to me. O the great love I
have for you, who have so well taught me to praise him! Praise the Lord
(therefore) O my Soul: While I live I will praise the Lord; yea as long as I
have any being, I will sing Praises unto my God, Psalm. 46.1. Thy Name, O Lord,
will I laud continually for thy great love, who have said to me, Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will answer thee and thou shall glorify me. I
will satisfy thee, and show thee my Salvation, Psalm. 50. 15. Psalm. 91. 16.
Yea, Lord, thou have heard me and comforted my Soul, that did so much long for
thee. Thou have (I say) in a most wonderful manner, comforted me with thy holy
Word and Spirit, and rid me of all my fears. And now, Lord, perfect thou the
good work thou have begun in me, And crown me with Eternal Bliss and Glory in
Heaven. Yea, O my good God, I have already obtained this great felicity; I have
seen thy Salvation.

THUS she took great delight in the paraphrasing of the Scripture; seeming, as
it were, to have received a new Vocation from God, and above all, that of
teaching every one their duty: Neither was she wanting in the stirring up
herself to the performance of her own, who often rehearsed these Words of the
Psalmist: Psalm. 34. 1, 2. I will always give thanks unto the Lord; his praise
shall ever be in my mouth. My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord; the humble
shall hear thereof and be glad, and so on. Which Psalm she repeated every day
both in Prose and Verse, according to the New or Old Translation, and had this
place very frequently in her mouth, ver.13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guilt. After which she added, I will give continual thanks
to my good God for his Infinite Mercies to me. would the whole Church were here
and all let in, who have a mind to see me; but above all, I wish those of a
contrary Religion were present, that they might take notice how good my
Religion is, since it makes me die so well. If any Man love not the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, let him be Anathema. Oh, how vast is my Happiness! How great my Joy!
How numberless are the Blessings I have received. Praised, praised for ever be
the Name of my Lord and Savior for all His wonderful Mercies bestowed upon me.

IN the mean time they that stood by, looking on a Watch that was upon the
Table, and perceiving thereby (it being now past Midnight) that she had been
speaking above six Hours, were much astonished, considering the vehement
palpitation of her heart, and the difficulty she had to fetch her breath: Which
made the Company desire her to leave off dis^ursing, for fear of spending her
self so much. But this advice was so unwelcome to her, that he presently, with
some indignation, answered, I cannot hold my tongue, I must speak for, My heart
is inditing of a good matter, Psalm. 45.1. O God, my heart is ready, my heart is
ready; I will sing and give praise with the best member that I have, Psalm.
108.1. After which, she remaining silent for a little while, broke out
immediately into these Words: O what pain do I suffer in holding my peace! And
indeed she had no sooner left off speaking, but they heard a Rattling in her
Throat that was very troublesome to her: but she nevertheless continued still
to entertain her self with God; when the Company withdrawing, the Lady her
Mother laid down her self by her, and both of them had a pretty good rest that
Night.

THE next Morning (being Thursday) after she had had some discourse with the
Lady her Mother, she gave her hand to a Gentleman of the Neighborhood, that
was come to visit her: and observing him to weep, said to him, What, Sir, do
you weep? (...) it because God has a love for me, and will take me to himself?
Here she alleged the Example of Josiah King of Judah, whom God took out of the
World, because he loved him, that he might not see those Calamities that were
to befall the City of Jerusalem, and the whole Jewish Nation. Then she speaking
to the Lady her Mother, said, O dear Mother, how well composed am I at this
time! I feel no pains at all; but am very easy, and do perceive my Savior has
delivered me from all my fears and troubles: Therefore I will give him eternal
thanks and praise. Whereupon she presently began to recite several Psalms (both
in Prose and Verse) as the VI.XXV.XXVII.XXXII.XXXIV.LXVI.CIII.CXVIII.CXLVI;
insisting particularly upon those places that were most proper for her
condition, and afforded her most comfort: which she uttered with so much zeal
and devotion, that it made the Lady her Mother say to her, Well dear Child,
thou art a going to make one in the Quire of Angels and Seraphims, and shall
very suddenly sing the Song of the Lamb. Yes, (answered she) I shall make sweet
Melody, and sing everlasting Hallelujahs to his Glory. And perceiving the Lady
her Mother was very attentive to what she said, added, Good Mother, we must
always endeavor to edify our Neighbors by praising God; and administer such
Comfort to them, as we would be glad to receive our selves at God's hand.

AFTER this, a Gentlewoman asking her, whether she would not take something,
she answered, I have no will of my own; bring me what you will, and do what you
please with me, it will be all one to me. Then she turned to another
Gentlewoman, that was just come into the Room, who I expressing her self to
have been much edified by the good things, she had heard her speak the night
before, this devout Patient replied, My dear Friend, don't you wonder at my
speaking so long with so much boldness and freedom, who was ever bashful, and
of few words? These are Gifts of God not to be forgotten. Which having said,
she looked about, and perceiving the Lady her Mother weep, said to her, It Is not
you, dear Mother, have cause to shed tears; it is Madam -- (she meant a
Gentlewoman, who was Mother to one that was turned a Papist) who has a reason
to bewail her Daughter. But as for yours, she is going to him who is the
Dispenser of true Glory, and not of Vanities.

SOME hours after this, the Young Ladies her Sisters coming to sit upon her
Bed, the Lady their Mother came and sat with them; and as she was saying to
God, Behold, Lord, here am I, and the Children thou have given me, Isa. 8.18.
Patient answered, Dear Mother, let us yield thanks to God. But what shall I
render to the Lord for all his Benefits toward me? Psalm. 116.12. Pray, my dear
Mother and Sisters, afford me your assistance to bless my God, and never mourn
for me; for I am too happy, in that my good God calls me to himself. How
miserable (alas!) should I have been in the World, where we do nothing else but
offend Him, go through a great deal of trouble (being our own Tormentors) and
in a word, run after Vanities, and mind nothing but Pride. To which the Lady
her Mother answered, My dear Child, thou wast very far from being worldly
minded, and have any vain or proud thoughts. O Mother (replied she) you did not
know the bottom of my heart: Certainly I had Pride in me, and would fain have
made a show in the World; and (perhaps) if I had remained longer in it, it
would have proved my undoing. Pray God keep our Brethren, who are exposed to
great trials. Some of them she did name, and added, Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed left he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. The world passes away, and the
lust thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever, 1 John 2.17.
Then applying her self to the Young Ladies her Sister she said to them, Dear
Sisters, keep always constantly to God's Word, and store your selves well with
it. ( Lord, thou have magnified thy word above all thy Name, Psalm. 138.2.) And
withal she charged them to learn the Psalms of the late Monsieur Conrart's
Translation, and Monsieur Gilberts; picking out (first) such as afforded most
comfort. As for herself, she had got twenty five of the former, and twelve of
the latter, by heart, at thirteen years of age; and the whole Book of Psalms,
according to the Old Translation, which she had learned at the late Lady
Marchioness de Verat's, that was both her Aunt and God mother, with whom she
lived for a time. She had also several of them in Proof by heart, which she
extremely delighted in, and though she was very perfect in sundry (...) and
most of the ^^^fying place, of the Scripture, (which she could say without
Book) yet she did off complain of her want of memory.

AFTER a little pause, she began fresh to speak, and applying her self to one
of the Young Ladies her Sisters, she exhorted her above all, to learn a certain
Prayer out of the forementioned Book, called [ Comforts against the Terrors of
Death] for God's Assistance and Grace to Die well, and advised her to use the
same daily, and intimating, that God had granted to her all the Petitions
therein. She was also wont to repeat every Morning the 90th Psalm.

LORD, thou have been our Refuge from one Generation to another, and so on, to
the end.

A GENTLE WOMAN of the Neighborhood having brought (...) ^wo Daughters to her,
whom she had desired the night before to see, she said to them, My dear
Friends, have always the fear of God before your Eyes, and never depart from
that Eternal truth which is in his Holy Scriptures. Obey your Parents and
Superiors; And love not the World, neither the things that are in the World;
for if any man love the World, the love of the Father not in him, 1 John 2.15.

AT the same time she remembered four or five other She-Friends of hers, wishing
them with her, and one above the rest, whom she ever had a great kindness for,
and recommended her to the Lady her Mother, desiring her to take care of, and
provide for her. And the Lady her Mother naming her some others, she earnestly
prayed God to bless them all and in a particular manner implored his Divine
help and assistance for one, who lay under an extraordinary great Affliction.

WHEN she was in health, she was not more backward, than she was forward and
desirous to speak now she was sick; delivering her self with a great deal of
freedom, and omitting nothing of what she knew to be edifying. After which, she
fell into a little slumber, and rested about an hour, and then awaking, one of
her Physicians was surpised to find her so well composed, she neither
speaking, nor looking like one that was sick, but on the contrary having a
serene countenance, and a free and undisturbed mind. He did also wonder to hear
her talk so well, as she did, of her condition; but yet for all that, he now
began to despair of her Recovery, considering her great shortness of breath and
weakness of her Stomach, that was not able to bear any thing; Nevertheless, she
took whatever he gave her, saying to him, Sir, I will do any thing you shall
please to direct and prescribe; for since you are called to look after me, and
give me relief, it behooves me to follow your Directions.

THE Lady her Mother, whose sorrow was greater than can be imagined, and who
had no other comfort than what she received from her observing the Holy and
Blessed Frame she was in, said to her, O dear Child, how edifying were thy
Words to the last night, and are still! Aye, surely (replied she) my mind was
then much at liberty, and I had a great deal more freedom in my utterance than
ever before. I was speaking very eloquently and freely of the wonderful works
of God; and my mouth did utter things I never knew before. I then was made
acquainted with the Mysteries of our Salvation, which are not to be known here
below. I cannot express them to you, for they are Things unspeakable; and
through Mercy, I continue still in this Heavenly condition.

THE rest of the day she was very still, and felt almost no pains, except when
they gave her something; for that did set her a coughing. Her slumbers were
frequent; and as she waked, always addressed her self to the Chaplain, and
congratulated her happy condition, rejoiced and triumphed in the Grace she had
received the day before. The only Subject of her Entertainment, was the HOLY
SCRIPTURE,(...)

THOU have dealt graciously with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word,
Psalm. 119.65. It is that word that gives wisdom to the simple; therefore I will
never forget it.

TO this she added also diverse other places of the Scripture; and then
meditating a little, she said, Now my fear is over, and (with St. Paul) There
is now no condemnation to me, who am in CHRIST JESUS. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is ever
at the right hand of God, making intercession for us, Romans 8.1.33, 34. Upon
which the Chaplain taking occasion to tell her she had done like that prudent
Merchant in the Gospel, who fought for and bought that Pear of Price; she
answered, Aye, it is my Savior has' made me a Present of this invaluable Jewel!
For, Sir, is it not true, that none can affirm JESUS to be the LORD, but by the
Holy Ghost? And that none can love him, but by the same Spirit? It is even He
that has put this Word into the mouth of his Handmaid. O the unutterable
Comfort and Relief this Word administers to me! It is you, my dear Mother
(speaking to my Lady) who taught it me. You have so well instructed us, and
shown us a good Example, which I wish I had better improved. By this you have
procured our Family the favor of God, whom I heartily pray to continue it, and
more and more increase his. Blessings upon you, and prosper all your ways. To
which Discourse the Lady her Mother made this reply: Dear Child, these
Instructions and edifying words you now utter, I apply as so many Checks and
Reproaches to my self, for my not having performed my Duty in all respects, as
I ought to have done. I pray God give me Grace to do better for the future,
according to my Calling; and as it is in vain that Paul plants, and Apollos
waters, except God give the increase; 1 Cor. 3.6. so I beseech him to prevent
and bless my endeavors with his Divine Grace, and Heavenly Benediction.

THE rest of that day, and part of the following night also, were spent in like
Conversations. But toward the Morning the Patient took some little rest; and
as she awaked, asked what a Clock it was. To which they answered, that it was
upon the stroke of Three, she cried out, O my God! shall the Sun shine once
more upon my Sufferings? Lord, thou could, if it were thy pleasure, make this
I the dawning of the Day of my Deliverance and Eternal Sabbath; and then would
I say with a holy transport of mind, Behold now is the accepted time; behold,
now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.

UPON which the Lady her Mother said, I hope every one of us shallonce see that
Day, when we may say one to another, Thy Sun shall go down no more, for the
Lord is an everlasting Light to thee; and the days of thy mourning are ended,
Isai. 60.20. Aye, dear Mother, (answered she) Yet a little while, and he that
shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37.

This is the Day which he has made,
Hosanna's now befit our voice;
Come let us in our God rejoice,
And in the Day which he has made be glad!
That he prosperity may send,
And to our troubles put an end.
Psalm. 119.24. Woodford. Set open unto me the Gates
Of Truth and Righteousness,
That I may enter into them,
The Lord's praise to express.
verse 19. Old Translation.

O Death! thou that bring'st good tidings, how welcome would thou be to me,
by casting me into the Arms of my dearest Friend, who has lived me before the
foundation of the World!

THIS day she was visited again by one of her She-Friends, who being come to
her Bedside, expressed an extreme sorrow to see her in this Condition, and
with that gave her her hand, which the Patient squeezing in hers, replied to
her, O my Dear, did you but know the Divine Consolations my God has bestowed
upon me, and how happy I am, you would confess with me, that I should have been
miserable, without this his gracious Visitation.

AFTER this, she had about an hour's sleep, out of which being awaked, she
said, What is our Life? Truly, it is even a vapor that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. Therefore, O Lord, teach us so to
number our days, as that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom, Psalm. 90.12. What
is Man, that thou art mindful of him; and the son of man, that thou visitest
him, Psalm. 8.4. When his breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth, Psalm.
146.4. But we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens, 2 Cor 5.1. And the glory of this latter House shall greater than
that of the former, Hag. 2.9. For the things which are seen, are temporal; but
the things which are not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18.

THEN she said, Pray let my Chaplain be called in, that he may comfort me. O
the comforts of the Holy Ghost are the refreshment of my Soul. LORD, how sweet
are thy words to my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth! Psalm. 119.103.

WHEN the Chaplain was come in, she said to him, Come, Sir, Let us go boldly
unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4.16. Whereupon he answering, Why don't you say, [Let us go
and implore for Mercy] rather than say, (as with confidence you do) Let us go,
that we may obtain mercy; She replv'd, Sir, it is because I find a Redeemer
there, who has bought me with a price, and said, Him that comes to me, I will
in no wise cast out; 1 Cor. 6.20. Joh. 6.37. and I am persuaded, He is faithful
and just, to keep his promise, 1 Job. 1.9. Aye, Madam (answered the Chaplain)
this Promise he has made to your Contrition, Repentance, and Faith.

DURING this whole day (which was Wednesday) she spoke many other admirable
things, that could not, all of them, be remembered. One would have thought by
seeing her, that her Soul was set loose from the Body. She had quite forgot the
Earth, and all Ties and Relations here; her only thoughts being now to unite
her self with her God by Meditation, till she might be more perfectly united to
him, in Heaven.

ABOUT Evening shc felt a great drought in her Throat, and was very thirsty;
yet they durst not give her any thing, by reason her Stomach could not bear so
much as one drop of fair Water, without bringing of it up, and that with a
vehement Cough, accompanied with a stoppage and shortness of breath; they
therefore only called for an Epitheme, to allay her great palpitation of heart.
But she little regarding the Relief they were willing to her Body, cried out on
a sudden, LORD JESUS! thou my Heavenly Physician, apply the Merits of thy
precious Blood to me; for that alone can infallibly heal my Soul.

IMMEDIATELY after this, she fell into most cruel Agonies, which made her take
very little rest all that night: but yet she continued to comfort her self in
God; seeking no where else, but in his Word, for a Remedy to all her griefs.
And in these circumstances she often cried, Speak, O Lord, for thy servant
hears, 1 SAMUEL 3. 10. Speak thou, O my God, to the Soul of thy poor Handmaid.

WHICH having said, she asked a Gentleman that was opening the Windows on her
Chamber, what time of the day it was; he answered, It was almost daylight;
adding, Madam, why do you ask me this Question? Have you a mind to do as David
did, and rise by break of day to praise God? No, Sir, (replied she) I cannot do
that; but i will continually bless and magnify him upon this my Bed of
Languishing.

Early, my God, before it is light,
And all the Stars are up, but that which makes the day.
Whilst Heaven alone with flames is bright,
And all below is hurled in sable vell of night,
Which they can neither draw nor take away;
Early I Will worship, and one glance from thee,
E're it is with others day, shall make it noon with me.
And as this dry and thirsty Land,
Where the ground, ready to expire for want of Rain,
Gaping, and out of breath does stand,
And shows its very bowels shrivled like its sand;
And having drunk, gapes for more drink again:
The Wilderness and I in this agree;
For as that thirsts for Rain, so, Lord, I thirst for thee.
I thirst thy glorious Power to see,
As I have seen it in thy Temple heretofore;
When ravished with thy love to me,
To die I was content, could I hut so love thee;
And so to die, this Life would choose no more:
Those thoughts so high my fainting Spirit do raise,
That through my lips they force their voice in Songs of praise.
For this I Will bless thee, and on high,
To thy Great Name send up my praises whilst I live;
For since at present I enjoy
A mind content, it shall prepare for more supply.
Though thou at present only that do give;
E'n that shall bring my famished Soul more good,
Than what my Body had from most delicious food.
Marrow and fatness it shall be,
And all the solid meats which please and feed the strong;
For I shall come at last to thee,
Who art the ever blessed End of all felicity,
And the best subject of my humble Song:
And on my Bed when I revolve thy might,
My praises shall, instead of Watches, part the Night.
Psalm. 63. Woodford.

ABOUT Four of the Clock her Illness so encreas'dupon her, that she felt most
intolerable pains; which was perceived both by the sharp Shreeks, and
lamentable Cries she from time to time put forth, and by the violent
Convulsion-fies she suffered, that distorted her Arms, and bent her Body
double. But for all this, her mind was still the same, and lost nothing of its
strength and freedom.

IN one of these Fits she did cry to God, Lord, have Mercy on me. Let this Cup
pass from me: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat.26.38. In
another Fit (which one would have thought would have thrown her out of her Bed,
so vehemently it ross'd her Body) she cried out, Thunder, Lightning, bruise,
break to pieces, and do what thou will with this poor Body; yet will I still
love thee, O my God! Yea, I will always bless thee, for thy wondrous Love and
Mercy to me.

AT another time, as she felt a Fit a coming again upon her, said, Verily,
Thine Arrows have wounded me already; Yet, O my God, though thou should
multiply thy Plaugues upon me to infinity, yet would that but the more increase
my love toward thee.

Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good; turn unto me according to
the multitude of thy tender mercies. And hide not thy face from thy servant,
for I am in trouble! hear me speedily. Draw nigh unto my soul, Psalm. 69.16, 17,
18. And thou, LORD JESUS, come; yea, come quickly, Rev. 22.20.

My soul out of this prison bring,
That I may praise thee, O my King.
Psalm 142.7. Sandys.

I most humbly beseech thee O Lord, mitigate and allay my pains, and speedily
place me with thee.

Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done, Luke 22.42. Then she looking on
the Lady her Mother, said to her, Dear Mother, I now suffer the cruel wounds
and pangs of Death.

AGAIN, at another time, when her violent pains seized her, she cried out, Pray
to God for me, my dear Friends; pray assist me: I am quite spent. I am now a
drinking the very dregs of the Cup of Affliction. Upon which the Chaplain said
to her, Madam, God deals now with you, as he did once with his only begotten
Son, with whom he never was more pleased, than when he lay under his deepest
Sufferings. O (answered she) I do wholly submit my self to God's will. For when
I am weak, then am I strong. I can do all things through Christ who strengthens
me, 2 Cor. 12.10. Phil 4.13.

NOW the Fits returning very thick upon her, she cried to God, O my good Lord!
How much do I suffer! But it is thy will, and it is mine too. Grant I may
suffer patiently for that it is acceptable with thee, 1 Pet. 2.20.

And I beseech thee, O Lord, Set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of
my lips, (Psalm. 141.5.) that I may I notspeak unadvisedly with my tongue, or
murmur against thee. For it is my earnest desire, always to bless and love
thee, O my God.

AFTER a little pause, she turning to the Company, said to them, I pray God
shorten your Agonies, when any of you shall arrive at your latter End. And then
again she called upon God, in these words of David:

O thou on whom my soul for help relies, Let my distres find pity in thine Eyes.

Psalm. 57.1. Woodford. Mercy, my God on me thy mercy show, And if thy pleasure
does, my need says now

Psalm. 56.1. The sorrows of death compass me round about,and the pains of hell
have got hold upon, me I find trouble and heaviness, Psalm. 116.3. Hide not thy
self from me in the needful time of my distress. Hearken unto me, answer me,
and haste thee to help me. O my God! I spread my complaint, and make my trouble
known unto thee. Have mercy, Lord, on thy poor Handmaid. My heart fails, and
my Soul saints within me. All these passages she rehearsed at several times, in
the midst of her terrible pains: for she had not now breath to speak for a long
time together.

AFTER this, she sat up in her Bed, and with a tone that would have made one
think she was not the same person, cried out,

Why art thou troubled, soul, and restiess grown,
As if forgotten through despair,
As if thy God had left his care,
And lower, than indeed thou art, cast down?
Trust in him still, for thou his Name shall praise:
And whom his absence has depressed his sight shall raise.
Psalm. 42.11. Woodford. THEN the Lady her Mother saying to her. Like as a
Father pities his Children, so the Lord pities them that fear him, Psalm.
103.13. Aye, dear Mother, (answered she) your love is nothing in comparison of
that my Savior has for me. I know my God loves me: He speaks to his Handmaid
according to her heart, and heaps his mercies upon me. Only, lest I should be
exalted above measure, be, has put this thorn in my flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7.

WHENEVER she had any intervas From pain, she sat up in her Bed, praising God
for the relief and ease he gave her, saying, I will ever bless and love thee, O
my good God. And when her grief returned, she held her sides with her hands,
and excited her self to patience, with these words: [ Courage, my Soul, still
bless thy God; Courage, my Soul, still love thy God.] For the sufferings of
this present World, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us: Romans 8.18. Though indeed my pain is very grievous.

And grief to the Earth my soul low does bond,
That scare in sighs lean to Heaven ascend;
Consumed with care my soul and life decay,
And in my wasted flesh unwillingly do. stay.
Psalm. 31.10. Woodford. NOW her violent pains returning upon her, she cried out
again, [I am quite spent.]

O let me gather strenght, before
I pass away, and be no more.
Psalm. 39.13 sandys. O my God, thy Correction is very severe; yet will I kiss
the Rod wherewith thou chastifest me.

WHEREUPON the Chaplain said to her, If you were without chastisement, then
were you a Bastard, and not a true born Child: for you know, Whom the, Lord
loves, he chastens, and scourges every Child he receives, Heb. 12.8, 6. To
which The answered, It Is true, Sir, I am well persuaded of what you say: Why?
My Savior has suffered for me; and if I suffer with him, I shall reign with
him also. He had Vinegar and Gall given him to drink, and was wounded to the
very heart for me. Lord cover me with thy Merits; impute thy Righteousness to
me, and let those cruel pains thou endurest upon the Cross for me, make me
forget my own. As they gave her a little Wine to refresh her, she took the
Glass and said, The hour is coming when I shall drink it new in my Fathers
Kingdom, Mat. 26.29.

IMMEDIATELY after this, her pains seizing her again, she cried, All thy waves
and thy billows are gone over me, Psalm. 42.7. Which the Chaplain hearing, said
to her, But, Madam, you don't add, that the Waves of his Mercy, and the Billows
of his Grace have overwhelmed you also. Aye, (replied she) it is very true, the
Grace and Mercies of my God, are greater than all the Miseries I undergo. Do
you think (continued the Chaplain, who neard her still groan and complain of
her being overborn with anguish) your Heavenly Father is angry with you, and
will let you sink under this Temptation No (answered she, sitting up in her
Bed) No Sir; I know that in all those things I am more than a Conqueror through
Him that loved me, Romans 8.37. 'And that as 'my miseries and troubles abound, so
his(...)

In which she had not long continued but the Pangs of Death came upon her; she
had vehement risings at her Stomach; her Countenance was fallen; sweat
proceeded from her Body in abundance; the Rattling in her Throat increased; and
her Eyes grew dim and were distorted. And being in this condition, one of her
Acquaintance, by name Madam Herault, touched her arm, thinking she was a
departing: But she recovered of this Fit; and these Agonies being somewhat
over, her Eyes re-ssum'd the same briskness and liveliness as before; she
rubbing them with both her hands, to disperse the Clouds that had begun already
to cover them. Her Countenance also was restored to its former gaity and
cheerfulness; and she was heard to make a Melody, in singing the 84th Psalm.

How beauteous is the place where thou
Thy presence, Lord, do grant!
O how I long to approach thy Courts,
Impatient of restraint!
And so on

THIS was a great surprise to many of them that were there; and yet, that was
not all: For after she had took a little breath, and slumber'd (as before) a
very little while, she stirred up her self anew, and began to sing the XCII
Psalm. Patrick.

O what a pleasant task it is
To praise the Lord above;
Morning and Evening to proclaim
His faithfulness and love.


THUS far only she went, tuning it to the Treble of Claudin, with all the
Ornaments, and Graces that could be: And then falling again into the like
slumber, she remained in it as long as the first time; after which, she tund
the LXXX Psalm, whereof she sang these following Verses only. Sandys.

Thou Shepherd of thy ISRAEL,
That, Flock-like, leadest Joseph's Race;
Who 'twixt the Cherubims do dwell,
O hear! show thy inlighting Face:
Exalt thy saving power before
Manaffeh, Ephraim, Benjamin:
O from Captivity restore!
And let thy beams upon us shine. Great
Great God of Battle, will thou still
Be angry, and our Prayers despise?
Bread, steeped in tears, our stomachs fill;
We drink the Rivers of our Eyes.
Our scoffing Neighbors fall at strife
Among themselves to share our Right:
Great God, restore the dead to life;
And comfort by thy quickening Light.


AFTERWARD being seized the fourth time with the Pangs of Death, she so
remained for the space of four hours; and then being come to herself again, she
sang this Stanza.

Into thy hands, Lord, I commit
My Spirit, which is thy due:
For why thou have redeemed it,
O Lord, my God most true!
Psalm. 31.5. Old Translation

THE Lady her Mother hearing her sing with so much strength, said to her, My
dear Child, since I have by God's Grace, put the first word into thy mouth,
wherewith thou have praised Him, let me put in the last also I shall ever hear
thee speak in this World: And so she rehearsed these Verses.

God, who my kind Preserver is,
I will for ever bless;
My tongue and lips shall be employed
His Goodness to confess.
Psalm. 34.1. Patrick.

Which the Patient sang with a strong voice; her Eyes being open, and her Looks
smiling all the while. Then her agonizing Fit coming again upon her, and the
Lady her Mother not being able to see her expire, bad her farewell, with a most
wonderful strength of mind: Adieu (said she) dear Daughter, adieu; I shall go
to thee, but thou shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12, 23. We shall see one
another again in that Blessed Day of the Resurrection of the Just. And
thereupon she withdrew, and went and lay down upon her own Bed, till her dying
Daughter had given up her Soul into the Hands of her Heavenly Father. But above
three hours after this, the Chaplain, Monsieur De Malnoe, being desirous to see
whether she had any sense left in her, took her by the hand, shook her arm, and
called to her to clinch his hand, if she heard still, and with that pricked her
with a Straw; but she gave no sign of Life. But as he was going out of the
Room, her Body I was re-animated on a sudden; and sitting up again in her Bed,
she sand the second time.

Into thy hands, Lord, I commit
My Spirit, which is thy due;
For Why, thou have redeemed it,
O Lord, my God most true!
THEN he drew near again, and laying his Ear to her Mouth, heard her say to
God, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word.
For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2 29, 30. Which having uttered,
she, without stirring in the least, breathed forth three Sighs, and so gave up
the Ghost; there being seen at the same time, both in her Countenance and Eyes
(which remained half open) a signal impression of Joy, that showed her Soul had
a taste of the Celestial Bliss, even before the Bonds, wherewith it was tied to
the Body, were wholly dissolved.

THE END.
Here follows the Prayer taken out of Mons. Drelincourt's, Comforts against the
Terrors of Death, which is mentioned in the 45th Page of this Book.
O GOD of all Flesh and Father of our Spirits, I know that any Death of thy
Beloved Ones, is precious in thy sight, and that whatsoever mine may be, thou will take care of my Salvation. I weighing every thing in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, do find it very little imports me, whether my Life be taken away by
a Disease, or forced from me by Violence, provided my Soul enter into thy Glory
and be made Partaker of those unutterable Felicities that are with thee. To me
it must be all one, whether my Lamp go out of it self, or be blown out by any
contrary wind; so it be but kindled again at the Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, and shine in the highest Heavens for evermore, Whatsoever Death
I die, I shall be happy, provided I die in the Lord, and enter into that
Eternal Rest from all my Labors. O Lord, thou know all thy works from
Everlasting. Thou, with one glance, discoverest the deepest Abyss, and see to
the very bottom of Eternity. As thou have precisely appointed the Hour of
Death, so have thou been pleased also to determine the manner of it. O Great
and Living God! it is my duty wholly to acquiesce in thy Adorable Providence,
and absolutely submit my self to thy wise Decrees. But, O my God, my Heavenly
Father! if thou will vouchsafe me (who am but dust and ashes) the liberty of
speaking to thee, and permit thy Child to pour his / her hearts desire into thy
Fatherly Bosom, I do, with all the powers of my I Soul, humbly beseech thee to
grant me this favor, that / may know my End, and not be (like Job's Children)
surpised by a sudden Death: But, O Lord, be thou pleased to give me notice of
my dissolution, as thou did to thy Servant Hezekiah. I do not sue for years,
but some few days; or at least, a few hours warning. I beg of thee that my mind
may never be disturbed by any malignant Vapors, or frighted with any false
Representations or delusions of the Devil; but that I may end my days with all
quietness and tranquillity, That I may always have the free use of my Senses, my
Reason and Understanding, and above all, the Light of thy Grace, that so I may
glorify thy Holy Name, and edify my Neighbors, to my very last breath.
Finally, that my Soul may not be snatched away by any sort of violence, but
that I may freely commend it into thy Fatherly Hands. Amen.

FINIS.

