Instructions to the LIVING, from the Condition of the DEAD.

A Brief Relation of REMARKABLES in the Shipwreck of above One Hundred Pirates,

Who were Cast away in the Ship Whido, on the Coast of New England, April 26.
1717.

And in the Death of Six, who after a Fair Trial at Boston, were Convicted and
Condemned, October. 22. And Executed, November. 15. 1717. With some Account of the
Discourse had with them on the way to their Execution.

And a SERMON Preached (...) their Occasion (...)

Boston, Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill. 1717

The End of Piracy.
ANTIQUITY Entertains us with Prodigious Relations, of the Miseries which
Mankind have suffered from the Growth of PIRACY. But perhaps no Example of
growing. PIRACY has been more considerable, than what the Romans were in^ested
withal, after the Destruction of (...), and of (...). When those ^ast Cities
were destroyed, the Inhabitants not having a place of Retreat, or means of
Subsistence, betook themselves to Piracy as their Profession; and there were
not want (...) People to Encourage them. It Is not easy to imagine the Height
of Power, that so (...) a Society arose unto, (...) with which they (...) their
Dominion. All Commerce was interrupted; The City that was the Empress of the
World was well nigh Starved; Some of its Magistrates as well as the other
principal Citizens, fell into the Hands of the Robbers. The Coasts of Italy
were every where molested and the Robbers with their Vessels, Entered the very
Tiber, as if Rome it self were designed for a Prey unto them. The Temples and
Cities, which lay near the Sea, were Sacked; and they had the Command of no
less than Four Hundred Towns on the Coasts, unto which they might retire in
Cases of Extremity; while other Marine Cities paid Ransomes to them for their
Liberties. These Praedacious Animals, though they were dispersed over the whole
Mediterranean, yet set up a sort of Commonwealth, and Elected Governors, and
had above One Thousand Ships of several sorts, and formed Regular Fleets to
carry on their Disorders. They had their Ports, their Watch-Towers, their
Arsenals and Magazines; and Cilicia was, as it (...), their Citadel, from
whence they (...) out Supplies for their Squadrons, upon occasion. An
Extraordinary Remedy was required, for a Mischief become so Formidable. The
Courage and Conduct of Pompey was the Remedy. The Romans, assisted by the
Rhodians, furnished Pompey, with five hundred Ships, and all the Provisions
that were necessary. Pompey surpassed the Hopes of them that Employed him; and
in less than Three Months time he purged the Sea of Pirates; Conquered their
whole Fleet; Pursued 'em to the Fortresses they had prepared among the Rocks of
Taurus; Compelled the most of them to surrender upon Discretion; and lost not
one Ship in the Expedition.

Before the PIRACY on the Atlantic, by reason of whom Sailing is now
dangerous, arrive to any thing like what we have seen on the Mediterranean, the
British Crown, Equips a Squadron of Men of War for their Extirpation. And, May
our Glorious GOD (...) success unto the Enterprise.

2. In the mean time, What the Compassion of our GOD has done for New England,
in the In^^ctions of (...) Justice on an horrid (...) of PIRATES, which made a
(...) unto our Coast, has had in it some Occurrences, the Relation whereof may
be worthy to be Preserved and Published.

About the latter end of April, there came upon the Coast (...) Ship called,
The Whido whereof one Bellamy was Commander: A Pirate Ship, of about (...) Men,
and 23 Guns. These Pirates, after many other Depraedations, took a Vessel which
had Wines aboard; and put Seven of their Crew on Board, (...) Orders to Steer
after the Whido. The seven Pirates being pretty free with the Liquor, got so
Drunk, that the Captive who had the Steering of the Vessel, took the
opportunity of the Night, now to run her ashore, on the backside of Eastham.

A Storm was now raised and raging (...) the Whido ignorantly following the
Light of her Stranded Prize, perished in a Shipwreck, and the whole Crew were
every one of them drowned, except only one Englishman, and one Indian, that
were (...) on Shore alive.

3. It is ^^redibly affirmed, That when these Barbarous Wretches, perceived
that their Ship was breaking under them, and that they must Swim for their
Lives, they horribly Murdered all their Prisoners (whereof they had a great
Number) aboard; (...) they should appear (...) Witnesses against them. The
doleful (...) heard unto the Shore, a little before they (...) and the Bloody
Wounds found in the Bodies afterward thrown ashore; were two great
Confirmations of this Report.

(...) How far they Wickedness of Men (...) them.

4. (...) The Delivered People said, Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us
as a Prey to their Teeth!

5. After some waiting for Direction, His Excellency, Colonel SHUTE, the
Governor, of New England, received, such Orders, that the Trial of the (...),
who had not been drowned might be proceeded in.

Accordingly on Tuesday, October 22 1717. there was held at Boston, a Special
Court of Admiralty (according to the Act of Parliament) for the Trial of

Simon Vanvoorst, who was Born at New York.

John Brown, Born in Jamaica.

Thomas Baker, Born at Flushing in Holland.

Henrick Quinter, Born in Amsterdam.

Peter Cornelius Hooff, Born in Swed^n.

John (...), Born at Nants in France. And T. S. Born at Boston in England.

The Last was Cleared; But the other Six, after a very fair Trial, were found
Guilty, and received Sentence of Death.

6. The Ministers of Boston, improved the Time, which the Clemency of the
GOVERNOR allowed for that purpose, to bestow all possible Instructions upon
the Condemned Criminals; Often Prayed with them; Often Preached to them. Often
Examined them, and Exhorted them; and presented them with Books of Piety,
suitable to their Condition. And perhaps, there is not that Place upon the face
of the Earth, where more pains are taken for the Spiritual the Eternal Good of
Condemned (...).

7. On Friday, (...). November. 15. Came o^ the Execution of these Miserables.

What may now be offered, is.

A Recollection of several Passages, which (...) it Discourse with the
Prisoners while they walked from the Prisoner to the Place of Execution.

I. Minister. Your determined Hour (...) Cry in the Destruction which GOD this
Afternoon brings upon you. I am come to help you what I can, that your Cry may
turn to some Good Account. How do you find your Heart now disposed?


Baker. Oh! I am a dreadful Condition! Lord JESUS, Dear JESUS, Look upon me!


Min. You are sensible, That you have been a very Great Sinner and that you are
by your Sins Exposed unto the dreadful Displeasure of the Glorious and Holy
GOD; -- Hands, which it is a fearful Thing to fall into!


Baker. Oh! Yes; I am! And is it possible that such a Sinner should ever find
mercy with GOD! O GOD, will thou pardon such a Sinner!


Min. My Friend, This is the very First Thing that I am to advise you of. There
is a Pardon to be had! The Blessed GOD has made this Gracious Proclamation;
That His Name is, A GOD Gracious and Merciful, Forgiving Iniquity, and
Transgression and Sin. He is a GOD Ready to pardon. It Is your Duty to Lay hold
on the Proclamation. The Pardoning Mercy of GOD is an Infinite Mercy. You have
not Sinned beyond the Bounds of a Mercy that has no Bounds. Poor man, Try to
Believe, Embrace, Admire this Wonderful Mercy. You have Sinned enough already:
Don't add the Sin of Despair to all the rest. Our Good GOD is One who takes
pleasure in them that hope in His Mercy.


Baker. Oh! I wish I could! I wish I could!


Min. GOD help thee! I say this to you, As Great as your Sins have been, there
are now Comforted in the Paradise of GOD, the Spirits of some who once
committed the very same (...) that you are now guilty of.


Baker. Lord! I have been guilty of all the Sins in the World!


Min. But now, O Give all the Attention of a Dying man* I am to show you, how
the Pardening Mercy of GOD may come to reach (...) Died for as; has undergone
the (...) that is due to as for our Sins has had His Blood shed* as (...) for
us. This Blood obtains a full (...) for all that come and humbly plead (...)
with the Dispositions of (...)


Baker. ^


Min. ^

(...) may die such a Death as my Savior died! Oh! that my Mind may be filled
with the Love of God, and have the Image of my SAVIOR produced in it. These
Wishes will flame in you wonderfully, if the Blood of your SAVIOR be Sprinkled
on you, for a Pardon.


Baker. Oh! I cannot come* I can do nothing* Pity me, O GOD! Sweet JESUS, Pity
me!


Min. I Will mention to you a sweet word of your Great SAVIOR; A word worth a
Thousand Worlds! Have you not a mighty Load Lying on you?


Baker. Oh! A Load, A Load, that is the heavy for me.


Min. Now heat the Wo^d of your SAVIOR: Come to me, All ye that Labor, and
are heavy (...) and I will give you Rest. Answer (...) it; But first Look to
Him, for (...) to give the Answer; O my SAVIOR I come unto thee!


Baker. O Almighty GOD. Look upon me.


Min. (...) perceive you are (...): very Great (...) But (...) must be (...)
with such at (...)


II. Min. Poor Vanvoorst, What shall (...) done for thee? How do you find your
Heart, in the dreadful Hour, that is now come upon you!


Vanvoorst. I hope, a Little (...) than it has been.


Min. You will give all possible Attention, unto the Admonition of Piety, which
are now to be given you.

Though you have so wickedly Chosen Other Gods; Yet the Glorious GOD, is Willing
to be Your GOD. The GOD, (...) have denied so many thousands of times; the GOD
whose Baptism you have Sinned against* the GOD against whom you have Rebelled,
after you had been by Religious Parents dedicated unto Him; This GOD is yet
Willing to be Your GOD. And if you have Him for Your GOD; then you are Happy to
all Eternity! You will have a Place in His Holy City assigned unto you.


V. V. What shall I do to be so Happy?


Min. Nothing in your own Strength. But having begged of GOD, that He would
Strengthen you. You must first Bewail it Bitterly, that you have Served Other
Gods. You have set up your Self in the Throne of GOD. You have placed on the
Riches of this World, the Dependence you should have, had only on GOD. You have
hearkened unto Satan more than unto GOD. Are you Sorry for this?


V. V. I hope, I am.


Min. Well; What remains is this. Our Great SAVIOR is the Head of His People
in the Covenant of GOD. You come into the Covenant of GOD, and He becomes Your
GOD, when you heartily Consent, that your SAVIOR do for you those two Grand
Things* which in His Covenant with GOD for His People, He Engaged the doing of.
GOD help you to understand this important Matter. Attend unto the Two Proposals.

In the first place, Do you Consent unto this; That the Sacrifice of your Great
SAVIOR, should be your Atonement; and that GOD should be favorable to you for
the sake of that alone?


V. V. I hope I do.


Min. But then, at the same time, Do you heartily Consent unto this; That your
SAVIOR should by His Good spirit quicken you to Live unto GOD; and render
every Sin Loathsome unto you; and incline you to every thing that is Holy and
Just and Good; and give you a New Heart; and make you a New Creature; and set
up His Kingdom in your Soul, and Dwell and Rule there for ever.


V. V. I hope I do.


Min. In thus Returning to GOD, it is most necessary, that you should have in
Heart full of Contrition, from the Sense of your horrid Sins against Him.


V. V. I have been (...) very Great Sinner.


Min. Of all your past Sins, which are they, that now by most heavy upon you?


V. V. My Undutifulness unto my Parents; And my Profanation of the Sabb^th.


Min. Your Sinning against a Religious Education, is a fearful Aggravation of
all your Sins. I pray you, to count it so.


V. V. I do, Sir.


Min. But I wish, that you, and all your miserable Companions here, were more
sensible of the Crime, for which you are presently to be chased from among the
Living.

Robbery, and Piracy! You felt the Light of GOD in your own Soul, condemning
you for it, while you were committing of it. All Nations agree, to treat your
Tribe, as the Common Enemies of Mankind, and Extirpate them out of the World.
Besides all this, and the Miseries you brought on many good people, in their
Disappointed Voyages, I am told, that some were Killed in your subduing of
them. You are Murderers! Their Blood cries to Heaven against you. And so does
the Blood of the poor Captives; [ Fourscore, I hear,] that were drowned, when
the Whida^ was Lost in the Storm, which cast you on Shore


V. V. We were Forced Men.


Min. Forced! No; There is no man who can say, He is Forced unto any Sin
against the Glorious GOD! Forced! No; You had better have Suffered any thing,
than to (...) Sinned as you have done. Better have died a Martyr by the cruel
Hands of your Brethren, than have become one of their Brethren.

Or, If I should allow that you were at first a Forced Man, what were you
(...), when you came upon the Coast of Cape-Cod? Were not you one of those, who
came (...) Aboard the Prize, wherein you were Lost? When the Ma^e so managed
the Tack, that you Lost the Sight of the Whidau, and you might have Escaped
easily from your Masters into our Arms, did not you Ca^se the Mate, and Compel
him with a thousand Menaces, to Recover the Sight of your Sh^p? After your
Shipwreck, did you fly into our Arms like men Escaped (...) of Prison? Or, did
not you Endeavor still such a Flight from us, as (...) Enable you (...) Return
unto the Trade you were now used unto? Is this the Conduct of a Forced Man?

We are Blessed with one of the Best GOVERNORS (...) a Person of uncommon
Goodness, and Candor, and Clemency. He was is full of Desire to have shown
Mercy, unto you and your Friend Baker here, as was possible. Instances were
made unto him on your behalf, by Friends; whom he set all possible value upon:
I my self bore my part in the pressing. Instances. But, when he Remonstrated
unto us, the strong and full Proofs which there were of your being Active
Pirates; and of your having the Cry of so much Innocent Blood against you; and
we saw, his Apprehension, that he could not answer it unto GOD, no more than
unto the King, (whose Commands for all Severity upon you were very positive) we
could say no more; but must Approve and Applaud the Inflexible Justice that we
see joined with a Temper full of Mercy in him.

Say now; What think you of the Bad Life, wherein you have Wandered from God?
Can you say nothing, that your Worthy Parents, (whom you have so killed!.) may
take a little Comfort from! have some Light in their Darkness?


V. V. I am heartily sorry for my very bad Life. I die with hope that GOD
Almighty will be Merciful to me. And I had rather Die this Afternoon, I would
Choose Death, rather than return to such a Life as I have Lived; rather than
Repeat my Crimes.


Min. It Is a Good and a Great Speech; But such as I have heard uttered by some,
who after a Reprieve, (which you cannot have) have returned unto their Crimes.
I must, now Leave you, in the Hands of Him who Searches the Heart; and beg of
Him, Oh! May there be such an Heart in you!


III. Min. Brown, In what State, in what Frame, does thy Death, now within a
few Minutes of thee, find thee.


Brown. Very Bad! Very Bad!


Min. You see your self then a most miserable Sinner.


Br. Oh! most Miserable!


Min. You have had an Heart Wonderfully bardened.


Br. Ay, and it grows harder. I don't know what is the matter with me. I cannot
but wonder at my self!


Min. There is no Help to be had, any where, but in the admirable SAVIOR, whom
I am now to point you to. Behold, an Admirable SAVIOR so calling on you, Look
to me and be Saved. O Wonderful Call! Salvation to be had for a Look!


Br. Ay, But I cannot Look!


Min. Ah, poor, sad, lost Creature, Look for Help to Look! But mind, What I say
unto you. Set your Heart unto these Things, They are your Life it. You are to
Look unto your SAVIOR, in all his Offices, for all His Benefits, you would
hope to be received by a SAVIOR, who Receives Sinners.

First, You must Consider your SAVIOR, as a Priest; and you must say to Him, O
my SAVIOR, I Rely upon thy Blood, that I may be cleansed from all my Sin! Is
this the Language of your Soul?


Br. Yes, Sir.


Min. You must Consider your SAVIOR then also as your Prophet; and you must
say unto Him; O my SAVIOR, Teach me thy Ways; and let not a Deceived Heart be
my Ruin at the last! Is this also the Language of your Soul?


Br. Yes, Sir.


Min. You must now Consider your SAVIOR as your King; and you must say unto
Him; O my SAVIOR, Enter into my Heart (...). Set up thy Throne there; Let thy
Law be written there. (...) all the Enmity of my Carnal Mind against GOD. Cause
me to Love Him! I^ this the Language of your Soul?


Br. Yes, Sir.


Min. Oh! I wish it may be so. I take notice, you have your PrayerBook with
(...) Forms of Prayer, may (...) of use to those who need the Assistances. You
have had such put into your Hands; and you have also had the Bible bestowed on
you, with Leafs folded unto Psalms, proper for you to turn into Prayers. But
after all. A Soul touched with a sense of your Condition, and fired with the
Sight of what (...) and what you want, and what our SAVIOR is willing to do
for you, will cause you to Pray, beyond that any Forms in the World can do. I
am jealous, that what you read sometimes, is rather for an Amusement, than from
any real and lively Sentiment raised in you: For some of the Prayers you Read,
are not pertinent unto your Condition. Friend, Make that Prayer, O Lord, I
beseech then, deliver my Soul! Make that Prayer, O Lord, Gather not my Soul
with Sinners! Make that Prayer, God be merciful to me a (...). These are Great
Prayers, though (...) ones Great Prayers, when they proceed from an Heart
broken before the Lord.


Br. Oh! God be merciful to me (...) Sinner!


Min. A Sinner. Alas, What cause to say so! But, I pray^ What more Special
Sins, Ly now as a more heavy Burden on you?


Br. Special Sins! Why, I have been guilty of all the Sins in the World! I know
not where to begin. I may begin with Gaming! No, Whoring, That Led on to
Gaming; and Gaming Led on to Drinking; and Drinking to Lying, and Swearing, and
Cursing, and all that is bad; and so to Thieving; And so to This!


Min. You ought now to Die Warning of all People, against these Paths of the
Destroyer.

I will say to you, but this one thing more. GOD has distinguished you from
your Drowned Brethren, by giving you a Space to Repent, which was denied unto
them. I am Sorry you have made no Better use of it. It may be, the Space has
been given, because GOD may have some of His Chosen, among the Six Children of
Death. GOD forbid, that the Space must be of no use to you, but only to
aggravate you Condemnation, when you appear before Him.


IV. Min. Hoof; A melted Heart would now'be a comfortable Symptom upon thee. Do
you find any thing of it.


Hoof. Something of it; I wish it were more!


Min. To pursue this Good Intention, I will now give a Blow with an Hammer,
that breaks the Rocks to pieces. I will bring you the most Heart-melting Word,
as ever was heard in the World. We find in the Sacred Scripture such a word as
this; CHRIST, who is GOD, does beseech you, Be ye Reconciled unto GOD. That
ever the Son of GOD, should come to us, with such a Message from His Eternal
Father! What? After we have so Offended His Infinite Majesty! After we have
been so Vile, so Vile! -- and He stands in so little Need of us! -- To beseech
such Criminals, to be Reconciled unto the Holy GOD, and be willing to be Happy
in His Favor. O Wonderful! Wonderful! Methinks, it cannot be heard without
flowing Tears of Joy!


Ho. Ah! But what shall I'do to be Reconciled unto GOD!


Min. Make an Answer, make an Echo, unto this Wonderful Word of your SAVIOR.
And, what can you make but this? -- And for this also, you must have the Help
of His Grace to make it; O my dear SAVIOR, I beseech thee to Reconcile me unto
GOD.


Ho. Oh! That it might be so!


Min. A Reconciliation to GOD it the Only thing that you have now to be
concerned about. If this be not accomplished, before a few minutes more are
Expired, you go into the Strange Punishment reserved for the Workers of
Iniquity. You go, where He that made you, will not have Mercy on you; He that
formed you, will show you no favor. But it is not yet altogether Too Late. An
Hearty Consent (...) the Motions of the (...), will prepare you to pass from an
Ignominious Death, into an Inconceivable Glory.


Ho. Oh! Let me hear them!


Min. First, You must Consent unto This; O, my SAVIOR, I fly to thy Sacrifice;
I beg, I beg, that for the sake of That, thy Wrath may be turned away from me;
I cannot bear to have thy Wrath Lying on me! Can you say so!


Ho. I say it, I say it!


Min. But then, You must Consent unto This also; O my SAVIOR, I Cry unto thee,
to take away all that is contrary to GOD in my Soul; and cause me to Love GOD
with all my Soul; and Conquer my depraved Will; and bring to Rights all that is
Wrong in my Affections; and let my Will become entirely subject unto the Will
of GOD in all things. Can you say so.


Ho. I say it, I say it!


Min. If it be heartily said, The Reconciliation is accomplished. But if you
were to Live your Life over again, how would you live it?


Ho. Not as I have done!


Min. How then?


Ho. In Serving of GOD, and in doing of Good unto Men.


Min. GOD Accept you. Oh! That your SAVIOR, might now say to you, as He said
in a Dying Hour, unto One, who died as a Thief, This Day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. I do with some Encouragement leave you in His Glorious Hands.


Ho. O my dear JESUS! I Lay hold on thee; and I resolve, never, never, to let
thee go!


Min. May He help you to keep your Hold, of the Hope set before you.


Ho. My Death this Afternoon, it is nothing, it is nothing; It Is the wrath of a
terrible GOD after Death abiding on me, which is all that I am afraid of.


Min. There is a JESUS, who delivers from the Wrath to come; With Him I Leave
you.


V. Min. Quinter, Thou art come into a Dark Time.


Quinter. It Is a Dark Time with me.


Min. But will you receive it, if I bring you Light in this Darkness!


Q. God be merciful to me!


Min. One who had been a Great Sinner, had this Experiment, I said, I (...)
confess my Transgressions unto the (...) thou forgavest the Iniquity of (...)
May not this be your Experience too!


Qu. I wish it may!


Min. When you have Sinned, you have swallowed a Deadly Poison. With a (...) of
Repentance, and Confession, you must cast up this Deadly (...) If your Soul go
away with it, you are Banished from GOD, and fixed in Eternal Miseries.


Qu. What shall I do?


Min. Do you Confess, That you are a very Great Sinner


Qu. Yes, I confess, I have committed all manner of Sins.


Min. Are you Sorry for what you have done?


Qu. Heartily Troubled.


Min. But are you sensible, That you have an Heart full of Sin; An Heart that
is desperately wicked? All the Sin in your Life, came out of your Heart. Are
you Troubled, that you have such an Heart?


Qu. Heartily Troubled.


Min. (...) Look up to GOD for New Heart?


Qu. With all my Heart.


Min. Do you own that GOD is Righteous in all the Evil that is some upon you?


Qu. Yes, I do.


Min. But now, Your Confession must be made, with a Faith Leaning on the Great
Sacrifice. On every Stroke in your Confession of your Sin, (...) must add;
Lord, Pardon my Sin, for the sake of the Blood of my SAVIOR.


Qu. I desire to do so.


Min. But, we are taught, He that confess^t^ and forsakes shall find mercy.
You will have no Opportunity now, for the Experiment of a Reformed Life; You
cannot now Live to see, whether you don't Return unto Folly. But however, your
Heart must be so set against all Sin, that your Choice must be, Rather to Die
than to Sin.

Though (...) cannot show you Mercy; your (...) is forfeited, beyond the Reach of
Mercy from the Government; yet upon a True Repentance, you will find Mercy with
GOD. (...) Repentance is also (...) Gift. Oh! Keep Looking up unto Him; Lord,
Give me a Repenting Heart! O my SAVIOR, Thou give Repentance and Remission
of Sins!

Man, Thy Immortal SOUL is presently to Return unto GOD. A SOUL doing so, can
look for nothing but His Fiery Indignation, and a dreadful Banishment from Him;
Except it be a SOUL with another Biass upon it, than what men have in their
Depraved Nature. It must be, A SOUL to which a CHRIST is Precious; to which a
CHRIST is the Prince of Life, the Living Spring of all that is Good: A SOUL to
which all Sin is odious, and more Bitter than Death: A SOUL groaning under all
its Evil Inclinations, as the most heavy Burdens; A SOUL sick of attemts to
find Satisfaction in Creatures: A SOUL desirous above all things to Serve and
please the Glorious GOD.

My Friend, May thy SOUL now be found so disposed!

VI. The Last among the Sons of Death, was a poor Frenchman, (called John
Shuan,) to whom, inasmuch as he understood not English, and had been a Roman
Catholic, the Minister thus applied himself.


Min. O Pecheur tres-miserable. Vous estes un Prisonnier^ de la Justice; Mais
Vous estes un Prisonnier de L' Esperance.

Notre Seigneur et Sauveur JESUS CHRIST, est L' Esperance des Pecheurs; Et il
ny a point de Salut en aucun autre.

Cette parole est Certain, et digne d'etre Entierement receue; C'est que JESUS
CHRIST est venu au monde, pour Souver les pecheurs.

Mais il est fort necessaire, d'invequer votre Sauveur.

Vous pleurez d'une maniere Lamentable; Las! Miserable Ie suis; qui me delivra?

JESUS CHRIST Le Grand Sauveur du Monde, respond, Regardez vors (...) s^yez
Sauvez. Entendez vous^


Shuan. Ouy, Monsieur. Ie l'entende bien.


Min. Ah, Mon Friar! Les Cordeaux de la Mart vous avoient Environnez; Et Les
destresses d'Enfer vous avoient rencontrez. Mais, Invoquez Le Nom de l'Eternel,
disant, Ie te pry, Eternel, Delivre mon Ame.

O meschant, Retourntz a L'eternel, et it (...) pity do vous, et il pardonnera
(...) or plus.

Entenaez vous?


Shuan. Ouys Monsieur; le vous remercy.


Min. Mais it faut que vous vous contentions du seul Sacrifice, et de
L'Intercession de JESUS CHRIST. (...) pardon de ses pechez, par sa propres
merits, ou par la Mediation de quelqua Creature. (...) faut, que votre priere
soit, L'Obeissance de JESUS CHRIST a ta Loy, O mon Dieu, est (...) Se^le
Justice. En Consideration de catte se^le Justice, fai que l' obtienne pardon et
Favenr ^upres de Tol. le Renonce, le Renonce, a tous autres Mediators.

Que dites vous! Renoncez vous tous (...) Mediateurs!


Shuan. Ie ne scay pas ce que le diray.

(...) le remets votre Esprit en la (...) votre Redempteur JESUS CHRIST.


Translated into English, at the Desire of the Bookseller.

'Min. Most Miserable Sinner; You are a Prisoner of Justice, but, you are yet a
Prisoner of Hope.

One Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST is the Hope of Sinners; and indeed there is
not Salvation in any other.

This is a Saving most certain, and worthy to be of all Entirely received; That
JESUS CHRIST is Come into the World, for to save Sinners.

But it is most Necessary, that you call upon your Savior.

You make this Lamentable Outcry, O wretched man that I am; who shall deliver
me!

JESUS CHRIST, the Great SAVIOR of the World, gives this Answer, Look unto me,
and be Saved.

Understand you what I say?


Shuan. Yes, Sir; I understand you very well.


Min. Ah, My Brother; The Cords of Death compass you, the An guishes of Hell
come upon you. But now, Call on the Name of the LORD, and say, O Lord, I
beseech thee, Deliver my Soul.

Sinful Man, Return to the Lord, and He will have pity on you; and He will
abundantly pardon you.

Do you understand me?


Shuan. Yes Sir; and I thank you.


Min. But you must then take up with the Only Sacrifice and Intercession of
JESUS CHRIST. No one comes at the Pardon of his Sins, on the account of his own
Deserts, or through the Mediation of any Creature. Your Prayer must be this, O my
GOD, The Obedience of JESUS CHRIST unto thy Law is my only Righteousness For
the sake of that Righteousness only grant that I may find pardon and mercy with
thee! I Renounce, I Renounce all other Mediators.

What do you say to This? Do you Renounce all other Mediators?


Shuan. I cannot well tell, what to say to it?


Min. I commit your Spirit into the Hand of JESUS CHRIST, your Redeemer.


At the Place of Execution, a Prayer was made by a Minister of the City; The
Chief Heads whereof were;

An Adoration of the Divine Justice in the Evil pursuing Sinners; --

-- Whereof here was now a dismal Spectacle; --

-- And of the Divine Mercy in the Forgiveness offered unto Chief of Sinners.

A Confession of what we have Committed, when we have Sinned;

-- And of what we have Deserved;

-- And of the Wicked Heart, which does Expose to all.

An Admiration of the Grace, which is Ready to Pardon;

And of the Blood which does purchase the Pardon;

With an Essay to Lay hold on it.

And Aspirations after the Token and Effect of a Pardon, in an Heart hating of,
and mourning for, all Sin, and filled with the Love of GOD.

An Application of these things more particularly unto the Case of the
Miserables now standing on the Scaffold; --

With ardent Cries to Heaven, that Free Grace might yet have Triumphs and
Wonders in them; and all Heaven be filled with Praises.

-- Pleading, That nothing Less than an Almighty Arm, could change such Vicious
and Obstinate Hearts as theirs; but that the Holy Spirit, who is the Arm of the
LORD, is nothing Less than the Almighty GOD.

A Supplication, that GOD would Sanctify the horrible Spectacle unto the vast
Crowd of Spectators now assembled; and Effectually Caution them to Shun the
Paths of the Destroyer.

Especially, the Young People; That they might Betimes give themselves up to
the Conduct of their SAVIOR; Left their Disobedience provoke Him, to Leave
them in the Hands of the Destroyer.

And a Supplication for our Seafaring People; That they may more generally
Turn and Live unto GOD; That they may not fall into the Hands of Pirates; That
such as are fallen into their Hands, may not fall into their Ways; That the
poor Captives may with Cries to GOD that shall pierce the Heavens, procure His
Good Providence to work for their Deliverance; And, That the Pirates now
infesting the Seas, may have a Remarkable Blast from Heaven following of them;
the Sea Monsters, of all the most cruel, be Extinguished; and that the Methods
now taking by the British Crown for the Suppression of these Mischiefs may be
prospered.

On the Scaffold, as the Last Minute came on, several of the Malefactors,
discovered a great Consternation.

Baker and Hoof appeared very distinguishingly Paenitent.

But Brown, behaved himself at such a rate, as one would hardly imagine that
any Compos Mentis, could have done so. He broke out into furious Expressions,
which had in them too much of the Language he had been used unto. Then he fell
to Reading of Prayers, not very pertinently chosen. At length he made a Short
Speech, which every body trembled at; Advising Sailors, to beware of all wicked
Living, such as his own had been; especially to beware of falling into the
Hands of the Pirates: But if they did, and were forced to join with them, then,
to have a care whom they kept, and whom they let go, and what Countries they
come into.

In such amazing Terms did he make his Exit! With such Madness, Go to the Dead!

The rest said Little, only Vanvoorst, having (with Baker) Sung a Dutch Psalm,
Exhorted Young. Persons to Lead a Life of Religion, and keep the Sabbath, and
carry it well to their Parents.

Behold, Reader, The End of Piracy!

WARNINGS TO Them that make Haste TO BE RICH.
BOSTON. 27. d. VIII. m. 1717.

JER. XVII. 2. He that gets Riches and not by Right, shall leave them in the
midst of his Days, and at his End shall be a Fool.

(...) a very sad (...), a very black Tragedy, which entertains us, in a just
Sentence of DEATH passed upon a Great Number of PIRATES, who have made their
wicked Attempts to (...) (...) and not by Right, and are now (...) leave them,
and all the World, in the midst of their Days; Their End, and a fearful End is
come; in which their Folly is with the most insupportable Stings now charged
upon them. What are these PIRATES now, but so many Preachers of those Things;
which once they could not bear to hear the Servants of GOD Preach unto them?
Unhappy, but Practical, and Oh! why not Powerful, Preachers of the Evil which
pursues Sinners, and of the Destruction and Misery found in the Ways of
Ungodliness and of Dishonesty. It will be our Folly, if the Voice of such
Warners be not understood, pondered, hearkened to; 'Twill be a proper Exercise
of Wisdom, in the Winners of Souls, to make the Voice of their Warnings as
Articulate and Effectual, as it is possible. My Heare^^, The Condition of these
wretched Men, is to Preach unto you; and I now read their Text unto you; A Text
on which they give you a very dismal Commentary.

The Sinful People, on whom (...) by his Prophets denounced very destroying
Judgments for their Sins, were yet very confident of their escaping the
Destruction threatend unto them. One Ground of their Carnal Confidence was
this; They were a Wealthy People; And they were an Instance of a Proverb, which
one of their own Kings had left with them; The Rich Man's Wealth is his (...)
City, and as an high Wall in his own conceit. My Text pulls down the High Wall
of their Strong City, and shows them the Folly of their vain Imaginations. They
were a Rich People, it is true; But then, what Riches they had, they did not
come honestly by them. They got Riches, but not by Right. Their Great Persons
had generally got their Great Estates in Ways forbidden by GOD, Ways offensive
to GOD: Now it could not be well expected, that such (...), or their Estates
could be (...) things. No; As the Woodcock (...) on what it did not lay, so is
he that (...) Riches and not by Right. But (...) Rapacious Bird, What becomes
of it? Shall it long enjoy the Nest which it has so praedatiously siez'd upon?
By no means: He shall leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End he
shall be a Fool. Convinced of his own Folly, he shall call himself, A Fool; and
all the World from the Conviction of what they see, shall also agree to call
him so.

My DOCTRINE, will be a Voice of the LORD, from Occurrents which we see upon
the Waters, and you hear the God of Glory Thundering in it.

RICHES not gotten Honesty are gotten Foolishly; and the dreadful Death which
comes at the End of an Unjust Life, will terribly proclaim the Folly of it.

The Peals of (...) Thunders are to be distinctly heard in the (...)
PROPOSITIONS.

I. It is no rare thing, I am sorry (...) say so! -- that Riches are got, or
sought, but not so Honestly as they ought to be. It Is often so, that Men would
get Riches, but not by Right.

But who are these Workers of Iniquity? The Hue-in-cry after the Men who are to
be Indicted for the Crimes of Trespassing upon the Rules of Honesty in the
pursuit of Riches; it is to be taken out of the Eighth Commandment. The
Trespasses of Men on what is implied in the Eighth Commandment, and all Essays
unjustly to sieze, or keep, what belongs unto another; These are the Points
wherein Men go to get Riches and not by Right.

But I shall single out some, that are more Notorious Transgressors in the Ways
of Dishonesty; and assure them, that they belong to the Tribe of Evildoers.

(...) sure, the PIRATE at Sea, and (...) the Robber on Shore, is one who (...)
to get Riches and not by Right. (...) here it may be complained, That (...) the
Laws reach the lesser Pirates (...) Robbers, there are, as one of them too
truly told the Execrable Alexander, much Greater Ones, whom no Humane Laws
presume to meddle withal: Monsters, whom we dignify with the Title of Hero's:
Conquerors and Emperors, but yet no other than a more splendid sort of
Highway-man. Of these, Many have done abominably; But thou, the Leviathan
lately at Versailles, have excelled them all.

But it must also be asserted, That he who loves to Oppress, or to Extort from
another, what he has no Legal Claim unto, the same is Brother to a Thief. When
it is become Necessary for a Man to have such or such a Commodity, and his
Neighbor takes advantage of his Necessity, to scrue unreasonably upon him;
When a Man takes advantage from his Neighbors being Low, and Mean, and Weak,
and compells him to Hard Bargains (...) him; then he goes to get Riches (...)
not by Right. He who would escaped the Devouring Fire, and Everlasting
Burnings, must be one who despises the Gain of such Oppressions.

But then, he who Pilsers from his Neighbor, or privately takes any of his
Possessions from him, without some Allowance from him for it; This is the
proper Thief: All the World Brands him for such an one. What he gets, is most
unquestionably not by Right. Neighbors must be some Way Agreed about it,
before one may take what belongs unto another.

All Fraud in Dealing, must also be condemned as a sort of Theft. Cheating and
Lying, in Dealing, is but Stealing. To warrant a thing for Sound, and Good, and
so and so Valuable, when it may be known to be otherwise; To draw a thing out
of another hands by any False Talk about the matter; To use False Weights, and
False Scales, and False Measures

This may be to get Riches; but it is (...) by Right; You cannot think it is!

Men may get Riches also, but you (...) be sure, it is not by Right, When it is a
Trade of Sin which they make their Earnings of: If they get Money by the direct
advancing of Idolatry; By Fortune-telling; By Unchastity; By playing the Pimp,
or Band; Or, By serving the Lusts, which ought to be mortifyed.

Gaining by Gaming is as bad. It is to get the Estate of a Neighbor at a
Price, which it ought not to be staked at. If he be such a Sot, as to stake any
thing of his Estate at such a Price, our Charity should not permit us to take
it from him. Surely, O Man, Thou durst not pray over this way of getting, and
seriously and solemnly Beg of the Glorious GOD, O Lord, I beseech thee, send
now Prosperity! A Clear Proof, It Is not by Right!

And, I pray, Why should the setting up of Lotteries, be esteemed a Christian
and a Credible Way of Living? Methinks, No Man that (...) Examine them, can
Justify them (...).

The Men also, that run rash (...) Debt, and care not how much, (...) how long
they ly in Debt; and will Borrow, without any View, or Care of Paying again: I
would ask of the Creditors, Think thou this to be Right.

I will declare one thing more unto you; Not only Unfaithful Treasurers, but
also, Judges, who take Bribes, either to pass a wrong Judgment, or ^^^passing a
Right one: Lawyers who take Fees, for pleading a Case, which they know to be an
Ill one; Rulers, who Sell the public Places of Trust, to which Merit should be
the only Recommendation: These too, may get Riches: But when the World that
groans under it, shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruptions, what they
do will be condemned, as Not by Right. You may Flatter your selves, in your own
Eyes, O ye Greedy Ones, As doing only what is Customary: But your Iniquity will
be found hateful, and it will be found a Filthy Lucre, that you are (...)
Greedy of.

(...) Stroke more, shall finish my (...) of The Methods wherein Men get Riches
and not by Right; It is done, when Men withhold more than is meet, and allow
not a due Portion of their Estates unto Pious Uses. A Fault, which provokes the
Holy One to withhold His Blessing from them. They fancy, they get Riches by
this Parsimony; but it eventually tends unto Poverty!

These People, all pray the Fool.

But this is what I am going more fully to advertise you of.

II. The Men who seek to get Riches, but not Honestly, they do very Foolishly.
The Man who gets Riches, and not by Right, will most certainly be found a Fool
at the last. We shall all presently see the Exaltation of this Folly.

First. Most Certainly, Sin is Folly. How often, how often, has the Wisdom of
GOD, in his Holy Oracles, called it so? No Man ever Sins, but he transgresses
the Rules of Wisdom* It may be said of him, as in Prove. V. 23. In the Greatness
of his Folly he goes astray. And his Confession must be that, 2 Samuel XXIV. 10.
I have sinned in what I have done, and I have done very foolishly.

Now when Riches are not got Honestly, they are got Sinfully. If they are not
got by Right, they are got by Sin. The Law of the Glorious God is, Thou shall
not Covet. But there is an Evil Coveteousness in them, who get Riches, and not
by Right. The Law of the Glorious GOD is, All things that you would have men do
to you, do ye even so to them. They who get Riches, and not by Right, are
those, who do not as they would be done unto. The Law of the Glorious GOD is,
That no man overreach, or defraud his Brother in any matter. They who get
Riches, and not by Right, are such as Overreach and Defraud their Brethren.
Yea, O Man, What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly? Such Laws of
the Only wise God, cannot without the most insolent Folly be trampled on.

But Secondly; If Men will get Riches and not by Right, Let us enquire, Whether
they don't lose more than they get. If they do so, it is most evidently an
Egregious Folly which they are guilty of. Now, O Man, by unjust Gain,
increasing thy Substance, Come and see me state thy Accounts, and from thy most
certain Losses, learn how foolishly thy Business has been carried on.

First; It is an astonishing Truth, and among them that walk in the Ways of
Dishonesty, it falls down like a flaming Thunderbolt! -- Foolish Men, All the
Riches which are not Honestly gotten, must be lost in a Shipwreck of Honest
Restitution, if ever Men come unto Repentance and Salvation. There is no Man,
who gets Riches and not by Right, but the Repentance, unto Salvation, will
bring him to that Language Zacheus; LUKE XIX. 8. Lord, I Restore. My Friends,
It Is a tremendous Lesson of Christianity, which I am now treating you withal.
Oh! tremble before it. It is, RESTITUTION, RESTITUTION; without which all
things not Honestly gotten, will remain and corrode, as an Eternal Poison in
the Soul of the Offender. If you get Riches and not by Right, it must be
Repented of; it must be Repented of: A Righteous God who loves Righteousness,
will banish you out of His Kingdom, if it be not Repented of. Now, there can be
nothing plainer than this; That if you Retain in your hands, what you have
gotten and not by Right, you do not Repent of what you have done. You cannot
Repent, if you do not Refund unto the utmost of your Capacity. Of a Man who has
got Riches and not by Right, we are told Job XX. 15. He has swallowed down
Riches, and he shall vomit them up again, GOD shall cast them out of his Belly.
O Unjust Man, look for a terrible Vomit. Either God will by Scourges, make thee
throw up thy Unjust Gain, and fetch it out of thee by one Impoverishing Stroke
after another; Or else, He will by Repentance dispose thee, to throw it up,
with an active, equal, patient Restitution. Alas, what have thou been a doing?
A Restitution of all thy Ill-gotten Treasures must be endeavored, if thou
would not shut thy self out from the Everlasting Mercies of GOD. Ah! How
fearfully, how fatally, how irrecoverably are the Souls of many Unjust Men
entangled in the Snares of Death? They cannot hope to find Favor with GOD, or
an Acceptance among true Paenitents, if they do not endeavor all the
Restitution that is possible. But will they ever come to this? No, The Vomit is
too strong for them; they will sooner dye than come unto it! Foolish Men; You
have at once lost all that you have got! You must with your own hands throw all
overboard, if you would not be drowned in Perdition at the Last!

Secondly. A Good Esteem is lost, by them who get Riches in the Ways of
Dishonesty; A Good Esteem among all those, who are willing to live in all
Godliness and Honesty. We have been told, Prove. XXII. 1. A good Name is rather
to be chosen than great Riches. It Is far more Honorable and Reputable, to be a
Good Man, than to be a Rich Man. It will most of all be found so, in the Day
when every Man shall receive Praise of God, who is found worthy of it. But now
as a Thief is ashamed when he is found, so it is a shameful Thing to be found a
False-dealer in any Degree, in any Affair: It makes a Man lightly esteemed. All
Baseness in any Dealing, is a Blemish on the Dealer. To Deal unjustly with any
Man; it is a Blot in any Scutcheon. The Kings themselves that have done it, are
of, of what Memory, I beseech you? No one believes it, if they say, A Blessed
One.

Thirdly, Yea, a Good Conscience is Lost. And that is a worse Loss, a Thousand
Times; a Loss which if we were wise, we should at any time take Joyfully the
Spoiling of our Goods, for the preventing of! When a man gets Riches and not by
Right, he has a Conscience within him, which tells him, He does what the ought
not to do. The Servant of GOD could say; Heb. XIII. 18. We have a Good
Conscience, in all things willing to Live honestly. Men don't keep a Good
Conscience, when they don't Live Honestly. The man that has taken more than his
own, is he, of whom we read, A Dreadful Sound is in his Ears; And again,
Terrors shall make him afraid on every side. His Wounded Conscience keeps
roaring in his Ears; Thou have wronged thy Neighbor, and there is a Just GOD,
who is a dreadful Revenger of such Wrongs at these. It Is a Folly for a man to
in^ur the Reproaches of an Angry Conscience. All the Riches of a Chaldean or
Persian Monarch, would be too dearly bought, if a man must have them
accompanied with the Lashes of a Guilty Conscience, furiously Reproaching of
him. All the Relish of Riches is Lost; Rocks of Diamonds, and Mountains of
Gold, are not worth a Straw; where the Conscience is like the Troubled Sea, and
there is no peace unto the Wicked!

Fourthly; The Loss of the SOUL is horribly Endangered; Yea, without
Repentance, the Danger is Unavoidable. And oh! that the awful words of our
SAVIOR, who knew the Worth of a SOUL, were duly considered with us; Mat. XVI.
26. What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and Lose his own Soul!
We commonly say, One may buy Gold too dear. If the SOUL be bartered away for
Gold, verily, we buy Gold too dear! To get Riches and not by Right, is to
render the SOUL obnoxious to the Wrath of GOD. A SOUL perishing under the Wrath
of GOD, is a Lost SOUL. Such is the SOUL of the Wicked, and of him who in Ill
Ways does make Haste to be Rich. No man can Wrong another man, but it may be
said of him, He wrongs his own SOUL. A very Unjust man had it said unto him;
Hab. II. 9, 10. Woe to him that Coveteth an Evil Covetousness; Thou have Sinned
against thy SOUL. To Lose the (...) comes at the End of an Unjust Life; This,
This will discover the Matchless Folly of all that is not Honestly done in and
for the Getting of Riches.

They that Get Riches and not by Right, must know, that this Trade will not Last
always. Their Way, and their Life, must come to an End. It will not be Long before
they have such Tidings bro't unto them; Ezekiel VII. 6. An End is come, the End is
come, it watches for thee, behold, it is come! No Riches will keep any man
always alive. It Is no New Thing, to have it said, The Rich man died. It is an
Occurrence of daily Experience, That they who boast themselves in the multitude
of their Riches, cannot Redeem a Brother, no, nor themselves, to Live for ever,
and not see Corruption. Verily, The Fat Ones of the Earth cannot keep alive
their own Souls. Much less, will the Mammon of Unrighteousness, keep off the
Arrest of Death. But now, at the Death of the man who gets Riches and not by
Right, What will there be Observable? Something to be Observed, by which the
Folly shall be manifest unto all men. Come, Let us Mark the Unjust man, and
behold the False Dealer, for the End of that man, will declare him to be a Fool.

First. There is oftentimes, an Early Death, in the Strange Punishment for
these Workers of Iniquity. They that Get Riches, and not by Right, are
oftentimes thus Punished; They must Leave them in the midst of their Days.
Thus, we find a Rich Fool promising himself Goods Laid up for many years. But,
in the midst of his Days he feels this Order from Heaven served upon him; Luke
XII. 20. Thou Fool, This night thy Soul shall be required of thee; Then whose
shall these things be, which thou have provided: The man must not Live to Taste
the Sweet of his Ill-gotten Goods. And perhaps the Wealth of the Sinner, is
Left unto a man more Just than himself. GOD required His People to deal
Righteously with one another, and Employed this motive; Deuteronomy. XXV. 15. That thy
Days may be lengthened in the Land, which the Lord thy GOD gives thee. But in
Unrighteous Dealings, men take the most Ready Course, that their Days may be
Shortened in the Land.

It is especially thus, when men grow more Dangerous Criminals, and are so
sharp set with the Cursed Hunger of Riches, that they do things wherein Humane
Society shall be considerably Damnified. Our Gracious GOD has a Wondrous
Tenderness for Humane Society; And when men grow so Outrageous in the Ways of
Dishonesty, that Humane Society suffers Insupportable Damages from them; Now
there goes up that Cry to Heaven, It Is Time, Lord, for thee to Work! And, GOD
comes down, GOD steps in, GOD in Compassion to Humane Society, fulfils that
word upon the man who trusted in the abundance of his Riches, and Strengthened
himself in his Wickedness; Psalm. LII. 5. GOD shall take thee away, and plack
thee out of thy Dewlling Place, and Root thee out of the Land of the Living.
Such Dangerous Criminals are Wicked overmuch. And the Doom of them that are
Wicked overmuch, is, To Die before their Time. Such Dangerous Criminals are Left
sometimes to do Bloody as well as Deceitful Things. And the Doom of such Bloody
and Deceitful men, is, They shall not Live out half their Days. Yea, many
times the Wretches run into Capital Crimes. It is reckoned among the Crimes of
them who are Greedy of Gain; Prove. I. 15. Their feet run to Evil, and make
Haste to shed Blood. The Sword which is to defend Humane Society, now
animadverts upon them. That Sword of GOD cuts them off. They Die at the Place of
Execution, and as a Fool dies. O dismal Sight! Young men drawn to the Place of
Execution! Young men, who must flee to the Pit, and none may stay them! Young
men, hurried out of the World, for having forfeited their Lives, by Getting
Riches, and not by Right. Such a Sight is this Day to be seen among us; Behold,
All ye your selves have seen it!

Secondly, But let the Death of the Wicked come when it will, be sure it Scribs
them of all the Riches they were Possessed of. The Riches which have been
gotten, and not by Right, many times Leave men before they Die. There is a
secret Blast from GOD, upon the Estates that have not been Honestly come at.
GOD has many Ways to blist Ill gotten Estates, and make such Treasures of (...)
to melt away to (...). Yea, Sometimes, if a man do but get a Little
unrighteously, it proves a Moth to all the rest that he has gotten, and brings
a strange Consumption upon it. But whether this fall out or no; This you may be
certain of: When men Die, then they must Leave all that they have got. So we are
told, 1 Timothy VI 7. We brought nothing into the World, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out. Ah, Dying Man, Thou art going, thou art going from all thy
Possessions: When thou Dyest, thou shall carry nothing away, neither shall thy
Glory descend after thee!

Thirdly. At the Death of men, and at the End of all, it will be found, That
SIN is what nothing is to be gotten by! To Sin, It Is to do a Deceitful Work. O
the Deceitfulness of Sin! Men dream of Getting, I know not what, by Sinning
against the Blessed GOD. But, Be not Deceived: In the End it will be found,
That nothing is to be Gotten, by the Unfruitful Works of Darkness. Men may for
a while Hatter themselves, that Sin will bring (...) small Gain unto the Crafts
men; But Syrs, I will call upon you, as the Prophet of old upon a Deceived
People; What will ye do in the end thereof? We read; Prove. X^. 21. An
inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning: But the End thereof shall
not (...) blessed. Be sure, it will be found so, (...) a Dying Hour, and at
that which will (...) the End of all men At the End of Life, and when the
Wickedness of the Wicked is brought unto an End; Then (...) will be found, That
nothing has been (...) by Sinning, but only this, That (...) Blessings of GOD
have been all Sinned away. It is a Quaestion (...) may (...) many an
Unrighteous Dealer into (...) Agony; What is the Hope of the (...), though he
has Gained never so much, then GOD shall take away his Soul? Yea, All sorts of
Impieties have this in them, to terrify you from committing of them. It Is a
smart Interrogatory; and you will ill in the End have it put unto (...); What
Fruit have you had of these things, whereof you are now ashamed! For the End of
those things is Death. What fruit will the Unchrist have, of his Lewdness? The
End (...) Death. All that he Gets is, (...) shall (...) the Last. What Fruit
will the (...) have of his Tippling? The (...) is Death. all that he Gets is,
(...) the (...), it bites like a (...), stings like an Adder. What (...)? What
Got? -- Be thy Evil Ways what they will, O man, if thou Sin, and pervert that
which it, Right, in the End thou shall say, (...) has not profited me! So in
the End, the Sinner is a Fool!

After (...) Admonitions from GOD (...) SAVIOR, if hope, there are (...)
^^ctions. Piety, that will find (...) Reception with you.

First. It is to be hoped, That if any of you have (...) Riches, and not by
Right; you will (...) it, (...) it; Seek a Reconciliation with GOD; And come to
that E^solution; Job XXX^^. ^^. If I have done Iniquity, I will do it no (...).

Secondly. It (...) to be hoped, That you will all keep close to the Ways of
Unspotted Honesty; Be Harmless; Be Blameless; Offer to no man the least Injury
in the World; Aim at the Benefit of others as well as your own: Prefer the
Little of (...) Righteous man, before the Treasures, of many Wicked. And be
within the reach of that Consolation, Psalm. CVI. 3. Blessed is he who does
Righteousness at all times.

Thirdly. It is to be hoped, That instead of grasping inordinately after the
Riches of this World, you will seek more importunately after the Durable Riches
of the Spiritual Blessings in the Heavenly Places. Yea, Seek these True Riches
(...) an Holy Violence; Take them by (...)! Be in Earnest for the (...) Riches
of CHRIST, and for that Wisdom, the Merchandise whereof is better than the
Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain thereof than (...) Gold. Oh! Be (...)
Earnest for what you have set before you, in Ephesians. I. 18. The Riches of the
Glory of the Inheritance among the Saints.

FINIS.

