A BRIEF APOLOGY In behalf of the PEOPLE In Derision called QUAKERS.

WRITTEN For the Information of our Sober and Well-Inclined Neighbors in and
about the Town of Warminster in the County of Wilts.

By Will. Chandler, Alex. Pyott, Jo. Hodges. And some others.

By Honor and Dishonor, by Evil Report and Good Report, as Deceivers, and yet
True, as Unknown, and yet Well-known; as Dying, and behold we Live, 2 Cor. VI.
8, 9. London Printed, and Reprinted by Andrew Bradford in Philadelphia. 1719

A Brief Apology,
IT is not that we love Contention or desire Controversy, or are Impatient in
bearing Reproaches, that we appear thus Public; but such have been the
repeated high Charges and smart Lashes that our Adversaries (more especially
some of the Presbyterian Assembly) have of late taken a Liberty, liberally and
lavishly to bestow upon us; that we find our selves concerned to Clear and
Vindicate the Truth and Innocence of our Christian Profession from those black
Aspersions, that have rendered it so frightful and formidable, as though 'twere
only a mere Complication of Pestilent Errors, as well to saisfy the Minds of
such of our Piously-inclined Neighbors as may be desirous to hear us speak for
our selves as also for the Information of those, who may have been Imposed
upon, by that Dress wherein our Opposers have represented us. And although these
can object nothing material against us now, that has not been long since over
and over offered by some of the same Persuasion, and have as often received
Answers from some or other of our Friends; (some of which have never yet been
by them Replied unto) yet forasmuch as those may not have come to the View of
many of our Neighbors, for whom this is chiefly intended, we thought it fit
briefly to say so much as we think may be accommodate to the present Occasion;
and which perhaps with unprejudiced Minds may bespeak our Creed not so Unsound
and Erroneous, Est. 3.5.
as our somewhat different Deportment has rendered us Obnoxious and
Contemptible, as well as Distastful to those who either ambitiously affect
Honor and Respect, and love Greetings, Joh 5.44. Mat^ ^3 ^^
or think a complaisant Compliance to the Fashions, Customs and Complements of
the Age, to be one of the chiefest Felicities of this Life, and best Expression
of their Civility and good Manners,

We therefore desire our well-disposed Neighbors heartily to weigh what we
have to allege against the Clamours of those, who to be sure will not set us
out to our best Advantage; and to receive an Account from our selves what we
are, and what we believe and hold for Christian Truths; who certainly must
needs know better our own Belief, than those who perhaps never examined it, to
any other End than to find fault, if ever they did it; and also that you will
not think it strange, that we express not our Belief in some Particulars, in
the affected Terms of other Professors of Christianity, but think it more
reasonable and safe, to content our selves with that Dress of Language in which
the Holy Ghost thought fit to hand them to us in the Holy Scriptures, those
most Excellent and Divine Writings, which above all others in the World,
challenge our Reverence and most diligent Reading, those Oracles of God, and
rich Christian Treasury of Divine Saving Truths, Romans 15.4.
which were Written for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of
them may have Hope, and are profitable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17
Reproof, Correction, and Instruction in Righteousness, to the Perfecting and
thoroughly furnishing of the Man of GOD to every good Work, making him wise unto
Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus; containing all Christian
Doctrines necessary to be believed for Salvation, and are a Sufficient External
Standard and Touchstone to try the Doctrines of Men, and we say with the
Apostle, Gal. 1.8.
whosoever shall publish and propagate any other Gospel and Faith than is
therein testified of, to us, by those Inspired Penmen, who were the first
Promulgators thereof, though he were an Angel, let him be accursed; all which and
whatsoever is therein contained, we as firmly believe as any of you do; and as
it is the Duty of every sincere Christian, we are heartily thankful to God for
them, who through his good Providence has preserved them to our Time, to our
great Benefit and Comfort.

We believe in that great omnipotent God, that made and created all things, and
gave us our Being, whom in sincerity of Heart we fear, reverence and worship,
being seriously concerned for our Souls Welfare to Eternity. We believe that
great Mystery, That there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, 1 Jo. 5.^.
and that these three are one in Being and Substance: And as do ye, so do we
also hope for, and expect Salvation, only and alone through the Son of God, our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ of Nazareth; Isa. 49.6 Act 1^.43 and 4.12
believing that God the Father has ordained him for Salvation to the Ends of
the Earth; and that no other Name is given under Heaven, by which Men shall be
saved; who being conceived by the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary,
was born of her at Bethlehem; 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Heb. 4.15
as also his holy and examplary Life, perfectly free from Sin; his Doctrine,
Miracles, Sufferings, and Death upon the Cross, without the Gates of Jerusalem;
his Resurrection from the Dead, To. 8.34 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. 1 Jo. 2.1.
and Ascension into Heaven, where he is at the right Hand of God the Father,
perfect God and perfect Man, and the alone Mediator between God and Man, and is
our Advocate with the Father, and ever lives to make Intercession for us; Acts
10.42.
and also shall Judge both Quick and Dead: All which, and whatsoever else is
recorded of him in the Sacred Scriptures, we firmly believe.

This Jesus in whom dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead, Col. 2.9.
we believe offered up himself according to the Will of the Father, Ephesians. 5.2. 1
Jo. 2.2.
an acceptable Sacrifice to God, and became a Propitiation for the Sins of
Mankind, to the End of the World, Heb. 10.12. To. 5.12.18.
and died for all Men, as all died in Adam; through whose Blood God proclaims
Redemption and Salvation to Man and offers to be reeconciled, 2 Cor 5.19
Rom ^.25
and freely for his Sons sake to remit, Luke 24.47. Acts 10 43. and 26, 20.
Ephesians. 4.22 23.24. Romans 8.3.4. 2 Cor. 5.15.17. Tit. 2.14
forgive and pass by all past Offenses, to as many as shall truly and heartily
repent of their Sins and turn from the same, and shall so believe in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and love him, as for the future to live a holy circumspect
Christian Life, and obey his Commands, thereby continuing in his Love.

Joh. 14.15, 21.23 24. and 15.10. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. Ja. 2.12. to
the End.
Which Holy Life so much Celebrated and strictly kept to in the Primitive Ages
of Christianity, (that whosoever named the Name or took the Name of Christ upon
them, were to depart from Iniquity) we believe ought to be inseparable from a
true and faithful Christian, as ever accompanying a true living and active
Faith; and it seems was thought no less necessary, by those who composed the
Promise, that should be made in behalf of Infants, before they were admitted
into that once sacred Catalogue, Tit. 2.11 12.
(to wit) that as they came to years of Discretion, they should forsake the
Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, Luke 1.75
and keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of
our Lives: To. 6.18, 19, 21. 2 Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 4.24
This we believe to be the bounden Duty of Mankind; and though our opposers have
scoft us, and branded us with Error, 1 These. 3 13. and 4.7 Heb. 12.10, 14. 1
Jo. 4 4
for holding Perfection, because (in Pleading for a Holy Righteous Life, as
that which is well pleasing to God, and avouching his Power to be stronger in
Man, as Man believes and cleaves to it, to rescue him from under the Power of
Satan, than is that of the Devil to retain him in Thraldom) we have sometime
made use of the Words of Christ and his Apostles; as, Be ye perfect, Mat. 5.48.
Col. 4.12. 1 Jo. 3.3.
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, he that has this Hope in him,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, etc. Yet have we never pretended to a
Moral Perfection beyond what is contained in the above Promise, which is sound
and true in it self, and is that which God requires of us; and therefore it is
that we frequently press its Necessity, and fervently exhort People to its
Performance. Neither do we expect to be exempt from Temptations, Heb. 6.1^
while we Inhabit these frail Tabernacles which is no Sin, provided we Consent
not; Christ himself was likewise Tempted, yet he sinned not; for though both good
and evil is presented to our Thoughts, yet we appropriate neither, but as we
entertain and embrace it: So that though the number of Thoughts may sometimes
press us, and the Nature of some grieve us; yet they don't otherwise affect us,
or is Sin thereby conceived, if our Wills don't close with, and join to them by
assenting; but if we consent, we are culpable in the Sight of God, though it
proceed not to an open Immorality. And as we cannot prevent the forming of some
Thoughts, so we cannot wholly avoid the presentation of some evil ones, while our
common Enemy is Busy with his Baits; but yet the more we resist, and the more
the Lusts and Affections of the Flesh (which is the part that entertains them)
is mortified the more their Habit is weakened, their Assaults feebler, and we
the less infested by them.

And notwithstanding we have hence been falsely accused, that we expect to be
saved by our own Works, as being meritorious, yet we don't acknowledge a Holy
Life as the Efficient and Procuring Cause of our Salvation; which we no less
than you totally refer to the free Grace and Mercy of God in Christ, without
any Merit in Man; Ephesians. 2.8.
but we esteem it as a Constant Companion thereto, Ja. 2.18. to the End.
and a necessary Condition on our part, in Compliance with Gods Gracious Offer
without which we may not obtain it, Heb. 1.9. Romans 12.1, 2,
being inseperably annexed to that Faith, which only pleases God, and is but
our reasonable Duty.

And we believe that although Christ thus offered up himself once for all, Heb.
2.9. and 10.12.
for the Sins of all Men to the End of the World; thereby rendering Repentance
and Ammendment of Life prevalent with God; yet that the Traditional Belief of
that alone, Acts 3.19.
is not sufficient to entitle us to that Common Salvation that comes by him;
but that it is of necessity that we truly repent and be Converted from the Evil
to the Good; and therefore it is no less necessary for us now, Act. 26 18, 20.
than 'twas for Believers in the Appostles days, that we be turned from
Darkness to Light; or in other Terms, from the dark Power of Satan, to the
Power of God, who is Light, that thereby we may every one know the Work of
Redemption and Salvation, wrought in and for our selves: For it is not enough to
believe that Christ died, if we feel not the blessed Effects of his Death, Mat
1.21 Act. 3.26 Tit 2.14.
who came to save us from our Sins, and bless us, by turning us from our
Iniquities, and gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good Works.

For we believe such to be the natural State of Man in the Fall, Genesis 2.17. Rom
5.12. 2 Cor. 5.14. Genesis 6.5. Romans 7.5.
that by Nature we are Dead as to God, at a distance from him, prone to Evil,
and to Gratify the Desires of our Sensual Minds, Ephesians 2.2.
swayed by the corrupt and sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and under the Power of a
strange King, 2 Timothy 2.26.
ruled by the Prince of the Power of the Air; so that our inward Man being thus
Dead from God, 1 Cor. 2.14
we cannot exercise our Spiritual Senses toward him, nor can this natural Man
perceive, know or savor the things of God, which only are Spiritually
discerned: Wherefore notwithstanding our Savior died for us, we are yet by
Nature in a miserable undone Condition, in Captivity to our Souls Enemy, 1 Cor.
14.45, 47. Ephesians 2.1, 5 Col. 2.13
except we know the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, that quickening Spirit,
to quicken our Souls, and make us alive to God again that being restored (...)
our inward Senses, Romans 8.11 Ephesians. 5.13, 14 Jo. 1.9. Ephesians. 2.3. and 5,6.
we may by the Assistance of his divine Light (wherewith for that End he has
blessed all the Sons and Daughters of Men) see our selves in this sad and lost
State under the Wrath of God, and abhor our selves therefore, and under this
living Sense (wherein things will appear with another Aspect than before) cry
to God for Deliverance therefrom, ^ Cor. 7.10.
with such an inward hearty Sorrow, as works a true Repentance for the same
It Is not our being Sprinkled, when Infants, that will make us true Christians,
Convert us from being Children of Wrath, to become Children of Grace, John 1
12, 13. Romans 8 24.
and Sons of God, and Members of Christ's Church, and Invest us in an Interest
in him; it is not le^rning our Chatechism, and subscribing to certian Articles
of Faith, though never so Orthodox, and being educated in an Historical Belief
of what Christ did for us above Sixteen Hundred Years ago; it is not this only
that will administer a sufficient, true, and saving Knowledge of Christ, and
really interest us in his Death and sufferings; all which People may talk of,
and please themselves withal, and yet continue as fast bound under the Dominion
of Satan (who still rules where Disobedience is) as those less perfect in that
Lesson: But the true and saving Knowledge of Christ, Acts 26.18. Col. 1.13
is to know our selves turned from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan
to the Power of God, that by it we may be delivered from the Power of Darkness,
and be translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son; Joh. 8 32.36. Mar. 3.27.
to know his Saving Power really to Rescue and redeem us from under the Power
of him that has enthralled us and leads captive at his Will those who live in
the Vanity of their Minds; Mal. 3 2.3
to know him bind this Strong Man, to spoil his Goods, Luke 3.^6 17. Romans
15.16. Joh. 13.8 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 1.2. Joh 14, 23 Heb. 13 21.
and dispossess and cast him out, to know Christ to sit in the Soul as a
Refiner, to burn up. Consume and destroy, to purify and thoroughly to purge out
whatsoever is contrary to him, to Wash us, and make us clean, that we may have
right to a part in him, that being cleansed and sanctified, he may take up his
abode with us exercising his Kingly Power, and working in us both to will and
to do, of his good pleasure. The Mind being thus disentangled, and having cast
off its former Yoke, the old Things being done away* all things now become new;
2 Cor. 5.17. Ezekiel. 36.26.
a new tender heart of Flesh, according to the Promise new Thoughts, Desires,
Inclinations, Affections, Words, and Actions; this new inside producing a new
outside also, even throughout a new Creature, Mat. 23.26.
now in Christ indeed, and really entitled to those Benefits that accrue to
Men through him. That living Faith that pleases God, and gives Victory, Jan
2.18 to the end.
and is ever fruitful to him in good Works, being begotten, and this Work of
Redemption and Regeneration thus wrought in the Soul by Jesus Christ, Heb. 12.2
together with that most precious Sacrifice he offered up, when his Precious
Blood was shed upon the Cross for us, we believe compleats the Salvation of
every Soul that is thus awakened* and made alive* and set free, Romans 6.11, 13.
by the Power and Spirit of him that is the Way, the Truth, Joh. 8 36
and the Life of every Soul that truly Lives to God, to Walk in that Holy Way
of Life, Truth and Peace, Isa. 35.8, 9.
that was prepared of old for the Ransomed and Redeemed to walk in.

And we believe that he Graciously waits with exceeding great Kindness and long
Suffering that Men may Repent, Rev. 3 2.
knocking at the Door of every Man's Heart, freely offering, but not Imposing
his Assistance, Mat. 23 37.
to this most concerning Work and Change in the Minds of Men; so that in the
Day wherein God will Judge the World by Jesus Christ and every secret thing
will be made manifest, God will be justified and clear of the Blood of all Men,
and every Mouth will be stopped, and every Man's Condemnation will be of
himself; for having rejected the Day of his Visitation (wherein God calls to
Man) and offers to be reconciled to him; for resisting the Strivings, and
slighting the Reproofs of his Spirit, which in matchless Mercy he has given
Man to Instruct him, Neh. 9 20
and show and lead him in the Way of Life and Peace.

We believe, That though the Pravity of Man's Nature in the Fall is such, that
the Natural or Carnal Man, that is Enmity against God, in the state of mere
Nature, ^^r 3.5, (...)
minds only the things of the Flesh and naturally brings forth the Works
thereof, and (...) please God, nor keep and observe his Laws, but is prone to
Evil; 1 Pet. 1 23. Heb. 4.12
yet that those who emb^a^e the Visitation of God, and are really Regenerated,
and born again of incorruptible Seed, Jam. 1 21. J^ 17.17, 19.
by the Word of God that lives and abides forever that ingrafted Word that is
quick and powerful, and able to Save and Sanctify the Soul, are born into a
new Life and invested with another and higher Power, and becomes Spiritually
Minded, and by the Spirit are set at Liberty to walk after the Spirit, (...) ^.6
and bring forth its Fruits and receive Ability from the Spirit, to serve God
acceptably, Romans 8.14, 15.
being now lead by the Spirit of God and become his Children, taught of him,
and through the Spirit of Adoption rereceived into their Hearts, 1 Cor. 12.^
Romans 8.13 and 6.6. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.9.10.
have right to call God Father, and Jesus Lord: For having through the Spirit
Mortified the Old Man, or first Nature, with his corrupt and depraved
^nclinations and Evil Deeds, and put him off, having Crucified the Flesh, with
the affections and Lusts thereof, they put on the New and Heavenly Man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Romans 6.4. and 7.6.
and being renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, they now walk in Newness of
Life, and are really in Christ, and therefore are changed, and become New
Creatures; and now think and act under the Conduct of a Principle Superior to
that which formerly governed them, having their Minds raised to a Region above
that of fallen Nature: so that now the Stream of their Thoughts, Desires and
Actions runs into another Current, Col. 3.1.2.
and the Bent of their Affections are after those things that are above, where
Christ is; that Eye being now opened that sees a more transcendent Beauty and
Desirableness in the invisible and durable Treasures of him, than all the
transient Felicities of this World can afford.

And we believe that whosoever expects the blessed Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Romans 13.14.
ought thus to put on the Lord Jesus, and to be thus clothed upon, and covered
with his Righteousness, and in measure have his holy Life brought forth in and
through them and know him to enliven and influence their Minds, Isa. 26 12
Phil. 2 13. and 4.13 Joh. 15.5
and to work in and for them; and that without him they can do nothing; but
through him that strengthens them they can do whatsoever he commands them; that
as they abide living Branches in him, through that Sap and Virtue they daily
receive from him, Joh. 15.5, 8.
they are made able to bring forth fruits well pleasing to God, whereby he is
glorified. For though God the Father accepts us in Christ, and for his sake; yet
is the New Birth the indispensible Qualification, and true distinguishing Mark
of those that are really in him. He that is in Christ is a new Creature: Old
things are past away, behold all things are become New. 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15.
^ Jo. 2.^. and 3.7, 8, 9
John says, He that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk even
as he walked. We ascribe nothing to Man, as having any Power or Ability in or
of himself to please God, but attribute all power to do that which is good to
(...) alone, (...) 5.
in whom the Father Christ's well pleased. It Is through him that Men so love and
fear God, as to eschew evil, and work that Righteousness which is acceptable to
him; Acts 10.34, 35.
upon whom therefore Man's Dependence ought to be, daily to receive from him
such suitable supplies, as through a constant Watchfulness may enable them so
to walk, as to continue in his favor and enjoy his smiles. For it is not, as
too many seem either to imagine, or would gladly have it to be, that they may
live in Sin and Disobedience here, and indulge their corrupt Inclinations; 1
Pet. 4.18.
and yet hereafter have Christ's Righteousness imputed to them. For though we are
not under the Mosaical Law, so as to be obliged to its Ordinances, diverse
Washings, and Levitical Priesthood, Mat. 5.20.
Christ our High Priest having offered up himself once for all, and abolished
it; yet are we not so under Grace, as to be discharged from living well: Though
we are not tied to its Rites and Ceremonies, yet we are obliged to fulfill its
Righteousness, which Christ came not to destroy, but to establish: For though God
be Gracious and Merciful to forgive us our Trespasses through the Mediation of
Christ, upon our true and hearty Repentance, To. 3.31, and 8, 3, 4.
and turning from them; Isa. 55.7
ye it is not that we should take a Liberty to go on in Sin and Rebellion
against him. Rom 6.^ 1, 2.
We are not to Sin because he is Gracious, that his Grace may abound; if so,
Where is the Straitness of this Way? If this be to take up a daily Cross to our
own Wills, that we may perform his, Pray where is the Liberty of the Flesh?
Those that are Virtually in Christ which renders them acceptable to the Father,
and completely espoused to him, must needs have resigned their Wills, as an
Effect of true Love, and requisite to so strict an Union; opposite Wills being
inconsistent therewith, whence Obedience necessarily follows The Apostle John,
after having signified that God is Light, and that those that would know the
Blood of Cleansing and true Fellowship with him, 1 Jo. 2.1
and one another, ought to walk in the Light as he is in the Light, tells the
Young and weak in the Faith whom he calls Children, that he writ those Things
that they should not Sin; but yet if any through Weakness or Inadvertency
should Sin, and so fall under the Fathers Displeasure, he tells them, that
Christ the Righteous is both a Propition and also an Advocate that intercedes
with the Father, 1 John 2. first 6 ^.
and that their keeping his Commands, was the surest Evidence of their knowing
and being in him; but of the Strong, whom therefore he calls young Men, he
says, That the word of God abode in them, and that they had overcome the Evil
one.

These things may soon be spoken and comprehended in the Understanding, but to
experience fulfilled in our selves is our highest Interest, and only can make us
sharers in them. The Essence of Christianity, and Happiness of Christians don't
consist in having our Heads stuffed with Knowledge only to lodge there, and feed
upon; but to have our Hearts filded with Divine Love, Joh. 14.21, 23
which animates us to Diligence, and inspires us with Courage and Vigor to
observe and perform the Will of God; who looks not at what People profess only,
or by what Name they are called, but regards the Heart, and what Principle
governs there: People may make a Profession of the Best Things and yet continue
alive to themselves; they may alter Opinion or Persuasion, and yet not turn
from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan to God. There has not been
wanting a very large and splendid Profession of Christianity, adorned with
curious elaborate, and elevated Notions, polished with Rhetoric and Oratory;
but that Power and Life that reaches the Heart, and gives Victory and Dominion
over its Lusts and Affections, which war against the Soul, is that which too
many are yet strangers to: When yet to know our lapsed Souls restored from
their first falen State in Adam, and raised to a Station where we may both
perceive the Things of God, and receive Power to work his Will; to know our
Minds redeemed, and that Power vanquished which led us captive, and we leavened
by the Heavenly Gift, into its own Nature; as it is the very Life and Marrow of
that Religion, about whose exterior Parts the World is filed with noise; so
it is the proper and most concerning Business of our Lives, to find this great
Salvation accomplished in us. The Experimental working out whereof in the
Heart, by the saving Grace and Spirit of God, Gal. 6.3, 4.
that is given to Man to profit with will yield more Satisfaction and true
Contentment to that Soul, that sincerely seeks the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof, in whom it is begun and carrying on, than to hear or read
all their Days of what God has done through all Ages for those that truly love
and fear him: For want of which it is that the Profession of Christianity is
generally so Empty and barren in producing a real Pious Life, attended with the
Fruits of the Spirit, and a due obedience proceeding from the Birth of the
Spirit, without which the most refined Methods of Worship and Devotion will not
recommend us to God, who is inaccessible by the Birth of the Flesh. Nor do we
believe that it is accepta^^^ to God, for People to Sing before him those Songs
and Psalms that were the Experiences and Spiritual Exercises of Holy Men in
times past, without having some living Experience of the same things in
themselves; or that People can properly and truly speak more or farther of the
things of God, than what they have known and experienced.

Where amongst all these sound Gospel-Scriptural-Truths, is lodged that latent
Venom so much feared and talked of by our Adversaries, that is so dangerously
Contagious, and apt to Infect the Minds of those that shall incline to converse
with Us, or our Books, touching our Belief in these necessary Points of
Christianity? Which of them is it, that being imbibed, is more Mortal and
Distructive to the Soul and defiles it more than drinking a draught of Poison,
As said Tho. Vincent.
or going to a Bawdy House? Where are those Damnable Opinions and Heresies,
where with you have been terrified? Which of them is it, that being persisted
in, does necssarily lead to Damnation, and for which the Devil T. R.'s ^^
savoury (...) uncharitable expression.
must needs carry us a Pick-pack to Hell? Is it in that we hold forth the
Infinite Love of God to Mankind, in not only freely, of his mere Grace and
Favor providing a Sacrifice, through which an Atonement is made for the past
Transgressions of Man, who was never at all in a Capacity to make any for
himself; Joh. ^.15.16. Act. 10.42. 1 Cor. 12.7
which is applicable to every one who shall believe, repent and return; but
has als^ afforded to all the Means of Faith, Repentance and Conversion; for
God requires not Impossibilities of Men, but expects they should Improve those
Talents distributed to them: In not only sending forth the Son of his Love to
dye for their Sins, that they should no longer live therein, Joh. 14.16, 19, 26
and 16.13.
but also in sending forth his Light and Spirit of Truth into their Hearts, to
lead and guide them into all Truth; Tit. 9.11 12.
and causing his Grace that brings Salvation, to appear to all Men, to instruct
and Teach them to deney all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, to forsake the Devil
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked World; to rescue and
save them from living in the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh and help and strengthen
them to return to their Obedience, and live a Sober, Righteous and Godly Life;
to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and Walk in the same all the Days of
their Lives.

Which Gift from God to Man, the Holy Scriptures plentifully testify to, under
various Denominations, as Spirit, Light, Word, Grace, Seed, Leaven, Anointing,
etc. By all which we understand that Spirit or Heavenly Talent, Mat. 25.14, 1^
with which God has endowed Mankind in some Degree or other that he may profit
with it; in the Improvement whereof, by a diligent Co-working therewith, to the
answering those holy Ends for which we receive it, we doubt not but to be happy
in rendering a good account of our Stewardship, and entering finally into the Joy
of our Lord. Our Opposers themselves also pretend to the Spirit And Grace of
God, or else what means their Praying for its Assistance, and those plausible
fine-spun discourses of it wherewith they some times entertain their Auditory.
We Charitably hope it is more real than only to beautify and recommend them to
the Hearers, as what they cannot well avoid, for that the Scriptures are so
full of that Language; and if indeed it be real, why i^ that a Fault and Error
in us, which is so sound and ornamental in them? And we think it very strange
that they should apprehend any incongruity in granting this Divine Principal to
be a Divine Light to the Mind; since its its proper Office is to teach and
instruct, to manifest and point us to our Duty, as well as to dispose and
enable us to perform it; Tit 2.11.12 Joh. 14, 17, 26. and 16.7, 8, 13, 14. 1 John 2^ 17.
and ought to be our Leader and Governor. If the Godly Admonitions and
Exemplary Lives of Good Men, were rightly called Lights to the World; surely
much more properly may this whose Fountain is Light (and does more nearly
illuminate and inform the Understanding, and renders those effectual) justly
challenge that necessary and acceptable Appellation. If then the Grace and
Spirit of God be in the Hearts of Men, surely it is not wholly unactive there, but
will be making some Attempts toward accomplishing the end for which it is
placed there. 'Twill be at times attacking the Enemy, and endeavoring to
supplant its contrary; for being Holy and Pure in its Nature, its never
reconcilable to Sin and Evil, but ever strives against it, and may as Men
regard it, be infalibly known by the nature of its efforts. And we dare appeal
even to all Mankind, whether they find not something placed in their Minds and
Consciences, which though perhaps not regent there, yet never mingles with, nor
Consents to their Evil Deeds, but always remains undefiled, and testifies
against them, and convicts, reproves and condemns them for it; Joh. 3 20, 21.
Ephesians 5.13
and also ofttimes in the cooler temper of their Spirits, manifests their
States to them, and as twere reasons with them discovering the Evil of their
Ways, secretly calling to them to come out of it; begeting Desires and
Inclinations sometimes to seek after God, and to make their Peace with him. Now
since Man in his mere natural state is totally Dead, and fallen from God, that
he cannot as of himself think a good Thought; and that God only is essentially
Good, and as that which is truly so, must needs proceed from him; J^ ^ 13 (...).
this Principle in us that ever convicts us for Vice and Evil, whether in
Thought Word or Deed, and disposes u^ to consider of our Latter End, and often
makes Man sigh in the midst of Laughter, reminding them, that for those things
they must give an Account; that draws us Heavenward, and Inclines us to Virtue
and Goodness, to do to all Men, as we would be done unto; to be Just, Sober,
Merciful, Temperate etc. must needs be something that is not of us, but is Pure
and Immaculate, and of a Divine Nature ever aspiring, and raising the Mind
toward its Original.

Whence it cannot be a Natural Light, or mere Light of Nature, as very many
would have it, who yet talk of the Spirit of God being in Man. For it is an
undoubted Truth, That no Agent can Act beyond its own Sphere, and raise its
Object to a State more Noble than it self, nor produce Effects of a Nature more
Sublime than its own Original. Besides, it is very Clear and Evident from
Scripture, Joh 21.17, Ps. 18, 28
That the Mind of Man is often Lighted by a Light Superior to that of mere
Reason, and that Man by the utmost Power and Extent of Humane Reason and
speculation (though he may arrive to an Implicit Knowledge that there is a God,
yet) can never attain to a true Spiritual and saving Knowledge of God without
the Concurrance of a Divine and Supernatural Agent: To. 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.6. Prove.
20 47. Luke 24.75 Joh. 1.9 Ephesians 5.13.14, 17 Mal. 36.9 Pro. 4.18. 1 Cor 2.18 to
the end.
For though the Mind of Man, as a Rational Being, be that Capacity or Candle that
is to be lighted, yet it is Christ that must so enlighten it, as to give us a
true discerning of those things that appertain to him and his Kingdom; and by
adhering and yielding Obedience to its Discoveries we shall know an Accession
of more Light. And the Apostle speaking of what God by his Spirit has revealed
to them, says expressly, That the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God; and that, as none knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of
Man which is in him, so the Things of God hnows no Man but the Spirit of God:
That The natural Man neither knows nor receives the things of the Spirit of
God, because they are spiritually discerned; and to that end they had received
the Spirit which is of God The Light of Nature is occupied about Natural
Objects, those things that are within its own Region, acting within its own
proper Orb; but reaches not to that Knowledge of God which is Life Eternal,
except our Natural Powers, or Humane Capacity be illuminated by the Rays of
Devine Light; for the World by Humane Wisdom knows not God. 1 Cor. 1 20.
And Christ says very plainly and positively, That none knows the Father but
the Son, and he to whom the Sons reveals him. Mat 11.27.


That these Struglings in us should be the Suggestions of Satan, that he should
disquiet and disturb People for their Sins, for Serving him, and put them upon
Endeavoring to be freed from their Vassalage under his Power, were absurd to
imagine; no, our Savior puts that beyond a Question, when he asks, Can a
Kingdom divided against it self stand? And by and by says plainly, That whilst
the Strong Man armed keeps the House, Mar. 3.24, 27. Luke 11 31.
his Goods are at Peace, till a stronger than he comes to bind him, etc. So
that it is clear its not the Devil, but the approaches of a superior Power, that
breaks the Peace of People for Sin, and that follows and condems them for
Disobedience and Transgression; and is the same that would, and only can redeem
their Minds out of that miserable state, and bind that strong Man, and break
his Power, and cast him out, would they but join thereto, and accept of
Deliverance by it.

Nor does its being extended to all Men, through all Ages, from their Youth
upwards, bespeak it to be therefore natural or contemptible; but on the
contrary, of the greater Moment to all Men: For besides that the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 12.
A Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. The
Blessings and gifts of God are free and valuable from their intrinsic Worth;
God in Nature ordained nothing in Vain, but by how much any thing is of the
greatest Use to us, for sustaining and accomodating our natural life, the more
common it is, as the Sun that gives Light to All through all Ages, etc. It Is we
fondly rate things according to our Fancies, and esteem and prize them more for
their Rarity and Curiosity, than Usefulness; but God bestows most Universally
that which is of the absolutest Necessity to Man. Are not all Men that are
born, Strangers and Enemies to God, in the dark, and at a distance from him, in
the State of Nature? And must therefore be enlightened, converted and Born
again, and become Spiritual, Jo 3.3.5.
before we can be reconciled to him; shall not God then, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4. 2 Pet.
3.9
that would have all Repent and be Saved, cause the Light of the Sun of
Righteousness to shine upon all, and give a Measure of his Grace and Spirit to
all to assist them in the Accomplishment of that in themselves, which they
cannot do of themselves, and yet is of indispensible Necessity to our
Salvation? Wherefore God by his Spirit strives with Man so long as his Day of
Visitation lasts.

Since then our Opposers acknowledge the Spirit and Grace of God, which also is
Light, to be in Man, unless they can show it, by its manifestly different and
Superior Nature, Tendency and Operation to be contradistinct, from that we
have been speaking of; we see neither Absurdity nor Error, in concluding it to
be one and the same Grace and free Gift of God to all, which is always the same
in Nature, though it differs in degree; and is that Heavenly Treasure, which
God has committed to our Trust. And blessed will they be, Mat. 13 31, 32.
who rightly employ and improve it and give place and room to this Seed of the
Kingdom in their Hearts, where, though it may appear at first contrary to the
expectatation of Man, little, mean and contemptible, scarsely regarded amongst
the stuff wherewith Men's Minds are filled; yet join but to it, that it may
exert its Power and Energy, and 'twill grow and increase; let but this Leaven
have its perfect work, and 'twill leaven the whole Lump into its own Nature.
Mat. 3.33 Luk 13 21


Jer 17.10 Rom 8.27 Rev. 2.23 Amo. 4.13
Be pleased to consider whether we have justly merited the invidious Invectives
of our Adversaries in believing that the Lord searches the Heart of Man, and
shows him his Thoughts; that he has and will remember this latter Age of the
World; and has not forgotten to be gracious in performing those bountiful
Promises made in times past to the Offspring of the Gentiles, Jer 31.33 34.
Ezekiel. 26 26, 27. Joel. 2.28 29. Acts. 2.16 17.18. Isa. 54.13 Mat. 11 27 Isa. 42
7. and 61.1.
in placeing his Law in our Hearts, and putting his Truth in our inward parts;
in pouring out of his Spirit upon all the Sons and Daughters of Men; in
becoming our Teacher; and giving us the knowledge of himself through the
Revelation of his Son Jesus Christ, who is come to open our blind Eyes, and to
bring us that were bound in darkness, out of the Prisonhouse, who has
promised to be with his People to the end of the World; Joh. 14 16 17, 26 and
16, 7.
in believing that God has sent us the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, to be
our Remembrancer, and to guide and direct us in the way of Truth, 1 John 2
20.17.
in attesting the Sufficiency and Utility of the Teachings of this Holy
Unction, sent into our Hearts; in believing that though Christ be in his
glorified Body in Heaven; Joh. 14.17, 20.23 and 17.23 26. Isa 57.15 2 Cor.
6.16. Prove 8.31
yet that he is present also in the Hearts of his People; who is King of
Saints, and shall he not then rule in them? The High and Holy one that inhabits
Eternity has promised to dwell also with the Humble and Contrite, to revive
and comfort them; shall not he whose Presence fills Heaven and Earth, be
present in the Heart of Man; Shall not he that rejoices in the habitable parts
of the Earth, and delights in the Sons of Men, 1 Cor 6.15 17.19.
reside in his People; Are they not Members of him, and he their Head; Joh.
15.4.5*
Can their be a more intimate Union and Communion then between the Head and the
Body, the Vine and the Branches; The same Spirit of Life that is in the Head,
is the Life of the body also, and acts it; He that is joined to the Lord, is
one Spirit: Does not the Life that is in the Root, pass to the Branches also,
and preserve them living? Are not all dead Branches in whom this Life is not?
whosoever has the Son of God, Joh. 6.56.57.
and feeds on him has Life by him; and those that have not Christ, 1 John 5.12.
who is the Life of his Saints, have not Life: How could his People in all Ages
pertaker of him, if he were not present in them Surely this Doctrine don't
deserve to be seoft, but is most Comfortable to those who are Sick of Love, and
thirst ardently after the Enjoyment (not Hearsay) of him.

Rom 16.7.8. verse
Consider seriously these things Which are agree to Scripture, and with what
reason People have derided us for our Belief herein; 2 Cor. 1^ 5. Col. 1.27.
terming it the Quaker's Christ; as though his manifesting himself in our
Hearts, were another or distinct from Jesus Christ Nazareth, that is glorified
with God the Father in Heaven, which we deny: For though he be Ascended into
Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of God, far above all Principalitis and
Powers; Col. 1.16 Ephesians. 1.16 and 3.9. and 4.10.
yet is not he so circumscribed, but that (as by him all things were made and
created, so) he is the Life and Fulniss, and fills all in all in his Church
and People. Is the Divinity and Humanity of Christ divided? Is not there
inseparable Union the true and entire Christ? Can then his Godhead be present,
and he who is the Heavenly Man be absent? What think you of him that appeared
to John, and gave him his Commission to the Seven Churches? whom he describes,
Rev. 3 20 and 2, 23.
Rev. Chapter 1 who said, Behold I stand at the Door and Knock, if any Man hear my
Voice, and open the Door. I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. The same says, I am he which searches the Reins and Heart, and I will
give unto every one of you according to your Work: Acts. 17, Rom 2.16
Was not this the true Christ, the Mediator, by whom God will Judge the World?
And can he make this near Inspection into the innermost part of the minds of
Men, so as no Thought can escape notice, if he be not present there? 2 Timothy
4.22. Joh. 1 16. 1 Jo. 4.13.
What made Paul desire that our Lord Jesus Christ might be with Timothy's
Spirit if he thought it impossible? Do not all acknowledge the Spirit of Christ
who is the Anointed, to be in his Poeple, and is he then absent? Is its being a
Mystery, far beyond our comprehension to conceive how it can be, a sufficient
Argument that it is not so? Ought we not in such cases to exercise Faith? And
acquiesce in the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, expressed in the Sacred Scriptures,
rather then Interpose with our nice and curious Subtilities, prying
unnecessarily into things that are too high for us? Remembering that Secret
things belong to God, and that those that know most here, know only in part the
things that are invisible; 1 Cor. 13.9, 12.
and see them but as through a Glass. Shall Men that neither know themselves,
nor have any Intuitive Knowledge of the Essences even of the meanest Things
wherewith Nature every where presents us, which are obvious to our Sensces,
aspire to those yet more abstruse, and undertake to account for that which is
beyond the Reach of the most pregnant Wits to penetrate.

Nor do we thus celebrate Christ's inward and spiritual Appearance in the Soul
of Man, with the least intent to diminish the true Value and Efficacy of what
he did without us, or transacted for us as God manifested in Flesh, but in
concurrence with it, and pursuant to it, for the completing the Salvation
intended in it; neither is it in opposition to him, as he is without us; but we
believe in him, as he is inwardly revealed in measure, and also as he is in his
own immense fullness without us, both as he is the one Offering for Sin, and
also as he is that quickening Spirit, and Immortal Seed, by which we are
begotten again, and made alive to God, and the Author of that living Faith,
through which it is savingly applied to us. For though he offered up himself
once for all, and sat down at the Right Hand of God, yet it is of absolute
necssity that he thus appear and opperate in the Hearts of his People, through
all times, or otherwise they can never be happy, nor they receive the full
advantage of his Death. But that he does thus appear and work, is most Evident;
for since he is the alone Savior, and none are saved but those who are
Regenerated, that Grace o^ Operative Divine Agent (that is the Efficient of
true saving Faith and Regeneration) must needs be Christ in us, our Hope of
Glory. Wherefore it is that we so frequently invite People to Regard, Believe
in, close with, and submit to him, as he is the true Light, discovering Evil
thus manifested in their inward Parts, for the full accomplishing their
redemption and restuaration, that they may taste and see for themselves, that
the Lord is good and gracious; and to Christ within, otherwise than thus, a
measure of the Anointing from the Anointed we don't pretend, whatever People
have apprehended concerning us. Which Truth our very Opposers are obliged to
acknowledge, notwithstanding they so ridicule it in us.

We hope it is no Error to avouch the Power of Christ to be stronger than that
of the Devil, Genesis 3.15.
that he is able really to bind him, to bruise his Head, and break his power,
to dispossess and cast him out, to fulfill to the uttermost the end of his
coming; to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to save those from their Sins
who shall have true Faith in his Name and Power: Surely it is not inconsistent
with Christianity to believe that Christ can or will thoroughly purge his Floor;
that he can Indeed deliver out of the Prison House, and restore Man out of the
Fall to God again, 1 These. 5 23
and give him Power to forsake the Devil, and all his Works, etc.

We find it consonant to Scripture, and the Gospel dispensation, to believe
that those who are Regenerated, Rom 6.6, 7, 11 2 Pet. 1.4
and born again of the Spirit, have through the Spirit mortified the first
carnal corrupt Nature which cannot please God; Ephesians. 4.22 23.24. Col. 3.9.10
and if dead, and Slain, and Buried too, surely then it no longer lives, but
the Mind is at Liberty and restored to act in a new life; to walk after the
Spirit, and fulfill the Righteousness of the Law; Romans 8.2.4.
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, having set them free from the
Law of Sin and Death, which is its Wages. It Is for want of Peoples Experiencing
this real Birth of the Spirit brought forth, and knowing Freedom in themselves
by it, which no Duties or Performances, in the Will of Man, nor entertaining of
the most Refined Opinions in Religion, can administer, short of the Law of the
Spirit of Christ in their Hearts; it is for want of this, that People are so
very apprehensive of Difficulty, even to Impossibility, of living a Holy
Righteous Life, which yet is so necessary to our Salvation, Mat. 5.8. Heb.
12.14.
that without it we cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, nor see God. Nor is the
Way broader, or its Passage less strait and difficult than they imagine; nay,
it is utterly impossibly for them to walk therein, while they are immersed in
their first corrupt unbridled Nature, which cannot keep the Law of God; while
their Lusts and Passions are rampant, their Affections in ordinate, and Wills
unsubjected, and follow the Desires and evil Inclinations of their minds
without restraint. But if they come to know another Principle and Power to
govern their Minds, to create in them new clean Hearts, to regulate and Subject
their Wills, to subdue and tame their Passions, to limit their Desires, and
direct their Affections an Inclinations wholly after that which is good, to
meliorate their Spirits throughout, and make them heavenly Minded, having an
aversion to all Evil, and a great love to Virtue and Goodness: Being thus
perfectly transformed, where is the Extreme difficulty now, Mat. 12.35.
for the good Man, out of the good Treasure of his Heart, to bring forth good
Things? Will not this new well-inclined inside, that now detests Evil, and
loves and delights in Righteousness, as naturally follow after, and bring forth
that which is good, as before he did Evil? Here is no force upon Peoples
Natures, but they are converted, and thoroughly levened into another Nature, and
are in their measures Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
which only can work the Will of God.

We request our Piously-inclined Neighbors, well and seriously to weigh and
consider the absolute Necessity there is for every true Christian, thus to know
their Minds molded and fashioned anew by the Power and Spirit of Christ, Col.
1.20
working mightily in them in order to their pleasing God by an Holy Righteous
Life, having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, and
considering that it is not so soon attained, as apprehended in the Understanding
to be necessary: That with all diligence they address them selves to the
performing that which is the proper Business of our Lives. Wherefore as it has
pleased the Divine Power to give us all things pertaining to Life and
Godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3 Tit. 2.11 12. Phil. 2.12 13.
so let us with a Vigilent Attention to, and co-working with that Grace, which
to that End is given, work out our Salvation whith a reverent Fear; since a
good degree of attainment herein is soon lost except there be a constant
sedulous Watchfulness upon the Mind amidst all Business and Concerns, to have a
Check upon our Words and Thoughts, and a diligent pressing forward: For while
we live in this World, we are liable to Temptations, Mat. 26* 41,
and may enter therein also, without a strict care and watchfulness; our Senses
presenting many Baits to our Minds on every Hand, which Satan makes use of to
beguile, and many Provocations offer themselves in our Pilgrimage; 2 Cor. 12.9
against all which Gods Grace is sufficient Armor, as our Minds are Seasoned
by it; so that where any shortness is, it is through Insincerity, Negligence, or
Inadvertency.

Or is it a dangerous heinous Heresy, that we, Psalm. 145.9
with very many Professors of Christianity, believe the Universality of the
Love of God to all Mankind; that God who is good to all, whose Mercies extend
to all the Works of his Hands) is sincere in his Intention, and Attestation
thereof, and does not design to delude us, when he affirms, That as certainly
as he lives, Ezekiel. 33.11. and 13.23
he desires not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he would return and
live: Joh. 3.14.15, 16, 17 Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22 17 Romans 5.18.
that God, whose Love and Mercy is unlimitted, does graciously and generously
offer Salvation through Jesus Christ, (upon certain Conditions to be performed
on our part) to all Mankind, to every individual Man and Woman upon the face of
the Earth; Luk 2.10 14
which is the true Gospel Message, good Tyding of great Joy, which shall be to
all People, Peace on Earth, and good Will toward Men; good cause indeed to
rejoice, Isa. 55.7 Ezekiel. 18 21, 22 to the End. Act. 10.34, 35. 1 John 2.2 Heb.
2.9.
that all are within the Verge of Mercy and free Par^on; that God is indeed no
respect or of Persons, but among all Nations and People, he or she that fears
him, and works Righteousness, is of him accepted; and that Christ dyed for the
Sins of the whole World, yea, for every Man; Tit. 2.11 1 Cor 6.12 7
surely then all for whom he died, are thereby put into a Capacity for
Salvation; that Saving Grace has appeared to all Men, and a Manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. See Prou. 1. from 20. to the
end.
And that none are reprobated, but those that continue to be deaf to the Calls
of this Grace, Mat 23.37.
and resist the Spirit, and hide and Neglect their Talents till the Day of
their Visitation be over; Neh. 9 20 26 Isa. 63.10 P^al. 81.11.12.13
and Christ so with draws himself, as to cease longer to strive with them; so
that the means being taken away, they are left to themselves, and given up to
hardness of Heart; that being absent, that should prepare, tender and molifie
it, that now they cannot Repent, Believe, and be converted.

If thus to believe be a dangerous and pernicious Error, we confess we are
guilty, and not like to be otherwise; for we cannot persuade our selves to
embrace that Anti-Evangelical opinion, That God from all Eternity has
personally and inconditionally, without respect to their accepting or rejecting
the Salvation offered in Christ, Elected some, and Reprobated others by an
Immutable Decree, so that those who are so Elected shall certainly be saved*
let them do what they will, for Gods Decree cannot be Reversed, let the unstable
Mind of Man vary as it will: And those that are Reprobated, were in effect
Damned Thousands of Years before they were born; so that their Salvation is put
beyond all hope, let them seek it never so earnestly and diligently, and be
never so desirous to serve and please God. For besides, that this sad Tidings,
instead of glad Tidings, if it were really true in it self, put an end to the
whole Business of Religion, by rendering all Worship and Devotion, all
Preaching, Praying, Assembling together, and holy living, as 'twere useless, by
invalidating all whatsoever on Man's part, as nothing contributing (as a
necessary condition on his part to be performed or neglected) toward his
Salvation or Eternal Destruction. We dare take up an Opinion so diametrically
opposite to the very Atributes of God, and his repeated Protestations to the
contrary, and with some Men thus presume to arraign his Justice, Mercy, and
Goodness. We cannot believe that God, who is Love it self, and Goodness it
self, and has always manifested a wonderful Care and Concern for Man, Wis.
12.15, 16.
as his darling Creature; (it being disagreeable to his Justice, to condemn
those that have not deserved to be punished, Ezekiel. 18* 32. Wis. 11.23.24.
and having no Pleasure in the Death of him that Dies) should yet make the
major Part of Mankind with design to damn them unprovoked thereto, without ever
tendering them Salvation; or that he would make the far greater number wholly
incapable of accepting the Salvation tendered them, by putting it out of their
Power to perform those Terms upon which he offers it, and then condemn them to
Eternal Misery, for not complying with those conditions, that 'twas impossible
for them to observe. Isa ^5.22
For he don't only call to all the Ends of the Earth (which implies all
Mankind) to look to him, and be saved; but he has given to every one a Portion
of his Spirit, Joh. 3.14 15, 16.
to enable them so to do; he has not only sent forth the Son of his Love to
shed his Blood for every Man, to be lifted up as Moses lifted up the Brazen
Serpent, Joh 6.44 45
that whosoever believes in him should not Perish; but he also draws them and
as they will receiev it, touches them with that divine Magnet that only can
incline and empower them effectually to turn to that Pole, in which all our
true Happiness centers.

Put this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, Joh. 3 19 20.
and Men love Darkness rather than (...) the Flesh, that People are lost and
sentenced to Perdition; 1 Timothy 2.3, 4.
and not because they were personaly and inconditionally Reprobated from all
Eternity. God who is Lord of all, is gracious unto all, and would have all Men
to be saved; but they disobey the call of God, and reject his Offers, and
resist the strivings of his Spirit, Rev. 3.20
and are deaf to those Knocks of our Savior for Reception and Entertainment in
their Hearts, and choose and prefer the present World and will not deny
themselves to follow Christ. It Is not as these Men say, because Salvation was
never within their reach: If 'twere not what must we think? Were those feigned
Tears then, that our Savior shed over Jerusalem, when the Day of its
Visitation was over? Saying also, Luke 13 34. Mal. 23 37.
How often would I have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her Chickens but you
would not; not, you could not.

But if any Man can be so hardy as to entertain an Opinion so derogatory to the
Justice, Mercy, Love and Paternal Care of God, and repugnant to the Gospel
Message; we cannot but admire what should induce them to obtrude it upon
others, and urge it as though 'twas a necessary Point to be believed in the
Christian Religion; for we cannot apprehend how this begets Love to God,
increases Faith in Christ, and raises our Veneration for him, excites to
Diligence, and encourages Piety, which is that which advances true Religion;
but on the contrary, it is plain, that it tends to the indulging some in a
Security, and procure in others a slight esteem of the Death and Sacrifice of
Christ, as being partial, and casts them into Dispond; and probably may
encourage both to gratify the Desires of their Minds to the full extent, since
nothing can alter such a suposed Decree of God one way or the other. Yet we
deny not the Prescience of God who fore-knows all things, things past, present,
and to come, being at once present to him: So that it may be said, such who
believe in Christ with that Living Active Faith, that works by Love, and
excites to Obedience, and persevere therein unto the end, and so know
Salvatition by him, are in him in whom the Election is before the World began;
and that those who so believe not, but reject the Tenders of Love, and by
persisting in disobedience, neglect so great Salvation, are condemned already.
Nor do we deny such a preference, as that some are made Stewards over more, and
some fewer Talents, according to Which their Improvement ought to be: Where
much is given much is required, and where less is given less is required; Mat
25.14 to 28
for God is just and equal in all his Ways; he is not a hard Master, that he
should exact or expect more than the Improvement of his own: Had he that
received but one Talent, employed it, and made it two, we doubt not but it had
been accepted; for we believe that none are from Eternity absolutely excluded
without any Talent, and that a Day also is afforded wherein 'ts possible for
them to improve it. So that though the Grace may work more powerfully in some
than in others, yet are all left without excuse.

There is yet another opinion dependent on this, which we cannot receive
neither, as they state it, for which our opposers think very ill of us; that
is, Once in a State of Grace and ever so; that there is no Total or final
falling away from Grace. How this Doctrine Promotes true Zeal and Piety, and
improves Christianity, we cannot understand; nor see no other reason why its
Votaries should be so fond of it, but because it is concordant to that of
Personal Election and Reprobation; so that those who embrace the one, are bound
to believe the other: But otherwise certainly it tends rather to slacken than
spur on People to that Care and Diligence, and constant unwearied watchfulness
to Prayer, which our Lord so much Exhorted to, and the Apostles so solictously
press the Saints every where to be found in, as of absolute Necessity, What
else means those Promises of reward in the Revelations, to those who should
overcome, and hold out to the End, but to engage them to a constant
Perseverance? Or what needed it, if 'twere impossible for them to fall short;
whom we suppose none will deny to have been in a State of Grace And the Church
of Ephesus was threatened to have their Candle stick removed, Rev. 2.5 and 3.16.
if they repented not, and did their first Works; and that of Laodicea, to be
spewed out of his Mouth. Who can say those foolish Virgins in the Parable, were
not once in a state of Grace, whose Lamps were once lighted and burning, Mat.
25.8
as well as trimmed, or else they could not properly be said to be gone out?
Luk 8.7, 8 14, 15.
or that those were not called by saving Grace in whose Hearts the Heavenly
Seed sprung up, and for a time prosper'd till the Briars and Thorns, the
overcare and concern about the Things of this Life choked it; 'twas not, that
they had no Day of Visitation from God wherein they might have wrought out
their Salvation, had they continued to make the Kingdom of Heaven, and its
Righteousness, their first and chiefest Choice, and placed their Treasure
there, and disentangled themselves from those unnecessary Cares; the Seed that
was Sown and sprung up, was the very same with that which in the honest Heart
brought forth Fruit abundantly.

Surely Paul, that great Apostle was not of these Men's Opinions, When after he
had long labored in the Gospel, takes care to keep under his Body, lest while
he preached to others he himself should be a Cast away; ^ (...) 6.2^
whom yet we doubt not, but they will grant was then effectually called, and in
a state of grace And the Author to the Hebrews writing in the third Chapter, to
those he calls Holy Brethren, and Partakers of the Heavenly Calling, Verse the
12 th, exhorts them to take heed, lest there was in any of them an evil Heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living God. And again, Chap. 1. Let us
therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering his rest, (surely then
not Eternally Reprobated) any of you should seem to come short of it. Verse. 11.
Let us labor therefore to enter that rest, lest any Man fall after the same
Example of Unbelief. Again, Chapter VI. Verse. 4.5, 6. speaking of those who had
been enlightened, and had tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and that had tasted the Good Word of God, and the Powers of
the World to come, (shrewd signs that they were effectually called and in a
state of Grace) that if they should fall away, 'twould be impossible to renew
them again to Repentance; not because they were eternally Reprobated, but
because they crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, because they
grieved his good Spirit, and rejected the Means. Has not the Lord said, Ezekiel.
18.24, 26 etc. 33 v. 18.
If a Righteous Man turns from his Righteousness he shall dye? Who can be
Righteous without the Assistance of God's Grace? No Man can make himself so;
it is not in Man to direct his own Ways; and yet it seems tis' possible for him
to fall from it, after he has lived so long under its conduct, as by it to be
made Righteous; and one would think, should then be sanctified too. Our Savior
says of him self, Jo. 15.1.2.5, 6.
I am the true Vine, ye are the Branches; my Father is the Husbandman, every
Branch in me that bears not Fruit, he takes away. Again, If a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered. Surely those who are
Branches in Christ, while so are accepted of the Father; and yet it seems it is
possible for them to fall away, and be cut of as withered Branches; whence he
often repeats this Condition, If ye abide in me; Jeh. 15 ^0.
and presently he says the Way to continue in his Love, was to do his Will, as
he had done that of his Fathers, and continued in his Love. But though we cannot
embrace their Opinion, for their Reasons, and as they state it; but own that
it is possible for People to make a considerable progress in Grace, and yet for
want of a Careful and Constant Watchfulness to that Grace, they may fall away:
Yet we believe such a State and Growth in Grace, through a vigilant Attention
thereto, and such a Degree of Faith attainable, as that there is no more going
forth.

Though we speak of Gods tendering, and Man's accepting or rejecting the Offers
of his Love, yet far be it from us to assert, That fallen Man in his own
Natural Estate can of himself think a good Thought, much less will a good Deed,
or in his own power convert his own Depraved Will to God, any more than the
Needle can turn and direct it self to the Pole, without being Impregnated by
the Loadstone. For though Adam's Fall Introduced no such real change in the
Faculties of Man's Soul, as to subvert their natural Order, and to destroy the
natural liberty and freedom of his Will, but that what he wills, he wills
freely, and not by constraint; yet forasmuch as he died from that Divine Life
to which he was united, and thence derived Power and Ability to will and do
that which was good he became thenceforth utterly incapable so to do as of
himself, otherwise than as he is influenced by, and assents, and yields to the
drawings of that Divine Grace, which God in his great Love has liberally
bestowed on Mankind, both to illuminate their U^nderstanding, and also incline
their Wills: Which is both sufficient, and freely offers to reclaim Man, and
convert his Will and finally unite his Mind to it self, and therein restore to
him the Power of willing and doing good, which Man never had, nor never can
have, but in conjunction with this pure Principle of Divine Light and Life; but
he may, and is most inclinable to slight its offers and resist its Endeavors,
and while so, cannot experience that Power and Virtue that is found in it, where
it freely exerts it self. So that as it must be acknowledged, that Man acts as
a free Agent, and as having an Elective Power, and that God in his various
Dispensations treats him as such; yet is this Gift of God the first Mover in
all his Motions toward that which is truly good and acceptable to him; which
is always so near and ready to help and assist a Man, (while it continues to
strive with him) that Probably none that neglect its Assistance and do Evil,
but upon Reflection plainly perceive they may do otherwise. Whence it is clear;
Man's destruction is of himselef, and his only sufficiency and help is in God;
who never requires any Duty of him, but he furnishes him with a suitable Power
to perform it, would he but regard and close with it.

But that which seems to be our Capital Error, and the top of all their Charge,
and that which is to silence all Pleas in our behalf, is our omitting the use
of the Ordinances (so called) of Baptism, and Bread and Wine

John indeed, as the next immediate forerunner of Christ to prepare his way
gave an Alarm to the Jews, that were so secure under the Law of Moses, and
proclaimed the Kingdom of Heaven at hand; Mat. 3.2 Acts 17.30
and the time come wherein God commanded the Jews, as well as others every
where to repent; 'twas not sufficient for them to go on in sinning, and then
offer the respective Sacrifices which the Law enjoined them for the same; Rom
1.18
but now the Wrath of God was near to be revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; 'twas not sufficient to deck and make
clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, Mat. 23 25, 26.
but the inside was to be cleansed, and then the outside would be clean also.
The Ax was now laid to the Root, Mat 3.10
and every Tree that brought not forth good Fruit, was to be hewn down. The Law
of Moses took hold on exterior Acts, Heb. 9.9. 2 Cor 10.5
and could not make perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; but now that
dispensation was about to be established that comes nearer home, Jam ^ 25
and takes cognizance of the very thoughts, that Sin be not so much as
conceived by the Wills joining thereto. Wherefore John was sent to administer
the Baptism of Repentance, as a lively Figure of that which was presently after
to follow; for John's Baptism was not capable to produce this Effect upon the
Mind: Mat 3.11 12.
And he himself testifies. That though he baptized them with Water, yet he that
came after him that was before him, and more honorable than he, should baptize
them with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; that his Fan was in his Hand, and that
'twas He should thoroughly purge his Floor. Which is the great Work that is to
be done under his Gospel dispensation, to take away the Sins of the World, 1 John 3.8
and destroy the Works of the Devil, to purify Peoples hearts and make them
spiritually minded; this is the proper Effect of Christ's lasting Baptism; not
the washing away of the Filth of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, to purge our Consciences from
dead Works, to serve the Living God in Newness of Life. The Baptism of Christ
is but one, Ephesians 4.5.
and those who by it are Baptized into Jesus Christ, are Baptized into his
Death; and their old Man Crucified with him, that the Body of Sin maybe
destroyed, Rom 6.3, 6, 7, 8, 11
and they no longer serve Sin; because they that are dead with Christ, are
freed from Sin and made alive to God, to live a holy righteous Life. These are
the blessed Effects of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and of Fire, 1 Cor. 12.13.
Zach. 13 1
and Benefits that redound to those that are in truth washed by Christ in that
Holy Laver which entitles us to a part in him; it is our chiefest concern to know
this inward spiritual Baptism of Christ that our Hearts may be washed, purified
and sanctified by the Spirit of God; 1 Cor. 6.11.
and that we really put on Christ, and are in him who is the Substance, in whom
the Types ended, John knew and foretold himself, that he must decrease, but
Christ must increase: He does not say, Joh. 3.30
I shall cease presently at once, so soon as Christ's Baptism takes place; but,
I must decrease; but were Water Baptism to continue always among Christians,
then would not John decrease; nor witll it solve this Allegation, that 'twas
abolished as John's, and instituted anew as Christ's; for then has Christ his
different Gospel Baptisms, which is Erroneous.

We grant that some of the Apostles did use Water Baptism for a time; but we
believe 'twas rather in compliance with the Circumstances of Time than of
Necessity, and in condescension to the Weakness of Believers in the very
Infancy of the Church, and even the same Age wherein John Baptized; who was not
only a true Messenger of God in his time, but had gained great Credit among the
People, and his Memory and Message could not soon be forgotten; nor was it
easy to draw them from a Practice that but just before was acknowledged to be
of Divine Authority. For we find the Apostles tolerated the believing Jews to
live in certain Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, notwithstanding the
Messiah was come in the Flesh and abrogated them; so difficult it is to
disengage People from those things wherein they have beeen Educated, and to
which their Minds are once glewed: And some of them would have had the
believing Gentiles come under that Yoke and be Circumcised; which Paul their
great Apostle withstood, Romans 14.17
seeing beyond all those things knowing that the Kingdom of God was not Meats
and Drinks, 1 Cor. 4.20.
but Righteousness, Col. 2.14.16.17, 22.10. Heb. 9.9.10
Peace and Joy, in the holy Ghost, and not in Word but Power; not diverse
Washings and carnal Ordinances which were Shadows, and to perish; but the Body
is of Christ, and those that are in him, Gal. 5.2.
are in him complete: believing that if they were Circumcised, Christ should
profit them nothing; and yet we see such was his Condescension, that he himself
notwithstanding, Circumcised Timothy; Acts 21.20, to ^8
and when he was at Jerusalem, shaved his Heed, etc. behaving himself as a Jew,
for the sakes of those who saw not so far as himself. And notwithstanding he
was such a laborious and zealous Publisher of the Gospel, yet we find he
Baptized but very few, 1 Cor. 1.14.
and thanks God that he Baptized no more, (surely 'twas not then essential to
the Gospel) but says plainly, That he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach
the Gospel; 1 Cor. 1.17. Col. 1.13
to turn People from Darkness to Light from the Power of Satan to God, who had
delivered them from the Power of Darkness, and translated them into the Kingdom
of his Dear Son; it is this that is of absolute Necessity to our Salvation; he
did not then Baptize because some others did it, which yet is as large a
Commission as perhaps any pretend to nowadays. Of which we say, as he did of
Circumcision, (though we don't grant it is the Seal of the Covenant, and
introduced in room of Circumcision, as some will have it, but without
Scripture-Authority) Neither Baptism nor no Baptism avails any thing short of
a new Creature; which is the truest sign of Possessing the inward Spiritual
Grace, and of being in Christ; and is beyond all visible Signs whatsoever.

The Apostles having thus indulged it, it is no wonder that 'twas continued, and
since got footing under the degeneracy; for as Corruption entered the Church,
and was increased, the Spirit and Life of Christianity was more and more
Eclipsed, and the Minds of it is Professors grew darker; and then adhered more
to External Performances; and not only continued that which had been used by
their Predecessors, or at least something in it is stead; but by Degrees added
more Rites and Ceremonies; and at length began to trim and ^eck that Religion
that in it self was plain, simple and homely, and consisted more in Power and
Divine Love, than outward Observations: Which in Process of time was so dressed
and garnished, that its August Splendour became inviting to others Under this
Degeneracy in Degree, sprung up Infant Baptism; a mere Humane Invention,
without any Scripture-Authority, either by Precept or Practice; wherefore for
those who don't use Baptism, as 'twas Instituted under its proper Dispensation,
to upbraid us for neglecting it, is absurd and unreasonable.

But that which makes the loudest Outcry of all, is our Dis-use of the
Sacrament, so called, of Bread and Wine; it is this is that Pestilent Mortal
Error, that in our Opposers Account, renders us worse than the Papists,
whatever it is that makes us the Spawn of the Jesuits; which with several
others, are Epithets, that to be sure were calculated (though unjustly) to render
us as odious as may be to the People, and carry a great deal of Rancour in
them, and savor of too much Gall, to proceed from the meek Spirit of
Christianity, that teaches to be at Peace with, and have Charity for all that
call on the Lord out of a pure Heart. 2 Timothy 2.22
But whether upon the whole matter we deserve this severe bitter Censure; or
whether those that so liberally bestow it upon us, have a just right to cast
the first Stone, is what we desire our sober Neighbors to consider, and not
Judge us also merely from an Implicit Believe of what others say of us.

We are not ignorant of the great Noise and Stir there has been about this in
Christendom, to the Scandalizing Christianity among both Jews and Turks: The
Papists have improved it to downright Idolatry, affirming it is the Real Body
and Blood, and as such adore it; (one would think 'twere better let alone:)
others that Christ is in it, though they know not how: One says it is this,
another it is that; while they all seem to expect that from it, which it does
not necessarily administer; for want of distinguishing between that Bread of
Life that came down from Heaven, Joh. 6.51 56.
(that Flesh and Blood of Christ that gives life to all that feed thereon by
which they dwell in him, and he in them) and that Supper which was eaten by the
Primitive Christians, in Commemoration of his Death and Sacrifice; which are
not so connext, as that the one necessarily includes the other as Experience
abundantly testifies; would People but be true to themselves herein: How many
are there that receive this from Year to Year, who yet complain all their lives
of Deadness Dryness, and Leanness of Soul, and want of Power; not receiving
that Renewing of Life, and Spiritual Strength that is proposed in it, and so
but an empty Shadow indeed: For how can they in truth expect to feed on Christ
Spiritually in their Hearts who will not admit that he really dwells in his
Saints, but esteem it an Error in those that do: Joh. 14.20, 21, 23
However we believe all People ought to be well persuaded in their own Minds,
and seriously considerate in these and other Religious Practices, and not take
up things merely traditionally, because others do it; nor ought they to be
vehemently pressed to, or against things not absolutely essential to Salvation,
in which their Understandings are not clear: Nor should any be scoft or
reproached for those things which to them are Matter of Conscience (and
therefore Sacred; though to othors it may appear of less moment) a Practice that
is a great Shame among People professing Christianity. Nor do we Judge and
condemn those that are sound in the Practice either of this or Water Baptism,
as 'twas primitively used; whose Sober, Christian, Circumspect Lives,
witnesses to their sincere Intentions herein, who may be conscientiously
tender in it, and fearful to ommit it, till they are otherwise fully
persuaded: But for us to whom the Barrenness and Emptiness of these outward
visible Things are manifest, we cannot continue therein; they yielding no true
Soul-Satisfaction, nor administering any inward Spiritual Grace to us. 1 Pet.
2.2, 3.
Wherefore having tasted that the Lord is good and gracious we wait for the
sincere Milk of that Word, by which we have been begotten to God, that we may
receive Strength thereby, and grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a greater acquaintance with
that true inward Spiritual Communion and Fellowship with him, wherein he sups
with his Saints, Rev. 3.20
and they with him and receive Life by him, who dwells in them, and they in
him, as the Members are Joined to the Head, and partake of its Life, Ephesians. 5.30.
Joh. 1.5.5
and live by it; or the Branches to the Vine, which receive Life, Virtue and
Nourishment from him, whereby Fruit is brought forth to the Glory of God and
well pleasing to him. It Is not sufficient that we participate hereof once a
Month or Quarter, but as the Jews had their Manna fresh every Morning, Ex. 16.21
so ought we to receive a daily Supply, and renewing of Strength in our inward
man, by eating that heavenly bread, that nourishes up to Eternal Life, and
drinking plentifully of that Well of Living Water, Joh. 4 14.
which in the Saints springs up to Life Eternal; for as in God we live, move,
and have our very being; so is Christ the true and proper Life of the inward
Man, by which it truly lives to God, nor can it live but by him. Those that are
begotten to God by the Word of Life, and are born again of the Spirit, are
privileged thus to feed on Christ, and enjoy him; which none can do, that are
not first quickened and made alive by him; none can receive Life, Sap, and
Virtue from him, as Head and Vine, that are not first joined to him as Members
and Branches of him; nor is it sufficient to make People Members of Christ and
give them admittance to feed on him, in that they were sprinkled when Infants,
etc. as we have already expressed though they should eat Bread, and drink Wine
all their Days.

Since then we no less enjoy the Substance without the Sign, why may we not
ommit it, as either being but temporary, or not of absolute necessity; as well
as our Opposers do that which was Instituted (to use their own Term) at the
same Time* and with as great Solemnity, and greater Formality, and was no less
positively Commanded, under the same pretense? Why may not the same Authority
absolve us from the use of this, and exempt us from being chargeable with the
Breach of a Command of Christ, as discharge them from washing one another
Feet, Joh. 13 4 5, 8, 14, 15. Act. 15.20, 29. Ja. 5.14.25.
and secure them from the like Censure? As also that of the Apostles,
concercing things strangled and Blood; and that of James, Anointing the Sick
with Oil? Why should they be thus partial? Have we not good reason to conclude,
That if these had not been long since laid down, they would have cleav'd as
close to them; and that had those of Baptism, and Bread and Wine, been then
discontinued also they would be now as easy under its Omission? For Tradition,
Custom and Education, makes greater Impressions on Men's Minds, than perhaps
every one may be sensible of; nor is it an easy task at first, to move them
from those things to which they have been fastened by it. Would but People
wholly relinquish these prejudices, and consider it impartially; it is probable
there may appear no such real Difference as justly to omit the one and yet with
equal reason to continue the other; since it is not that Bread that gives Life
to the Soul, nor does necessarily include it; but that Christ may be and is
received, and fed on without it. Not that those can be thought to forget his
Death and Sacrifice, who sensibly partake of the Benefits thereof, Tit. 2.14.
and pursue its ends; Gal. 1.4.
who are taught and assisted by him to live a godly righteous Life, and bear
about in them the Marks of the Dying of our Lord Jesus; who dyed for all, Mat.
1.21 2 Cor 5.15
that those who live, should no longer live to themselves, fulfilling the
desires of their Minds, but to him that Dyed for them; that through the Power
of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10
they may mortify the deeds of the Flesh and have Fellowship with his
Sufferings, in whom his Life is made manifest. Neither can those who
acknowledge his Death and Sacrifice, and partake from time to time of this
Bread and Wine, in memory of it, and yet are not by him Redeemed from a vain
Conversation, and made conformable to his Death and so feed on him, as to
participate of that Life that comes by him in any wise escape Damnation, let
their Pretensions be what they will.

Since then God has replenished our Hearts with his Grace, and has not
withheld his heavenly Manna from us, but Daily owns us by his Comfortable
Presence, to our great Satisfaction, under the Omission of these things;
supplying our wants and necessities, as we have recourse unto him, in that
which has ever access unto him, having our continual Dependancy on him, who
enables and strengthens those of us For we intend not to Apologize for those,
who, though they may be called by our Name, yet live loosly, and walk disorderly,
and are Blemishes and a Grief to us, which yet ought to be imputed to their
Insincerity, or unwatchfulness, and not to the Insufficiency of the Principle
they pretend to.
that retain our Primitive Sincerity and Integrity, to lead a Sober, Pious,
Christian Life, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, which is the certain Product
of Spirital Grace; and forasmuch as our Opposers acknowledge it to be an
outward visible Sign and dare not say that the inward Spiritual Grace is tied
to it, nor that it is of absolute necessity to Salvation; with what Reason do
they unchristian us, and so load us with Calumnies and Accusations on this
Account; using it as an Instance to blacken us and condemn in gross our whole
Christian Profession, principally from hence; as though twere the chief thing
that constitutes a Christian, and entitles him to the Benefits that come by
Christ.

What shall we think then of perhaps more than two Parts in three of their own
Assembly, who no more practice this than do we, and yet are many of them, as
sober People, and if we may know (as Christ directs us) by their Fruits, are
doubtless as near the Kingdom, and no less in a state of Grace, than are those
who so exult in, and value themselves upon this Performance; which however it
may bound and distinguish particular Societies and Communions, it is certain no
Observations nor Performances short of being ruled and governed by the Spirit
of Christ, as Head, can entitle us to a Membership in him; we may make a
specious show, and carry a System of Divinity in our Heads; but if he rules not
our Hearts, we are none of his. 'Twere well they were as thoughtful to fulfill
all Righteousness in every respect, and as zealously careful and concerned to
observe and punctually perform all the Commands and Injunctions to which the
Christian Religion obliges them, and to qual^fi^ themselves to be Rightful
Inheritors of those Blessings and Promises pronounced by our Savior, as they
tenaciouly adher to this; as though twere indeed the sum both of Men's Duty and
Enjoyments, and that their Salvation turned upon this very Pin; which yet
People may perform, while their Wills are unsubdued, and Lusts unmortified. But
we find that Men have been apt enough to be busily employed about Mint, Annis
and Cummin, whilst they neglect the weightier Matters, to run into, and cry up,
and maintain those exterior Parts of Religion, that are reconcilable to an
unconverted state.

If the Professors of Christianity were less taken up about Signs and Shadows,
and nice and unnecessary Scrutinies and Distinctions, wherewith they perplex
it, and more devoted to observe the weighty, impotant, and indispensable
Precepts of Christ, and demonstrate the Power that Christianity has over their
Minds, by affording signal Instances of their being his true Disciples, and
Rightful Heirs of his Kingdom, being in Measure invested with his Divine
Virtues and Graces: we should have less Envy, Variance, Backbiting, and
Detraction, which weaken the common Interest and Piety, and give our common
Enemy an advantage: and more christian Love, Peace, Concord, and good
Neighborhood amongst us. If all that mean well, did but pursue Virtue, love
it, and encourage it wherever it appears; and hate Vice and Evil in all, and
discountenance it every where; and make these the Measures of their Christian
Charity, rather than Parallel Opinions in lesser Matters, 'twould bring us
nearer together, and more advance true Piety, than all their Contendings about
different Apprehensions in things far less Essential. God, who regards not
Names, but Natures knows among all Nations, and People who are his; and the
Rule he left us to know also was their Fruits, their Actions being the Exertion
of their Wills. All Mankind are either under the Power and Conduct of the
Spirit of God, or else of the Devil: all are either Carnal or Spiritual minded;
and as is the Spring and Bent of their desires and affections, so is their
Actions; each Birth has their proper Products, which are contrary to each
other. So that let what Notions or Opinions soever possess Men's Heads, they
live according to that Spirit and Principle that governs their Hearts. Gal 5.1^
to 24.
We cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles; no Fountain sends
forth bitter Water and sweet at the same time. It Is an Evangelical Truth, Those
that live in Envy and Strife, and bring forth the Fruits of the Flesh, are of
their Father the Devil; Ephesians. 5.^
and those who by the Spirit mortify those corrupt Lusts and Affections, and
bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior,
by a Sober, Godly, Righteous Life, are of God, 1 Jo. ^.1^
for herein the Children of God are manifest from the Children of the Devil.

Thus have we heartily, though briefly, expressed our real Opinion and Belief in
those Points in which we apprehend our Adversaries have endeavored most to
expose us; which we hope may prove Satisfactory to those who are not resolved
to think ill of us: But to speak fully to every Critical, Trifling Objection,
were a tedious Task, as well as vastly beyond the Extent of our Design. We
request out Serious Neighbors to Hear and See for themselves, and not take
things upon Trust from Others, and judging the things they know not, condemn us
by hear say. Don't be imposed upon by those whose peevish Humors would have
all do like themselves; who either look not at all, or but very coyly, into the
Books of those they have taken a Pet against, whose Persuasion in some things
differs from what they have pronounced Orthodox; as though Truth were their
peculiar Enclosure; which yet argues either a great deal of Prejudice, or a
feeble and fleeting Judgment, that dares not trust it self. Were our Books
stuffed with such palpable Errors as is suggested, surely twere not so dangerous
reading them: Who fears to read the Alcoran? But on the contrary, it is a strong
Indication that they contain much Truth; for as it is the proper Object of the
Understanding, so where it appears with a clear Evidence, answering to Peoples
own Experience, it is very forcible and prevalent upon the minds of those, who
diligently seek it for Love of it, and willingly deposit all pre-engagements of
Mind in its disquisition. Be then so just to us and kind to your selves, as to
relinquish all Prejudice and Prepossessions, and impartially examine the Truth
of these things; search the Sacred Scriptures diligently, with an Inclination
rather to find and embrace Truth than to support a received Opinion; try
whether it is so or not; comparing it with your own Experiences, and the
Witness of God in your own Hearts. Though our Belief in some of these Particulars
don't exactly quadrate to that of our Opposers, it don't therefore necessarily
follow it is not agreeable to Truth and Scripture: nor can they give us any
infallible assurance, that their Conceptions are a true Standard of Truth
notwithstanding they vend their Apprehensions as the only Orthodox; yes and are
displeased too with those that cannot be determined by them.

We have no design carrying on behind the Curtain, howsoever our Sober
Demeanor may be uncharitably (not to say maliciously) insinuated as only a
cover of Sheeps Clothing upon the Wolves Nature; and our most Solemn
Declaration of our Belief in several Religious Points (being undeniable Truths)
construed and suggested by some Men as only a fair Cover wherewith we gild over
^^r Poison that it may pass the less suspected, and be the more glibly
swallowed. What think you? Is not this the height of Prejudice, and Envy in
the abstract? Would they themselves be content to be thus Interpreted? We have
no intent to decoy and trap an People that we should walk under a Disguise;
which Intreagues usually have Interest at one end of them, which cannot be our
Case, who neither give nor take Money for Preaching; so that the Increase of
our Numbers will not fill our Coffers. We have no other Interest to promote but
the Advancement of True Piety and Christianity: and having Love and good Will
to all People, more especially to those whose Minds are awakned, and Hearts
warmed, having true fervent Desires, and living Breathings toward God,
thirsting after a nearer and more satisfactory Knowledge of, and Acquaintance
with him, than barely a profession and hear say of him; and therefore what we
have found advantageous, assistant and satisfactory to us, in our unwearied
Pursuit after Peace with him, that we recommend to others. We call People home
to the Gift of God in themselves, which only can do them good; that every one
may know the good Shepherd and Bishop of Souls for themselves, and hear and
know his Voice in them, from that of a Stranger, and learn of him and follow
him, who is pure, and ever leads to Purity and Holiness; that so his offering
up of himself for them may be of Benefit to them, and they experience the great
Salvation of God. For impress this upon your Minds, and take it along with you,
That notwithstanding our Savior has paid a Ransom for us and made an
atonement through the precious Blood of his Cross; yet if we experience not the
End of his Coming and Death, effected and answered in our selves, it shall
avail us nothing: Except we know him a Savior and Supporter near; except we
know a Principle of Divine Light and Life, to illuminate our Minds, to revive
and warm our langishing Hearts, to beget and increase true Love to God, and the
living Faith that gives Victory, to convert us, and govern our Thoughts, to
renew and regulate our Wills, and limit our Desires, and bridle our Tongues, to
excite holy Inclinations, and keep up a due Heat in our Christianity, and
strengthen our Minds in that which is good and well-pleasing to God: Except we
know these things in and for our selves, all our outside show of Religion is
but vain, and our Profession of Christ shall profit us nothing; Romans 8 ^ 14.
but we shall lie down in Sorrow at last. For none are Christ's but those that
have his Spirit, and are influenced by it; nor are any Children of God but
those that are led by the Spirit of God; which begets in the Mind a detestation
of Sin and Evil, and a love to Purity, Goodness and Virtue. Wherefore laying
aside all Strife and Animosites, all Envying and Evil-speaking, let us abhor
that which is Evil, Rom 12.9
and cleave to that which is Good, and address our selves with a due and Humble
Application to the Accomplishment of that most Concerning and Important Affair
of our Lives, the working out our Salvation And let every one follow the Lord
faitfully, according to what is made known to them; knowing that we shall be
judged according to our Knowledge, and that 'twill be happy for those whose
Wills and Performances correspond with their Understandings, in that Day when
all must stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and give an Account of their
Deeds done in the Body, and receive a Sentence thereafter, either, Come ye
Blessed, or Depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity. It will not be then of what
Congregation or Confession of Faith, or of what Persuasion amongst the many
wast thou* Among all which there will then be but two Sorts, the Sheep and the
Goats; those that heard the Shepherds Voice, and followed him, who were guided
and governed by the good Spirit of God in their Hearts; and those who wrapping
their Talent in a Napkin, stifled Convictions, and neglecting the Day of their
Visitation, continued under the dark Power of the Evil One. One may go a great
way, and make a fair show of Religion and Piety, and yet be turned to the left
Hand; it is not having our Heads filled with curious sublime Notions, though of
never so fine and elevated a Speculation; let us trim and garnish our Lamps
never so finely, 'twil not administer an entrance without the Heavenly Oil,
without that holy Divine Unction fills our Hearts, enlightens our Minds, and
inflames our Affections to a due Watchfulness and Obedience to its Teachings;
which are the most assured Marks of our being really in Christ, in whom only
our acceptance is.

That you with us, and we with you, may so circumspectly live up to our Light
and Knowledge given by Christ, as that our Consciences may not condemn us; but
that having finished our Days here with Comfort, we may lay down our Heads in
Peace, with a well-grounded Hope of a Joyful Resurrection, and have boldness in
the Day of Judgment, is our Hearty Desire.

For howsoever People may have been possessed with the contrary, by those who
probably have left nothing unattempted, which their Invention could supply, to
fix an Odium, and scare People from us, we believe the Resurrection as
delievered to us in the Holy Scriptures, and our Adversaries cannot reasonable
pretend to know more; in which we willingly acquiesce; content that Faith
supply the defect of Demonstration; esteeming it con^entaneous to Reason, to
forbear even the most abstracted Reasoning about that which is above Reason. We
doubt not in the least either the Reality or Excellency of it; but our great
Care, and necessary Concern is That if by any Means we may attain to the
Resurrection of the Just; and then it is sufficient that when our Lord appears
we shall be like him: Which Hope and Expectation ought to incite in all most
fervent Desires, 1 John 3 2, 3.
and vigorous Pursuits after Purity and Holiness.

If what we have written for your Information, may find some place with Those,
who being Impartial and Inquiring, have Room to receive it and that it
contributes to their Benefit and Satisfaction, we have our End: But for those
who are Full, or are Critical, and ready to Carp at every Word or Sentence that
is not placed to their Mind, if not also pre-judge it, as it is not intended for
them; so we don't suppose 'twill prove to their good Liking, nor meet with a
Reception amongst them. For we don't purpose to reconcile our whole Belief and
Persuasion in Religious Matters to that of our Opposers, who notwithstanding
what we have writ, we expect will yet accuse us of Error.

However, having thus far declared our selves in the most necessary Points of
the Christian Religion, we don't think our selves further obliged to answer the
Cavils and Critiscisms of such who may appear Contentious, and will never want
something to-object against those that come not up in all things exactly to
their Level. Whom yet we advise rather to be quiet, and study to know and
govern themselves according to that Religion that is pure and undefiled before
God, Jam 1.27
and leads to Visit and Assist the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction,
and to keep themselves from the Spots and Defilements of this World. Were this
(as it ought) our Principal Care and Concern in our Conduct, we should have
little Mind or Lesure to differ about Matters of less Moment: And while we seem
zealously to contend about Religion, frustrare its End. We should not be taken
up in Disputing what that Principle is, which God has placed in us, to do us
Good, and in the mean time neglect its Assistance, and obstruct its Operation
upon the Mind, but be given up to be Leavened and Changed by it, that we may
partake of the Blessings thereof; and with it build on the Foundation which God
has laid, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13 14.
that which may abide the Fiery Trial. To which we recommend you, and remain
your Peaceable and Loving Neighbors.

William Chandler. Alexander Pyot. Joseph Hodges. etc.


FINIS.

