A SERMON Delivered By Thomas Prince, M. A. On Wensday, October 1. 1718. AT HIS
ORDINATION TO THE PASTORAL CHARGE Of the SOUTH CHURCH in Boston, N. E. In
Conjunction with the Reverend Mr. JOSEPH SEWALL.

Together with The CHARGE, By the Reverend INCREASE MATHER, D. D. And a Copy of
what was said at giving the Right Hand of Fellowship:

By the Reverend COTTON MATHER, D. D. To which is added, A DISCOURSE Of the
Validity of Ordination by the Hands of Presbyters, Previous to Mr. SEWALL'S on
September 16. 1713.

By the Late Reverend and Learned Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, Pastor of the same
Church.

BOSTON: Printed by J. FRANKLIN for S. GERRISH, and Sold at his Shop near the
Old Meeting House. 1718.

TO THE SOUTH CHURCH IN BOSTON.
I HAVE many times wondered in my Travels aabroad at the mysterious Reasons of
Providence in carrying Me forth April 1. 1709.
and detaining Me so long from Returning July 20. 1717.
to My Native Land. Though GOD has endowed Us with the Power of Reason to direct
Us in all Our Designs and Actions, and in the Course of my Travels I was then
ready to think I was Generally Guided thereby; Yet I must needs acknowledge,
that whenever I have made Reflections on that Part of My Life, I have not been
able to see with Satisfaction the Reasonableness or Consistency of it. I have
been often surprised to consider, how I have been unaccountably governed by
various Views and Motives, and successively led on from One to Another till
they all entirely vanished but the Prospect and Love of My Country.

UPON My Arrival, It seems as if I am awakened out of a long and continued
Train of Dreams and Amusements, and have been insensibly wandering in Visionary
Regions of Delusion and Error. But now Methinks I clearly see that a Wise and
Designing Hand has overruled and led Me, and some of the Ends of His
Mysterious Dealings appear with Amazement, ^s the others remain concealed for
the Exercise of my awful Reverence and profound Adoration.

MY Reception into My Native Country with so great Respect and Affection I must
account to be One of the happiest Scenes in all My Life. I was so young and
unknown when I left it, that I had hardly contracted any other Acquaintance
than among my contemporary Students at College: And I had spent such a Series
of Years abroad, as I thought They had almost lost their Affection and
Remembrance of Me. It must therefore needs be a surprising and inexpressible
Joy to find Myself at my Arrival embraced and surrounded with Numbers of
Friends, and many that seemed to know Me at Once, though They never saw Me
before. I could not forbear imagining Myself as Happy as the Roman Orator, if
the Reader will forgive the bold Comparison, when He returned to the City in
Triumph; Though I dare not speak as He, That the Pleasures of that single Day
were almost preferable to Immortality.

BUT as there is an unavoidable and perpetual Succession of Delight and Trouble
in Humane Life; I quickly found that I must exchange my Scenes of Diversion and
Pleasure into the contrary Scenes of Care and Business. And these have
surprised Me as much as the other.

THE sudden Invitation of so desirable and considerable a Church and Town as
Hingham within Eight and Forty Hours of my Landing and their Call in a little
Time after, together with Yours at the same Conjuncture and the Motion of
Another, for which I bare a peculiar Esteem and Affection, as well as to Their
most Reverend, Pious and Learned Pastors, must needs involve Me in the greatest
Perplexities, and astonish my Mind.

I COULD hardly imagine Myself duly Qualifyed for the Ministerial Office, and
should scarcely have engaged in it, were it not for the Persuasion of Others,
and the repeated Call of Providence by so many Churches. I had denied the
Solicitations of Two in England before; Of Battisford and Combs Jan. 29. 1713,
14
in Suffolk, and afterward of a larger Society that alternately meets at
Winden and Clavering October. 31. 1714.
on the Borders of Cambridgshire and Essex. I was now therefore seized with
Fear, lest GOD who knew My Unfitness and Sin, should overruled these
extraordinary Things for my utter Confusion. The Anxiety and Distress of my
Soul has been beyond Expression: And with a Concurrence at the same Conjuncture
of various other Extraordinary Temptations and Troubles would have overwhelmed
and sunk Me without a Divine Support: As indeed they have made such unusual
Impressions on Me, that I have not yet entirely recovered that Sedateness of
Temper which I thank GOD is so Natural to Me, and had been a firm and perpetual
Proof against all the Difficulties of my Preceding Life.

I HAVE spoken of some of these Things already in my Reply to Your Call and the
succeeding Discourse, Together with the Principal Motives that determined me to
Enter into the Sacred Office, and to Accept of Your Flock for My Peculiar
Charge. I shall not therefore here repeat them, nor would it be convenient o^
prudent to offer the Reasons of My not yielding to the Call of Bristol. But You
will give Me leave on this Occasion, Because it is Justice and Gratitude, To
express My Grateful Resentments and the Singular Love and Honor I owe to that
Kind and Worthy People, as well as the Others beforementioned, who have all
unanimously Called Me, and all but One have surprised Me with the most
undeserved Respect of Choosing Me as soon as ever they knew Me. May They all be
the be^ter supplied by My not settling with Them, as it is with great
Satisfaction I behold the Church at Hingham to be.

BUT if You can bear Me with Patience, I would now proceed to offer a few
Things more before I conclude.

IN the First Place I would Here observe, That I not only look upon those in
full Comunion to belong to Our Ministerial Care; But all Those also at least
that have been admitted Members of Your Ecclesiastical Body at their receiving
the Baptismal Seal of the Covenant. I take it for Granted You will readily own
it: But I mention it Her^ to make You sensible of the cast and dreadful
Aggravation which it gives of the Weight of Our Charge. You will easily
conce^ve what I say, When it appears from the Records that the Church was
founded on the 12. of May 1669; And since that Time to this which is not yet
Fifty Years, to Seven Hundred Communicants and near as many more that have
Owned the Covenant, there have been about Five Thousand Baptized Persons. The
Though It of This (...) enough to shock the greatest Capacity, and to make us cry
out with Moses Number. 11.14.
, We are not able to bear all this People alone, Because it is too Heavy for Us!

THERE is another Consideration which affects Me with the utmost Concern and
Abasement; And that is My succeeding such Great and Illustrious Persons as have
so conspicuously distinguished and adorned Your Society, and made it the more
Renowned and Venerable throughout all this Country. Men on whose Hands if alive
I were unworthy to pour our Water, as Elisha the Son of Shaphat on the Hands of
His Master Elijah 2 Kings 3.11.
. Oh that as I take up their Mantle, the Character and Badge of their Office, I
might receive and enjoy their Ministerial Spirit!

THE First of Your Pastors which was the Reverend Mr. Thatcher, is beyond the
Personal Knowledge and Remembrance of most among You. But by the Memorial of
his Iafe^^ Dr. Mather's Church-H^story, He appears to have been a Man of
Singular Abilities and Learning, and a great Variety of uncommon
Accomplishments. To this Account, I have learned from Those that were
acquainted with Him, That He was a Person of great Humanity, Meekness and
Sweetness of Temper. He was settled among You on February 16. 1669, 70. and
Died on October 15. 1678, at 58 Years of Age.

HIS Successor was the Reverend Mr. Willard, the Learned Vice President of
Harvard College. We were all acquainted with Him, and shall ever revere his
Memory. Mr. Pemberton has given Us His exquisite Picture with a Masterly Hand
in his Funeral Sermon: And He has been universally owned to have been One of
the Wisest and most Generous Men, and One of the Greatest Divines which these
Parts of the World have produced. I shall never forget His admired Expositions
Twice a Week in the Hall, His Gracious Deportment, nor the copious, exact, and
pathetical Prayers He as frequently poured out among Us. I must ever Remember
Him with peculiar Esteem and Gratitude for the Heavenly Gravity, Condescension
and melting Affection wherewith he treated me in my tender Years, when he took
me aside at College to encourage and direct me in the Affairs of my Soul. He
was settled among You on April 10. 1678. Mr. Sewall and I were Two of the last
who received their Degrees from Him, which was on July 2. 1707, and He dyed the
12th of September after, at 68 Years of Age.

IT has been my great Unhappiness and Sorrow, that I was never in Company with
the Reverend Mr. Pemberton, that extraordinary Person who followed Him, Before
I went out of the Country I have often heard him with the greatest Admiration
and Pleasure; methought he spoke like a Flaming Seraph. Upon my Return I find
he has left as Great a Character for Superior Abilities and Universal Learning
as any that have gone before Him. The Reverend Mr. Colman and my Reverend
Colleague have drawn it in its lively Colors in their Funeral Sermons. It is a
very Grateful and Singular Honor to have the following and excellent Remains
of His enclosed in the same Cover with Mine. He was Ordained among You on
August 28. 1700, and Deceased February 13. 1716, at 45 Years of Age.

WHEN I consider of My standing up in the Room of such extraordinary Persons as
These, and in One of the most Numerous* Honorable, Learned and Judicious
Auditories I know in the World; It must needs Surprise Me with Shame and
Anxiety, and throw My Mind into a great Degree of Consternation and Terror.

HOWEVER, in the midst of all My Distress, I must own that through the
overruling Wisdom and Goodness of GOD I am now settled in the Happiest Country
and in One of the Delightfullest Towns upon Earth. It is an invaluable
Privilege that I now Here enjoy, In living among such Numbers of Persons of
every Order that so illustriously shine in Piety, Justice, Temperance and
Social Virtues. It is a singular Advantage which I could hardly find any
where-else, to be fixed in a Constellation of such Eminent Ministers, united in
the same Design and Affection: Three of whom have done Me the Honor to
accompany Me in the following Pages, and for their various Excellencies I find
are justly Renowned and Esteemed abroad.

I MUST likewise admire the same overruling Wisdom and Goodness, in settling
among you about Five Years before, Mr. Sewall Your Reverend Pastor, My
Classmate, the Companion of My Youth, and one of My Dearest and most Intimate
Friends at College. As this has been a very powerful Incentive and
Encouragement to Me to submit and associate with Him in the same Ministerial
Service; So it seems to be a most hopeful Foundation, if GOD is pleased to
continue Our Lives, of the greatest Advantage and Pleasure. Our Nearness of
Age, Our Conformity of Inclinations and Principles, Our long and early
Acquaintance and Friendship, the peculiar Communion and Intimacy, wherewith We
have often unbosom'd Our Souls; and especially the Raising Our Respect and
Affection on the substantial Basis of Religion and Virtue, does already support
and animate Me to proceed in My Work, and afford Me the lively Prospect of so
much Happiness as I am sometimes afraid is too great to be looked for, or not
long enjoyed in this evil and changeable World.

MAY the Father of Lights with whom is no Variableness nor Shadow of Turning,
and from whom every good and perfect Gift descends James 1.17.
, Help Us to Preserve, Increase and Perfect Our Friendship, and improve it to
Your great Advantage as well as Our Own. May We strive to Emulate in Piety,
Learning and Usefulness; not that We may exceed Each Other, But that We may
Quicken Each Other to exceed Ourselves, May We Unite in Pulling down the strong
Holds of Sin and Satan and in Building up the Church and enlarging the Kingdom
of CHRIST. May we Recommend His Religion and Person in Our Divine Discourses
and Amiable and Heavenly Lives. May We attract Your Cordial and Religious
Esteem and Love, and Return them into Your Bosoms, by more cheerful and lively
Endeavors for Your present Comfort and Welfare and Everlasting Happiness. May
We be more and more engaged and devoted to You, and be more heartily willing to
Do and Suffer any thing for You, To Bare any thing from you, And to resolve
with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.15. That we will very gladly spend and be spent for
your Souls (...)
, Though the more abundantly We Love You the Less We be Loved.

To Conclude, Let us all endeavor to be mutual Encouragements and Consolations
in this World, that we may be mutual Joys and Delights in the Other, Let us
Remember and Imitate the many Ornaments of Our Church and diligently move on in
the fair Tracks of Light they have left behind them till We ascend and meet
them in the Heavenly World. And in the mean while Let Us also aspire to excel
in Our Several Stations and Employments, and strive which shall appear to be
the more Laborious and Watchful Pastors, or the more Peaceable and Fruitful
People.

Finally, Brethren, farewell: be Perfect be of good Comfort, be of one Mind,
live in Peace; and the GOD of Love and Peace shall be with You 2 Cor 13.11.
. And the Lord make You to Increase and Abound in Love One toward Another, and
toward all Men, even as We do toward You: To the end He may stablish Your
Hearts unblamable in Holiness before GOD even Our Father, at the Coming of Our
Lord Jesus Christ with all His Saint^ 1 These. 3.12, 13.
. Now unto Him that is Able to keep You from falling, and to Present You
faultless before the Presence of His Glory with exceeding Joy, To the Only Wise
GOD Our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both Now and ever.
Amen Jude 24, 25.
.

THOMAS PRINCE.

AN ORDINATION-SERMON.
HEB. XIII. -- 17 --. -- FOR They watch for your Souls, as They that must give
Account; that They may do it with Joy, and not with Grief. --


THAT this Epistle was wrote by the Apostle Paul, and in the Greek Language has
been sufficiently cleared by many Learned Men Pareus, Piscator, Owen, Mills,
etc.
. It must needs have been written upon His Release at Rome, after His Two Years
Confinement there Acts 28.30.
, while He tarryed yet in Italy Heb. 13.18, -- 24.
and before he returned to Judea. This Period of Time, according to the common
Account, appears to be about the Sixty first Year from the Birth of CHRIST, as
Calvisius fixes it, or the Sixty fifth as Bishop Usher: and about the Eighth
Calvisius.
or Eleventh Usher.
Year of the Reign of Nero.

THE Title and Subscription Dickson in Poscrip.
are indeed omitted in some manuscript and printed Copies Mills, Wetstenius.
. But it appears from several remarkable Passages, and from the Scope and
Subject of the whole, as well as ancient History; that it was directed to the
Hebrews who had embraced the Christian Religion in the Province of Judea, and
especially those who lived at Jerusalem.

THE Churches in those Places were then very numerous as Dr. Owen tells us, and
had suffered a World of Trouble in the Confusions that fell out upon the Death
of Festus and the Succession of Albinus the Roman Governors Us^er, Owen.
. The Miseries and Outrage of those Days are described in a lively manner by
Josephus: And the Professors of CHRIST had a peculiar Share in them, as they
were hated by every Party, and our Apostle intimates in the Tenth Chapter, at
the 31 st, -- 34 th Verses.

BUT about this time they were harrass'd in a particular manner by one Ananus a
malignant Sadducee, who had been exalted to the High Priesthood by King Agrippa
Owen,
. For as a Learned Man Fell.
oberves, 'Tho' the Hebrew Christians in Judea were more inclined than others
to the Jewish Worship, adjoining it to Christianity as necessary to Salvation;
yet they were more grieviously persecuted There than in other Places: The Jews
having a peculiar Hatred and Contempt of CHRIST, and a greater Power There by
the Laws or Permission of the Roman Empire. By Reproaches, Censures, Fines,
Stripes, Imprisonments and other Sufferings, some Hebrew Christians had
deserted their Assemblies Heb. 10.25.
, and others their Profession Heb. 6.4, etc. and chap. 10.26.
: Hoping They might still obtain Salvation, as They might have done before They
embraced the Gospel.

THEY were more easily reduced to the entire Observance of their old Religion;
Because they had never yet abandoned it, but were very zealous for it. They had
received CHRIST as the true Messiah; But they would not leave Their ancient
Covenant nor any of the Laws of GOD by Moses. The Council at Jerusalem had
indeed decided that They should not be imposed on the Gentile Converts Acts
15.23.
: But Eight or Nine Years after Owen.
, when our Apostle returned thither; His Brother James informs Him that many
thousands of the Believing Jews were very zealous for the Law, and accounted
Their own Nation were still obliged to keep it Acts 21.17, -- 21.
. They therefore held Their Assemblys distinct from the Christian Gentiles
throwout the World, as Dr. Owen observes from Jerome and some ancient Writers.
Those at least who inhabited Judea were exceeding fond of that Land of Promise,
and of Jerusalem which They used to call The Holy City Isa 48.2. and 52.1. Mat.
4.5. and 22.53.
. They were exceeding zealous for the Mosaic Worship as observed in the
Synagogues and Temple, and all the Ceremonies that belonged to them.

OUR Apostle therefore sends this excellent Epistle to them, to inform them of
the Natue, Use and Expiration of all the Legal Rites: And without the^^
Mixture, to persuade them to persist in the Profession and Observance of the
more excellent and unvailed Gospel.

IN the first Ten Chapters He shows them, That CHRIST who died for Sin is the
true Messiah and the Son of GOD and Man^ Incomparably more excellent than the
Angels in Dignity and Nature; and than Moses, Aaron and Melchizedeck in His
Prophetical Priestly and Kingly Office and Dispensation. That the ancient
Institutions of the Law were designed only as Types to represent Him: And that
by the Appearance, Sacrifice and Exaltation of Himself, their Ends and Uses are
now accomplished, and those shaddowy Victims and Emblems are for ever abolished.

AT the Nineteenth Verse of the Tenth and through the following Chapters, He
applies the Doctrines He had explained and proved as His usual manner was: And
exhorts and moves them to various Practices and Graces, that became the
Disciples of so Divine a Person, and the Revelation, Nature and Design of so
excellent a Dispensation. He first exhorts to the Exercise and Perseverance of
Faith, to the End of the Eleventh Chapter: Of Hope and Patience, to the End of
the Twelfth: And in the Thirteenth, of Charity, Purity, Liberality and the due
Regard of Their faithful Rulers.

IN the Seventh Verse of this Thirteenth Chapter He bids Them Remember Their
Rulers (...).
[already Deceased Calvin, Pareus, Brandmiller, etc.
] Who had spoken the Word of God unto Them: And reflecting on (...).
the End of Their Conversation, to follow their Faith The Order in the Original.
. In the Verse of our Text, He comes to exhort and urge Them to yield Obedience
and Subjection to the Rulers that were Living and presiding among them. Obey
Them that have the Rule over You, and submit Yourselves: [For They watch for
Your Souls, as Those that must give Account: That They may do it with Joy, and
not with Grief:] For that is unprofitable for You.

HERE is 1. a Duty: And 2. the Motives or Reasons of it.

1. HERE is an important Duty prescribed to the Christian Hebrews. Obey them
that have the Rule over You, and submit Yourselves.

BY Those that had the Rule over Them the Apostle could not mean Their Civil
Rulers. The Rulers here intended are represented in the following Part of the
Verse to be such, whose Office 'twas to watch for their Souls, as Those that
must give Account; which is not the Civil Rulers Office. And if it could be,
the Hebrew Christians then had none in the Magistratick Order to take such
Notice of Them. He could therefore mean no other than the Spiritual Rulers of
Their Churches. They must be those who had the peculiar Care of Souls committed
to Them: and the same He mentioned in the Seventh Verse; where the Word in the
Original is the same as here, and applied to Those who had Preached the Word of
God unto them: As Calvin and Pareus observe.

WE are to obey these spiritual Rulers and submit Ourselves unto Them. i. e. We
are to obey Them and submit Ourselves unto Them in Spiritual Things, and
according to those Instructions They receive from CHRIST and the Laws and
Constitutions of His Heavenly Kingdom.

IN such Respects as these We are to obey Them and submit Ourselves unto Them.
i. e. as a Learned Man Leigh, and Fell.
expounds it; We are to obey Them in the Truths they Preach, and submit
Ourselves unto Them in the due Administration of Their Discipline and
Authority. The Words are (...); Which seem to represent the Twofold Duty of
People to Their Spiritual Rulers -- Obedience and Submission: There being Two
Sorts of Things which We are subject to, viz. Their Teaching and Their
Discipline Leigh.
. We are to obey Them in the wholesome Truths and Precepts They deliver, for Our
Belief and Practice: And We are quietly to submit to the regular Exercise of
Their Authority, that the Peace and Unity, Strength and Beauty of the Church
may be preserved.

THIS in General is the Duty of People to Their Spiritual Rulers.

2. WE have then the Reasons or Motives urging to the ready Performance of it.
For They watch for Your Souls, as Those that must give Account: That They may
do it with Joy, and not with Grief, etc.

THE Apostle founds the Reasonableness of the Peoples Duty, upon Their
Spiritual Rulers awful and important Office and Concern for Those committed to
Them: And every Word He uses is exceeding cogent and emphatical.

THEY have the Charge of Your most precious and immortal Souls: They watch for
the Security and Salvation of them in the midst of a thousand dreadful Dangers:
They must give an Account of what They do for You, and of what Treatment They
meet with from You. They must give up Their Account either with Joy or Grief.
It will be exceeding happy both for You and Them, if They give up Their Account
with perfect Joy: But dreadful and pernicious, if They must give it up with
Sorrow.

IT is as if He should say --

THEY are set over You for Your own Advantage: Their painful and laborious
Business is to watch for Your Souls and the Salvation of them, and They have a
most awful Account to give to GOD. It is therefore highly reasonable, equal and
becoming, that You should yield a peaceable and ready Obedience and Submission
to Them: That You should thereby show Your just and grateful Sense of the Pains
and Labors They undergo, the Benefits You receive Piscator.
and the dreadful Hazard They expose Themselves unto for Your Salvation. If
They duly watch, and You obey Their wholesome Word and submit to Their Spiritual
Rule and Conduct; They will both be cheerful in Their watching for Your Souls,
They will happily promote the Welfare and Salvation of them, and They will give
up Their Account with Joy. But if either They neglect Their Business, or You be
refractory to Their Authority or disobedient to their Doctrine; They will have
a sorrowful Account to give. Or though They be faithful and so save Themselves;
yet They will bitterly mourn and complain to GOD of Your Ungratefulness and
Sin: And their Groans and Sorrows will be of no Advantage to Your Souls, but
exceeding hurtful and pernicious to the Salvation of them Piscator,
Brandmiller, etc.
.

THIS is the Main Intention of the Text, and this the Occasion of it is being
introduced. It is alleged as a most powerful and obliging Argument for the
People, to live in due Obedience and Submission to Their Spiritual Rulers.

BUT I stand not here this Day so much to inform You of Your Obligations to
Them; as to give You some Apprehensions of My Duty unto You, and that awful and
tremendous Office I am going to undertake at the Hands of CHRIST, and that most
heavy Charge and Burden that is to be imposed on Me.

I SHALL not therefore consider the Words with respect to the primary Design of
the Apostle in them, or their Connection with what preceeds and brings them in.
I shall only now insist on their plain and single Meaning in the following

DOCTRINE.

THAT Your Spiritual Rulers are to watch for Your Souls, as Those that must
give Account: That They may do it with Joy, and not with Grief.

YOU have Spiritual Rulers placed over You; and are not Dens of Confusion, but
Houses of Rule and Order 1 Timothy 3.5, 15.
: Having some to be Guides and Rulers, and others to be taught and governed
Dickson.
. They watch, i. e. They ought to watch: It is Their peculiar Business, and
indispensible Duty: And Those that are true and faithful do carefully do it J.
Capel. in Pol. Synop.
. Not over your Goods or Bodies, as the Civil Magistrate; but over Your Souls
which are infinitely more precious Jones.
. As Those that must give Account -- of the Charge committed to them. That They
may do it with Joy, and not with Grief: i. e. One of these will be the certain
Issue, and They must continually keep it in View and watch accordingly.

THERE are so many Things to be explained in our Text and Doctrine, and such a
Number and Variety of Questions to be resolved; That I think it most convenient
to handle them under the several Propositions contained or fairly implied in it.

1. THAT Your Spiritual Rulers have the Care of Your Souls committed to Them.
2. THAT it is therefore Their special Business to watch for Them. 3. THAT They
must certainly give an Account. 4. THAT They must do it with Joy or Grief. 5.
THAT They are then to watch as Those that must give an Account, That They may
do it with Joy, and not with Grief.
PROP. I. THAT Your Spiritual Rulers have the Care of Your Souls committed to
Them.
THIS is plainly implied in the Text before Us* [ For They -- ] i. e. Those who
rule over You, in the preceding Part of the Verse, and We have already proved
to be Spiritual Rulers. And They [ watch for Your Souls -- ] which implies that
Your Souls are committed to Them, and are Their peculiar Charge. Their
Spiritual Care and Rule appear to be inseparable and of equal Dimension: For
Those who rule over You, says the Apostle, watch for Your Souls. Your Souls are
committed to Their Care and Watch, as well as to Their Government and
Authority. They can be none of Your Rulers, if They do not watch for Your
Souls: and if this be not Their Care and Business, You by this Precept owe Them
neither Obedience nor Submission Calvin, Pareus, Owen.
.

BUT They cannot watch for nor give Account of all the Souls throwout the
World; and therefore They cannot be Universal Rulers. Their Charge must be
confined to such a Number, and not exceed it, as They can duly watch for, as
well as lead and govern. The most evident Light of Nature does direct to this.
They must have a particular Society committed to Them which They can duly rule
and look after: And this is Their peculiar Charge and Government Acts 20.28,
31. and 1 Timothy 3.5.
.

BUT here We must briefly consider these Three Things.

1. WHO are the Spiritual Rulers here intended, and what in General is Their
Ruling Authority, Power and Office. 2. WHAT is this Committing Your Souls to
Their peculiar Care, and By Whom is it done. 3. BY what Ways and Means is it
performed and effected.
I. WHO are the Spiritual Rulers here intended, and what in General is Their
Ruling Power and Office.

THE Greek (...) is more comprehensive than the English-RULERS, or any other
Word now in use; and therefore variously rendered by Learned Men. It may be
translated Guide^, as You may find it in the Margin of Your English Bibles.
Junius and Tremellius render it Governors and Captains Verse 7, 12, 24, and
marg. 24.
: Beza and Piscator, Leaders and Directors; and Stephanus In Concord.
, Those that take the Care of You, or go before You, or oversee You. These are
Bishops says Theophilact In Mil.
; Or the Pastors of the Church, says Deodate, Who are to govern and lead the
People by the Word of God. They are Pastors and Teachers says Bishop Fell: And
other Rulers, says Piscator, And who in other Places are called Presbyters and
Elders.

IN Short, It is a General Term including all of whatever Denomination, that
have any Authoritative Office in any particular Society of Professing
Christians. They are any Officers in any Church of CHRIST whatever that have a
Power either of Ruling or Instructing: Call Them Bishops, Pastors, Teachers,
Presbyters, Elders, Ministers, or any other Name the Scriptures give Them. They
are all included in this General Term.

THE Word indeed is of so extensive a Signification as to comprehend the Charge
and Office both of Civil Rulers, of Military Leaders, and of Tutors or Trainers
up of Youth. But applied to the Heads of Christian Churches, it includes these
Three Things.

1. THAT They are to Govern and overule the Society committed to Them in
Wisdom, Justice and Authority, and keep it in Peace and Order.

2. THAT They are to order, Defend and guide it in the midst of all it is
Spiritual Enemies; with attentive and unwearied Sagacity, Vigilance and
Resolution.

3. THAT They are to Teach, reprove and lead the Members of it both by Censure,
Life and Doctrine: And train Them up with Integrity and Care to the Knowledge
and Performance of Their various Duties.

BUT Their Rule is entirely restrained to Spiritual Things Joh 18.36. and 2
Cor. 10.3, -- 5.
, and to be exercised and directed by the Laws of CHRIST.

THEY must keep and move and shine in the proper and peculiar Sphaere assigned
Them, and not vary from it, or extend Their Reigning Power, though They may Their
Generous Influence of Light and Warmth without it. They may be concerned with
Temporal Affairs in Moderation, Advice and Council, as becomes every Private
Member of the Civil Body. But They must neither assume Authority in them, nor
bring them into Their Pulpits, nor allow them to engage Their Hearts or Time,
or interfere, or hinder Them in Their Spiritual Watch and Duty 2 Timothy 2.4.
. They have infinitely greater Projects to form, infinitely nobler Pursuits in
View.

NOR are They even in Spiritual Things to act with an Arbitrary Will and Power.
Not as Those that [lord it over Inheritances (...)
;] But as Those that are [made (...).
] Ensamples of the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. Not that They have Dominion over Your
Faith, but are Helpers of Your Joy, 2 Cor. 1.24. They Themselves are subject to
the Laws of CHRIST; which are evident either by Revelation or the Light of
Reason, and must direct and rule according to them, Mat. 28.18, -- 20.

IN Fine, They must keep to the Limits of Their Divine Commission, and teach
and govern by it: And when They do so, They may speak and act with great
Assurance, Resolution and Authority. The Authority wherewith They teach and
rule is not merely Theirs: But as They do what CHRIST directs Them; it is the
awful Authority of CHRIST Himself Our Glorious Sovereign exerted by Them, and
which He will not suffer to be trampled on or disregarded, Mat. 18.15 -- 18.
Joh. 20.19 -- 23.

THESE are the Spiritual Rulers here intended, and this in General is Their
Ruling Authority, Power and Office. Let us now consider

II. WHAT is this Committing Your Souls to Their peculiar Care, and By Whom is
it done.

IT does Not imply as if the Care of Your Souls were so devolved on Your
Ministers, as to relieve or excuse You from the Care of them. Your Care of them
is never a whit diminished by Your Ministers taking the Charge of them. You are
rather obliged to take the greater Care of Yourselves; or the Care of Your
Ministers may be vain and fruitless to You, and only serve to enhance Your
present Sin, and Your future Doom and Misery.

BUT it implies that Your Spiritual Welfare is of great Importance, and Your
Souls have the greatest need to be cared for and looked after. They have not
only need of Your own utmost Care; But also of a peculiar Order of Men
appointed to this only Business, to mind them, and do their utmost to secure
the Welfare and Salvation of them. This is the peculiar Work of Your Spiritual
Guides and Rulers, and the great and continual Concern of Their Lives. They
have the Care of Your Souls Salvation and Spiritual and Eternal Welfare
committed to Them. But By Whom is it done?

THE Holy Scriptures ascribe the Creation of the Ministerial Office to GOD, in
1 Cor. 12.28. and 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. By GOD we are to understand the DEITY,
comprehending the FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST; Who are all concerned in this
Sacred and Important Action. It is therefore also distinctly ascribed to Every
Person of the Blessed TRINITY. To the FATHER, in Mat. 9.31. To CHRIST the SON,
in Acts 20.24. and Ephesians. 4.8 -- 13. And to the HOLY GHOST, in Acts 20.28.

THEY do not only all concur in this great Affair by Their Will, Appointment
and Approbation; But They have every One a peculiar Work and Influence in
providing Ministers and committing the Care of Your Souls unto Them. The FATHER
has willed and given Them to the SON Joh. 3.35. and 13.3. and 17.1 -- 12.
to purchase and bestow on the needy Souls of Sinners. The SON has purchased
Them and the Power of bestowing Them Mat. 28.18 -- 20.
on the Souls of Men. The HOLY GHOST does accomplish and introduce Acts 20.28.
Them into Their Sacred Office.

BUT We are directed in the Holy Scriptures to have a peculiar View to GOD the
SON in ordering Ministers to take the Care of You. He is represented upon His
Ascent on High, as the Sovereign Lord and Ruler of the whole Creation, and as
giving Them this Divine Commission Ephesians. 4.8 -- 13. and 1 Timothy 1.1, 12.
. The Care of Your Souls is committed to Your Ministers in such a peculiar
manner by CHRIST Himself the Savior of them, and Lord of all Things. But

III. BY what Ways and Means is it performed and effected.

HE may constitute such Rulers over You either by His Appearance in Humane
Nature, as He did Our Apostles and the First Disciples; Or by the miraculous
Descent of His HOLY SPIRIT, as He often did in the early Ages of Christianity.
But such Extraordinary Ways as Those are long since ceased, and now He does it
by such Ordinary and common Ways and Means as These.

1. BY Your lawful Choice or Consent. 2. BY Their Acceptance. 3. BY Their
Solemn Ordination. 4. BY the Scriptures, His revealed Word. 5. BY the Operation
of His HOLY SPIRIT.
1. Your Ministers have the Care of Your Souls committed to Them by Means of
Your lawful Choice or Consent.

YOUR Choice or Consent is Lawful when it is freely and fairly made by the
Greater Part of the Society, and the Other have no Objection to Their
Unsuitableness or Insufficiency to take Care of Your Souls. And that every
Community has a Right to such a Choice, is most plainly founded on the Laws of
Nature, which are the Laws of CHRIST Joh. 1.1 -- 10.
. The Apostles discerned it, and acted according to it in an inferior Office,
in Acts 6.3 -- 6. They directed the People to choose Their Deacons, in Their
Presence; and then the Apostles ordained Them. If We have a Right to choose Our
Officers to take Care of Our Earthly Treasures and Bodily Wants; We have
infinitely a greater Right to the Choice of Those who are to take Care of Our
Immortal Souls, which are infinitely more precious and dear unto Us, and the
Salvation of them of infinitely greater Moment! Mat. 16.26 Mark 8.36, 37.
.

THIS is therefore a plain Institution of CHRIST, Both by the Laws of Nature,
and Apostolical Example and Precept. And thus by means of Your lawful Choice,
He commits the Care of Your Souls to Your Spiritual Guides and Rulers.

2. HE does it also by Their Acceptance of Your lawful Choice.

YOUR Election does not give Them a Power to rule or take Care of Your Souls:
For They must Accept the Choice, or They have neither the Power over You nor
the Care of You. Your choosing and determining on Them to be Your Spiritual
Rulers does no more than give Them a Right of determining on You for Their
peculiar Charge. It does not impose a Necessity on Them to be Your Ministers.
They have the Liberty left Them to judge, Whether it may be more serviceable to
the Interest of CHRIST to accept or deny. When They accept; They are then Your
Spiritual Guides and Rulers by Right, and by Right and Title You are Their
Charge. They have not yet the Power of Rule and Care, till They are set apart,
ordained and devoted to this Sacred Office. By Your lawful Choice and Their
Acceptance They are entitled to the Investiture of the Care and Government of
You: But They have not the Power till They are ordained, Acts 13.1 -- 3. Numb.
8.10, 22.

BY Accepting Your lawful Choice, They consent to receive and take the Charge
of Your Souls, and so CHRIST commits it to Them.

3. THIS is therefore conferred on Them by Their Solemn Ordination.

YOUR choosing Them and Their accepting is such a Call of CHRIST, and intitles
Them in such a manner to Their Ordination; that if They be duly qualified,
None may refuse it. By ordaining Them, the Power of taking Care of Your Souls
is actually committed to Them: And They do actually receive it, and lay
Themselves under the most Solemn Vows and Obligations to take Care of Them.
They are to make it Their great and principal Concern and Busi^ess, in
Submission to the Glory, Will and Providence of CHRIST Their Sovereign.

BUT Their Power and Office are derived from CHRIST: And it is He that really
commits the Charge of Your Souls to Your ordained Ministers. He has appointed
Other Spiritual Rulers to represent him in this Authoritative Work of
Ordination: And it is by such as These, and not by any Others unless in Cases
of Necessity, that He fixes Spiritual Guides and Rulers over You, and commits
the Care of Your Souls unto Them, Acts. 6.3. and 14.23 With 1 Timothy 4.14. and
5.21. 2 Timothy 2.2. Tit. 1.5. Heb. 7.7.
.

4. HE does it also by the Commands and Precepts of His Revealed WORD.

THE Holy Scriptures are the Fruits of His Purchase and Prophetical and Kingly
Office. He has inspired them by his infallible Spirit, and confirmed them by
incontestible Miracles, and made them the Source of Spiritual Power and the
Rule of Our Proceedings. He has given them for our Direction in the choosing
and ordaining His Ministers and the Discharge of Their Office. He therein shows
Their Endowments and Work, and gives Them their Divine Commission 1 and 2
Epist* Tim. Tit. etc.
. He therein impowers Them to rule and take Care of the Souls of Those They are
set over, and lays on Them the heaviest Charges and Obligations to attend to
this most important Business.

IF We therefore look in the Holy Scriptures, we shall see that He therein
commits the Care of Your Souls to Your Ministers in a particular and awful
Manner. At the Instant of Their Ordination, He commits the Care of Your Souls
to Them by His Revealed Word, and puts Them under all the Solemn Charges and
Obligations that are delivered in it.

HE does it by such External and visible Means as These. But,

5. AND Lastly, He does it likewise by a real though invisible Operation of His
HOLY SPIRIT.

CHRIST is exalted to the Head of all Rule and Authority, and all Affairs and
Things in Heaven and in Earth are really and continually subject to His Care
and Government Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
. But He rules on Earth by His Omnipresent, Alwise and Almighty SPIRIT Joh.
16.7 -- 15. 1 Cor. 12.1 -- 11, etc.
. By This He inclines and qualifies particular Persons for Divine Employments,
and gives Them Opportunities of Laboring in them. By This He makes Them
successful, approved, esteemed, and disposes the Hearts of His People to Them.
By This He influences and directs in Their Choice and Acceptance and Solemn
Consecration to Their Sacred Office. By This He therefore secretly though
effectively calls and ordains Them, and thereby investeth Them with Spiritual
Care and Government. This is His ever and all-over-ruling Agent in the lower
World: And by This He constitutes Spiritual Rulers and gives Them Authority,
and commits the Care and Oversight of Souls unto Them, Acts 20.28.

AT the Instant of Their Ordination according to the Directions of CHRIST, His
HOLY SIPRIT* does actually then commit the Care of Your Souls to Them: And this
is one of those Things implied in the Imposition of Hands.

THIS is the Committing Your Souls to Their peculiar Care, and by such Persons,
Ways and Means as these is it performed and effected. Our

PROP. II. THEN is -- That it is therefore Their special Business to Watch for
Them.
BY special Business I mean both Their peculiar Employment, and Their most
important Concern and Duty. Having received the Charge of Your Souls, They are
under the greatest Obligations to Watch for them: And this is to be Their most
zealous Desire, Endeavor and Labor. It is to be Their Principal Design and
Employment: And Their other Cares are to be conformed and subordinate to it.
The Work is of such great Importance, Difficulty and Variety; that They had
need apply Themselves entirely to it, and allow no other to divert or hinder
Them. Your Souls are immortal and so exceeding precious, that nothing may be
omitted that can be done for the Security of Your Eternal Welfare and Salvation.

BUT I shall endeavor to clear this Point by considering these Two Things as
fully as the Time will allow.

1. WHAT does this Watching for Your Souls imply. 2. WHEREIN is it to be
e^ercised or expressed.
I. LET Us consider what does this Watching for Your Souls imply.

1. THE Greek (...) is translated by Junius and Tremellius into a Word Vigilant.
that signifies to keep awake, to sit up in the Night, and to be very vigilant
and careful. A Word of the same Derivation (...).
is used by Our Apostle in 2 Cor. 6.5. Where He tells us of Himself and
Timothy, That They approved Themselves in all Things as the Ministers of GOD,
-- In Labors, in Watchings, etc. And in Chap. 11.27. Are They Ministers? -- I
am more, -- In Weariness, in Painfulness, in Watchings often, etc. As Instances
of this, Estius cites to Acts 16.25. and Chap. 20.7. Where We read of the
Apostles Praying and Preaching till Midnight for the Souls of Men.

IN a Literal Sense, Your Ministers are many times to keep awake and watch and
study for your Souls Salvation, and deny Themselves the Rest and Ease that You
enjoy. They must keep awake and watch, says Pareus, while others are sleeping
in Quiet. They are often watching and praying for Your Souls in the Night,
while You are neglecting them, and even allowing Yourselves in Sin.

HOWEVER, the Word is here of a Metaphorical Sense: And may be taken from
Physicians and Nurses, who sit up and watch for the Sick, and deny Themselves
Sleep and Rest for Their Relief and Comfort. They stir up Themselves and shake
off Their natural Drowsiness, and watch for every good or evil Symptom that
appears in their Patients: They carefully observe every Circumstance and
Motion; They are attentive to all Their Complaints and Wants, and are ready to
administer Medicines and Cordials to Them.

THE Ministers of CHRIST are not then to indulge Themselves in Negligence or
Ease: But attend on Their Charge with a wakeful and lively Spirit. They have
the Care of many Souls that are dying and perishing, or drooping and helpless,
and need Their Assistance. They must watch for all the dangerous or hopeful
Signs that appear in Them. They must hearken to Their Complaints, and observe
Their Wants, and be continually ready to relieve and comfort Them.

THUS Our Savior calls Himself a Physician, Mat. 9.12 Mark 2 17. Luke 5.31.
. And Our Apostle with Sylvanus and Timothy, liken Themselves to tender and
careful Nurses, 1 These. 2.7.

2. BUT Beza renders the Word in Our Text by Another Excubant.
that signifies to lie out, to stand Sentry, to keep Watch and Ward, or stand
upon the Guard in a Time of Danger. In this Sense it alludes to Soldiers, who
are appointed to watch both for the Preservation of Themselves and the rest of
the City or Army. Those especially that are Leaders or Captains, are to be
continually apprehensive of Evils and Enemies from every Quarter, and to be
looking out sharply for every first Appearance of Them. They must watch over
Their Soldiers to see that They observe exact Order and Discipline. And They
must also be very attentive to Their State and Wants, and observe every
Beginning of Mutiny, Complaint or Disturbance.

Agreeable to this the Word is used in Three other Places in the New Testament,
and in them all is joined to the Exercise of Prayer in a Time of Danger. Thus
Our Apostle prescribes it as a most important Duty to the Christian Warrior,
in Ephesians 6.18. And thus Our BLESSED SAVIOR exhorts His Disciples to Take heed,
Watch and Pray; For They know not the Time when the Son of Man will come,
Whether at Even, Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or early in the Morning,
Mark. 13.33 -- e Luke 21.36.

THUS the Church is called a City Heb. 12.22.
, the Members Fellow- Citizens Ephesians. 2.^^.
, and the Ministers Watchmen in several Places of Holy Scripture Isai. 52.8^
etc,
. It seems to be likened also to an Army with Banners, Cant. 6.4, 10. The
Ministers of CHRIST are styled Soldiers by Our Apostle in Phil. 2.25 And 2 Timothy
2.3, 4.
. And in the preceding Part of our Text, and the Seventh and Twenty-fourth
Verses, He calls Them, (...), i. e. Governors, Captains or Leaders, as We have
observed the Word may be rendered.

THE Ministers of CHRIST are therefore diligently to watch for the Societies
and Companies that are committed to their Care and Government. They are to look
and see that You keep exactly to Order and Discipline. They must observe Your
Wants and Temptations, and every Beginning of Dissension and Discord. They must
expect and narrowly watch for Enemies on all sides, and carefully warn You of
Them and provide against Them; that They may not successfully assault or
undermine You.

3. BUT after all, I am apt to think, that the Word rather alludes to
Shepherds, and that Our Apostle had a particular Regard to Them in this
excellent Allusion. Especially considering the following Word (...) more
commonly signifies over than for, and the Clause may rather therefore be
rendered, -- They watch over Your Souls, which is a Pastoral Phrase, or a
Phrase that seems to be peculiar to Shepherds; as denoting that Simplicity,
Care and Tenderness which They usually manifest in watching over Their exposed
and innocent Flocks. They continually and carefully survey them; to defend them
from Destroyers, to keep them from wandering into Mischief, and that not One of
them may be missing or lost for want of looking after.

THUS Our Blessed Savior tells Us that He is the Good Shepherd, and His
Disciples the Sheep, Joh. 10.12, 14 So Mat. 26.31.
. Our Apostle calls Him the Great Shepherd, in the Twentieth Verse succeeding
Our Text. The Apostle Peter calls Him the Shepherd and Bishop [or Overseer] of
Your Souls ^sti^^.
; as the Word (...) imports, and is therefore rendered in Acts 20.28: And the
Chief Shepherd, (...) i. e. The Prince of Shepherds, implying that there are
Others under Him, 1 Pet. 5.4. We find Our Savior accordingly committing the
Care of some of His Sheep and Lambs to this very Apostle, in Joh. 21, 15, 16,
17. And afterward We have the same Apostle exhorting the ^^ders of the Church
of the Lesser Asia to Feed the Flock of GOD among Them: [ Taking the Oversight
thereof (...).
:] Not by Constraint, but willingly: Not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind,
1 Pet. 1.1. and 5.1, 2.

THIS Watching for your Souls does therefore intimate That singular Care and
Solicitude which is required of the Pastors of the Flocks of CHRIST ^stiu^.
.

IT implies that Your Souls are exceeding Precious, and in dreadful Hazard:
That They are in Danger of devouring Enemies and of going astray, and have need
to be carefully looked after: That Your Faithful Ministers are aware of this,
and extremely moved with the Sight and Prospect: That They are full of Tender
Compassion, Concern and Solicitude about Your Eternal Welfare and Salvation:
That They entirely devote Themselves to take Care of Your Souls, and mind
nothing in the World if They can but save them: That They watch for You, as for
Those They highly value, and dearly love, and are exceeding loath should be lost
and perish for ever: In Fine. It implies as Pareus observes, the extraordinary
Dangers and Difficulties of the Ministerial Office; and those innumerable
Labors, Cares and Troubles which it is filled withal.

THIS and a great deal more is implied in Our Watching for Your Souls. But We
must now proceed to consider,

II. WHEREIN is this Watching for Them to be exercised or expressed.

A LEARNED Man (...).
observes, That the Word imports a Watchfulness, not only with the greatest
Design and Care; but also with the greatest Diligence and Endeavor against
Troubles, Dangers and Oppositions, i. e. The Design and Work of Your Ministers
is entirely to take Care of Your precious Souls, and by all Means to preserve
and save Them. To keep Them from Backsliding, Sin and Evil: To instruct and
feed Them: To promote Your Obedience, Grace and Comfort, and lead You safely to
Eternal Happiness* For this End has CHRIST ordained Their Office, and fixed Them
in it, and herein do They continually Labor. Though the Phrase of Watching for
Your Souls does principally then intend the peculiar Manner of Our discharging
the Ministerial Work; Yet the Whole Employment is likewise here comprised.

IT will be impossible for Me to mention, and much less insist on the various
Duties included in this most extensive Office. My Endeavor therefore under
this Enquiry must only be a summary Enumeration of them. And that We may see
them in a clear and easy Light, I shall lay down this comprehensive PROPOSITION
as a General Answer.

THAT Our Ministerial Watching is to be exercised and expressed By a careful
Observance of the Spiritual Circumstances of Every Soul committed to Us, and by
Doing all we know is needful for Their Welfare and Salvation.

THERE are Three Particulars contained in this General Proposition.

1. THAT Every Soul committed to Us is the Object of our Care and Watch. 2.
THAT We must carefully Observe the Circumstances and Cases of them. 3. THAT
Hereupon We must Do all We know is needful for Their Welfare and Salvation.
1.) EVERY Soul Committed to Us is the Object of Our Care and Watch.

IF We watch for Any, We must watch for All: For They are equally committed to
Our Spiritual Care, They are all Immortal, and in the Kingdom of CHRIST there
is no Distinction Romans 10.12. and 1 Cor. 12.13.
. The Great and Small, the High the Low: The Honorable and Mean, and Those in
Superior and Public, or Inferior and Private Stations. The Rich the Poor, the
Prosperous and Afflicted, the Respected and Despised, the Good the Bad, the Old
the Young, the Wise the Foolish. In Fine, of every Sex and Age and Temper: Of
every Ability, Character, Order, Circumstance and Employment.

THE Great and High and Honorable, and Those in Public Stations are not above
Our Watch: They are equally subject to the Dominion and Laws of CHRIST, and
They need it as well as Any. The Common People are also the Objects of it. The
Small and Low and Mean are not beneath it: Their Souls are equally precious and
dear to CHRIST, and He died for Them as well as Others. The Respected, Rich and
Prosperous are to be observed by Us: And the Despised, Poor, Afflicted are as
much as They in Spiritual Things to be remembered and regarded. The Parents and
their Children: The Master and the Servant: The Mistress and her Handmaid Ephesians.
6. Col. 3. and 4, etc.
: The Jew, the Greek, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, Male or Female: For Ye
are all one in CHRIST JESUS, Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.28.

WE must Therefore Watch, and as Our Apostle exhorted the Ephesian Elders, We
must remember His great Example, Who ceased not to warn Every One Night and Day
with Tears, Acts 20.31. We must Preach CHRIST, as He tells Us of Himself and
Timothy: Admonishing (...).
Every Man and Teaching Every Man in all Wisdom; That We may present Every Man
Perfect in CHRIST JESUS: Whereunto We must also Labor; striving according to
His Working, which works in Us mightily, Col. 1.28, 29.

2.) WE must carefully observe Your Spiritual Circumstances and Conditions.

AND here We may briefly consider these Two Things.

1. WHAT those Spiritual Circumstances and Conditions are which We must
observe. 2. THE Ways and Methods We must take for the Observance of them.
(1.) LET us consider briefly what those Spiritual Circumstances and Conditions
are which We must Observe.

THEY are innumerable and exceeding various, and no Humane Mind can imagine
them all. But They may be reduced to these Four Heads.

1. THE Spiritual State Your Souls are in. 2. THE Dangers They are exposed to.
3. YOUR Lives and Actions. 4. YOUR incumbent Duties.
1. WE must carefully Observe the Spiritual State Your Souls are in.

WE must Observe Your Knowledge, Ignorance and Mistakes of the Things of GOD.
The Appearances of the Life, Declensions and Increase of Grace: And the Power
and Prevalence of Sin and Lust. The Signs of Covetousness, Voluptuousness and
Ambition: The Rise and Growth of Vanities, Follies, Errors, Enmities and
Contentions. We must observe Your Spiritual Deficiencies, Decays and Wants:
Your Weakness, Imperfections and Infirmities: And the Discouragements,
Darknesses, Griefs and Troubles Your Souls are involved in and laboring under.

2. WE must carefully Observe the Dangers They are exposed to.

THE Temptations that lie before You, from the World and Satan and Your own
Corruptions. The Temporal and Spiritual Judgments that may be impending over
You. The pernicious Errors and Delusions You may be in Danger of: And that
Spiritual Indifference and Apostasy We are all so exceeding prone and subject
to. We are to observe Your Danger of losing Your lively Sense and Concern of
the Things of GOD: And that Presumption and Despondency that are so threatening
and destructive to the Souls of Men.

WE must watch for Your Souls, says Pareus, That they may not be infused or
seduced and perish by Mistakes and Erroneous Doctrines; But by a true and
upright Faith and Life may obtain Eternal Happiness. Agreeable to this Our
Apostle observes to the forementioned Elders of the Church at Ephesus; -- That
grevious* Wolves would enter in among Them, not sparing the Flock, and of Their
Ownselves would Men arise speaking perverse Things, to draw Disciples after
Them: And Therefore He exhorts Them to Watch, etc. Acts 20.29 -- 31.

3. We must also carefully Observe Your Lives and Actions.

WE must watch over Your Behaviors and Carriages to One another: To Your
Families, Relatives and Neighbors: Your Fellow Members and Fellow Christians,
and Others of every Condition, Rank and Order. We must see whether You fill up
the Duties and exercise the Virtues of Your several Places, Stations and
Employments. Whether Your Words, Discourses and Conversations be as become the
Gospel of CHRIST, which You seem to make a Profession of Phil. 1.27.
. Whether Your Managements, Enterprises and mutual Dealings be conformable to
the Rules of Charity, Justice and Integrity. More especially, Whether Your
Religious Actions and Behaviors are according to the Precepts, Examples and
Directions of the Holy Scriptures.

IN short, We must observe when You walk aright, and whenever You go astray: i.
e. Whether You visibly deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live
Soberly, Righteously, and Piously in this present World, as the Grace of God
has taught You, in Tit. 2.11.12.

4. AND Lastly, We must therefore carefully Observe Your incumbent Duties.

WE must not only take a careful Notice of what you really do; but even
likewise of what You ought to do. We must consider the various Privileges
which You are favored with, and the various Duties arising from them. Your
diverse Gifts, Endowments and Abilities of Doing Good: And Your Providential
Powers and Opportunities of employing and improving them. In Fine, We must
observe Your several Duties both to GOD and Others and Yourselves: And see that
You do not knowingly neglect them, or slightly perform them.

WE must make Our careful observance of such Things as These; or We shant know
how to deal with You, and are not and cant be faithful Watchmen for Your Souls.
But We must now consider,

(2.) THE Ways and Methods which We needs must take for Our Observance of Them.

THEY are briefly such as These --

WE must endeavor to know and be familiarly acquainted with You. We must be
with You at all Seasons, and go from House to House, as Our Apostle did among
the Ephesian Christians, Act. 20.18, 20. We must frequently Visit You Jer.
23.1, 2.
, and in Wisdom ask and inform Ourselves of Your Affairs. We must endeavor to
convince You by Our Looks, Behavior, Words and Conduct, That We are sincere
and hearty Lovers and compassionate and faithful Friends of Your Precious
Souls, That You may be free and open in revealing Your Cases to Us. We must
upon all Occasions observe Your Carriages, Actions and Discourses. And Finally,
We must with Decency inquire of Others that are likely to give us a true,
unprejudiced and certain Information of You.

BY such Means as These are We to watch over You, and carefully observe Your
Spiritual Circumstances and Conditions.

FROM hence we may by the way observe, That the Ministerial Office is attended
with a World of Difficulty, Danger and Uneasiness: And it always was, and is,
and ever will be a most ungrateful and hateful Office to loose and wicked
People, who cannot abide to be faithfully watched over, or looked after.

BUT we must ever remember the Wise Man's Words, as though they were continually
sounding from the Mouth of CHRIST in Our Ears, as being applied to His
Under-Shepherds with exceeding great Propriety. Prove. 27.23. Be thou diligent
to know the State of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds. For if this be the
Husbandman's Duty with respect to perishing and brutish Creatures, that are
slain at last for Humane Use; Of what infinitely greater Concern is it, That We
should be diligent to know and look well to the Flock of CHRIST, the most
Precious and Immortal Souls of Men, which He has shed His Blood and laid down
His Life to purchase and redeem, and has committed to our Care?

3.) HEREUPON, We must do all we know is needful for Your Welfare and
Salvation. And,

1. IN General.

WE must in Private often think of You, and consider, meditate, pray, contrive
and study for You. We must always have an Eye to Some or Other, and All as much
as possible, in the Composition of Our Sermons.

WE must Watch by Dispensing the Word of GOD, By Praying in Public with and
for You, By Exercising Discipline among You, and Disputing Acts 17.17. and 19.9.
and Defending the Truths of the Gospel Dickson ex Pareo.
. We must constantly preach, instruct, interpret, expound, exhort and warn in
Public. We must administer the Sacraments Mat. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 11.23 -- 26.
Acts 20.11.
, and also plain and open Admonitions, Rebukes 1 Timothy 5.1, 2, 19, 20.
and Censures Tit. 3.10, 11.
, as the Case requires. We must take Care of You by Ruling well and laboring
in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.5. and 5.7.

WE must not only Teach You Publicly, but also from House to House, Testifying
-- Repentance toward GOD and Faith toward Our LORD JESUS CHRIST: As our
Apostle has set us a lively Copy, Acts 20.20, 21. We must exercise our Watch
over You by familiar Converse and Acquaintance. We must manifest Our Concern,
Respect and Love, by the Wise and Gracious Words of Our Lips, and by kind and
friendly Offices, Actions and Deportments.

WE must also lead You, and illustrate and confirm Our Doctrine, By the fair
and exemplary Patterns of Our Lives and Tempers. We must in all Things show
Ourselves Patterns of Good Works, as well as in Doctrine: Uncorruptness,
Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech which cannot be condemned; that He who is of
the contrary Part may be ashamed, Having no Evil Thing to say of Us, Tit. 2.7,
8. Vid. 2 Cor. 6.3 -- 10. and 1 Timothy ^^ 1. -- 7. and Tit. 1.5 -- 9.
But,

2. MORE Particularly.

WE must inform and let You know Your Dangers, Faults, Mistakes and Duties; and
freely tell Our Minds, and labor by the Holy Scriptures to convince You of
them. We must speak, exhort, rebuke with all Authority, and let none despise Us
Tit. 2.15.
. And yet the Servant of the LORD must not strive; But be gentle to all Men;
apt to teach, Patient, in Meekness instructing Those that oppose Themselves; If
peradventure GOD will give Them Repentance to the Acknowledgment of the Truth,
and that Those may recover out of the Snare of the Devil Who are taken Captive
by Him at His Will, 2 Timothy 2.24 -- e.

WE must warn You of Temptations, Errors, Sins and Sufferings: We must
endeavor to inlighten the Ignorant, awaken the Secure, and affect and move the
Stupid. We must argue, reason Acts 18.4, 1^.
and expostulate with You in Wisdom, Meekness, Earnestness and serious Temper.
We must sometimes correct You with severe Reproofs 2 Cor. 13.8, 10. Tit. 1.13.
: not for the venting Our malignant, exorbitant or selfish Passions; But as
wise and careful Parents do their Children, for Your Advantage. We must
sometimes blame You, and lay open all the Aggravations of Your Sins: And
sometimes commend in Wisdom, or at least approve.

WE must sometimes grieve and terrify, and sometimes encourage and consolate
Your Souls. We must rejoice with Them that rejoice aright, and Praise GOD with
Them. We must sympathize and pity and weep and mourn with Those that weep and
mourn: And carry Them in Our Supplications to the Throne of Grace. We must
especially Visit the Sick and Afflicted, and Pray over Them in the Name of the
LORD, Jam. 5.14, ^5.

IN Short, We must confirm Acts 14.22. and 15.32.
and strengthen Luke 22.32. Acts 18.23.
the Wavering and Uncertain, resolve the Doubtful, caution the Unwary, quicken
the Negligent and Sloathful 2 Pet. 1.13. and 3.1.
, persuade Acts 18.4. and 2 Cor. 5.11.
and urge the Unwilling and Backward, cheer up and animate the Diffident and
Disheartened, advise, direct and guide in difficult Cases, and charge 1 Timothy
6.^7.
, beseech and pray Romans 12 1. 2 Cor. 5.20. and 6.1.
You for Your own Advantage. And to conclude this Head: We must Admonish (...).
v. 12.
the Unruly, comfort the Feeble-minded, support the Weak, bear long with (...).
All: And see that none render Evil for Evil to Any, but ever follow that which
is Good, both among Yourselves and all Others: As Our Apostle seems to exhort
the Thessalonian Ministers Zanch. ex Graec. Schol.
in 1 These. 5.14, 15. Our

PROP. III. THEN is This, That Your Spiritual Rulers must give Account of Their
Charge.
AS They have solemnly received it at the Hands of CHRIST, They must also give
an Account.

IT is an Allusion to Stewards, says Estius, from whom Accounts are required of
Their Administration, and who are blamed if any Thing be lost which was
committed to Them. They must give an Account; i. e. Of Their Dispensation and
Stewwardship, says Junius In Pol. Synop.
: No doubt alluding to 1 Cor. 9.17. Where Our Apostle tells Us, That A
Dispensation was committed to Him So in Ephesians. 3.2 Col. 1.25.
. The Word is (...); i. e. Stewardship, As (...) is Twice translated Stewards,
and expressly applied to the Ministers of CHRIST in the Fourth Chapter of the
same Epistle, in the First and Second Verses; in Tit. 1.7. and 1 Pet. 4.10.

IN all those Places the Ministers of CHRIST are sty^ed the Stewards of GOD. In
that 1 Cor. 4.2. Our Apostle observes, That of such it is required that They be
found faithful: And in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Verses, that They will be
judged of the LORD when He comes, Who will bring to Light the hidden Things of
Darkness, and will make manifest the Councils of the Hearts.

WE must give Account, as They are obliged to do that are entrusted with the
Management and Dispensation of what belongs to Others; Which is the certain
Case of every Minister of CHRIST J. Ca^^l. in Pol. Synop.
. It is taken here for granted that We Must give up our Account, and are under
such a Necessity to it, as it will be absolutely unavoidable. Agreeable to this
Our Apostle tells Us in the preceding Verse of that 1 Cor. 9.17. That as A
Dispensation or Stewardship was committed to Him; So says He in the Sixteenth
Verse, I have nothing to Glory of: For Necessity is laid upon Me: Yea, Woe is
Me if I Preach not the Gospel.

BUT I shall endeavor to clear the Proposition before Us, by considering these
Three Particulars.

1. TO Whom are They to give Account. 2. WHAT is Implied in this. And 3. WHEN
are They to give it.
I. LET Us briefly consider, To Whom are Your Ministers to give an Account.

IT is to GOD, as a Learned Man Estius.
expounds it: i. e. To GOD in the Person of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST; Answerable
to what Our Apostle asserts in Romans 14.10 -- 12. We shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of CHRIST: For it is written, As ^^ve, says the LORD; Every Knee
shall bow to M^* and every Tongue shall confess to GOD; So then Every One of Us
shall give an Account of Himself to GOD.

AGREEABLE to this, Our Apostle speaks of Himself as a Minister of CHRIST, and
a Steward of the Mysteries of GOD; That it is the LORD who was to judge Him, 1
Cor. 4.1 -- 5. By the LORD is here plainly intended the LORD JESUS CHRIST, as
Our Apostle gives Him this distinguishing Character in Phil. 2.9 -- 11.
Wherefore GOD also has highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name which is above
every Name: That at the Name of JESUS every Knee should bow, of Things in
Heaven, and Things in Earth, and Things under the Earth; And that every Tongue
should confess, that JESUS CHRIST is LORD, to the Glory of GOD the FATHER.

HE is placed at the Head of all Rule and Empire, and all Things both in Heaven
and Earth are put under His Feet, Ephesians. 1.20 -- 23. He tell Us Himself, That The
FATHER judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the SON, Joh. 5.22 --
27. And He commanded Us to preach unto the People, and to testify that it is
He which was ordained of GOD to be the Judge of Quick and Dead, Acts 1^.42.
Wherefore, We labor, that whether present or absent We may be accepted of Him.
For We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, that every One may
reeceive the Things done in His B^dy, according to that he has done, whether
it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.9* 10.

WE receive Our Charge and Commission from Him: And to Him We must Therefore
resign it, and give up Our Account. And as He sends and imploys Us; so He
continually views and observes Us in the Discharge of Our Office. He bids Us
observe and remember That He is always with Us to the End of the World, Mat.
28.20. If He is always with Us; He always sees Us, and is able to judge
uprightly. While We are watching Others, He is also watching us all with
infinitely greater Intenseness and Care. His Eyes are therefore represented as
A Flame of Fire: Dreadfully piercing and jealous, to behold Our Hypocrisy,
Negligence and Infidelity, and Your Unfruitfulness, Rev. 1.14 Rev. 2.18. and
19.12.
.

BUT We proceed to consider,

II. WHAT is Implied in Our Giving Account.

AND these Four Things are included in it.

1. THAT We give an Account of Ourselves. 2. THAT We give Account of You. 3.
THAT Our Account must be Impartial and Entire. 4. THAT We must give it up in
order to be Tried and Judged.
1. WE must give an Account of Ourselves.

THIS Every Man indeed must do Romans 14.12. Luke 16.2. Mat. 18.23, etc.
. But the Account of Your Ministers will be abundantly greater; As Their Charge
is infinitely more precious and important.

WE must give an Account of Our Accomplishments, Abilities and Opportunities:
Of Our Mispence of Precious Time, Our letting pass Our Seasons of doing Good,
and Our Abuse and not Improvement of Our various Talents. We must give an
Account of what We have spoken, done and studied for Your Souls Salvation and
Eternal Welfare: And of Our Neglect and Carelessness in securing and promoting
them. We must give an Account of Our careful and tedious Expenses, Pains and
Labors: And of Our Sloth and Negligence in watching over You.

WE must give an Account whether We have Prophesyed, or Expounded according to
the Analogy of Faith: And have attended to Our Ministry, Teaching, Exhortation,
Distribution and Rule with Simplicity and Diligence Romans 12.6 -- 8.
. Whether We have given Ourselves to Prayer and the Ministry of the Word Acts
6.4.
. Whether We have Taken heed to the Min^stry We have received of the LORD, that
We might fulfill it Col. 4 17.
. In Fine, Whether We have Preached the Word, and have been Instant in Season,
Out of Season; and have reprov^d, rebuked and exhorted with all Long-suffering
and [needful] Doctrine: As Our Apostle most solemnly charged Timothy before GOD
and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, Who shall judge the Quick and Dead at His Appearance
and Kingdom; in 2 Timothy 4.1, 2,

2. WE must also give an Account of You.

THUS several Copies add (...) to (...) Mi^^s.
: And accordingly Junius and Tremellius insert the Translation into their
Version, and read it -- Those that must give an Account [of You.] The
Alexandrian Copy Wetstenius.
has left the Words Transposed, and writ them thus, -- For they watch as Those
that must give Account of Your Souls.

WE must watch over You, and give an Account of You to CHRIST that imploys Us,
and commits the Care of You to Us. He will requite an Account of Your Souls
from Us, if but One of them perishes through Our Neglect or Fault^.

WE must give an Account of the Suc^ess and Consequence of Our painful Ministry
O^ Your Profiting under it, and of Your Unfruitfulnes^. Of Your Affection,
Reverence, Obedience (...) to it: And of Your Neglect, (...) and Slight and
Rejection of it. We must (...) an Account of Your various Treatment of Us and
(...) Behavior to Us. Of Your receiving, (...), valuing and loving Us in the
Name of CHRIST: And of Your despising, hating, abusing, (...) and disgracing Us.

3. OUR Account must be Impartial and Int^re.

CHRIST that imploys Us is exact and impartial, and All Things are
[continually] naked and open unto the Eyes of Him with whom we have to do Heb.
4.12, 13.
. He will therefore require an impartial and strict Account: And in order to
this, It must be Int^re and Full, and Nothing that has been done or omitted can
escape the Reckoning.

WE must give an Account whether We have kept back Nothing that was profitable
to You, but have showed You, and have not shunned to declare unto Grotius in
Pol. Synop and Dickson.
You All the Council of GOD; Without which We are not Pure from the Blood of
all Men. And Whether Therefore We have taken he^d to Ourselves, and to All the
Flock over which the HOLY GHOST has mad^ Us Overseers, to feed the Church of
GOD which he has purchased with His Own Blood, Acts 20.20, 26 -- 28.

WE must give an Account of all Our Talents Gifts and Graces, and Opportunities
of improving them for the Good of Your Souls. We must give an Account of every
Power We have abused and neglected, and of every Season we have carelessly
passed away. ^e must give an Account of all Our Pains and Labors and Fatigues
and Burdens; and of all the Discouragements, Unkindnesses, Abuses and Sorrows
we have undergone in Our Work. In Fine* Whether We have Watched in all Things,
endured Evil (...), c. 2. v. 3.
, done the Work of a Preacher of the Gospel (...). Fell.
, and fulfilled (...).
Our Ministry: As Our Apostle charges Timothy, in 2 Epist. 4.5.

4. AND Lastly, We must also g^ve up Our Account in order to be Tried and
Judged.

IF the mere giving up Our Account to CHRIST were all, it would not be so
excceeding solemn and dreadful. But We must give it up that We may be Tried and
Judged, and receive a Recompense. We have the very same Phrase, as Grotius
observes In Pol. Sy^op.
, in 1 Pet. 4.4. Applied to Thos^ who speak Evil of the Followers of CHRIST:
Who shall give Account to Him that is ready to judge the Quick, i. e. the
Li^ing, and the Dead. (...): It Signifys, says that Learned Man In 1 Pet. 4.4.
, Our Giving Account in order to receive Our Reward of Good or Evil, as We have
behaved Ourselves. If We are faithful to CHRIST and You, We shall deliver Our
Souls: But if You perish through Our Neglect, Your Blood will be required of Us.

THIS is asserted and expressed in the most plain and awful Terms in Ezekiel. 3.17
-- ^^ So in Ezekiel. 33.1 -- 9.
* Son of Man I have made Thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel: Therefore
hear the Word at My Mouth, and give Them Warning from Me. When I say unto the
Wicked, Thou shall surely die, and Thou give Him not Warning, nor speak to
warn the Wicked from his wicked Way, to save his Life; the same wicked Man
shall die in his Iniquity: But his Blood will I require at Thine Hand. Yet if
thou warn the Wicked, and He turn not from His Wickedness, nor from His wicked
Way, he shall die in his Iniquity: But Thou have delivered Thy Soul. Again,
When a Righteous Man does turn from his Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, and
I lay a stumbling Block before Him, He shall die: Because Thou have not given
Him Warning, He shall die in His Sin, and His Righteousness which He has done
shall not be remembered: But His Blood will I require at Thine Hand.
Nevertheless, if Thou warn the Righteous Man, that the Righteous sin not, and
He does not sin; He shall surely live, because He is warned: Also Thou have
delivered Thy Soul.

BUT We must now Consider,

III. WHEN are We to give Our Account.

AND there are these Three remarkable Seasons for it.

1. AT the General Judgment. 2. AT the Time of Death. 3. EVEN Every Day.
1. WE must give up Our Account at the General Judgment.

THUS says Estius on the Place before Us. We are Then to do it in a Public
Manner: And every Suffering, Action, Word Mat. 12.31 -- 37.
, Design and Thought Romans 2.11 -- 16.
will be exposed and revealed to all the World Luke 12.2, 3.
. We must openly declare the Pains and Labors We have faithfully taken for
Your Salvation; and the Hardships, Griefs and Troubles We have met with from
You in the Prosecution of it. We must likewise give Account of Our
Unfaithfulness and Neglect; That every Thing in Judgment may be laid in the
Balance, and Those who are Disobedient to the Gospel may be fairly Tried and
Judged and Condemned in Equity.

2. WE must also give up Our Account at the Time of Death.

OUR Ministerial Work is finished when this Momentany Life is ended: And there
is Nothing for us to do in the Grave or State of the Dead for Our Own
Salvation, and much less for Yours Eccles. 9.10.
. The Fruit of Our Labors indeed may follow Us, and by Angelick Messengers may
bring Us every Day a surprising and fresh Revenue and Increase of Joy and
Happiness in the Separate State: Which seems to Me to be the Meaning of that
Expression in Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the LORD; From
henceforth, Yea, says the Spirit, that They may rest from Their Labors, and
Their Works do follow [with (...)
] Them. But Our Watching for Your Souls is at an End when We leave the present
Life, and We then resign Our Commission and Charge to CHRIST, from Whom We
derived it.

OUR Dusty Bodies indeed dissolve and return to the Earth from whence they
sprang: But Our Immortal Spirits still remain and return to GOD Who gave them
Eccles. 12.7.
. They then appear in the Presence of CHRIST the Judge; To give Account and
stand their Trial and receive their Eternal and Just Decision.

THAT there is such a Judgment at the Time of Death, appears from Luke 12.35 --
46. Luke 16.19 -- e. And from Phil. 1.21 -- 23. 2 Timothy 4.6 -- 8. 1 Timothy 6.12 --
16; Compared with 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. 1 Pet. 4.5 -- 7. 2 Pet. 2.1 -- 9. Jude 6, 7.

3. WE must even give Our Account Every Day We Live.

THIS, says a Learned Expositor Owen.
, seems Here to be chiefly meant, By giving up Our Account: And thereupon He
observes, that there are no Conscientious Ministers but Continually represent
to CHRIST the State of their Flocks, and the Success of their Ministry. If They
thrive, if They flourish, if They go on to Perfection; They give Him an Account
of it with Praise and Thankfulness, and bless Him for the Works of His Grace
and Spirit. If They are diseased and unthrifty, if They fall into Decays, or
any way miscarry; They likewise give an Account to CHRIST: They spread it
before Him with Mourning and Sorrow.

THOSE who attend, says He, with Conscience and Diligence to their Ministerial
Employment, have no greater Joy or Sorrow in this World than what accompanys
the Daily Report They present to CHRIST of the Discharge and Success of Their
Work. Much of the Life and Benefit of the Ministry depends on the giving
Account to CHRIST by Prayer and Thanks of the State of the Church, and Success
of Ordinances in it: And Those who live in such a Continual Practice, will find
their Minds engaged thereby to constant Diligence and earnest Labor in the
Discharge of their Duty Owen in Loc.
.

Your Ministers are Every Day to give up their Account both of Themselves and
You. They must Every Day give an Account of what They have observed in You, and
done and studied for You. They must Continually give an Account to CHRIST Who
sends Them, of Their Pains and Labors for Your Salvation, and how They are
entertained and improved by You.

BUT We must now proceed to the

PROP. IV. WHICH is the Consequence of This; viz. That They must therefore
Watch and give up their Account either with Joy or Grief.
I PUT them Both together; Because the Words are -- For They watch -- as Those
that must give Account; (...); That They may do [ This] or [ That] as (...) is
translated in the following Part of the Verse, For [That] is unprofitable for
You.

IT is a Relative Clause, and refers to something expressed before. Something
is to be done by Your Ministers with Joy or Grief: But it is not precisely
said, Whether their Giving their Account, or their Watching for You. It may be
equally applied to Either, and is accordingly construed among Expositors. It is
equally true and natural to apply to Both: And therefore likely, that Our
Apostle had an equal Regard to them. q. d. That They may Perform their Office,
and Give Account thereof with Joy, and not with Grief Fell.
.

IT may be referred says Estius, Either (1.) To their Watching for You. q. d.
That They may cheerfully take Care of You, and not groan under their heavy
Burden. Or (2.) To their Giving up their Account. Being Secure of their
Reward, and not lamenting either for Your Destruction, and the Loss and
Disappointment of the joyful Fruit of their Pains and Labors; Or for Their Own
exceeding Danger, by Your Perishing through their Default.

1. YOUR Ministers will Watch with Joy or Grief.

THEY Watch for Your Souls, etc. That They may do it; i. e. says Junius In Pol.
Synop.
, may do or discharge the Work committed to Them: That They may go on to watch
with Joy; i. e. says Grotius In Pol. Synop.
, with that Alacrity which rises out of Joy and Gladness. You must intermingle,
says He, Your Labor with all manner of Respects and Good Offices; That with a
cheerful Spirit rather than with Regret and Sorrow They may perform their Work,
which is heavy and grievous enough of itself, though You give them no Occasion to
grieve.

THEIR Work is of such a Nature, and of such vast Importance both to themselves
and others; That They must needs perform it with Cheerfulness, or else with
Sorrow. They cannot live in a Medium between them both; Unless They are
Ignorant of their Sacred Office, or are Unbelievers and Hypocrites, or of a
stupid, indifferent and careless Spirit. If They do not watch with Joy and
Alacrity, They must do it with Grief and Mourning.

THE Word is (...) (...): angustus. Mat. 7.13, 14. and Luke 13.24. and inde
(...): Suspirium. Act. 7.34. Romans 8.26.
, and is translated Sighing in Mark 7.34. And so Beza renders it Suspirantes.
. It is Here rendered Grieving by a Learned Man Bp. Fell.
: And is so translated in the Margin of Jam. 5.9, i. e. Heavily complaining of
Those that abuse or injure Us. It is also translated Groaning in Romans 8.23. And
so it is here rendered by Piscator Gementes.
and Junius Cum Gemitibus.
.

A GREAT and Learned Critic Steph. in Concord.
represents the Word to signify Bewailing, Sighing, Sobbing Ingemiscant.
. And Another Grotius in Pol. Synop.
says, It signifies That heavy Grief which is expressed by Groaning; and
whereof We have Our Apostle speaking in 2 Cor. 2.1 -- 3. and 5.2 -- 4. and
12.21. It intimates also that Concern, Anxiety and Grief of Soul, wherewith
Your compassionate and tenderhearted Ministers do lament and mourn when They
watch over a disobedient and unfruitful People. But,

2. THEY must also Give up Their Account either with Joy or Grief.

THERE will be a great deal of Difference in this Respect between the Giving up
Their Account to CHRIST in the Present and in the Future World.

IN this Present World They will ever have sufficient Cause both to rejoice and
mourn either for Themselves or Others. Their Joys and Sorrows will be
interchangeable and temporary, and there will be a various and continual
Success^on of them. For the greater Part by far of their Pilgrimage here on
Earth, They will have Occasion both to rejoice and grieve together. Their Joys
and Sorrows will be intermixed and mingled: And while They give up a good
Account of Themselves with Comfort, They must many Times give a Sorrowful
Account of Those committed to Them. Of Some They will speak to CHRIST with an
Holy Transport of Joy and Gratitude, when for Ot^ers They must lament and
mourn. While They tell of a Believers Grace and Good Works with Pleasure; They
must often remember His Failings, Infirmities and Sins with Sorrow.

BUT this Intermixture and various Succession of Joys and Sorrows shall
terminate with the present Life: And at the Hour of Death, there shall be an
Eternal Separation made between them. The Ministers of CHRIST must then as well
as Others enter into a State of pure and endless Joy, or of unmingled and
endless Sorrow. They must awake and arise from the Dust as the rest of Men,
with perfect and everlasting Rejoicing and Honor; or with complete and endless
Contempt and Mourning. They that are Wise, shall shine as ^he Brightness of the
Firmament: And They that have turned many to Righteousness, as the Stars for
ever and ever, Dan. 12.2.3.

IF We save Ourselves, Our Joy will be complete and full: And if You be saved
with Us, and by Our Endeavor; Your Salvation will be a vast Increase of Our
Joy and Honor 1 The^. 2 ^0.
. If We Ourselves be final Castaways; Our Grief and Mourning will be complete
and endless: And if Your Immortal Souls be lost with Ours, and by Our Neglect
and Sloth; It will be an inconceivable Addition to Our Shame and Anguish.

BUT We must consider briefly these Two Inquiries.

1. WHEN do We Watch and Give Account with Joy. 2. WHEN do We Watch and give
Account with Grief.
I. WHEN do We Watch and Give Our Account with Joy.

I MUST answer this Enquiry by these Two comprehensive Heads, which are
expressed and intimated in the same Verse.

1. WHEN We duly and conscientiously Lead You and Watch for You. 2. WHEN You
are likewise Obedient and Submissive to Our Spiritual Rule and Doctrine.
1. WE do it with Joy, when We duly and conscientiously Lead You and Watch for
You.

WHEN We duly Preserve and Exercise the Authority and Discipline of the Church
of CHRIST. When We keep within the Limits of the Commission We have received
from Him, and act according to the Rules and Directions of it.

WHEN Ye are Witnesses and GOD also, How Holy and Justly and Unblamably We
behave Ourselves among You -- and exhort and comfort and charge Every One of
You, as a Father does his Children; That Ye would walk wor^hy ^f GOD who has
called You to His Kingdom and Gl^ry, 1 These. 2.10, 11.

WHEN We carefuly and continually watch over You, and perform Our Duty to You.
When We take Care of You all, and observe as much as may be Your various
Circumstances and Conditions, and do what We judge is needful for Your Welfare
and Salvation. When Herein, with Our Apostle, We do exercise Ourselves to have
always a Conscience void of Offense toward GOD and toward Men, Acts 24.16.

IN Fine, When We are Examples of the Believers in Word, in Conversation, in
Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity: When We give Attendance to Reading, to
Exhortation, to Doctrine: When We neglect not the [Ministerial] Gift that is in
Us: When We meditate on these Things, When We give Ourselves wholly to them:
And Lastly, When We take heed to Ourselves and to the Doctrine, and continue in
them; For in Doing This We shall both save Ourselves and Those that hear Us.
Thus Our Apostle directs, incourages and assures His Beloved Timothy in 1 Timothy
4.11 -- e.

IF We are continually careful and conscientious in These Things; We shall have
a perpetual Source of Consolation and Pleasure rising in Us, that will diffuse
itself through all the Discouragements and Sorrows We are acquainted with. We may
cheerfully proce^d in Our painful and laborious Work, until We finish Our
Course and Ministry; And then We shall give up Our Account with Perfect Joy.
Though We have labored in vain, and have spent Our Strength for Naught and in
vain; Yet surely Our Judgment is with the LORD, and Our Work with Our GOD: And
though Israel be not gathered; Yet shall We be Glorious in the Eyes of the LORD,
and Our GOD shall be Our Strength, Isai. 49, 4, 5.

2. WE may Watch and Give up Our Account with Joy, when You are likewise
Obedient and Submissive to Our Spiritual Rule and Doctrine.

I HAVE before observed, That by Our Spiritual Rule and Doctrine, I do not mean
Our Arbitrary Dictates and Dominion; Which CHRIST Our Sovereign Lord and Master
has expressly forbidden Us to exercise Mat. 20* 20 -- 28. and* 23.8 -- 11. Luke
22.24 -- 30.
. But I mean the Rule and Discipline ordained by Him and exercised by the
Ministers He places over You; And the Truth or Doctrines which He has evidently
revealed, and They deliver.

THEY watch for Your Souls, and give Account with Joy or Cheerfulness; When You
live in due Obedience and Submission to their Rule and Doctrine. When You
carefully observe the Ordinances, Orders, Laws and Government, which He has
appointed in His Church; And when You live in a peaceable and harmonious
Subjection to them. You Fulfill Our Joy; When Ye be like-minded, having the same
Love [to One Another Fell.
,] Being of One Accord, and of One Mind, Phil. 2.2.

WHEN You duly come and hear, receive and love the Truths We teach; and yield
an exemplary Obedience to them. When Your Actions, Lives and Tempers are the
fair and lovely Transcript of Our Heavenly Doctrines. When In all Things You
adorn the Doctrine of GOD Our Savior Tit. 2.10.
: And when You Grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of Him 2 Pet. 3.18.
. In Fine, When You respect and value Us, because We are the Ministers of
CHRIST, and faithfully watch for Your Souls.

WHEN You do such Things as These; We shall then exceedingly rejoice in Our
Watching over You: Our Work will be Our greatest Delight and Pleasure, and We
shall have a joyful and triumphant Account to give to CHRIST. We may call You
as Our Apostle did His Dear Philippians -- Our Brethren, Dearly Beloved and
longed for, Our Joy and Crown Phil. 3.18, 19.
. We can say as the loving Elder, -- We have no greater Joy than to hear and
find and see Our Children walking in the Truth, in this Present World. And We
may cry out with some sort of Elevation and Rapture, as Our Apostle did to his
Exemplary Thessalonians -- For what is Our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing?
Are not even Ye in the Presence of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST, at His coming? For Ye
are Our Glory and Joy, 1 These. 2.19, 20. But,

II. WHEN do We Watch and Give Account with Grief.

AS this is the entire Reverse of the other Head; So the Contrary Reasons of
Our Grief and Mourning are to be here assigned.

1. WHEN You are Disorderly, Contentious and Disobedient. 2. WHEN We are
Negligent and Unfaithful in Our Sacred Office.
1. WHEN You are Disorderly, Contentious and Disobedient.

WE watch over You, and give Account to CHRIST with Grief of Soul; When We see
You lose Your Reverence of His Holy Laws and Orders, and Your Brotherly Love of
One Another. When a Spirit of Vanity, Pride and Earthliness appears and
prevails among You Phil. 3.18, 19.
. When You abound in Contention, Opposition, Envy; And break the Peace and
Unity of the Members of the Body of CHRIST.

WHEN the Life and Power of Religion seem to decay and dye, and We can see but
little more than the Superficial Form of Godliness. When You don't appear to
profit by Our Preaching to You. When You are guilty of shameful Defects and
Offenses to GOD and Man: And those Passions, Actions, Speeches and Behaviors
that become not the Professed Followers of JESUS CHRIST.

WHEN You Regard not the faithful Admonitions and Reproofs We give You. When
You cannot bear that We should deal plainly with You: And tell You of Your
Errors, Sins and Duties; and exhort, advise and warn You of approaching Danger.
In Fine, When You will not be watched over, observed, rebuked, informed and
counseled by Your compassionate and faithful Ministers: But asperse and blame
Them for taking Care of Your Salvation and Eternal Welfare.

WHEN You do, and persist in such Things as These; You make Us watch over You
with Grief and Heaviness. We mourn and lament Your Unteachableness and Contempt
of CHRIST Fell.
: We sigh with Sorrow for Your Disobedience to Him Deodate.
: You discourage and dishearten Us* That We cannot do Our Work with Joy or
Comfort Cradock.
: We must give Our Account with Regret and Mourning, and bitterly complain
(...) CHRIST of Your Rebellion and Impenitence.

IN Short, If You obey Your Pastors, says Pareus; You will rejoice and elevate
Their Souls, and They will more cheerfully do their Work for Your Advantage.
But if They must grieve and complain to GOD against You; They must yet go on,
but with Heaviness and Mourning: And so You that should be their Comforters and
Supporters will prove their Torturers and Tormenters -- Most cruel and
ungrateful Men!

2. WHEN We are Negligent or Unfaithful in Our Sacred Office; We must needs
watch over You, or at least We must give Our Account with Grief.

IF We are conscious to Ourselves, That We Are Negligent or Unfaithful in this
Divine Employment; It is not possible that We should enjoy any Peace or
Comfort, unless Our Minds are extremely stupid or drowned in dreadful
Infidelity. The Reflection in Our serious Intervals must needs awaken and smite
Us with anxious Concern and Dread: And with Trembling Aw and Horror We must
needs give up Our Account to GOD.

IF We Have been negligent or unfaithful in Our Business; How grievous must it
be to think, That many Souls may be now in an irrecoverable State of Torment
through Our wicked Carlesness and Neglect of them. If We have herein been already
Guilty, and do believe and realize such Things as These; Our Hearts must needs
be wounded and affected with Grief throughout Our remaining Work. And if this
has been Our unhappy Case; We must give up Our wretched Account to CHRIST with
the most afflicting Regret and Shame and Sorrow.

BUT If We Prove at Last to have been unfaithful; Oh! The Confusion that will
cover Us, and the insuff^rable Agony that will fill Our Souls at the Appearance
of CHRIST to Judge Us!

HOW tormenting will be the Reflectio^ of Our Contempt of Him, and Our
Perfidiousness in His Service! What a miserable Account shall We have to offer
to Him, both of Ourselves and Those that have perished through Our Neglect! How
dreadful will His Face appear with Resentment and Displeasure! And what fearful
Looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation to devour Us Heb. 10.27.
! When We Lift up Our Eyes and behold Them that come from the North, And CHRIST
shall say as in Jer. 13.20. Where is the Flock that was given Thee, Thy
Beautiful Flock! What will Thou say when He shall punish Th^e? -- Shall not
Sorrows take Thee as a Woman in Travail! And if thou say in Thy Heart,
Wherefore come these Things unto Me? For the Greatness of Thy Sin are thy
Skirts discovered, and thy Heels made bare.

OH! How will it also strike Us, as a Spear through the Liver, and add to Our
Extremity of Pain and Anguish, To meet with Others that have perished through Our
Unfaithfulness to CHRIST and Them! When we shall see and hear One and Another
Wretched Creature wringing their Hands in Torment, and crying out about Us, --
Oh You Unfaithful, Wicked Minister! My Soul, and My Soul was committed to Your
Care: But You watched not for it: You neglected it: And now it is Lost! Oh it is
lost! It Is lost for Ever! Our

PROP. V. THEREFORE is, That your Spiritual Rulers are to Watch As Those Who
must give Account, That They may do it with Joy, and not with Grief:
THE Particle [ As] is Here of a great Importance and Significance. It Implies
In General, That They must watch in such a manner as it behooves Those who must
give Account to GOD, That They may do it with Joy, and not with Grief. It is
This which renders their Charge so exceeding dangerous and fearful: And they
had need to take the utmost Care how They attend unto it and perform it. The
Consideration and Rem^mbrance of it is of the last Importance to Them: And
should ever influence and make Them extremely careful in their Watching for You.

BUT the Time is so far passed away; That I may not enlarge on this important
Proposition, nor insist on those Particulars that are needful to explain it. I
may therefore only mention the General Heads, and hasten on to a Close.

This Watching -- as Those that must give Account: That We may do it with Joy,
and not with Grief, Implies These following Things.

THAT We do continually remember, The Care of Your precious and immortal Souls
is committed to Us, and shall be required of Us. That We ever keep in Mind a
lively Apprehension of that impartial and exact Account We are to give of Them
and of Our Endeavors for Them, and the Trial and Eternal Decision that will
follow on it. That We therefore watch for Every Soul committed to Us, without
Exception, Omission, or Partiallity 1 Timothy 5.21.
. That We watch over Them with the utmost Caution, Circumspection, Concern and
Care; That not One may perish through Our Neglect Pareus.
.

THAT We do Every Thing We are able and can devise for their Eternal Welfare
and Salvation. That We make the utmost Improvement of Our Powers and
Opportunities for the Security and Advancement of them. That herein We
continually labor with Zeal and Resolution, and without Discouragement,
Interruption or Remissness. That We persevere and Be faithful unto Death, Rev.
2.10. And Ke^p this Commandment without Spot, Unrebuk^able, until the Appearing
of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST; Which in His Times He shall show, Who is the Blessed
and Only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15.

FINALLY, That We watch as Those that are always ready to give up Our entire
and impartial Account to CHRIST: And as He has expressly warned Us in Luke
12.35. That Our Loins be girded about and Our Lights burning, and We Ourselves
like to Men who wait for their Lord when He will return from the Wedding; That
when He comes and knocks, We may open immediately: Blessed are those Servants
whom the LORD when He comes shall find Watching.

THUS have I endeavored as comprehensive and concise an Explication as I could
well contrive of Our Text and Doctrine. I have said no more than I thought was
needful to give You a full and clear Interpretation of this most important
Scripture. I have had no Time to insist on a great many Heads to Illustrate or
Confirm them. The greater Part of my Discourse has therefore rather been an
Enumeration of various Particulars which are included in the Ministerial
Office. It would take up a copious Volumn to clear a Twentieth Part of the
Things delivered. I must endeavor to fill up my Life in the more evident Proof
and Explanation of them.

I SHALL now Improve the Subject in a Special

APPLICATION
OF it To Those whose Souls I am now venturing to undertake the Watch and Care
of, and in a great Measure to be Accountable for to CHRIST. And in this Address
I shall not speak in My Own Name alone, but sometimes in the Name of Your
Reverend Pastor and My Dear Companion in the Ministerial Work.

I. YOU see My Brethren, How exceeding Weighty, Difficult and Hazardous is the
Work We undertake and undergo for Your Salvation.

SUCH, says Calvin, is the Ministerial Office; That it contains both the
greatest Troubles, and the greatest Dangers In Loc.
. An Employment, says Another Learned Man Pareus in Loc.
, So full of Labor, Burden and awful Hazard; That it is a Wonder any should
seek it, who duly weigh the Peril of giving up Their Account to GOD.

1. HOW exceeding Weighty!

IT is Your Precious and Immortal Souls that are committed to Our Care and
Charge! Oh how insupportably heavy is this Load and Burden! If it were not the
Burden and Yoke of CHRIST; We could never be brought to submit unto it, We
could never bear it. We find it to be Work enough, and indeed more than We can
perform aright, to take Care of Our Own Immortal Souls: And how then shall We
take Care of Yours! We are in danger of del^ding Ourselves in the Great Affairs
of Our Salvation: And how then shall We undertake to lead You secure and safe
in the narrow Path of Eternal Life and Happiness! But,

2. HOW exceeding Hard and Difficult is the Work!

HOW prone are We to be negligent and careless of Our Own Souls: And how then
shall We watch for Yours! What Difficulties must We be encumbered with from the
Corruptions, Passions, Selfishness, Wilfulness and Pride of Men; and the
prevailing Vanities and evil Customs of this Declining Generation. How hard is
it to Act against Our native Bashfulness and Unwillingness of offending, and to
be Faithful to You! How exceeding Difficult, if not impossible, to watch over
so many Souls, when We can hardly know Them: And if We do not know Them, They
must needs be miserably looked after!

WHAT need have We of great Degrees of Knowledge, Understanding, Wisdom and
Integrity! What great Degrees of Purity, Devotion and Love and Zeal for CHRIST:
And of Courage, and continual Tenderness of Conscience in His Work and Service!
What need of Humility, Meekness, Patience, Charity, and Benignity of Temper!
What need of perpetual Caution, Fear and Circumspection and painful Labor! In
Fine, What need of every Grace, and the lively, strong and constant Exercise of
them: And especially of Faith and Hope in Things invisible, and of most dear
Compassion and Love to You; As a perpetual Source and Spring of Vigor,
Resolution, Activity, Fidelity, and unwea^i^d Diligence!

3. HOW exceeding Hazardous and Dreadful also is Our Employment!

YOUR Souls are committed to Us by CHRIST Himself, and They will also be
required of Us. If One be lost through Our Neglect, We must answer for it. Oh,
How can We think of this, and not fear and tremble! Our Sovereign Lord and
Judge will be exact and strict at Our future Trial, and We must give up Our
Account impartially and entirely to Him. He is ever present with Us, and
watchful of Us: His Eyes behold, and His Ey-lids try Us Psalm. 11.4.
: And He sees Our Sloth and Negligence, and will bring Them into Judgment.

IT is most awful to Consider, That in such a Number there is no Doubt but many
will for ever Perish: And the dreadful Loss will be charged to Our Account, if
We knowingly omit any Thing that is needful to be done for Your Salvation.

HOW Perilous and Dreadful then is it, to be obliged to give an Account of
You; When if We had not this Charge upon Us, We should never be able to give an
Account of Ourselves Estiu^.
.

YOU therefore see, My Brethren, How exceeding Weighty, Difficult and Hazardous
is the Work We undertake and undergo for Your Eternal Safety.

II. YOU likewise see from Hence the Awfulness and Solemnity of Our Ordinations.

THEY are the Actual Committing the Care of Your Souls unto Us by CHRIST
Himself: The Investing Us with the Power and Office of Ruling and Watching over
You in His Room and Stead, and according to His Institutions: And the Bringing
Us under the most Solemn Obligations to Attend and Fulfill this Ministry. All
the Ministerial Charges of His Revealed Word are now laid and bound upon Us:
And Woe unto Us if We don't observe them!

CHRIST Himself in His Divine and Invisible Nature is really Present with Us:
He is now in the Midst of Our Assembly: He sees the secret Sentiments of all
Our Hearts, and He either approves or is offended. He has provided and
appointed His Ministers to Represent Him in this Authoritative and Sacred Work:
He beholds and authorizes His Institution: He confirms it and efficaciously
gives the Blessing.

BUT the HOLY GHOST is His active and effectual Agent in this great Affair. It
is He that Works on all Our Souls, and inlivens and seals the Institution with
His Powerful Influence. It is He that helps Us all in Our ardent Prayers and
Supplications, and excites the lively Exercises of Our Spiritual Desires and
Faith, for the Graces and Gifts of CHRIST for Your Ministers in the Act of
Ordination and Afterward. It is He that has influenced and overruled, and
brought Us to this awful Juncture: And that now really and effectually
communicates and derives Authority, and commits the Care of Your Souls unto Us,
By the Imposition of Hands and Charges and Prayers and Blessings of the Elders
of His Churches.

IT Must be This HOLY SPIRIT that must rest upon Us and possess Us, and reside
and work (...); or We are fit for Nothing. It is He that must assist and enable
Us, or We con do Nothing: It is He that must inliven and succeed Our Work, or
We work in Vain.

BUT I must leave My Partner Here, And

III. REFLECT a little on what I Myself am going in the Presence of CHRIST to
do.

AND suffer Me Here to confess my Sins, and make My Vows to GOD, and Glory in
My Infirmities; that the Power and Grace of CHRIST, if He pleases, may be
manifest in Me.

IT is amazing, That so worthless and vile a Life as Mine should be preserved
through so many Perils, and restored to this most happy Land. I think never any
One, for whom GOD has done so much in Soul and Body, has abused ^is Grace and
Patience as I have done. He has followed Me with a continual and most peculiar
Train of Kindness from my first Creation: And though Others are not sensible of
My Wickedness; Yet never sure has any been so ungrateful and contemptuous, that
has known so much and received so much, and has had so many Gracious Influences
and Admonitions of His HOLY SPIRIT.

IT is most astonishing to Me, and. I believe to the Holy Angels also; That
after all My Provoking Sins, that CHRIST Himself Who has seen them with
Resentment and Detestation, and now beholds My great Unfitness, through My wicked
Sloth and Negligence, for this Divine Employment, should bring Me under a
Necessity of engaging in it. My Knowledge is so small in the Holy Scriptures:
My Heart so sinful, sordid and impure, and so little devoted to Him: My Views
of CHRIST so faint and mingled with so low a respect unto His Divine Person,
and so small a Regard to His Interest, Will and Honor: And the Life of Grace,
if I have any at all, so languid and declined in Me; That I have a Thousand
Times greater Reason than ever the Prophet had, to cry out with Dread and
Horror Isai. 6.5.
, -- Woe is M^, for I am undone! --

I KNOW not what He designs to do: But This I know; That unless He pleases to
purify My Heart, and give Me a powerful and active Faith, I shall never be able
to bear the Burdens of My Charge, and much less perform My Work with any
Liveliness or Pleasure.

I DESIRE to abhor Myself before Him: To bewail and mourn, and repent from My
Soul of all my Sins and Follies: And to lie with shame and low Abasement at the
Feet of His infinite Grace and Mercy. It is with Awe and Trembling, that I
enter into this Sacred Work: Lest I should prove Unfaithful, and at length a
Castaway 1 Cor. 9.27.
, and have been unhappily now preparing a most dreadful Witness against Myself.
My Chief Encouragement is the Consideration of what He has promised, and can
easily do for Me; Together with His Own external Call of Providence, and the
present seeming Necessity, and the future Need of so Pious and Numerous a
People, that I believe are Dear unto Him.

IN an humble Sense of my great Unworthiness, and Dependence on His HOLY SPIRIT
to sanctify and rest upon Me, and His Gracious Presence with Me; I again Renew
My Covenant, and Devote Myself entirely and for ever to Him: I Particularly
give up Myself to Him in the Ministerial Work: And with a Mixture of Hope and
Trembling, I take the Oversight of this Flock of His, and receive the Care of
Your Souls at His Hands.

LET me now return with My Brother again, And,

IV. OBSERVE from Hence, What need You have to take especial Care, that You do
not Discourage or Grieve Us in Our Work.

THE desperate Hazards We expose Ourselves unto are enough to make Us uneasy
and perplex Us: The Difficulties of Watching, to dishearten, and the Weighty
Care of so many Souls, to sink Us. We have no need to meet with other
Discouragements and Burdens from You of Our Charge. How hard will it be that
You should grieve and trouble Us; While We are undergoing so burdensome and
dangerous and hard a Task for You Dikson
! How unkind will it be for You to vex Us; While We are Studying and Praying
and Watching for Your Eternal Safety, and Accountable for Your Miscarriage!

ALAS! You will also dearly find it what Our Apostle assures Us in the End of
the Verse -- Unprofitable for You* i. e. says an excellent Divine of S^otland
Dickson ex Pareo*
, If perchance any among You should not care for the Troubles, Sorrows and
Griefs of Your Minist^rs; It will turn to Your Hurt. If the Ministers of
CHRIST, says He, are forced ^o mourn for Your Fault; CHRIST will hear their
Groanings while They are employed in His Work; and will severely Vindicate the
Contempt of His Ambassadors.

V. YOU see what Reason there is of Doing all You can for Our Comfort,
Encouragement and Relief.

YOU should be Teachable and ready to Obey, says Calvin In Loc.
; That what Your Ministers ought to do for You, They may do it freely, and with
a cheerful Mind. For if Our Minds be encumbered with Uneasiness and Trouble,
Though We be Faithful, yet We must needs be duller and heavier in Our Work. For
Our Vigor and Activity, and Our Cheerfulness of Spirit will arise and fall
together.

BUT I must draw to a Close with humbly Desiring These Things of You, which I
may just but mention.

1. THAT You would indulge and nourish in You a dear Affection for Us 1 These.
5.12, 13^
; Which You will find of unspeakable Advantage to You in the Fruit of Our
Ministrations. Our Words will thereby enter into Your Hearts with a wonderful
Facility and Pleasure, and from thence appear with a Thousand Graces and lovely
Beauties in Your Lives and Tempers.

2. THAT You would account Us the compassionate and faithful Friends of Your
Precious Souls, and endeavor to cultivate a Peculiar Acquaintance with Us.

3. THAT You would freely Repair to Us under all Your Afflictions and Spiritual
Troubles.

4. THAT You would let Us know how You Benefit and Edify by Our Ministry: Which
will be a great Encouragement and Motive to Us, and help Us to give up Our
Account every Day with Joy.

5. THAT You would continually Remember and Pity Us under all Our heavy
Burdens, and not willingly add to the sinking Load; By raising Disturbances in
the Church, or Reflecting on Us, or slighting Our Ministerial Power and Care,
or any way discouraging or hindering Us in the due Exercise and Improvement of
them.

6. THAT You would always give Us a free and open Access to Your Hearts and
Consciences: And readily and kindly receive the faithful Counsels and
Admonitions We have to give You.

7. THAT You would never forget to pour out Your Earnest Prayers every Day,
both in Your Families and Closets for Us: That GOD would make Us Faithful in
Our Spiritual Rule and Watching over You, that We may continually keep Our
Account clear with CHRIST, And may be able to give it up every Evening, with
Joy or Comfort, and not with Grief or Shame and Mourning.

IN Short, That You would Do all You can to support and help and encourage Us
in Our most weighty, difficult and awful Work; That We may go on and finish it
with Success and Triumph.

VI. AND Lastly. Let Me now most importunately beseech You to raise up Your
Minds, and exert Your Graces, and strive and labor in Your most fervent
Supplications for Me.

THAT Now if ever, the Presence of CHRIST may be sensibly manifest to my Soul.

THAT He would help Me in the deepest Abasement and Self-abhorrence to Repent
of all My Sins, and Relinquish them for ever.

THAT He would Wash Me from them in His Own Blood, and make Me a Priest unto
GOD Rev. 1.5* 6.
.

THAT He would seal the Pardon to Me, and satisfactorily say to My Soul, --
Thine Iniquity is taken away, and Thy Sin is purged Isai. 6.7.
.

THAT He would in a Moment Purify Me from all my Filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.
; And throwly sanctify Me in Spirit, Soul and Body 1 These. 5.23.
.

THAT He would help Me freely to devote Myself to this Sacred Work, and
graciously receive and consecrate Me to it.

THAT He would now take the full^ and absolute and Eternal Possession of Me,
and prepare Me for the comfortable Descent of His HOLY SPIRIT.

THAT He would then, by an Act of His Mediatorial Will and Authority, Present
Me to That Gracious Dispenser of Divine and Sacred Influence, for its
Ministerial Effusion and Blessing.

THAT while His Representatives in His Name and Commission are Laying their
Hands on My trembling Head; the HOLY GHOST may seize on My Soul, and fill it
with a New and Pure and Heavenly Life and Vigor, and Those Divine Operations
that I never have felt before.

THAT It would then rest upon Me, a and make Me Purified and Beautiful Temple,
and show forth Its Glory and the Glory of CHRIST, and ravish every Power in Me
with the Love and Admiration of Him and Devotion toward Him.

THAT He would reside in Me for Ever, and in My Dear Associate in His
Ministerial Employment; And prove an abounding and perpetual Source of all
Varieties of Graces and Gifts and Powers that are needful for the faithful and
lively Discharge of Our Work.

THAT He would fill Us especially with the same Benignity, Compassion, Wisdom,
Resolution, Zeal, and other Indowments which have appeared in Those
extraordinary Luminaries, that in this Golden Candlestick have shined and burnt
out before Us.

THAT We may carefully, continually, and if possible, fully follow the Bright
Examples of Your Renowned Thatcher, Willard, Pemberton, which They have
exhibited to Us.

THAT We may see You Rising in Circumstances of Glory round about Us in the
Resurrection-World; And may be Our Crown of Rejoicing, Exultation, Honor and
Triumph, at the Appearance of CHRIST 1 These. ^.19, 20.
.

AND FINALLY, That When CHRIST the Chief Shepherd shall appear and descend with
His shining Train from Heaven; We with Them may receive Our Flourishing Crowns
of Glory that shall never fade away 1 Pet. 5.4.
.

FINIS.
The CHARGE, Given by the Reverend Dr. INCREASE MATHER, In the Ordination of
Mr. Thomas Prince.
WHEARAS You, on whom we now Impose our Hands, art called unto the Work of the
Evangelical Ministry, in this Church of God, and unto the Office of a Pastor,
in this particular Church of the Lord; We now CHARGE before the Great God, and
our SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, That You Take heed unto the Ministry which you have
Received from the Lord, faithfully to fulfill it, and watch for Souls as One
that must give up an Account unto him: That you feed the whole Flock, whereof
you are now made an Overseer, and therein Study to show Yourself Approved of
God, and a Workn an that needs not be ashamed: That You give your self to
Reading, and Preach the Word, Instruct, Reprove, Exhort, with all
Long-Suffering and Doctrine; That You Administer the Sacraments of the New
Covenant, as a Wise and Good Steward in the house of God* That in Dispensing
the Holy Discipline, with which the House of God is to be ordered, You do
nothing with Partiality: And That You be an Example of the Believers, in Word,
in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, and in Purity.

And if You keep this Charge We declare unto You, that the Lord of Hosts will
give You a Place among His Elect Angels, who doubtless are Witnesses of the
Solemnity, wherein We are now Concerned. Yea, We declare unto You, That if You
do this, when the Lord JESUS CHRIST shall Appear, You shall then Appear with
him in Glory; and He who is the Great Shepherd, will then give You a Crown of
Glory, that fades not away.

The FELLOWSHIP OF THE CHURCHES, Given by the Reverend Dr. COTTON MATHER, At
the Ordination of Mr. Thomas Prince.
IT is confessed by all who have not lost all sense of Religion, and laid aside
the use of Reason, That Ministers of the Gospel, duly furnished and rightly
disposed, for the Glorious Ministry, are very precious Gifts of our Ascended
Redeemer unto his Churches in the World. As a Corrupt, Ignorant, and Vicious
Clergy, is one of the darkest and most comprehensive Infelicities* under which
the Rulers of the darkness of this World, hold it putrefying; Yea, the Grand
Cause of all the Corruption, in which Mankind Lie generally Languishing and
Perishing; And it is not for nothing, that when the Kingdom of our God comes
on, this must be one Introduction and Concomitant of it; Thus says the Lord
God, Behold, I am against the Shepherds; and I will cause them to cease from
feeding the flock; For I will deliver my Flock from their Mouth: So the Reverse
of this is a set of Good Men, inspired with an Holy Zeal to do Good, who like
Angels flying through the midst of Heaven, preach nothing but the Everlasting
Gospel, with the true spirit of it, unto them who dwell upon the Earth;
Certainly such Men are the Stars, whom God calls by their Names; They Shine as
Lights to the World; In their benign Influences, the Blessings of the People
that Enjoy them, are Wonderful! are Wonderful!

Highly favored of God, are the Churches Enriched with Pastors of bright
Abilities, for the building and Serving of His Temple: Able to understand the
Sacred Oracles, even in the Languages wherein they are given us, and Illustrate
them from an intimate Acquaintance with Antiquity: Able to Explain and Apply
the Great Mysteries of Godliness, and rightly to Divide the word of Truth,
laying the Several parts of the Sacrifice with a proper disposal of them, in
their Discourses: Able to maintain the Truth with Armor fetched from the Tower
of David, and Convince or Confound Gainsayers, that go to perplex us with their
Controverses: Ahle to handle their matters wisely, when Cases of Conscience are
laid before them; Able to address all sorts of persons with the Wisdom
requisite unto the winning of Souls; Able to manage Every part of the P^storal
Care, with a Dext^rity that shall adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior: And at
the same time continually dious to grow more and more Able; and with an
Indefatigable Industry filling the Chambers of their Souls, with all precious
and pleasant Riches; That so from immense Treasures the Scribes well-instructed
for the Kingdom of Heaven, may produce Things New and Old upon all Occasions.

Highly favored of God, are the Churches Ennobled with Pastors of an
Experimental and Exemplary Piety: Preachers who Take heed first unto
Themselves, and then unto their Do^trine; And have upon their own Souls a deep
Impression of the Truths which they preach unto others; afraid of preaching a
Sermon unto the People until they have preached first unto Themselves: Men, who
first have God Reigning in their own Hearts, and then do what They can that God
may have His Throne in the Hearts of their Hea^^^s; Men who first have a CHRIST
formed in Themselves, and Lo^ed more than any beloved, and then recommend this
lovely CHRIST unto their Hearers; M^n who are Themselves (...) purified from
all Ill Affections toward their Neighbors, and then persuade their Neighbors
to be well-affected unto one another; Good Livers as well as Good Speakers: and
such as can give a good Answer unto the World making ^his Demand upon them,
What do thou work, that we may see and believe thee?

Highly favored of God, are the Churches beautified with Pastors that are
faithful and prudent Stewards in the House of their God: Pastors, whose
well-adapted Labors for the Instruction, the Conversion, the Salvation of
their People, are unwearied; and who, though they are often Every Week weary in
them, are Never Never weary of them: and count that the Bringing home of any
one Soul unto their only Savior, is infinitely worth all the pains that can b^
taken for it: more to be rejoiced in than all Riches: Pastors who watch, and
watchfully take all Opportunities, both Publicly and Privately to let fall the
most suitable Communications from Heaven upon their people, and contrive that
none may ever come anear them without being the Wiser or the Better for it:
Pastors, who carry on their whole Work, with Incessantly Praying over it; and
be no strangers to whole Days of Prayer, that they may fetch down Blessings
upon their People as well as themselves: Pastors, who have a tender sense of
the Temptations and Afflictions, in which any of their People may be sufferers;
As ready to visit the Poor as the Rich; Ready to hazard their Own Health in
visits to the Sick; Always devising Liberal Things for those that are in want;
Scattering their Alms like the showers of Heaven; Exciteing those of others, if
their own happen to be Exhausted: Pastors, full of projections to Do good unto
all; Exceedingly pleased, if any of the people will but let them know of any
Good they can do for them; and in doing thereof not making any Difference
between those that Oblige them, and those that have carried it very
disobligingly. Finally, Men of God; And therefore Men full of a Glorious
CHRIST: such as cannot bear to be many Hours without some Thoug^ts of a
Glorious CHRIST: such as are Swallowed up with Him; A Conformity to a Glorious
CHRIST, the very Law and Salt and Life of their Life: To be Servic^ale unto a
Glorious CHRIST, the very top of their Ambition: their most Ravishing
Satisfaction! Ministers of the New Testament, who not with a veiled but an open
face, Reflecting (For so the Text is to be read) as from a Glass the Glory of
the LORD, are not only themselves changed into the same Image, but also covey
it unto many about them, from Glory to Glory.

But then, Oh! highly Favored Churches of New England; Which have, as it may
be hoped, many such precious G^fts of Heaven bestowed upon them! Yea, our
compassionate SAVIOR may say unto us, Have not I raised up of your (...) for
such Prophets, and your Young Men for such Separated Ones; Is it not even thus,
O Churches of NEW ENGLAND, Says the Lord! Happy, O thou American Zion, Happy
thou, in having so many of thy own Sons, rising up to take thee by the hand,
and even while they are Young Men, so far to answer the Character of Pastors
after the Heart of God.

It will be no Trespass on the Modesty of my Brother, for me to say, That his
hearty Desire and Study will be to come up unto this Character.

And, Sir, In token of our Prayers and Hopes, that you will prove such an One,
I do now with an Heart full of Brotherly Regard, in the Name of our Churches,
give thi^ Hand unto you. -- It Is done, to testify that We acknowledge You as a
Regularly Elected and Ordained Minister of the Gospel, and as a Pastor of a
Church in an Evangelical Consociation with us. It Is done to testify how Pleased
and Glad we are in the Choice which this Church has made, of such an one to
join with us in the pursuit of our greatest Interests. I do it that I may
certify you of our purpose and promise at all times to Assist you, to
Strengthen you, to Comfort you, as it may be called for. We bless you in the
Name of the Lord. And, if you do what these Churches expect from you: Behold
you^ Glorious Lord, Whom you have sought and served from your Early Childhood,
preparing the White Robes of an Heavenly Priesthood for you; and assuring you;
If thou walk in (...) ways, and if thou will keep my Change, I will (...) day
give th^^ a Place among my Holy Angels, who stand by (...) of (...) Solemnity
with which thou have now taken the Vows of God upon thee.

We congratulate unto this beloved Flock what our Gracious Lord has done for
them, in the Two Pastors, with which they are now accommodated and Illuminated.
The Ex^^^^lent Spirit, and the Substantial and Savoury Entertainments,
wherewith you are blessed in the Pastor, that has been thi^ Five Years feeding
you in the Strength of the Lord, cannon but Exceedingly Endear him to you: as
indeed they do* unto us all. The Pastor which you have now made his Colleg^^
will very much add unto the Fullness of the B^essing of the Gospel, whereof you
know the Joyful (...). The (...) of Two such Ris^^g Sta^^, portends unto you a
(...) of Good; whereof you cannot be defeated, if the Twelfth and Thirteenth
Verses, in the fifth Chapter of the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, be not
forgotten with you. Beloved, We are persuaded better Things of you; We are
persuaded you will be sensible of your Enjoyments; and we are persuaded that as
there have now Seven times Seven Years ran since this Church was gathered, So
you will have something of a Jubil^e in the Joy of what you shall find your
SAVIOR doing for you.

Unto this Capital City of the Province, there belong Ten Assemblies of
Christians, which carry on so Lovingly, and so Peaceably, and so Decently, and
all the Offices of Good Neighborhood, are so admirably cultivated among them,
as to give unto the Bigots of Uniformity a forcible rebuke of their Bigotry,
and a notable proof, how consistent a variety of Rites in Religion may be with
the Tranquillity of Humane Society: and unto the whole World, a Demonstration,
that Persecution for Conscientious Dissents in Religion, is an Abomination of
Desolation; a thing whereof all Wise and Just Men will say, Cursed be its Anger
for it is fierce, and its wrath for it is cruel.

I hope, the Ministers of the Town, will not be the least Instruments of It Is
welfare. If We fail in our Good Carriage unto One another, or unto our people,
do You, O our dear People, advise us of it. But if We may have the Hand of the
Lord with us, and if many may by Our means Be added unto the Lord, the
Consequence will be this; God will bless thee, O Boston; Thou shall be a
Mountain of Holiness, and a Dwelling of Righteousness; and thy name shall be,
JEHOVAH SHAMMAH, The Lord is There.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE HAD By the late Reverend and Learned Mr. EBENEZER PEMBERTON,
Previous to the Ordination Of the Reverend Mr. Joseph Sewall, At BOSTON,
September 16. 1713. Affirming and proving the Validity OF Presbyterial
ORDINATION.

BOSTON: Printed by J. FRANKLIN, for S. GERRISH, and Sold at his Shop near the
Old Meeting House. 1718.

PREFACE.
THE Reader is desired to observe, That the following Discourse is published
from the first and rough Draught of the Reverend Author, and wants his
finishing Hand to have been put to it; Which Advantage if it might have had, it
would doubtless have appeared more Correct in Style and Diction, and with
Enlargements in some parts of it, which I suppose it had in the Delivery of it.
But especially I am prone to think, He would not have let it go out of his
hands without directing the Reader to the particular Pages of the Authors whom
he names and refers us to. Yet as it is, whoever attentively reads it, and knew
Mr. PEMBERTON, cannot but discern evidently here his strong and masterly way of
Speaking or Writing, his close and nervous manner of Reasoning and Arguing, and
that the Discourse is worthy of his known Learning and Reading, and excellent
Judgment. So that I hope I have done an Honor to my deceased Friend, as well
as a Service and Honor to my Country, in transcribing it for the Press, and
shall please and oblige many.

My Wish is, that we could recover, and that the Public might enjoy more of
the Valuable Discourses of this Great Man: But alas, he carried the mighty
Stores and Treasures of his laborious Studies in his own vast Mind, and for the
most part wrote only Hints to himself, to be Enlarged on in the Pulpit, which
he wonderfully performed. So that as the Psalmist speaks of the Princes of the
Earth, we may say here, In the day that his breath went forth, and he returned
to his Earth, in that very day his Thoughts perished: Saving those few which he
has left in Print, and more I trust graven on the Hearts of many by the finger
of GOD.

May the DIVINE SPIRIT bless what is here published for the Enlightening and
Establishing many in the present Truth: And may the Spirit of Peace and
Meekness that breaths every where through the following Argument and adorns it,
rest upon all Christians in their Researches after Truth and Defenses of it.

I desire also to add my thankful Acknowledgement of the Divine Goodness, which
has returned Mr. PRINCE to us to stand up in and fill the place of the
Deceased; at whose earnest desire and instant Motion it is that this Discourse
now sees the light, and accompanies his own Ordination Sermon to the Press: And
while he thankfully takes up this Skirt of the Mantle of his Ascended
Predecessor, may he with a double Portion of his Spirit enter into his Labors;
always bearing in mind those Words of our LORD JESUS, I must work the Works of
Him that sent Me while it is day, the night comes wherein no man can Work.

BOSTON, Nov. 10. 1718. BENJ. COLMAN.

A DISCOURSE, To Prove that ORDINATION By the Hands of the Presbitery, Is Valid
and Regular According to Divine Institution.
THIS Audience cannot but be Sensible that the design of this Solemn Assembly
is to Separate One to the Service of GOD in the Ministry of the Gospel of his
dear SON, by Solemn Prayer, and the Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery.
And I cannot but apprehend it proper and Seasonable to preface this Solemnity
with some brief Account of the Nature of the present Sacred Action, and of the
Grounds on which we apprehend that we regularly according to Gospel Rule are
attending on it. And this I shall endeavor to do with all due deference to the
Godly and Learned, who may see things in another light; and without offense to
any, unless such as are for stretching or cutting all men to their own Measure.
This Account I at present apprehend necessary, as we are Accountable peculiarly
for such public Actions to GOD and Man.

I shall proceed herein gradually, in these steps,

I. It is not to be disputed but that Christ has appointed a standing Gospel
Ministry in his Church, to continue to the Consummation of all things. It was
not a Temporary Constitution, but a Standing Ordinance, that there should be in
all Ages of the Church an order of men to represent his Person, publish his
Laws, exhibit the Promises, and administer Seals and Censures. This seems
evident to a Demonstration, from the Promise of Christ's Presence to be with
his Ministers to the End of the World, Math. 28.20. In that the Reason of such
an Institution of Men to this Service will continue. Their work will: The Lords
Supper is to be administered till Christ shall come: Christ's Church needs such
Ministrations: for the Seculum Spiritus Sancti, such a Dispensation of the
Spirit as shall supercede the Use of Ministry and Ordinances, is not to be
expected till Christ shall come in the Clouds, when the Lamb himself shall be
the Light and Glory. Agreeably we have the End and Duration of the Gospel
Ministry stated, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. For the perfecting of the Saints, till we all
come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ.

II. It is most evident that those who are to serve God in the Ministry of his
Gospel, must be duly Authorized to discharge the Office of a Gospel Minister.
This Honor no man must take to himself but they that are called. The Apostles
Interrogation implies a vehement Assertion; Romans 10.14. How can one preach
unless he be sent? God has not left this Work of the Ministry in common, but
within a Sacred Enclosure, which cannot be broke over without the Efforts of a
Corah-like Spirit.

Now We are to observe two things necessary in Ordinary cases to entitle any to
the power of the Ministerial Office; viz. The Power it self, and the
Investiture whereby they are regularly authorized to the Exercise of that
Ministerial power.

These must be distinguished; for want of which confusion follows. The Power
comes alone from the Head of the Church, by his Commission given in the Gospel
to all Ministers. The Investiture is only requisite unto the regular Exercise
of that power which is given by Christ's Commission. And the Distinction may be
Illustrated by parallel Cases among men. Thus particularly the Mayor of a City,
his Power is one thing, and his regular Introduction into the Exercise of it,
another. The people or Burgesses ele^^; the Recorder or Steward gives him his
Oath; but none of these confer the power, but only (...) the particular Person
who receives his power from the Prince alone, by the Charter of the P^^ce.

So in the Case before us, -- The whole power of a Gospel Minister is from
Christ: for that Charter in the Gospel in which he institutes such an Order of
men states their Work, and qualifications, and appoints what power shall belong
to their Office. And it is not in the power of any men to institute a new
Office. They cannot alter their Work, nor require other Qualifications than what
Christ has stated: for that would be to encroach upon the Authority and
Governing Wisdom of Christ, the great Lawgiver of the Church.

And hence it follows, that it is not the Intention of the Ordainers that can
determine what power a Gospel Minister is invested with. When he is introduced
into the Office, he has all the powers that by the Gospel belongs to that
Office. For the Minister is not of Men; though by Men; as those that invest
regularly with that Authority.

Now the Investiture is by Persons authorized by Christ hereto; whose Business
only is designare personam, to signify that the Person offering himself to the
Ministry has Gospel qualifications for it, and being willing to Dedicate
himself to it, and having Opportunity for the exercise of it, is Commissioned
by Christ, approved as such, charged and commended to the Grace of God. They
declare according to the Grace of the Gosspel, it is the Will of Christ the
great Lawgiver of the Church, that the Person Ordained should officiate in the
Sacred Function, and be under the solemn Bonds and Obligations, and endowed
with all the Privileges and Power that belong to the Office. The Person thus
qualified has a Right before: A right to be admitted, -- and the Investiture
cannot be denied him. It is not at the pleasure of men to deny it.

This Investiture is received in Ordination, performed according to Scripture
precept and precedent. And no man, how qualified soever for the Work, can
regularly exercise this right and power in ordinary Cases (I meddle not with
Cases of Necessity) till he is regularly Introduced into the Ministry and
Invested. Now according to Gospel Order a Minister receives his Investiture by
being separated to this Work by the Imposition of Hands and solemn Prayer, by
which he is commended to the Grace of God: Which Separation by the approved
Ceremony is to be performed regularly only by such as Christ has given a right
and power thus to separate and ordain to the Ministerial Office.

Here therefore these three things are necessary,

1. Solemn Prayer, by which the Presence of God with them, and his Acceptance
of the Ordained, is implored. So we find Paul and Barnabas were recommended to
the Grace of God, Acts 13.2.

2. Imposition of Hands, which is a Sacred Ceremony used in the setting a
Person apart for the Discharge of a Sacred Office. This Ceremony we find used
in Scripture on various Occasions. 1. As a Rite of Benediction. So Jacob used
it when he blessed Ephraim and Manasseh. And so our Savior on the Children
when he blessed them. Sometimes in Conferring Miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Sometimes for working, Miraculous Cures. But chiefly as a Rite of
Consecration, whereby a person was dedicated to the Exercise of a Function,
which immediately related to the Service of God. So Moses laid his hands on
Joshua before the whole Congregation, and gave him a Charge, Numb. 27.23. So
the Apostles used it in Ordaining Deacons, Acts 6.6. So Paul and Barnabas had
hands laid on them, when separated to the Work, to which God had called them.
And so Timothy was separated, 1 Timothy 4.14.

This was not borrowed from the Ceremonies of the Tabernacle or Temple; for the
Priests were not consecrated by that Ceremony; but from the Synag^^^e, where
their Doctors and Teachers were set apart to their Work by Imposition of Hands.
And there is an admirable Conformity between the Synagogue, and the
Constitution of Christian Churches; as may be seen in Blondel, Vitringa, Dr.
Lightfoot, Stillingfleet, and Basnage. However this Ceremony is now Introduced
into the Christian Church, and it is requisite in the Ordinary Separation of a
Person to the Work of the Ministry, and may not be despised or neglected
without Sin. And hence we have Gospel Examples of its Use, and the whole of
Ordination is sometimes expressed by i^. So 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on
no man.

3. The third thing requisite in an Orderly Separation to the Ministry is, That
this Investiture be made by those that have Authority from Christ to Ordain.
Which Power of Ordination must come from Christ. And such as have not a Right
inherent in their Office to Ordain, may not presume to do it. For as it is
Christ's Will manifested that tells Us who shall be Ordained, so who shall have
power to Ordain. This is therefore necessary to a regular Investiture in the
Ministerial Office, that it be performed by such as have been delegated by
Christ to this Work.

Now here the Great Question is, Who these are? And this will be considered
under the next Assertion, to which we pass,

III. That we cannot but Apprehend that according to the Will of Christ, Gospel
Presbyters or Elders, the Ordinary standing Ministry of the Gospel, who have
Power to preach and dispense the Sacraments, have power to Ordain, and admit
Persons suitably qualified and called into the Ministerial Office.

Now the Grounds on which we build this Assertion are, -- That we are satisfied
that we have Scripture light to direct Ordinary Ministers in Ordaining -- That
we have nothing in Primitive or later Antiquity but what may be reconciled
hereto, and much to confirm this Practice, -- That there are no Pleas we can
find against it which appear of sufficient force to invalidate it -- And that
there will certainly great Inconveniences and Mischiefs to the Church of God
follow from a denial of this power to Ordinary Presbyters.

Something I shall offer to each of these,

I. We are satisfied that by Scripture light the Ordinary Ministers or
Presbyters have power to invest others with Ministerial Authority. And from
Scripture we have such Reasons as these to confirm our Assertion.

1. Presbyters or the Ordinary Ministers of the Gospel appear to have this
Power, in that the Commission of Christ, by which any that are supposed of a
Superior Order Degree or Character do ordain, does certainly belong to them.

They that have power to ordain must have it from Christ, by his Commission.
Where now shall we find this Commission? We must look to the Time after Christ's
Resurrection; for before there was no Officers appointed, nor any Christian
Churches gathered. Now there are two Places which are pleaded to contain this
power of Ordination, not expressly but implicitly. John 20.21, 23. As my Father
has sent me, even so send I You: Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted
to them. The other is, Math. 28.19, 20. Go t^ach all Nations, baptising them,
etc. And ^o I am with you always, even unto the End of the World, Am^n. Now
these belong equally to Presbyters or Gospel Ministers. It is by this they
Baptize, Preach, etc. and by these the Opponents to our Assertion do assert the
power of Presbyters to remit and retain Sins. Now if the Commission belongs to
'em it must belong to 'em in its full power, unless Christ has limited them.
And this Limitation we demand. If Christ has not limited, none else have power
to limit their Commission. Either therefore they have by this Commission no
power to Baptize and administer the Lords Supper, or they have power to Ordain.
For the power of an Office must be taken from the Commission which impowers to
the Discharge of it.

And this is owned by Several of a great Character and name in the Established
Church of our Nation. So Dr. Forbes in his Discourse of Episcopa^y says, that
Presbyters have the same power to Ordain by Divine Right, as to preach and
baptize. And Dr. Charlton in his Treatise of Jurisdiction says, The power of
Order is given alike by Christ to all Bishops and Priests in their
Consecration. So Dr. Field of the Church. And it was a Celebrated Saying of Dr.
Usher, that Ordinis est Ordinare. Presbyters therefore having the power of
Order, have the power of Ordination.

2. A second Reason is, Because we cannot find in Scripture the Institution of
any standing Officer in the Church of a Superior Degree or Order to that of
Elders, or Ministers of a particular Flock.

We read indeed of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets; but these were
Extraordinary Offices, endowed with extraordinary powers, and had an
extraordinary Call. But these ceased with the extraordinary Circumstances of
the Church of God, which then called for them.

Bishops and Presbyters do in Scripture evidently appear the same. Were Bishops
of a Superior degree or Office we must surely discover it by distinct Names or
by distinct Qualifications required of them, or by different Work assigned
them; by a different Commission given them, or by different Ordination and
Consecration. But we find nothing of this upon Scripture Record. The same
Office and Officers are promiscuously styled Bishops or Elders, So Acts 20.28.
The Elders of Ephesus are termed Bishops: Take heed to the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers: i e. Bishops, in the Original. So the
Elders of Philippi are called Bishops, Philip. 1.1. Now these must be Elders
and not Bishops, because there could not be more than One Bishop in a Church
according to the Scheme of our Opponents. Moreover, The same qualifications are
required: See Titus 1.5 -- 9. the same Work is assigned to them: the Elders are
to take the Oversight of the Flock and to do the Work of a Bishop: 1 Pet. 5.1,
2. The Elders which are among you, I exhort, -- feed ye the Flock of God which
is among you, taking the Oversight thereof, -- not as Lords over God's
Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock. The word is Episcopountes. Again,
We find no difference in their Commission, Consecration or Ordination. We have
a Directory for the Ordination of Elders in every Church, Tit. 1.5. But none
for the Consecration of Bishops to a Superior Office. Nay we want a Scripture
Canon for any ordinary standing Officer to rule Presbyters. And we have no
shadow of a Command to them to subject themselves to any standing Superior
Degree or Order of Officers.

So that we cannot but conclude Scripture Bishops and Elders to be of the same
Order and Degree in the Church; and that either there is no Elder as a Minister
of a particular Flock, or no Bishop as Superior to an Elder. And this made Dr.
Hammond say, "There were no Presbyters of an Inferior Order instituted by the
Apostles: and Dr. Stilling^leet on the Contrary, "That there were no Bishops
during the Apostles life. And a Superior Officer without an Inferior under him,
or an Inferior without a Superior over him, comes to one and the same. And if
there be no Officer Superior to Ministers, then Ministers have the Authority to
Ordain, if there be any.

3. Another Reason is, Because they that have Authority to exercise the power
of the Keys, and are consequently Rulers in God's Household, have the power of
Ordaining Ministers. But the Ordinary Ministers of the Gospel have the Keys
committed to them. It is universally acknowledged, they have the Key of
Doctrine; but how, or by what Rule, can that be separated from the Key of
Jurisdiction.

The full power of the Keys was committed to the Apostles, and must be
transmitted to all Gospel Elders. Unless some Divine Canon may be produced to
divide them.

There are Rulers in the Church of Christ: A power to bind and loose:
Qualifications for Government are required: the feeding the flock comprehends
Government in it: Submission is required to them that rule, Heb. 13.17. Obey
them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
Your Souls, as they that must give Account. And we can find no Elders but what
have the power of Rule.

4. We cannot but apprehend their power of Ordination from Scripture Precedents.
I shall name two famous Instances. Paul and Barnabas were set apart by the
hands of Ordinary Elders: Acts 13.1, 2, 3. So was Timothy ordained by the
Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery: 1 Timothy 4.14. And what was then valid
is now. So that if we err, it is safest erring with such Guides.

Upon the whole, If Scripture be the Rule then we cannot but safely conclude for
the Right of Presbyters, or Ordinary Gospel Ministers, to Ordain Others into
that holy Function without Intrusion, or Encroachment upon the Prerogative of
any other Degree or ^^der of men; or any breach upon any Canon truly Divine or
Apostolical.

II. We find much in Antiquity, Primitive and later, that favors this power of
Presbyters; and nothing but what may be reconciled to it. Though our Cause is not
to stand at this Tribunal: We have a more sure Rule to judge by. Yet here we
meet with what confirms our Assertion. Clemens Romanus and Polycarp mention
only two Orders of Officers as of Divine Institution; viz. Bishops or Elders,
and Deacons. Jerome and Hil^^y are on our side by the consent of all. And where
he speaks of Ordination as the peculiar of the Bishop, he speaks what was
according to Constitution Ecclesiastical. And we have Evidence that in
Alexandria for two hundred Years only Presbyters appointed any unto the Sacred
Office.

It must be acknowledged that Early there was a distinction between Bishops and
Presbyters. But this at first was not greater than between a Moderator of a
Council and the rest of the Presbytery of which it is Constituted.

Ignatius his Authority does not move us, because his Bishop was certainly but
a Pastor of a single Congregation; and his Presbyters not the Ministers that
had the care of different Flocks, but Assistants to the Bishop in one and the
same Flock* In that also he asserts "That his Presbyters did succeed into the
Bench of the Apostles, and as such are to be regarded and submitted to. Not to
say, how much reason we have to question whether his Epistles are genuine.

Afterward the Superior power of Bishops was fixed by Councils, and by common
Agreement. We find sufficient in Canonists, Councils and Schoolmen to give us
to understand, that this Limitation of the Power of Presbyters was not owing to
Divine Institution, but to Ecclesiastical Constitutions: with what warrant I
leave.

If we come to the time of the Reformation we find it as clear as the Light
that the Reformers were for an inherent power in Elders to Ordain. The Judgment
of the foreign Churches of the Reformed is evident from the Harmony of their
Confessions, which assert an Equality in all Gospel Ministers. The sense of the
Protestant Churches of the German Empire may be well known from those Articles
called the Smalcaldic; in which the Equality of Ordaining power by Divine right
is asserted to belong to Presbyters; which was subscribed by three Electors,
Forty five Noblemen, the Consuls and Senators of Thirty five Cities, and a vast
Number of Divines. At Home in our Nation, the Reformers asserted the same
Equality of power by Divine right. We have Dr. Cranmer's Judgment for it given
by Dr. Stillingfleet: and in the Book called the Erudition of the Christian
Man, which was drawn up by the Body of the Clergy, approved by both Houses of
Parliament, and publish^d by the Kings Command, it is asserted That Priests and
Bishops by God's Law are one and the same; and that the power of Ordination
belongs Equally to both. I shall only add, that when the three Scottish Bishops
came to be Consecrated in the days of Archbishop Bancroft, the Motion for
their being first Ordained Priests, because they had never received Episcopal
Ordination, was over-rul^d for this Reason, because Priests had the power of
Ordination.

We stand therefore with the Reformed, in asserting our own Ord^ining Power.

III. We cannot see sufficient Strength in any Pleas alleged against
Ordination by Presbyters, without a Superior Officer.

It is pleaded that the Seventy were subbordinated to the Apostles; and that
Bishops succeed to the Apostles, and Presbyters to the Seventy. But this
appears to us only asserted, not proved; nor as we think can be; for the
Apostles were Extraordinary Officers, unfixed, and had no Successors, as is
made good by Dr. Barrow in his Discourse of the Popes Supremacy. Nor can we
find the Seventy subjected to them; but rather that they had the same
Commission: Their Mission also seems but for a season, and we hear no more of
them after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension and therefore they have no
Successors.

It is pleaded that Timothy and Titus had as Bishops a Superiority over
Presbyters. But we find them no where styled so in the Word of God; and the
Superiority they had was as they were Extraordinary Officers, and not as fixed
Bishops. For we are assured that they did not fix their Abode in the Places
where they (...) said to be Bishops. We find them both in other Cities, and
carrying on the some Work. And we find several Bishops of Ephesus together,
while Timothy was alive, Acts 20.28. And though Timothy in Ephesus and Titus in
Crete had the Power of Ordination, yet there appears nothing to restrain the
Stated Elders of those Places from the Exercise of the like power.

It is pleaded, that the Bishops that ordained Elders did not commit to them
ordaining Power. But we see no weight in this: If they were Ordained to the
Offi^e of Gospel Ministers, and the power of that Office is not to be
determined by the Intention of the Ordainers, but by the Powers granted by
Christ unto such an Office.

It is pleaded, That the want of a lineal Succession in a direct line from the
Apostles, does wholly subvert the power of Subordinate Presbyters to Ordain.
But we cannot be moved by this; partly because we believe there is no necessity
of such a Succession; partly because we are satisfied that the Ordination of no
one Minister on Earth can be thus made evident; and because the same way that
others make good that they themselves are in the Line of Succession, Presbyters
may prove that they are equally in it. But we dare not put the Regularity and
much less the Validity of our Ministry upon such an uncertain foundation.

IV. We cannot but apprehend manifest Inconveniences, nay Mischiefs to the
Church of God, by denying this power of Ordination to all true Ministers of the
Gospel. I shall mention two.

1. If we deny that power, we must conclude that the main part of the Churches
of the Reformation have no regular or Lawful Ministers, nor regular Ordinances,
And we cannot pass a Judgment so rash and severe.

2. Then also we must conclude, that when Churches are overun with the greatest
Heresies and Idolatry there can be no Reformation unless the Ministers of an
Episcopal Character lead therein. For if they reform without them, they will
lose all regular power to propogate the Ministerial Order. And this is a
Thought so big with shocking Conclusions that we can on no terms be reconciled
to it.

Upon all these Accounts we are satisfied, that Ordination by the Hands of the
Presbytery is valid and regular according to Divine Institution: And we trust
that we have found the Presence of God with us herein, and with our Ministers
thus Separated to the service of the Gospel: And therefore we hope at this time
to enjoy his Presence and Blessing in the present Solemnity, in which we shall
now engage in his Name and Fear.

FINIS.

