The Bonds OF Baptism: SHOWING, I. That those under the Gospel, should seek
Baptism for themselves and their Children. II. When those Baptized in Infancy,
grow up to Years of Understanding; they should renew their Covenant with GOD

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston,
New England.

Mat. 28.19, 20. -- Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even to
the end of the world.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, Sold by B. Eliot, at his Shop. 1717

Preface.
WHat I briefly offer in the following Pages, I was moved to by the Reverend
Mr. George Corwin, late Minister of Salem. He lived greatly and justly beloved
and desired, and I think died as much lamented. He was an Able, Faithful,
Laborious Minister of the Gospel; and a lover of Souls, and I believe is now
gone to his Everlasting Rest. When he was last in Town a few Months ago; he
desired me to write some short thing, to show that Persons should seek Baptism
for themselves and Children; and that Baptized Persons when grown up, should
renew their Covenant with God. He desired (if I Remember right) that what
should be written might be adapted to the Capacity of the meanest; and might be
Short also, that so it might be the more easily bought, and charitably
distributed, where it might probably do good. If he had not died so soon, I
believe I should scarce have begun to write so soon as I have. But quickly
after I heard of his Death, this motion revived in my mind, and put me upon
fulfilling (in some poor measure) the will of the dead. I have here made a
brief Essay without looking into any Author, but only consulting the Bible.
Indeed long before his motion, I had written a Dialogue about the Lord's
Supper, (though it is not published) and another about Baptism, though it is not yet
finished, each of them much larger than this. Let what is here offered, he
compared with the Scripture, tried by that; if in any thing it disagrees
thereto let it so far be rejected: But if it agrees with Scripture, and is yet
disregarded by any, (...) such their neglect, they must answer to God the Judge
of all. So far as this brief Essay, answers the desire of the worthy Mr.
Corwin; I say, so far, though he be dead, he yet speaks in it. Let those who were
once under his Faithful Ministry, Remember how they have heard; and live
agreeably to the truths of God which he Inculcated on them. Indeed all under
the Gospel, should believe it and obey it; if what is here offered shall be
Instrumental of quickening any thereto, let God have all the Glory; and the
unworthy Author be remembered in their Prayers.

Benj. Wadsworth.
Boston, December. 4th. 1717.
The Bonds of Baptism.
Proposition, I. Those under the Gospel, ought to seek Baptism for themselves
and for their Children.
1. THEY should seek it for themselves. For the illustrating and proving of
this truth, let the following particulars be considered, viz.

1. Since the Fall and Apostasy of the First Man Adam, all Mankind naturally
are Sinners, the Children of the Devil, and liable to eternal Wrath and Misery.
Sin is a breach or Transgression of God's Law. 1 John 3.4. Through the
deceitful Templations of the Devil, our First Parents Sinned, (and so deserved
Death) in eating the forbidden Fruit. 2 Cor. 11.3. Genesis 3.4, 6, 13. Hence the
Devil is called a murderer from the beginning. Joh. 8.44. The First Adam was
considered as a public Person, a common Covenant -- head to all his Posterity;
and therefore all his Posterity were Involved in his Sin and Guilt. By one Man
(that is the first Adam) Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so
Death passed upon all Men, for that all have Sinned -- by one Man's
disobedience many were made Sinners, Romans 5.12, 19. In Adam all die, 1 Cor.
15.22. Thus all Men Sinned in Adam; as coming from him, they are Sinful and
Guilty. And so considered merely as Sinful, they are the Children of the Devil.
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do. Joh.
8. 44. In this the Children of God (by regeneration and adoption) are manifest,
and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Rightcousness, is not of God,
etc. Natural unregenerate Men, they do not work Righteousness, they cannot do
the things that please God, Romans 8.7, 8. Therefore they are the Children of the
Devil, they Imitate him, obey him, follow him. He that commits Sin is of the
Devil. 1 John 3.8. And Men considered as Sinners, are Children of Wrath by
Nature. Ephesians. 2.3. The wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them.
Gal. 3.10. Sin deserves, Everlasting Fire -- Everlasting Punishment. Mat 25.41,
46. What has been thus briefly described, is the State and condition of all Men
naturally since the Fall of Adam. 2. God has sent his only begotten Son the
Lord Jesus Christ, into the World to destroy the works of the Devil; to Save
men from Sin and Misery, to make them holy and happy. 1 John 3.8. For this
cause the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil. Mat. 1.21. -- Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their Sins. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all Iniquity and purafie us to himself a peculiar People,
zealous of good Works. 1 These. 1.10. -- Jesus which delivered us from wrath to
come. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, -- being
made a Curse for us, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in hint, before the foundation
of the World that we should be holy, and without blame before him in Love. Joh.
3.16. God so loved the World, that the gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever beheveth in him, should not perish but should have everlasting Life.
Christ came into the World, led an Holy Life. (1 Pet. 2.22.) Died an accursed
Death ( Gal. 3.13.) that he might Save Sinners (1 Pet. 3.18) might destroy him
that had the power of Death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2.14. Therefore the Scope
of the Gospel is, to open Men's Eyes, turn them from Darkness to light, from
the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgivnes of Sins, and
Inheritance among them that are Sanctified by Faith that is in Christ. Act.
26.18. Christ came into the World, to purchase Salvation for sinfulmen, to turn
rebel men from Sin and Satan unto God, that they might be reconciled to God,
love him, live to him, and be eternally happy in his Favor. 3. The Lord Jesus
Christ is the only Savior of Sinners. As he come to Save Sinners. (1 Timothy
1.15.) So, neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is none other
Name given under Heaven among Men, whereby we must be Saved. Acts 4.12. There Is
no remisson of Sin) without Shedding of Blood (Heb. 9.22.) not the Blood of
Bulls and Goats (Heb. 10.4.) but the Blood of Jesus (1 John 1.7.1 Pet. 1.19.)
Who is that Lamb of God which takes away the Sin of the World. Joh. 1.29.
Christ then is the only Savior of Sinners, and he is an Allsufficient one too.
Heb. 7.25. -- He is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God
by him. Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but shall have
everlasting Life. Joh. 3.16. 4. No Men can be Saved, without true Repentance of
Sin and Faith in Christ Jesus. I mean this, of those grown to years of
Understanding, and not of such as die in Infancy. Many Children of professing
Parents, Children of the Covenant die in Infancy. As such Infants are capable
of being, sharers in the Sin and Guilt of the first Adam, and so becoming
liable to Death; so they are as capable of having righteousness and grace from
Jesus Christ the second Adam, and of being Saved by him. Romans 5.14. -- 19.1
Cor. 15.22.45. -- 49. But as for those under the Gospel, grown to years of
Understanding; they must repent of Sin, if they would be Saved by Christ. They
must be convinced of Sin. ( Joh. 16.8.) Guilt. (Romans 3.19.) Wrath. (Mat. 3.7.)
They must have their hearts rent and broken for Sin. ( Joel. 2.13. Psalm.
51.17.) must mourn for it. ( Zech. 12.10.) be sorry for it ( Psalm. 38.18.) Be
ashamed and confounded for their own Sinful ways, and loath themselves for
them. ( Ezekiel. 36.31, 32.) and with such a Soul abhorrence of Sin, they must
turn from all their Transgressions that so Iniquity may not be their Ruin.
Ezekiel. 18.30. Such Repentanee there must be in Persons, if they would be
pardoned and Saved. Repent -- for the Remission of Sins -- Repent -- that your
Sins may be blotted out. Acts 2.38. and 3.19. Christ is exalted, to give
Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins. Acts 5.31. Except ye Repent ye
shall likewise perish. Luke 13.5. And together with this Repentance, this
Soul-loathing of, and turning from Sin; there must be true Faith in Jesus
Christ; even such Faith as purifies the heart. Acts 15.9. The great things
Inculcated in the Gospel, are Repentace toward God, and Faith toward (...)
Lord Jesus Christ Acts 20, 21. The one of these is never separated from the
other, they always go together. Faith in Christ is necessary in order to
pardon and Salvation. He that believes not, as condemned aheady. Joh. 3.18. He
that believes not, shall be damned. Mark 16.16. But on the other hand,
whosoever believes in him (that is, in Christ) shall have remission of sins;
and Everlasting Life. Acts 10.43. Joh. 3.16. He therefore that with his heart,
with his very Soul, mourns for his Sins, hates, loathes, turns from them; and
together herewith, trusts in the righteousness of Christ for Justification
before God; I say, he is Justified freely by grace through the Redemption that
is in Jesus. Romans 3.21. -- 25. Ephesians. 1.7. Romans 5.1. and 8.1. The Soul which thus
penitently trusts in Christ, receives Christ. ( Joh. 1.12.) receives him as
Prince and Savior (Acts 5.31.) and so yields up himself to serve Christ; to
glorify him with his Body and spirit. 1 Cor. 6.20. True faith works by love
(Gal. 5.6.) puts the Soul upon obeying God. Heb. 11.8. Faith without works is
dead. Jam 2.26. 5. It Is the will God, that those who turn from Sin and Satan to
Christ to live to him and be saved by him; should be known and distinguished
among Men, by some outward Instituted marks, signs, or badges of their
belonging to Christ. Christ was promised as the Savior of Sinners, long before
he came into the World. Genesis 3.15. As it is nothing but Christ's blood, that
can Cleanse from Sin, and purge the Conscience from dead Works. (1 John 1.7.
Heb. 9.14.) So God very early after Adam's Apostasy, Instituted Sacrifices to
be Types, shadows, prefigurations of Christ, who as a sacrificed Lamb was to
take away the Sin of the World. Job. 1.29. Ephesians. 5.2.1 Pet. 3.18, 19. Hence
Christ is called, the Lamb (...) from the foundation of the World. Rev. 13.8.
He was in types and prefigurations, slain from the foundation of the World. The
Sins of Old Testament believers, were pardoned by virtue of Christ's Blood that
was to be shed, and that was typified by Sacrifices; the Prophets preached
Remission of sins, through Faith in him. Acts 10.43. God Instituted Sacrifices
as types of Christ; else Abel could not have offered his excellent Sacrifice by
Faith. Heb. 21.4. Therefore of old sacrificing was Instituted by God, as an
outward sign, badge, token, or action; whereby those who renounced the Devil
and his works, and gave up themselves to be the Lord's Covenant Servants,
trusting in his mercy through the promised Messiah (or Christ) for Salvation,
were known and distinguished from the rest of Mankind. Hence that in Psalm.
50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with
me by sacrifice. After a while. God appointed another visible sign and seal of
the Covenant, between Him and Abraham, and his seed, even Circumcision God
himself calls this a token of the Covenant. Genesis 17.11. And it was the Covenant
of Grace, the Covenant which Justified a Person through Faith in Christ, who
was then to come, that Circumcision was a token of. Romans 4.11. He received the
sign of Circumcision, a seal of the Righteousness of Faith. About four hundred
Years after this, God appointed yet another sign and seal of the Covenant,
between him and his peculiar People; and that was the Passover, to be
celebrated once every Year, Exodus chap. 12. The Israelites who had their
Door-posts sprinkled with the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, were preserved; while
the Plague destroyed the first born of the Egyptians. And this Passover was a
Type of Christ, who afterward was Sacrificed for us. 1 Cor. 5.7. Thus in all
past ages of the World it has been, and still is, the will of God, that those
of the Apostate race of Adam, who renounce the Devil and his works, and give up
themselves to Christ the Son of God, to be his Covenant People and Servants,
and to trust in him for Salvation; I say, it has been (and still is) the will
of God, that such should be known and distinguished from the rest of Mankind,
by some divinely Instituted badge, sign or token of the Covenant between him
and them. Christ's Subjects should not be ashamed of him before men, but should
wear his Livery; and by the Instituted signs, tokens or badges of the Covenant,
openly profess and declare their renouncing the Devil and his works, and their
consecrating themselves to the Lord, to serve him as their Prince and Savior,
and to trust in his favor for their complete happiness.

6. Under the New Testament, Baptism and the Lord's Supper are signs and seals
of the Covenant of Grace. The latter of these, viz. the Lord's supper, I shall
not discourse of at present; but the former, viz. Baptism, is what the
Proposition I undertook to prove, obliges me to bring under further
consideration.
Baptism is a sign and seal of the Covenant of Grace, of Persons being
consecreated to Jesus Christ, and Interested in his saving benefits. It
signifies, their Communion with Christ in the benefits of his Death and
Resurrection, in their dying to Sin and living to Righteousness. Romans 6.4 -- 6.
Col. 2.11 -- 13. Christ's Blood is the purchasing, procuring, meritorious cause
of Pardon or Remission of Sins. 1 Job. 1.7. Ephesians. 1.7. on our part, true
Repentance of Sin and Faith in Christ Jesus (as was hinted before) are
necessary in order to our being Pardoned. Acts 3.19. Job. 3.18. Acts 10.43. Now
this Pardoning virtue of the Blood of Christ, is Signified, Represented, Sealed
in the holy Ordinance of Baptism. Acts 2.38. Be Baptized every one of you in
the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of Sins, Acts 22.16. Arise and be
Baptized, and wash away thy Sins. Baptism then is a sign and seal of the
Covenant of Grace, when a grown Person receives Baptism, the Covenant is sealed
between God and him. He professes Repentance of Sin, trusting in Christ for
Salvation, and that he will live to Christ and obey him as long as he lives. By
receiving Baptism, he does devote and consecrate, bind, engage and oblige
himself; to live unto, and obey God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, as long as he lives. And if he is sincere in this profession, if he does
heartily Repent of his Sins, and trust in Christ as offered in the Gospel for
Salvation; then Baptism is a seal on God's part, that God does and will Pardon
his Sins, and Save him for ever. Even Baptism does also now save us. 1 Pet.
3.21. Baptism obliges the Person that receives it, to die unto Sin and live
unto Righteousness; to answer a good Conscience toward God. 1 Pet. 3.21. It
signifies a Sanctifying and Cleansing. Ephesians. 5.26. As many of you as have been
Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Baptism is a sign, token or badge of
the Christian Religion; those who receive it, are thereby and therefore obliged
to live as becomes Christians; inasmuch as their names are given up to Christ,
they should depart from all Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

I think these things show, that those who live under the Gospel, who Enjoy the
Revelations of God's will in his written Word, the Holy Bible, should seek
after Baptism for themselves. God in his holy Word, most plainly commands them
to Repent and turn from their Sins. Acts 17.30. Ezekiel. 18.30. He commands them
to believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John 3.23. This is the Work
God requires of them. Joh. 6.29. It Is most absolutely Indispensibly necessary
for Persons thus to Believe and Repent; for if they neglect it, they must
certainly perish for ever. Luke 13.5. Mark 16.16. And those who do penitently
believe in Christ, should be Baptized, as a sign and seal of their consecration
to him, and of their being Pardoned and Saved by him.

It is Christ's Command, that those who are his Disciples, Subjects, Servants
should be Baptized, He said to his Apostles, Mat. 28 19, 20. Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son, and of Holy Ghost;
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you; and to, I
am with you always to the End of the World. Teach them, the word signisies to
Disciple, or make Disciples; it is as if he had said, Disciple all Nations
Baptising them. Here Is a plain command of Christ, that those who become his
Disciples Subjects, Servants, who penitently turn to him, trust in him, give
themselves to him, should be Baptized. And Baptism was to be administered not
only by the Apostles, but also by ordinary Ministers of the Gospel
successively; because this work is to be done even to the end of the World.

And as this was the Command of Christ, so it was obeyed. The New Testament
History Informs us, that upon Persons believing in Jesus Christ, they were
Baptized. Thus three Thousand were Baptized in one Day, Acts 2.41. Those at
Samaria that believed, were Baptized both Men and Women; and afterward the
Eunuch also, (Acts 8.12.36 -- 38.) and Paul, (Acts 9.18.) and Cornelius and
those with him, (Acts 10.48.) Lydia and her Household; the Jailer and all (...),
(Acts 16. 14, 15.31, 33.) the Corinthians also, and those at Ephesus, (Acts
18.8. and 19. 1.5.) the Romans, (Romans 6.3.) and Galatians, Gal. 3.27. This
Indeed was the practice, to Baptize the Disciples of Christ, and thus it ought
to be to the end of the World.

You therefore that are come to Years of Understanding, and have been
acquainted with the Gospel; if you seriously consider these things, you cannot
but know that you are Indispensably obliged to Repent of Sin, and Believe in
Christ Jesus, to receive him, trust in him, submit to him as Prince and
Savior. God's Authority, and your own welfare and Salvation, oblige you thus
to do. As coming from sallen Apostate Adam, you are naturally Sinful and
Guilty, Children of the Devil, Children of Wrath, liable to eternal burnings in
Hell; and there is no getting out of this State, but by penitently believing in
Jesus Christ. All are under the power and guilt of Sin, and tyranny of Satan,
till Ingrafted into Christ. Every Individual Person, is a Child of God or of
the Devil, (1 John 3.10.) Either with Christ, or against him, (Luke 11.23.)
Either serving the Devil and going to Hell, or submitting to Christ and going
to Heaven. And which of these States are you in? Who is on the Lord's Side?
Exodus 32.26. How long halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow
him; but if Baal, then follow him, 1 Kings 18.21. What say ye? whose Side are
you of? will you take the narrow way to Life, or the broad one to Destruction?
will you continue serving the Devil, rebelling against God, and throw your
selves into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone; or will you dutifully
and wisely turn from Sin to God, penitently trust in Christ, and give up your
selves to be Governed and Saved by him? (...) and Death (...) before you,
therefore choose Life, Deuteronomy. 30.19. You are Indispensibly obliged therefore, to
Renounce the Devil and his works, penitently to trust in Christ, and most
heartily to give up your selves to him in an everlasting Covenant, to be for
him and for none elso, ( Isai. 55.3. Psalm. 103.17, 18.) And to receive Baptism
(if you have not yet had it) as the seal of this Covenant, as a badge and token
of your consecration to the Lord. There Is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
Ephesians. 4.5. You should believe in your heart unto Righteousness, and confess with
your mouth unto Salvation, (Romans 10. 10.) and as you should believe in Christ,
so you should be Baptized into him. Put on Christ, (Gal. 3.27.) List your
selves Soldiers under this Captian of Salvation, (Heb. 2.10.) wear his Livery,
own him (and don't be ashamed of him) before Men ( Mark 8.38.) but let the
World know, that you are Followers of the Lamb. Christ the only Savior of
Sinners, King in the Church, and Judge of the World, has said, Mark 16.16. He
that believes and is Baptized, shall be Saved. Heb 12.25. See that ye refuse
not him that speaks; for if they eseaped not who refused him that spoke on
Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks
from Heaven. Those who call themselves Christians, and yet neglect Baptism,
when they have an Opportunity to receive it as the Bible directs; they Sin
greatly. By this neglect, they so far trample on Christ's Authority, disobey
his plain command: They neglect, suitably to profess their Subjection to
Christ. They are not blameless, because they don't walk in all the Ordinances
and Commandments of the Lord. Luke 1.6. If they would suitably show their
Friendship to Christ, they should do whatsoever he commands, (Joh. 15.14.)
Possibly some will,

Object. I don't know that I am a true Convert, a sincere Servant of Christ,
and that I shall faithfully persevere in his Holy-Covenant, how dare I then to
engage in that Covenant, and Seal, it by being Baptized.

Answ. The brevity I design, wont allow me to say much to Objections; however I
reply, how can thou know thy self to be a sincere Servant of Christ, if thou
did never Engage to serve him? How can thou know thyself to be a faithful
Soldier under the Captain of Salvation, if thou did never List thy self
under his banner? It seems an Inconsistency and self contradiction, that thou
should know thou art faithful to Holy Covenant Engagements, if thou did
never make such Engagements. Covenant Engagements bind for the future, they
must be made before they can be performed. I readily grant, it is God alone can
give an heart of Fiesh, (Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.) put his fear in the heart (Jer.
32.39, 40.) beget Persons to Christ, ( Jam. 1.18.) Draw them to him, (Joh.
6.44.) Convert the Soul, Psalm. 19.7. Endeavor therefore to be thoroughly
sensible of thy great Guiltiness, unworthyness to receive any good, wretched
Impotency to do any good; Importunately and earnestly Pray, (Luke 18.1.) for
the Divine Grace, for for a new heart and right Spirit, Psalm. 51. 10. Ezekiel.
36.26.37. Pray, Draw me, we will run after thee, (Cant. 1.4.) Turn thou us unto
thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, (Lam. 5.21.) Take away all Iniquity, and
receive us graciously, Hof. 14.2. Thus Importunately praying for the Renewing,
Sanctifying, Assisting Grace of God, (and pardon of Sin) most heartily,
seriously, solemnly give up thy self to him in an Everlasting Covenant never to
be forgotten; resolving by the help and Grace of Christ ( Job. 15.5. Phil.
4.13.2 Tim. 2.1.) that thou will serve him and him only, as long as thou have a
being. Swear, that thou will keep his Righteous Judgments -- always unto the
End, Psalm. 119.106.112. When Israel engaged by Covenant, to do all that the
Lord had said, and be Obedient, Exodus 24.7. God replied, they have well said,
all that they have spoken, Deuteronomy. 5.28.

I think what has been hitherto said, may suffice to prove, that grown up (or
Adult) Persons under the Gospel, spould seek after Baptism (if they have not
received it already) for themselves. The second thing in the Assertion or
Proposition which I am demonstrating, is, that they should seek Baptism for
their Children also. By their Children, I mean such as are in Minority, not
capable of acting deliberately and understandingly, in such an Important
affair. I shall not here engage, in any large or direct proof of Infant
Baptism; (the brevity I design will not allow it, and it has been strongly done by
others) but reckon it sufficient to my present purpose, to offer these things
which follow, viz.

1. God's Covenant with Abraham, did extend to his seed as well as to himself.
God said to him, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, in their Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant; to
be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And so Abraham's Infant seed
(that were capable of it, viz. the Males) were to receive Circumcision the
token (or seal, Romans 4.11.) of the Covenant when they were eight Days Old.
ver. 10, 11, 12. 2. Believing Gentiles under the New Testament, are in the same
Covenant with God as Abraham was; I say, the same Covenant as to the substance
of it, as to Spiritual saving Blessings, and Covenant duties. Abraham --
received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of Faith, which
he bad being yet uncircumcised, that be might be the Father of all them that
believe, 'tho they be not circumcised -- to the end the promise might be sine
to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law; but to that also which
is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all; as it is written I
have made thee a Father of many Nations. Romans 4.9.11.16, 17. They which are of
Faith; the same are the Children of Abraham. And the Scripture foreseeing that
God would Justify the heathen through Faith; Preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, in thee shall all Nations be Blessed. So then, they which be
of Faith, are Blessed with Faithful Abraham -- that the Blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ -- And if ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3. 7, 8,
9.14.29. These things plainly prove, that believing Gentiles are in the same
Covenant with Abraham, as to Spiritual Blessings, and are therefore said to be
his Children, blessed with him; nay the last verse mentioned Intimates, that we
are not Christ's, not united to him, nor Interested in him, unless we are
Abraham's seed, that is his Spiritual seed. And since believing Gentiles are in
the same Covenant with Abraham, it follows. 3. That their Children with them
are also in Covenant with God. For thus it was with Abraham, (Genesis 17.7.) and
therefore thus it must be with those, who are in the same Covenant with him.
The Infant seed of believing Gentiles, are now as really and truly the seed of
the Covenant, as the seed of Abraham were of old; for the Blessing of Abraham
is come on the Gentiles. Therefore their Childien are called Holy, I Cor. 7.14.
And Inasmuch as the Children of believing Gentiles are in God's Covenant.
Therefore 4. They ought to have the Initiating or first Seal of God's Covenant,
viz. Baptism applied to them. Infants of Professors, are now as capable of
being in God's Covenant, and of receiving the Initiating Seal of it, as they
were in Abraham's time. Now under the New Testament, as to Spiritual Covenant
Duties and Blessings; there is no difference between believing Jews, and Greeks,
bond and free, Male and Female, Gal. 3.28. And yet when the Apostle urged the
Jews to Repent and be Baptized; he added, for the promise is to you and to your
Children, Act 2. 38, 39. If they repented and believed in Chirst, as thereby
the Covenant promise (that God would be a God to them) would belong to them, so
it would also to their Children; and therefore Baptism the Seal of the
Covenant, ought to be applied to them and their Children too. Baptism is now
the first or Initiating Seal of the Covenant, as Circumcision of old was;
therefore as Abraham of Old was to apply Circumcision to his Infant seed that
were capable of it; so believing Gentiles are obliged to get Baptism applied to
their Infant seed that are capable of it, even their Male and Female Children.
It seems Moses had like to have lost his Life, for neglecting to apply the seal
of God's Covenant to his Child, Exodus 4.24. -- 26. It Is a thing provoking to
God, and very dangerous (whatever any may think of it) to neglect Instituted
Worship, even to neglect the seals of God's covenant, Exodus 5.3.^ Chron. 29.7,
8. Genesis 17.14 Number. 9.13. You that are Parents, are you Penitents? are you
Believers? are you Christ's? If so, you are Abraham's seed, (Gal. 3.29.) Why
then don't you act like Abraham? Why don't you most Solemnly give up your
Children in Covenant to God, and get the seal of his holy Covenant, even
Baptism applied to them? While you neglect this, you don't act like believing
Abraham; his Faith put him upon obeying God, (Heb. 11. 8.) and so should yours
also. Did not Christ say, Joh. 8.39. If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do
the works of Abraham. Christ said, Suffer little Children, and forbid them not
to come unto me: for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. When some
brought little Children, Infants to Christ, his Disciples rebuked them for
doing so; but when Jesus saw it he was much Displeased, and said unto them,
suffer little Children to come to me and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of God -- And he took them up in his Arms, put his hands upon them, and
Blessed them, Mark 10.13 -- 16. Luke 18.15. 16. It Is evident, 1. That Christ
received the little Children of his People. 2. He would have none forbid their
being brought to him. 3. He Blessed them. 4. Of such is the Kingdom of God, of
Heaven. God has taken such, as well as their professing Parents, into Covenant
with himself; he has engaged to be a God to them (Genesis 17. 7.) which
comprehends in it, His preparing for them an Heavenly City, (Heb. 11.16.) and
granting to them a glorious Resurrection hereafter, Mat. 22.31, 32.1 Cor.
15.23. 42, 43, 44. Was Christ real and hearty in Blessing thief little
Children? To say he was not, would be Blasphemy, If he was, when did he change
his mind? God declared the taking into Covenant with himself, the Children of
his professing Servants, required that the Initiating Seal of his Covenant
should be applied to them; and none can show when, where, how-God has revoked
this Act of his Grace: Indeed he has not done it, therefore it abides firm, and
therefore the Infants of professing Believers should be Baptized. Christian
Parents therefore, should hold themselves obliged, bound in Duty and Conscience
to Dedicate, Consecrate, give up their Children in Covenant to be the Lord's;
and to endeavor that Baptism the Seal of God's Covenant may be applied to
them.
Another Proposition I was desired to say something to, is to this purpose.

Proposition, II. That when those Baptized in Infancy, grow up to Years of
Understanding and Maturity; they ought Personally to own the God of their
Fathers to be their God; to renew their Covenant Engagements to Him, and to
walk in his ways.
THOUGH while they were Infants, they could not act deliberately and
understandingly for themselves; yet when they become Adult, and are capable of
understanding the Gracious Covenant of God, the duties required and benefits
exhibited therein; they should then Personally and heartily renew their
Covenant engagements to be the Lord's.

For the clearing and proving this truth, we may Consider, 1. The Scripture
requires professing Parents, to bring up their Children in the Knowledge, Pew
and Service of God. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I Command thee this Day,
shall be in thy mouth; and thou shall teach them Diligently to thy Children,
and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Ephesians. 6.4. And ye
Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath; but bring them up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord. Prove. 22. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should
go; and when he is Old he will not depart from it. Children while such, while
Young, should be taught and Instructed in those ways of God, of Virtue and
Holiness, which they ought to walk in when Old, when grown up. And the reason
why Children should be thus instructed in the truths and ways of God, is, that
they might hope in God, keep his Commandments; and might Teach and Instruct
their Children after them so to do, and so successively from one Generation to
another. Psalm. 78.5 -- 7. One Generation shall praise thy works to another.
Psalm. 145.4. 2. It has been the good practice of the Saints, thus to Instruct
and charge their Children to keep the way of the Lord. For this see, Prove.
chap. 4. throughout. Prove. 31.1. etc. Psalm. 34.11.13, 14. Come ye Children,
hearken unto me; I will Teach you the Fear of the Lord. Keep thy Tongue from
evil, and thy Lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil and do good, seek
peace and pursue it. David gave a most solemn charge to his Son, sit to be
given by all professing Parents to their Children. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Know thou the
God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind:
For the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of
the thoughts: If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
him, he will cast the off for ever. God commended Abraham, saying, Genesis 18.19.
I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after him; and
they shall keep the way of the Lord. Josoua's good Resolution, is written for
his Commendation, and our Imitation, (Romans 1^. 4. Heb. 6.12.) As for me and my
House, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.1^. 3 God is often spoken of in
Scripture, as standing in Covenant Relation to Persons in being the God of
their Fathers. 1. Under this character or consideration, God recommends himself
to them; as being mercifully ready to help them. Genesis 28.13.15. I am the Lord
God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isace, and behold, I am with thee,
and will keep thee in all places whether thou go. Genesis 46.3. I am God, the
God of thy Father, fear not to go down into Egypt. Deuteronomy. 4.31. For the Lord
thy God is a merciful God; he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee; nor
forget the Covenant of thy Father which he swear unto them. See, 2 Kings 13.23.
2. Persons are Encouraged to seek and serve God, under this character as the
God of their Fathers. King Asa -- Commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers, and to do the Law and Commandment, 2 Chronicles. 14. 2.4. Make confession
to the Lord God of your Fathers, and do his pleasure Ezra 10.11. 3. Many
trusted in, prayed to, worshipped God as the God of their Fathers; and he
wonderfully appeared for their help and relief. Exodus 15.2. The Lord is my
strength -- my Fathers God, and I will exalt him. Acts 24. 14 -- so worship I
the God of my Fathers, Believing all things which are written in the Law and
the Prophets, Deuteronomy. 26.7. When we cried to the Lord God of our Fathers, the
Lord heard our voice, 2 Chronicles. 13.18 -- The Children of Judah prevailed,
because they relied on the Lord God of their Fathers. See also 2 Chronicles. 30.18
-- 20. and 33.12, 13. 4. Many were blamed, and greatly afflicted, for Sinning
against the living and true God, as the God of their Fathers, 2 Kings 21.20.
22. And he did that which was evil -- And he forsook the Lord God of his
Fathers. Jehoram met with great troubles, because he had forsaken the Lord God
of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 21, 10 and 7.21, 22.1 Chron. 5.25, 26. Deuteronomy. 29.22 --
25.



I think these things (which might easily have been enlarged on) may suffice to
show; that such as in their minority were given up in Covenant to God, when
they grow up, should know, obey, serve and worship the Lord God of their
Fathers. They are comprehended in the same Covenant with their Fathers, and, as
they grow up and become capable of understanding, of acting rationally and
deliberately, they should personally own the God of their Fathers to be their
God, and engage by the help of his Grace that they will walk in all his ways, as
long as they live. Jer. 50. 5 -- Come and let us Join our selves to the Lord,
in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. God's Covenant takes in
Children, little ones, as well as Parents. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Moses said to
Israel in the Fortieth Year after they came out of Egypt ( Deuteronomy. 1.3.) when
all except two Men were dead, that were numbered at Sinai, (Number. 26.64, 65.) The
Lord our God made a Covenant with us in Horeb. The Lord made not this Covenant
with our Fathers, but with us even with us, who are all of us here alive this
Day, Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3. As if he had said, it is now about Forty Years, since God
made a Covenant with our Fathers in Horeb; yet 'twas not made with them
exclusive of their Children; for though they are all Dead that were then above
twenty Years Old (except Caleb and Joshua) yet their Children were comprehended
in it; therefore the Covenant was made with us who are now alive. The most of
the Israelites at this time living, were born within the Forty preceding
Years, born since Israel departed from Horeb; yet Inasinuch as God made a
Covenant with their Fathers (and so with their Posterity) there; Moses here
says, God made a Covenant with us in Horeb. Therefore Moses ascribes to them
now alive, what their Fathers (now Dead) said, and did so long ago, ver. 22.
These words the Lord spoke unto all your Assembly in the Mount, ver. 23. When
ye heard the voice out of the midst of the Darkness -- Ye came near unto me.
ver. 24. And ye said -- we have seen this Day that God does talk with Man, and
he lives. 28. And the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spoke them
unto me, etc. Therefore though this was said to be a Covenant, besides the
Covenant which he made with them in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 29.1. Yet 'twas the same as to
the Substance, Jer. 11.3, 4. Differing in the time and manner, of it is being
renewed.

These things plainly show, that Children of the Covenant, (Acts 3.25.) Don't
cease to be in God's Covenant, merely by their growing up from an Infant to an
Adult State; as some are too apt to Imagine. No Indeed, God will ever be
mindful of his Covenant -- He has Commanded his Covenant for ever, Psalm.
111.5.^9. His Righteousness is to Childrens Children, to such as keep his
Covenant, and Remember his Commandments to do them, Psalm 103.17, 13.) even to a
Thousand Generations. Deuteronomy. 7.9. I Swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant
with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. Ezekiel 16.3. He brings
them into the bond of the Covenant. Ezak. 20.37. Those in God's Covenant are
his; he will not alineate his right to them, and none else have Authority to do
it; they are under Covenant Bonds to be the Lord's. That Children are obliged
to obey their Fathers Covenant, is undeniably evident, because a Curse is
denounced against those who did not keep the Covenant God made with their
Fathers, many Hundred Years before. Jer. 11.3, 4. Well then, you that in your
Infancy were given up in Covenant to God, and received Baptism the Seal of it;
when you grow up to have Knowledge and Understanding, stand to the Covenant,
perform the words of the Covenant; to keep God's Commandments, Testimonies,
Statutes; with all your Heart and all your Soul, Neh. 10.28, 29.2 Kings 23.3.
Good Josiah caused the People to enter into this Covenant, to renew it; and he
is commended for one of the best of Kings that Judah had, ver. 25.2. Chron.
34.31, 32. Asa also did commendably, in causing the People thus to renew
Covenant with God; and whosoever would not seek the Lord was to be put to
Death, whether small or great, Man or Woman, (...) Chron 15.12, 13. You
therefore that have been given! up to God, and Baptized; know and serve your
Covenant God, the God of your Fathers. Ministers should say to you, as the
Prophet did, Jer. 11.6. -- Hear ye the words of this Covenant and do them.
Deuteronomy. 4.23. Take heed unto your selves, lest ye forget the Covenant of the Lord
your God. 1 Chronicles. 16.15. Be ye mindful always of his Covenant; the word which
he Commanded to a Thousand Generations. Say as he, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly
I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant and the Son of thy handmaid. Psalm. 86. 16. O
turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy Servant; and
save the Son of thine handmaid. Plead thy Interest in God's Covenant, as
proceeding from professing Parents; and own thy Obligations to Duty also, as
being born of such. David was a Child of the Covenant, Circumcised in Infancy;
yet when he grew up he personally bound himself by Covenant to be the Lord's.
He said to God. Psalm. 119 106. I have sworn and I will perform it; that I will
keep thy Righteous Judgments. Go thou and do likewise. Do thou avouch the
Lord to be thy God? then see what this obliges thee to, Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou art a
Baptized Disciple of Christ, and therefore should observe all things what
soever he commands thee. Mat. 28.19, 20. Therefore (among other things) thou
should heartily and seriously come to the Lord's Supper, about which Christ
has said, Luke 22.19. This do in Remembrance of me. Don't neglect this command
of Christ, nor Indeed any other; show thy Love and Friendship to him, in doing
what soever he Commands. Joh. 15.14 and 14.15. It Is in vain to profess him to
be thy Lord; if thou do not obey him, Luke 6.46. Mat. 7.21 -- 23. If thou will not obey Christ, don't expect to be Saved by him. Heb. 5.9. If thou will
not have him to Reign over thee, he will slay thee, Luke 19.27. If thou will not
come under his easy yoke (Mat. 11.30) Thou shall be broken by his Iron Rod,
Psalm. 2.9. Cursed be the Man that obeys not the words of this covenant: viz.
to obey God's voice, and do his Commands, Jer. 11, 3, 4.

It is surely a very provoking thing God, that so many in New England neglect,
Baptism for themselves and Children; and also neglect the Lord's Supper
Doubtless God has a controversy with the Land, because his holy Gospel is no
more obeyed. I know, that a mere external attending on Ordinances, will not please
God nor profit our Souls; God forbid that any should trust in it. But we should
heartily Repent of Sin, Believe in the Lord Jesus, receive the Seals of his
Covenant as he requires; and yield sincere, universal, unwearied Obedience to
his Commands, Our hearts should be right with God, and siedfast in his
covenant. Psalm. 78.37. The pare in heart shall see God, without Holiness no Man
shall see the Lord Mat. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. That what is thus briefly written, may
quicken the Readers of it to their Duty, is the hearty Prayer of the Unworthy
Author.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
LAtely Published, Twelve Single SERMONS on various Subjects, tending to
Promote Godliness, and Quicken Persons to walk in the way of Salvation. By
Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston, N. E.

Sold by Benjamin Eliot at his Shop in King Street.


