Honoring GOD The True Way to Honor.

A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE Colony of Connecticut At
Hartford May 14 th. 1719.

The Day for the Election of the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the
Deputy Governor, and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS there.

By Nathanael Chauncey, A.M. Pastor of the Church in Durham.

Published by Order of Authority.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, Printer to his Honor the
GOVERNOR and COMPANY. 1719.

An Election SERMON.
I SAMUEL II. 30 -- Them that honor Me, I will Honor --
PErsons of highest improvement in the world, are subject to the Laws of GOD as
well as others, and no less exposed, (in case of Sin) to the Wrath of the
impartial Judge of the world, who accepts not the person of Princes, nor
regards the Rich more than the poor. Men that are Exalted to the Higher Places
of the Earth, are more out of the reach of Man's short Arm, but still, as much
as ever within the reach of an Omnipotent Arm; Indeed no place can be found,
that will hide from God's Eye, or secure from his Hand; for he is still above
the highest Mountains, easily overturns them in his Wrath, and makes the
Pillars of the Earth to Tremble. The various Orders of Men in the World, that
look at, either the outward, or inward good of a People, are of God's
appointing; And the Lawful Power, Civil or Sacred, that any are Invested with,
is from God, who is the Prime Seat, and Original of all Power. The greatest in
Improvement are but Servants in Gods Family, whom he Improves, as the
Instruments of his Providence. It is he that Advances one to Rule, calls
another near to Minister, and to Bless in his Name; It is he that puts the
Sword of Justice into one Hand, and that of the Spirit into another; Charging
those that receive such Power, with the most awful Authority, that they have a
regard to his Honor and Glory while they Improve the same in a Discharge of
the Duties of their places. And that they may not want Motive, to reach the
main Springs of action in the Nature of Man, they are forewarned, that God will
deal with them in Proportion to their Carriage and Deportment toward Him, as
is expressed in the words Read; Them that Honor me I will Honor, and they
that Despise me shall be lightly Esteemed.

That God who did Sanctify the whole Seed of Israel to be a Holy and Peculiar
People to himself, did set apart Aaron and his Sons to Minister in the Priests
Office; And taught them, both by Precept and indeed, by Terrible things in
Righteousness, that he would be Sanctified in them that came nigh him, and had
in Reverence of all about him; yet the most clear, and often repeated Precepts,
the most forceable Motives, were not Sufficient to keep Alive in their Hearts,
a sense of their Duty, and a care to attend it. That People had not been long
Possessed of the Holy Land, before they defiled it; they quickly turned out of
the way; And there was not only a grievous Corruption in the Body of the
People, but the most Sacred order of men were Defiled; the Covenant of Levi was
Corrupted; those that handled the Law, and were by Office* Obliged to teach
others the Knowledge of God, were themselves shamefully Ignorant of him; and
they that Ministered before the Lord with Clean Garments did it with Filthy and
Impure Souls. It was little better than this, in Eli's time, when his Profane
Sons Ministered under him in the Priests Office; as appears by the Character
given of them. (1) As to the disposition and state of their Souls, they were
Sons of Belial, they Knew not the Lord, Verse ^. (2) As to their Conduct of
themselves, they were Intemperate, Indulging themselves in unclean Lusts Verse
22. (3) And then, as to their doings in Holy things they were Profane and
Sacrilegious. Verse 13, 14, 15. Not content with the bountiful Allowance of
Heaven: God had not been an hard Master to them, he did not require them to
kindle a Fire on his Altar for naught; but had made them partakers with himself
at the Altar; besides the large Provisions other ways made for their
Comfortable and Honorable Support, God had allowed them, certain Portions out
of the Offerings made by Fire unto himself; they were not content therewith,
but in a Sacrilegious manner, did Seize on Gods Part; And Snatch to themselves
out of the best of it, to satisfy their lusting Appetite: Besides they liked
not the Appointed way of its being prepared for Use; Neither would stay until
God was Served; whereby Foul Indignities were offered unto God, and the Holy
things of God were brought into Contempt; for on these accounts, Men Despised
the Offerings of the Lord: These things were highly Provoking to a Holy and
Jealous God; he sends a Message to Eli rather than to his Sons, who was looked
on as a partaker with them in their Sins, in that he had not Interposed his
Authority, either as a Parent, or an High Priest, for their Reformation or at
least Restraint. Indeed we find mention made of his Manifesting his Dislike of
their doings, Verse 23. etc, but its very Probable, he had Connived and kept
Silence too long, till they were grown Shameless and Obstinate, and then was
too mild in his Reproofs; the case called for other Measures; for although,
Mildness and Gentleness be rather to be Chose, yet when the case calls for
Severity, it may be a Sin rather than a Duty, and may be a reason of coming
short of the end. Surely the case was such as did call for a Flaming Zeal, both
in Respect of the Honor of God which Suffered, and in Respect of their best
Interest in greatest Hazard. By this Indifferency of Spirit and Sinful
Indulgence, he forfeited the Character given of Levi long before; Deuteronomy. 3^.19.
For according to that he should not in such a case have known his own Children:
And herein he Honored his Sons above God. God Resented these things (...), and
Threatens to Deal in a very Astonishing manner with his House; and a reason
hereof is Rendered from Gods Steadfast Purpose and the Unvarying Method of his
Practice, Them that Honor me I will Honor, etc. God is wont to Proportion his
Dealings with Men, to their Carriage and Deportment toward himself; such
Measure as Men Mete, is Wisely and Justly Measured to them. He is truly a
Bountiful Lord, who will abundantly Reward such as faithfully Serve Him; and is
wont to suit the Rewards to the Work; but he is a Just and a Jealous God, who
is tender of his own Honor, and will not put up the Affronts and Indignities
that are offered to him by Profane and Haughty Sinners; but will Repay them to
their Faces, by pouring Contempt upon them, and staining the Pride of their
Glory.

In the Words Read, we have an Honorable Work Propounded, and an Encouraging
Reward Promised.

1. Let us consider the Work it self Propounded and Expected, viz. To Honor
GOD. Them that Honor Me, etc. Honor is a Word that is often used and indeed
taken in various senses; an Enumeration is needless, and would be tedious. It
may suffice to observe the meaning must be determined by the Party or Object to
whom it is to be Paid; Now the Object here mentioned, is GOD himself; A Being
Exalted far above all Blessing and Praise; and therefore it cannot be by adding
any Luster or Glory to him, but by such actions as hold forth great thoughts of
God, do become his Excellency and tend to his Praise. We are to consider, that
God is a Being of all Possible Perfection; we are Creatures that are full of
Imperfections; and therefore we can add nothing to God; yet are we Creatures
Capable of entertaining some sense of the Perfection, Excellency and Glory of
God, and of expressing the same in agreeable Actions, such Actions as are
becoming his Excellency; and when we do so, God is pleased to account it an
Honor done to Him. Which Work, is excellently suited to the Nature of Man, and
Propounded unto all; not restrained or limited to Persons of Public
Improvement, but a Work belonging to all: Indeed such persons have greater
Advantages in their hands for the Glorifying of God, and God expects a greater
tribute of Honor and Glory from them: But it is a Work Propounded unto all,
and indeed fitted for every one; Not below the Highest, nor above the Meanest,
but well suiting the Nature of Man, and appointed to every one; indeed the very
End of Man's Being, the Business of his Life, the Sum of his Duty.

2. Let us consider the Glorious Reward secured by Promise to such as attend
and perform this Work; and this is Honor from GOD. Them that honor Me, I will
Honor. The work it self is Honorable, and Honor is promised in Reward
thereof. The word Translated Honor, Signifys Weightiness, and the Reward of
Virtue has Weight and Worth in it. We add nothing to God when we Honor him;
But when God Honors us there is a true Luster added; The Creature is set on
high, he is made truly Great and Glorious. Now God will certainly Honor such
as Honor Him: He is the Fountain of Honor, he is the God of Glory Riches and
Honor come of him, and in his Hands it is to make great and to set on high, 1 Chronicles. ^9. 12. And he (...) ^^^tainly make good his Word. Though he make others
Mean, and expose them to Contempt, yet he will not neglect such as Honor him:
The wise shall inherit Glory.

Hence the Words afford this Doctrine;

DOCT. GOD will bestow Honor on such as Honor Him.

Honor is one of those things the Mind of Man does Naturally desire and reach
after, and not in Vain. The wise Author of Nature has universally fitted and
apportioned an Object to each natural Power. There is undoubtedly an Honor
that is proportioned to a reasonable nature, and often propounded unto Man as
worthy of his desire, and to be reached after, as belonging to the Perfection
and Blessedness of his Nature. We read, Joh. 5. 44. Of an Honor that comes
from God only, in opposition to the Honor that comes from Man, so that its a
Good that is both Real, and Great, giving true Advancement to the Creature: And
therefore, there is an Ambition of Mind after it that is truly Laudable; but as
it is aptly Expressed by one, Bishop Hall.
Nature has dim Eyes and they are misplaced, not thereby discerning where, or
in what her Happiness lies, or how to come at it. And hence it is, that the
Attempts of Multitudes are Vain and Fruitless. Men are mistaken in the Object:
There are sundry things that are but the Picture, Appearance, or Shadow of true
Honor; such as Great Titles, Humane Applause, Place of Power and Command,
Splendid Living, Honorable Attendance, etc. Which are usually mistaken by Men,
for the true Object; and in pursuit of these, men do oftentimes strain and tire
themselves to no purpose; and if at any time they are Gained, they Advance
little, add but little of Luster to the Enjoyers; after all, Persons having
nothing but these to Advance or Adorn them, they are but as a worthless Romance
under a Gilded Cover; or a very small Letter in the midst of a great Gay; the
Man may notwithstanding all this be very mean and contemptible in the account
of true Wisdom. Now, Religion which designs the true Happiness and best Good of
Man, makes Discovery of the true Object; tells what true Honor is, and wherein
it consists; raises up, and helps the Mind of man to Discern it, and prescribes
a sure way to Attain it; a way that has been oftentimes tried and found
Effectual; and this is by Virtuous Actions; In short, by Honoring God.
Religion does in its own Nature tend to raise up and ennoble the Mind of man,
and Adorn it with a greater Luster and Glory than a Multitude of empty Titles
can possibly do; but besides, hereby Persons are entitled to the free and rich
Promise of God, who has said, That he will Honor them that Honor him.

In Handling of this point I must first of all, Describe the Work, and then
Discourse of the Reward.

I. I shall Attempt to Describe the Work and show what it is for any to Honor
God.

Now in General, this Work consists in such Actions as proceed from, and
testify the great thoughts are had of God, and are intended and directed to his
Praise.

Its a matter that consists mainly in Action; indeed Speech and the instrument
thereof were given to Praise God with, and not to ly Silent; however, there is
more in this than only some Verbal Praises; Christ himself has taught us thus,
Joh. 15. 8 Herein is my Father Glorified that ye bear much Fruit. And it was by
Action that he himself Glorified God. Joh. 17. 4. I have Glorified thee on
earth, I have Finished the Work given me to do. But then,

Its by such Actions as proceed from, and testify the great thoughts that are
had of God, and are intended, and directed to his Praise. It is not enough to
perform such Actions as relate to God, and have been Commanded by him; but they
must flow from this Principle, and be directed to this end, otherwise whatever
may be the end of the Work, this is not the end of the Workman; and therefore
an Act or Work that finds acceptance and applause with Man, may be Rejected by
God; for though Men Honor God with their Lips (or any External Action) yet if
their Heart be Removed from him, he accounts himself but Dishonored in the
Service, Isa. 29. 13.

Undoubtedly right thoughts of God do lay the Foundation of all suitable
Carriage toward him; hence that Advice, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my
Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect Heart, and
a willing Mind.

So long as the Mind is void of the true Knowledge of God, or leavened with
unworthy and unbecoming thoughts of him, the Carriage will never be respectful;
but such as holds forth Contempt, Thence Sprang the Profane Carriage of the
Sons of Eli, they were Sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 12.
But it will be needful to reduce these Actions under some certain Heads, which
are these that follow, 1. Persons Honor God, by acting directly toward him,
in a manner becoming his Excellency. 2. Persons Honor God, by acting suitably
toward such Objects as relate to him. 3. Persons Honor God, by acting in a
full and perfect Subjection to him. 4. Persons Honor God, by endeavoring to
the utmost to act like him. 5. Persons Honor God, by a lively, and a Vigorous
acting for him in the World, These are such actions as do flow from, and
testify the great thoughts had of God, and do tend to his Praise.


1. Persons Honor God, by acting directly toward him, in a manner becoming
his Excellency. God is ultimately respected in every Holy, or Religious Action;
even such Actions as do nextly respect our selves or our Neighbor, have an
ultimate regard to God; hence Ephesians. 6. 7 With good Will, doing Service as to the
Lord and not to Men: But there are some Actions that do more directly look
toward him; and these are Acts of Worship, Natural or Instituted, wherein the
Soul being withdrawn from other Objects, turns its self toward the Author of
its being; draws near to him and acts toward him, according as its touched with
a Sense of those Various Perfections that shine in him. And then do we Exalt
the Lord, when we raise up our Minds to think of him, to get Acquaintance with
him, to partake of him, and to be filled with him. When we come before him with
an Holy awe on our Hearts, we give him the Glory of his Power, Justice,
Holiness; Psalm. 22. 23. When we Humble and Abase our selves in his Presence we
Exalt him; when we Confess and Bewail our Sins before him we give Glory to him:
Josh. 7. 19. Give Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession: Hence
Mal. 2. 2. If ye will not lay it to Heart, to give Glory to my Name, I will
send a Curse upon you* When we give him Thanks for the Mercies we Receive, we
Magnify him: Hence Psalm. 34. 3. O Magnify the Lord with me, and let us Exalt
his Name together. And Psalm. 50. ult. Whosoever offers Praise, Glorifyeth me.
When we place our Trust in him, and call upon him for good things we want, we
give him the Glory of his Alsufficiency, Kindness: Hence Psalm. 62. 8 Trust in
him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is a Refuge
for us. When our Hearts go out in Love to him, it declares we account him to be
the most Amiable Being, that there is none in the Heavens, or in the Earth that
may be compared to him: Psalm. 73. 25 Whom have I in Heaven but thee, etc. In a
Word, we Honor God when we attend upon the various parts of instituted Worship
in a manner becoming his Excellency, when our outward actions therein, proceed
from, and express a truly Religious Disposition of Soul; This is oftentimes
called a Glorifying God; Psalm. 86.9. All Nations whom thou have made shall come
and Worship before thee, O Lord, and shall Glorify thy Name. So Psalm. 96. 8, 9.
Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name: bring an offering, and come
into his Courts. O Worship the Lord in the beauty of Holiness. Psalm. 99. 5.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and Worship at his Footstool.

2. Persons Honor God, by acting suitably toward such Objects as relate to
him. Its a known, and a received Rule, that, that for which, any thing is what
it is, is its self much more so. Men usually account, that they themselves are
Honored, when any that relate or belong to them, are Honored, and Respected
for their sakes. Now, there are Objects that do more peculiarly relate to God;
and when they are treated in a Respectful manner, for Gods sake, it argues the
great thoughts that are had of God, and God is pleased to take it as an Honor
done to himself. There are persons that come under this relative consideration:
And here it becomes us first of all to consider Him, who in all things has the
Preeminence, and is both related to, and one with God; even Jesus Christ; who
is the Messenger of the Covenant, the Chief Apostle of our Profession; both the
Head of the Church, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: God expects that
his Son should be Reverenced, yea that all men should Honor the Son, even as
they Honor the Father, Joh. 5 23. And Christ is Honored when he is
Acknowleged and Received as the Son of God, when his Testimony is Believed, his
Religion is Embraced, his Mediation Relied on, and he is Betrusted with the
Affairs of the Soul; And Honor is done to God the Father, when Christ is
Honored: Hence Joh. 12. 44. He that Believes on me, Believes no^ ^n me, but
on him that sent me. But then the Civil Magistrate comes under this Relative
consideration; for he is the Deputy of the Supreme Ruler of the World, whom God
has appointed to Represent him, and Act for him here below; to which end, he
has given him his own Name, put a Ray of his own Glory upon him. Imprinted some
Characters of Divinity on him; Dan. 5. 18, 19. The most high God gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor. And
for the Majesty that he gave him, all People, Nations, and Languages Trembled
and Feared before him. God expects they should be Honored under this Notion;
and hence the Duty we owe to our Sovereign in Heaven, and to his Deputy here on
Earth are both Joined together. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King. God
himself is Honored, when these are duly Honored; and he resents it as a
Dishonor done to himself, when those that Represent him in the world are
Despised; 1 Samuel 8. 7. They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me,
that I should not reign over them. And hence was it taken so ill in those that
despised Saul, seeing God had appointed him to Rule over his People, 1 Samuel 10.
ult. Again, There are those that Minister in Sacred things, that come under
consideration; they are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Ambassadors that
represent the great King; 2 Cor. 5. 20. And it is required that they be
respected on this account. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man account of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Honor or Dishonor
done to them is taken as though it were done to him whom they Represent; Luke
10.16. He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises
me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

But this consideration extends it self yet further, not only to the true
Church of God, but to every Pious Member thereof; and therefore a due Respect
yielded thereto under this notion, is an Honor done to God. He that Honors
such as fear God, Honors God himself Psalm. 15. 4. Hence that of Christ, Mat.
25.40* In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.

But then there are things as well as persons that relate to God; viz. His
Word, His Works, His Ordinances, His Day, His House: Now God is Honored when
there is a reverend regard to, and a Holy use made of these. See in particular,
Isa. 58. 13. Hence God complains of dishonor done to him by his Peoples
profaning his holy things, Ezekiel. 22. 26.

3. Persons Honor God, by acting in a full and perfect Subjection to him;
which includes both, an Obedience to his Laws, and a due Submission to his
Corrective Dispensations. Man in his very Make and Constitution is fitted for a
Moral Government: It can Appertain to none but the Author of his Being, to
Exercise it over him: From Creation arises absolute Propriety, and full right
of Government, and God does really exercise the same: The most High does Rule
among the Children of Men. Dan. 4. 17. He is the Governor among the Nations:
He sits King for ever; and his Kingdom Rules over all. He that dispenses some
portions of Power to others, holds the Governments of the World, (yea of both
Worlds) in his own Hands. He actually gives Laws to his Creatures to Live by;
Laws that are most Righteous and most Extensive, that reach every person, and
direct how to carry it toward every Object: Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, etc. And he also
upholds a Discipline in his Family: Indeed God does not willingly Afflict or
Grieve the Children of Men, yet for Wise, and Holy ends, He orders a variety of
Evils to Men in a Corrective way: He does not only Chastize the Heathen, but he
Chasteneth his own Covenant People; Deuteronomy. 8. 5. As a man chasteneth his son, so
the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. And God does not only Correct and Chasten
those among his People that are the Unfaithful, Slothful Servants in his Family
but even his dearest Children, every ^on whom he Loves. Heb 12. 6. The Law and
the Rod, were for a while together, in the Ark of the Covenant, and they will
never be Separate in Gods Government of his Family; we read of Gods Fire in
Zion, and Furnace in Jerusalem. Isa 31. 9. Now God is Honored both by an
Obedience to the one, and a quiet Submission to the other. God is Honored by
an Obedience to his Laws; Sinners by breaking the Divine Law Dishonor God;
Rom.2.23. By breaking of Gods Law Sinners cast a slight on him, they deny his
Sovereignty, they undervalue his Favor, they slight and contemn his Power;
hence Psalm. 10. 13. Wherefore does tho Wicked contemn God? But by an Obedience
to Gods Law, God is Honored. Sacrificing to God is called an Honoring God,
Isa. 43 23. Thou have not Honored me, with thy Sacrifices; But Obedience is
much more so, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings
and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? To obey is better then
sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of rams. Hence are we directed to Pray,
Thy will be done; Mat. 6. 10. That Gods Name may be Hallowed, and his Kingdom
come. And the Obedience by which, God is Honored, is a Universal Obedience; by
such Obedience did Abraham, Moses, Joshua, David, and others endeavor to
Honor and Glorify God, Act. 13. 22. Again God is Honored by that Obedience
which is both Sincere and also Cheerful, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. This gives God the
Glory of his Omnisciency, Truth, Bounty. Again a resolved Obedience Honors
God; when Persons refuse to be allured, or affrighted from the way of Duty;
instances of such Obedience might be taken notice of in Joseph, in the three
Children, Dan. 3. 16, 17. and the Apostles, Act. 5. 29. But then a Submission
to God's Hand and a Compliance with his Providence, gives Honor and Glory to
him. When the Evils God is pleased to order to any in the way of his
Providence, are quietly and patiently born, it gives God the Glory of his
Sovereignty, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness; thus did Aaron, David, Hezekiah, and
above all, CHRIST himself glorify God: Luke 22. 42. Not my will, but thine be
done. Joh. 18. 11. The cup which my Father has given me to drink, shall I not
drink it?

4. Persons honor God by endeavoring to the utmost to Act like him. Imitation
is usually a fruit of Esteem; and gives evidence thereof. The Nature of Man is
very Prone to be led by Example, and especially by the Example of Superiors
that are Honored and Esteemed: When once a person has taken up an high Esteem
of another, he is unaccountably carried away unto an Imitation of the person
Admired: And the force hereof is sometimes so great as to carry away a person
unto an Imitation of him in such things as are the Defects and blemishes of the
person Admired, and the Irregularities of his Actions; and herein is Honor
done to the person; such a Conformity to another testifies that he is had in
Admiration. Now God is the Supreme and Everlasting Standard of Perfection: his
Nature is a Pattern for ours, and his Actions which are known in the Earth are
for our Example. It was Man's primitive Glory, that he was made like to God, and
it must be his brightest Perfection and Glory to be and act like him The works
and actions of God are all done in Truth; He ever proceeds by the Rules of
Wisdom, Justice, Goodness in all his doings Now such is the Nature of Man, that
he is capable of some imitation of him, and hereunto is obliged; Ephesians 5. 1. Be
ye followers of God, as dear children. God is to be imitated in Purity and
Holiness; Lev. 19. 2. He is to be imitated in hatred of Sin, in Justice, Truth,
Faithfulness, Goodness, and Kindness, in slowness to Anger, in readiness to
Forgive, and to be Reconciled, in readiness to Believe and Help the Miserable.
Mat.5. ult. Be ye Perfect. And when we endeavor to the utmost to conform our
selves to the example of God himself in our doings, it declares we have great
thoughts of God; that our Hearts are truly touched with a Sense of his
Perfections; It shows we Believe there is none in the Heavens or the Earth that
may be likened unto him; nor any Works, like unto his Works, Psalm. 86 8.

5. Persons Honor God, by a lively, and a vigourous acting for him in the
World God does not require man to spend all his time in acts of Devotion; nor
allow him to spend the rest of his time in Idleness; much less, in following
the Desires and Devices of his own Heart, which lead from God and true
Happiness, and into Confusion and Misery: But God having made Man for himself,
and capable of acting for an end, has appointed him work, and directed him what
to have ever in his View, which lies in each ones faithful serving of his
Generation, by doing all the good he can in the World* for we are to consider,
not only the needy miserable and hazardous State of each man, but his Relation
to a world of Creatures, in the like ill case, oppressed with Miseries,
corrupted with ill Manners, set very far off from the End of their being Man is
born a Member of some Society, Family, City, etc and there are a multitude of
Offices of love and kindness to be done for our fellow Creatures, both for
their Souls, and also for their Outward welfare, which being done with rega^d
to God's Command, and with a design to glorify Him, God is pleased to take as
done for him; for such is the bounty of God that he does not only acknowledge
those actions to be a serving of him, which look nextly at his Glory, but those
also, which look this way but remotely, or in consequence. There are a
multitude of Necessities that attend mankind, for which, the Provision made is
by the Ministry of men and therefore is God pleased to bestow on men a very
great variety of Gi^ts and Talents, that they may be the better enabled to be
useful in the World, 1 Cor. 12.7 Such as Knowledge, Wisdom, Skill, Authority,
Wealth, Valor, etc. Now when Persons in their several Stations improve their
Talents in a faithful discharge of the Duties of their respective Places, God
is honored: 1 Pet. 4 11. If any man minister let him do it as of the ability
which God gives; that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ.
And now

II. It follows to Discourse of the Reward promised to them that Honor God:
which is HONOR: Them that honor Me, I will Honor. A Reward that is very
great and no less sure. The Promise of God secures it to all such; which
Promise we find many times made; Psalm. 1 12.9. His horn shall be exalted with
honor. Prove. 4. 8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall being thee
to honor, when thou do embrace her. Romans 2. 10. Glory, honor, and peace to
every one that works good. And Christ himself has brought us his Father's
Promise, Joh 12 26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. And what
greater Security can be had or desired, than the Promise of God? For the
Strength of Israel will not lie. And God's own Practice has ever been agreeable
hereunto; Should we look over the whole History of God's dealings, we might
observe a very remarkable Agreement with this Promise, in a multitude of
instances, both before, and after this Promise was made* especially we might
take notice of it in Joseph, Moses, David, Mordecai, Daniel, who in a way of
honoring God by Ve^tuous Actions were raised up to an Excellency of dignity
and honor.

And indeed no instance can be brought to the contrary; we may challenge all
Ages to being an instance of any one who eve^ tried this wa^ and yet missed of
this e^d? What one ever attended this Work faithful, and yet came sho^t of the
Reward? Indeed every (...) affords instances of those of whom the world is not
worthy, who have been despised and dishonourably treated, while they have
lived, and it man be, have had in the account of the World an unglorious end;
but not really so, or in the account of true Wisdom, for while they were hated
and despised of men, they were dear to God; and while they were outwardly-Vile,
by hateful aspersions they were still inwardly glorious, having the Spirit of
God and of Glory resting on them. And though they had not their full Reward given
while at work, it follows not but that they have it now, and shall be for ever
the more bright and glorious, in proportion to the shame and disgrace endured
in the world; for indeed these Evils do work for Persons a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. So that the Reward is not only
great, but most sure

Quest But what Honor shall be done to these Persons, and when shall it be
bestowed?

Answ. I shall give answer to both in one.

1. Such as honor God shall have Honor bestowed on them here in this World.
2. Such as honor God shall have Honor bestowed on them after this Life is
ended.
1. Those that honor God shall have Honor bestowed on them here in this Life.
An Object appears greater, or less as its nearer to, or further distant from
the Eye: And so is it with a good propounded to the Mind; though the good
propounded, be very great, yet if at a vast distance, it appears but small, and
affects but little; whereas, if it be near, it appears the greater and moves
the more forcibly. It is a speedy and undelayed enjoyment of a good* Prized,
that men would have, and the hope hereof excites much* Men that are enquiring
after Honor, would gladly become glorious without delay; and are disposed to
listen after a speedy way of becoming so: Now the way of virtue propounded
tends to Honor here; God is wont to bestow Honor on such, even here in this
Life. Indeed, it is oftentimes made good in a very Remarkable manner.

(1) Sometimes God Honors such as Honor him by Defending, or Delivering them
from the foul Aspersions cast on them in the World. It is not the purest
Innocence, nor the greatest worth, nor most extensive usefulness that will
always secure men from Contumelies and Reproaches. Envy as a dark shadow,
attends the Body of Honor, hatred, Goodness, and ill Requitals, the most kind
and beneficial Services. It is not rare that persons who have deserved best of
their fellow Creatures do meet with the worst treatment from them. There is in
the Mouth of ^he Wicked a Rod of Pride, which he uses Industriously to Scourge
and Defile Men of the rightest Merit. Now God does sometimes ^efend his
faithful Servants from their Mouth (...) from the Hand of the mighty. Job 5.
13. The Services of the Crafty are disappointed, and the counsel the Froward is
turned headlong. The en^enom'd Arrows that fly in the Dark, make Wounds: their
Names are so Oiled that the filth that is spit at them does not stick. But
suppose, Enemies are suffered to prevail by Iniquity, so that their Brightness
is Obscured, and their Horn is defiled in the dust, God does sometimes appear
very Wonderfully in pleading their cause, in rolling off Reproach from them,
and clothing their Enemies with Shame. He brings forth their Judgment as the
light, and their Righteousness as the noon day; He turns the shadow of Death
unto them, into the Morning. Thus God dealt with Joseph, David, Daniel, and
others; And it agrees with what he has said, Psalm.91 15. I will deliver him and
honor him.

(2.) God Honors them that Honor him, by giving them Favor and Respect in
the Eyes of Men. Favor and Respect amongst Men is prized and hunted after by
many as the greatest good in the World. Saul was very fond to have Honor
before the Elders of the People: 1 Samuel 15. 30. And Christ speaks of some, that
loved the praise of men more than the praise of God, Joh. 12. 43. However though
it be overvalued by the most, it is not to be undervalued by any. A wise man's
greatest care is to be worthy of account and esteem; and had much rather be so,
than only be so accounted of. A wise man values his own stock of sufficiency
and real worth, beyound the highest Applauses in the World: Yet notwithstanding
a just esteem when yielded, is not to be slighted: Its Promised by God, as an
encouragement unto Virtue, and bestowed as a reward thereof: Prove.3.4. So shall
thou find favor. And the wise man has observed, that he that seeks good
procures favor, Prove. 11. 27. God has the hearts of all men in his hands, and
he inclines and turns them as he pleases; and many times* does cause his
faithful Servants to find Respect.

And that,

Both with Superiors and Inferiors. A Princes Favor is a thing highly valued;
many will entreat it; and indeed it is as the Dew, Prove. 19. 12. And its very
observable, how oftentimes holy and righteous Persons* have in a way of Serving
and Honoring God been advanced unto it: Their Heavenly wisdom, and God-like
goodness has made their faces to shine, and brought them into the Presence of
great men. So was it with Joseph, Mordecai, Daniel, and others.

And this procures Reverence and Esteem in the minds of Inferiors; and that not
only of the good and virtuous, but the evil. As for the Righteous, among them
Piety and Holiness is in account: Prove. 14. 9. Their very temper disposes them
to honor such as fear God, Psalm. 15. 4. And although there may be some others
that are Sons of Belial that despise, Yet of such as these they will be had in
Honor, 2. Sam 6. 22 But besides this, there is sometimes a Testimony enforced
from the Consciences of the worst men, in the Commendation of the Virtuous;
which is (as one says well) Equivalent to an Universal good Report.

(3) God Honors such as honor him with his own Favor. It is a very great
Honor to be a Favorite of God. The favor of an earthly Prince is accounted a
great Honor. Men usually Value themselves by it; and its the measure and rule
of Valuation and Esteem to others He that is high in the favor of his Prince
may hope for defense and protection from his Enemies; he has an advantage in
his hand to procure good things for himself and others; indeed in the light of
the Kings Countenance is Life, and his favor is as the latter rain, Prove 16.
15. But the Favor of the KING of Kings is by far a greater honor to any one.
When the Beams of the Sun are darted directly on an Object, it makes it appear
bright; and the favor of God and the light of his Countenance toward any one,
does add a true luster; it argues a real worth, it affords a true refreshment
to the Soul; it recommends any one to the respect of the World, it sets on
high, and makes a man's mountain to stand strong. Now this honor have all his
Saints. It was not only the privilege of Joseph, David, Daniel, etc. that they
were favorites of Heaven, but the Countenance of the King of Kings is toward
every wise Servant. All his Saints are in his hand, he loves the Righteous,
and his Countenance does behold the Upright, Psalm. 11 7. And their being dear
to God and precious in his sight, makes them Honorable, Isa 43. 4. In his
favor is their horn Exalted, Psalm. 89. 17.

(4) God honors those that Honor him with his own gracious Presence. Indeed
God is not very far from any of his Creatures. Act. 17. 27 God is every where
Present by his All-comprehending Essence, He fills Heaven and Earth with his
Presence: He is every where present by his Power, Upholding, Guiding and
Governing all his Creatures. He is present in holy Places, by his Grace and
Blessing, He is present in the Consciences of good and bad, by way of Testimony
and Judgment. But he is especially Present with the Virtuous by Manifestation
and peculiar Influence. God is nigh unto all them that call upon him in truth,
Psalm. 145. 18 Persons of greatest Eminency and richest Accomplishments have
usually low and mean thoughts of themselves; and ready to plead unfitness and
insufficiency, when it pleases God to call them forth to improvement; They have
a sense of the greatness of the Work, the difficulty and opposition, that
attends it, and their own inability to grapple therewith, unless they were
furnished with a greater stock of Wisdom, Courage, Strength, than they find
themselves to have; and hence, are wont to raise Pleas from those Heads that
they may be excused: As may be seen in Moses, and in Jeremiah. Now to silence
and remove these Objections, and free the heart from Discouragement, GOD is
Pleased to make the Promise of his own Gracious Presence with his Servants in
the Work he Calls them to. So did he to Moses, Joshua, David, etc. And indeed
not to them only, but to Us in them: For what God said to Joshua, He says to
every true and faithful Servant of his, Deuteronomy. 31. 8. Heb 13.5. I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Which Promise, as it contains in it all the good
we want in the way of Duty, so it is certainly made good; His Promise does not
ever fail. GOD was present with Moses, Joshua, David, and others, as he
Promised; and so He ever is, and will be Present with his faithful Servants to
the end of the World. And this is an Honor, and indeed such an honor as
Earthly Princes cannot possibly bestow upon all their faithful Servants, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Zec. 8. 23.

(5) Lastly, God Honors those that honor him by making them Instruments of
great good in the world. Usefulness in the world is a man's great Glory; and is
wont to procure for a man Repute and Esteem: 2 King. 5. 1. He was an Honorable
man, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria. It argues a
mean, base, unworthy Spirit, in a man, to have a regard only to his own Private
Interest, to make himself the Center of his own actions; and to be careless
about the good of others. He deserves to be neglected, that lives and does no
good in the world: Such an one wastes and squanders away all the Talents given
him to improve. He lives besides the End of his Being; is sunk below the Nature
of Man; and does but only fill up the number of things in the World. But
usefulness makes a man Honorable: It makes a man like to Christ, who was ever
Employed in doing good, Act. 10. ^8 On this account was Jehoiada so greatly
respected, 2 Chronicles. 24. 16. -- Because he had done good in Israel, both toward
God, and toward his House. And it was this that Procured such Esteem and
Reverence to Job, which was very great, both from old and young, the greatest
and most honorable, as well as others. He gives this account of it, when the
ear heard me then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me it gave witness to me:
Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had
no helper. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame: I was a father
to the poor; and the cause I knew not I searched, Job 29. 11, -- He endeavored
by his Wisdom, Wealth, Authority, to do all the good he could. Now it is of
GOD, that any are such Blessings, and Instruments of so much good in the world.
It is He that bestows on men gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Wealth, Valor, etc.
It is He that gives that Divine temper of Soul that disposes men to lay out
themselves, in Endeavors to do good: And it is He, that gives unto men
Opportunity, and by his Blessing renders Endeavors successful; For except the
Lord build the City, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127. 1 And in
this way does God many times Honor such as honor him: So he did Joseph,
Joshua, Nehemiah, Jehoiada, etc. On the account of which, after Generations
will call them blessed. But

2. Such as honor God here, shall have Honor bestowed on them after this Life
is ended. Persons of greatest Eminency and Usefulness, must yield to Death as
well as others. Its daily seen in the world, that wise men die, as well as the
fool and the brutish person, Psalm. 49. 10 They are under the same Circumstances
of Mortality with the rest of the world: Both the Moral and the Physical cause
of Death are found with them; and they are reached by the irreversible Decree
of Heaven; whereby its appointed for men once to Die: It is but a short Day,
that man has allowed to him to Labor in; and then he is overtaken with the
Night of death, -- Which brings men down from their Places of Dignity and
Employment, breaks off their Purposes: In that very day their thoughts perish.
Yet Death does not put an end to the Honor of the Virtuous. Indeed the Pomp
and Glory of sinful Men, which they have gotten without Goodness, and
endeavored to maintain without Virtue, usually comes to an end at Death; Their
glorious Beauty becomes like a fading Flower; it, passes away as a Dream: Their
Mountain falling comes to naught. But the Honor of the Virtuous reaches
beyond Death and the Grave.

And here I might take notice of the Honor that shall be done to their
Spirits, Names, Bodies, whole Persons, --

(1) Honor shall be done to the Spirits of the Virtuous after Death: For when
the close Union between Soul and Body is dissolved, the Spirit which is yielded
up to the care of its mighty and faithful Redeemer, is safely Conveyed and
Conducted to a place of rest, and united to that Heavenly Assembly, of the
Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. It is said of the Wicked; Joh 27. 19. He
shall ly down, but he shall not be gathered; Which is but rarely true of his
Body's not being gathered into the Grave by Burial, but ever true of his Soul,
which is not gathered to a place of Peace. But the Soul of the Virtuous man is
at Death gathered to a state and place of Peace and Refreshment We find
frequent mention made, of good men's being gathered to their Fathers at Death,
so is it said of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Josiah, etc And
it is thought, the Phrase intends, their Spirits being gathered to a place of
rest and refreshment, and their being united to the great Assembly of Happy
Souls in their Separate state However that be, we have a very clear Text for
it; Luke 16 22. Where we are told, that when the Beggar Dyed, he was Carried by
Angels into Abraham's Bosom. Which points out to us the safe and comfortable
state he was put into, and the honorable Company he was United with. And
indeed, it will be a very great Honor to be of that number, to be admitted a
Member of that bright Assembly of Holy Prophets and Apostles, to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, a place perfectly free from all
Sin and Sorrow: a place that has no need of the Sun, nor the Moon to shine upon
it, for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

(2) Honor shall be done to the Names of the Virtuous: Which lies not in some
bitter Lamentations at their Death, or in many Tears dropped over their Graves;
though indeed, these are Evidences of Love and Esteem, and an Honor done to the
Dead. So were the Lamentations of David, at the Death of Saul and Jonathan. It
certainly intended shame and disgrace to Jeh^iakim, when God Threatened him that
he should Die Unlamented. Jer. 22. 28. They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah
Lord, or ah his Glory. His Death should be but like the breaking of a worthless
Vessel, wherein was no Pleasure. And it is certainly spoken of, as an Honor
done to others, that they dyed much Lamented: 2 Chronicles. 35. 24. And all Judah
and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah, etc. But besides Honor of this nature done
them at their Death, their names shall be Perpetuated. The perishing of a man's
name has been accounted of, and is mentioned as one of the greatest Evils; Job
18. 17. His Remembrance shall Perish from the earth, and he shall have no name
in the street. Be utterly for gotten or else be remembered only as some loathsome
Object: But the Perpetuating of a man's Name, is spoken of and promised as a
very desirable thing, Psalm.72.17. His name shall endure for ever. Isa. 56 5. I
will give him an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. Now this honor
shall be done to the faithful Servants of God. Prove. 10.7. The Memory of the
Just is Blessed. The Name of the Wicked shall rot; but the Righteous shall be
had in everlasting Remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. They are often thought of, and
spoken of with respect, after they have been long dead; and their Commendable
spirit and practice is propounded to the living for imitation, Heb. 6. 12. How
fresh and fragrant are the Names of Abraham, Moses, David, etc. to this Day? --
Their Name is as ointment poured.

(3) Great Honor shall be done to these Persons in the Day of Christ's
Appearing. We have great assurance that there will be a day of Retribution; not
only from the Justice of God, but his Truth The Sacred Oracles do assert it.
They inform us not when; but how, and by whom, this great and last Judgment
shall be managed, viz. by Jesus Christ, who shall descend in flaming Fire,
attended with a numerous Host unto judgment. And in that Day shall great Honor
be put on them. Then their Bodies shall be raised and be made Glorious, even
like unto Christ's Glorious Body, Phil. 3. ult. What was sown in Dishonor shall
be raised in Glory; 1 Cor. 15. 43. And made fit to entertain a glorified
Spirit. And then shall peculiar Marks of Respect and Honor be put upon them.

CHRIST will then own, and commend them; He will openly acquit them before the
World; He will then set the Crown on their Heads, Cloth them with Garments of
Glory, allow them to sit down as Assessors with Himself, in the Judgment of the
Wicked. And when the Affairs of the last Judgment are finished, they shall
follow their Victorious Redeemer unto the Cae^estial City, and be set in the
Presence of God with exceeding Joy; and shall dwell for ever more before the
Throne, and shall Sing Everlasting Hallelujahs to Him that sits on the Throne,
and to the Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 7. 15. 16.

And now follows the APPLICATION.
USE, I. For INFORMATION.
Hence, 1. This Truth serves to teach us, that God has a Perfect Knowledge;
yea, that he takes an Exact Notice of all the Doings of the Children of men.
Surely if so, He is a God of Knowledge, and b^ Him Actions are weighed, 1. Sam.
2. 3. He has not eyes of flesh, nor sees as man does, that he need enquire
after iniquity and make search for Sin: for the ways of man are before the eyes
of the Lord and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5. 21. He is the great Eye
of the world, who has a clear view of all the doings of his Creatures. Job,
seems to have been under a deep sense hereof, when he said, Job. 31. 4. Does
not he see my way, and count all my steps? And David was even astonished, at
the thought of Gods All comprehending Knowledge, Psalm. 139. 3* 4 5 It is
impossible the eye of an Earthly Ruler should be on all the Servants of his
numerous Family, appointed to several ways and about differing employments:
much less can he discern clearly, the particular Views of every one. But all
things are naked, and open before that God, with whom we have to do. He knows
the secrets of the Hearts, sees clearly the most hidden springs of action, and
unto what end they are directed, and intended. His Just proportioning of his
dealings to men's carriage declares that he Searches the Heart and tryes the
Reins, Rev. 2. 23. And the maintaining of a lively and constant sense hereof
would be of very great use through the whole course of a man's life. And hence
do we find this consideration used as an argument to engage the heart in being
sincere and cheerful in the service of God. 1. Chron. 28. 9. For the Lord
searches all Hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the thoughts.

Hence. 2. This wonderful bounty of God does hold out great encouragement unto
men to endeavor to the utmost, to honor and glorify God. It is indeed
wonderful bounty in God to reward those that honor him in such a manner* It is
a very great honor to be Employed for God and very strange it should be
recompensed with so ample a Reward. Its by Gifts, Talents, and a right temper
of Soul received from God, that any are enabled to Honor Him; and it argues
strange Bounty in God, thus to Honor his own Gifts. The Services done by any,
bear no proportion with the Reward. Our best Services are weak, and very
imperfect; but the reward is great and weighty. Our Services are very short;
but the Crown of glory given in reward, is everlasting, and never fading, 1.
Pet.5. 4. So that it is an act of Royal Bounty. And we have much greater reason
than he had, to Express ourselves as he did, 2 Samuel 19. 36 -- And why should
the King recompense it with such a reward? Surely its not after the manner of
man. And it holds, out abundant encouragement to any to serve God, and to lay
out themselves to the utmost in endeavors to honor him. Here is enough to
make amends for all the difficulties any have to encounter in the way of their
duty. Here is enough to bear up the Heart, in the midst of any sufferings that
befall them, and for the longest time spent in the service of God; or greatest
good done by any Services. Surely Moses thought so, Heb. 11. 26. -- For he had
a respect to the recompense of reward. And was not Christ himself moved by the
Joy that was set before him? Heb. 1^. 2.

Hence, 3. This Truth is of use to guide in the Choice of Persons to Places of
Public Improvement. Persons of Public Improvement, have great advantages in
their Hands to Honor God: Indeed there is no person but may do somewhat this
way, let his Station be never so low, his Talents few, his Abilities small, he
may notwithstanding Contribute somewhat. He that could not bring Gold, or
Silver, or Precious Stones, toward Building of the Tabernacle, might bring
Goats Hair, Badger Skins of Shittim Wood, and find a ready Acceptance: So here.
However persons that stand in places of Public Trust may do more; they have
more Talents, and better Opportunities to Honor God than others: And indeed,
God expects more from them. Now the Choice of Men to such Public Places does
(among us) lie with the People; and its a Privilege. It may be not Universally
accounted so: A Privilege we are not enough Thankful for: A Privilege that is
horribly abused by too many among us. And yet, do we show a lothness to part
with it, when we are under Threatenings of being Deprived. Now this truth
teaches us how to improve this Privilege, so as that we may feel the Benefit
thereof: and this is in looking out for, and in the choice of, such men for
Improvement as are likely to Honor God. (...) a Religious Spirit; Men of a
Divine (...) of Soul. By such men the Happy (...) of Government are most likely
to be reached; and the best Interests of a People are like to be Secured and
Advanced. Honor is not seemly for a Fool; Nay its a sore Evil that Folly is at
any time set in great Dignity. Though persons have various other needful
Qualifications, yet if they are void of Piety and of the true Fear of God, they
are miserably unfit. Though persons are Honorably Descended, have had a Liberal
Education, are persons of Knowledge, Wealth, Courage, etc. Yet if they are
persons of vicious Lives, of selfish Spirits, of unsanctified Hearts, the true
ends of their Advancement are not likely to be reached. What can be looked for
when Vile men are Exalted? and such as work Wickedness are set up? Surely then
God's Honor will be neglected, if not the betraying of His Interest into the
hands of its Enemies. Religion must needs be in a very unsafe State when those
that are not its Friends have the Care of it Therefore should those be looked
for that are men fearing God, etc. Exodus 18. 21. The Rock of Israel has said,
that he who rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 22.
3.

Hence, 4. This Truth serves to teach us how God will deal with them that
Neglect and Dishonor Him: Nay it is expressed in the very next words, They
shall be lightly Esteemed. If Honor be the reward of Virtue; then Shame and
Disgrace shall be the punishment of Vice and of a Neglect of God. Shame shall
be the Promotion of such as Neglect God and Dishonor him. Men of Proud and
Ambitious spirits are very often Resis^ed by God: While they are trying to
climb on high, they are thrust down: Or if by any means they are set on high,
they oftentimes come down wonderfully. Though their Excellency mount up to the
Heavens, yet they are brought down: their Glory becomes like a fading Flower,
or a Garment that is Moth-eaten, Job 20. 6. But I pass to

USE, II. Which is of EXHORTATION,
Unto all Ranks and Orders of men, with greatest Earnestness and Intention of
mind, to apply themselves to this Work, that has so Encouraging a Promise
annexed to it. And

1. Let me humbly Propose this to Civil Rulers, whether in a higher, or in a
lower Station; and in particular, I would Address the Honorable the Governor,
the Deputy Governor, and the Worshipful Assistants, who at present have or may
have, the Chief Places of Civil Power among us in this Colony. Honored and
Worshipful, I am deeply sensible of my Meanness, and Unfitness on all accounts
for the Performance of what I am engaged in. I have thought, on these
Occasions, Days should speak, and multitude of Years should teach Wisdom: for
with the Ancient there is Wisdom, and in Length of Days is Understanding. And
we that are but of Yesterday and know nothing (comparatively) should rejoice to
hear with our Ears, what our Fathers would tell us: Or if any Younger Persons
of brighter Parts and Abilities were called forth, My own Meanness beyond all,
would Excuse me from such Public Services* but Your Commands have reached, and
bro't me out of my Obscurity, to hand a part of the Divine Counsel to you This
Warrants and should Embolden me, humbly to recommend this Honorable Work, with
its Mighty Encouragement to your Choice. I trust you are determined wherein
true Honor lies, and have your Hearts settled, in this only right Way, of
becoming great and glorious. Be Quickened and Encouraged therein: Honor GOD,
and He will Honor you.

And the things this Truth does very Naturally suggest to you, to Honor God
by, are,

(1) That you be bright Patterns of Piety and true Devotion; yea indeed, of
every Christian Virtue. Goodness can be no disparagement to the greatest; nor
in the least obscure any ones Glory: goodness being joined with greatness, in
an object, renders the same by far, the more glorious, even God-like This
renders all other accomplishments the more bright: and lays a lasting
foundation of Honor. It is the Wisdom and the Honor of the Judges o^ the
Earth to Worship and serve the Lord. It is said of Constantine that he would be
pictured in a Praying Posture. Be devout worshippers of God, Live in obedience
to his laws, and in an experimental acquaintance with each virtue belonging to
the Christian Li^e. Be patterns of Humility, Temperance, Chastity,
Righteousness, Mercy etc. This will make you shine in the world; this will
secure you respect and esteem; this will establish your authority, and give you
boldness in the administration of Justice. This will recommend Religion unto
others and be a means to provoke many. And then

(2) That you be lively Agents for God in the World. It is from GOD you have
your Power, and he expects it be improved for Him.

[1] Endeavor to defend the Honor and Interest of God. It is in the midst of
Enemies, that Christ has set up his Kingdom, Psalm 110. 2. Gods heritage is like
a Speckled Bird, the Birds round about her are against her Jer. 12. 8. There
are Constant assaults made upon Gods Interest from Earth and Hell. Gods Truths,
His Laws, Ordinances, His Day, His People, a^e ever exposed to injuries. Be you
a defense* By wi^e and prudent laws; By entrusting duly qualified persons in
inferior stations, and by a constant Vigilance and Watchfulness over such as
are Improved, that the good and wholesome Laws made, may be duly Executed.
Rulers are called Shields, Psalm 47. 9 Be such to the Interest of God. Rulers
are called Mountains, Psalm. 72. 3. Be as Mountains of Defense round about the
City of God Its much easier to prevent and keep off Evils, than to remedy them.

[2] Revenge the Wrongs and Injuries done to the Honor of God. GOD is the
Supreme Ruler of the World, and Vengeance belongs to him, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Some of
this Power he Invests those with, that represent him in the World. The Civil
Magistrate is called a Revenger: Romans 13. 4. A revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. He has the Sword of Justice put into his Hand, to Execute
Wrath on Evil doers; 1 Pet. 2. 14. Bear not the Sword in vain; but draw and use
it in Revenging the Wrongs done to GOD's Honor. There are some Sins that are
more directly a dishonor done to God, such as Cursing, Swearing Sabbath
breaking, Neglect of God's Worship, Profaneness, Irreverence, etc. For the
Restraining and Suppressing of which, a distinguishing Zeal should put forth
its self. Yet we are to remember, that other Sins are Breaches of the Law of
God, and a Dishonor done to him, Rom.2. 23. And are they not also to be found
with us? Such as, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Unrighteousness, Oppression,
Idleness, Mispence of Time. Let not Sinners grow bold by being Neglected, Eccl
8 11* Be Resolved and Courageous in appearing against Sin, that so the Sins
that are in the Land may not be Charged to the Land, nor indeed the Guilt of
them be drawn on your own Souls. It is resolved by one, Bishop Wilkins.
That there are three things that will raise a Sin to be a Public Guilt, viz.
Common Practice, Public Establishment and Connivance, and General
Insensibleness. Let there be the utmost Care that the Sins which are in the
Land may not be Imputed or Charged to the Land.

[3] Endeavor to the utmost, to further and advance the Honor and Interest of
God. Do what you can that Religion may Revive and Flourish among us. To this
end, your endeavors to allay our Heats and appease our Differences are most
needful; we are not like to Recover to a healthy State, so long as this fever
is in our Blood. Let the Mountains bring forth Peace to the People, and the
little Hills by Righteousness, Ps 72.3 Your Endeavors to Encourage the
Ministry, and to preserve the same from Contempt, is of good tendency this way.
Your early care that Religion and Learning may grow up and Flourish together,
in your Superior School may be very Conducive this way. Then will Plants of
Renown be taken therefrom: Trees of Righteousness that will afford much Shadow
and abundance of good Fruit.

That your Eyes be on the Faithful of the Land, in your dispensing Preferments,
is an Honor done to God, and a good means to secure and advance the best
Interest; Prove. 11. 11 By the blessing of the righteous the City is exalted.
And does not the sad Case of the miserable Heathen among us call for Pity?
Indeed there are but some poor and thin Remains of them; and they the very
dregs of Humane Nature; But is not their Wretchedness our Shame? What Pains
would the Pharisees of old take to make Proselytes? And what indefatigable
Pains do the Papists take, for the Conversion of Heathen to a False Religion?
How far will they Travel? and what Hazards and Difficulties will they
Encounter, for this End? And yet these miserable Creatures are Neglected by us,
Nay they are not only Neglected, but made Sevenfold more Stupid and Sottish
than before, by our means.

Honorable and Worshipful,

I do but briefly hint at some things, whereby you may Honor God. And if we
Consider the sad Decays of Religion, the mighty Prevalency of Sin among us, the
sore Displeasure of God, various ways testified against us, for our Sins
whereby he has been Dishonored. And if we also Consider that Selfishness of
spirit and general Unconcernedness about the Honor and Interest of God, the
matter calls for your earnest Application. In a due Regard to these things, you
may be Instruments of great good unto his People, both in keeping off
Judgments, and in deriving Blessings unto them: And for Encouragement You may
be assured of Gods Presence; And to have pursued and reached earnestly after
this, will give you Comfort in your last Hours; and the Work shall surely be
Rewarded. For when you have Finished the Work given you to do, you shall be
removed to a better World, and be made Members of that Venerable Assembly
above, where your employment will all be Honorable and Sweet, without Burden,
without Contradiction, without Censure, your Places sure, your Crown, and your
Joy, Great and Everlasting.

2. And now; I would turn Myself to my Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry;
Let us look on Ourselves to be deeply concerned in this Matter. And

(1) Let us carefully avoid all such things as tend to the Dishonor of God.
Those that Preach against what is amiss in others had need to take heed to
themselves. Such things as pass off, even without Censure in others, will be
looked upon as black Offenses in those of this Order. Let us take heed to our
selves, that we be Harmless and without Rebuke, etc. Let us carefully avoid all
Covetousness, Pride, Passion, Intemperance, Idleness, Unrighteousness,
Unpeaceableness and Contention. It is Lamentable, there is so much of this last
among us, as is at this Day. And it concerns us to Consider, Is it a Divine
Heat, or some Strange Fire? What Spirit are we of? Is it the Spirit of GOD? or
the Spirit that is in the World? Are we herein Zealous for the Lord of Hosts,
or have we not some Private Views? Do not our Contentions proceed from the
common Causes of Strife,and argue that we are Carnal?

Is it not sad, there should be Contentions among Us, who are the
MessengersandPreachers of Peace,andshould above all men, be the keepers and
practisers thereof? How shall we be able to Preach against StrifeandContention
in others, while we our selves practice it? Romans 2. 1.

Who can shut his Eyes from beholding the Mischiefs that have arisen here from
already? Is it not sad that the Hearts of Ministers should be Alienated from
one another? By what shall the World know, we are the true Disciples and
Followers of Christ if we do not Love one another, and Live in Peace? Was the
Ministry ever so much exposed to Contempt, as it is at this Day under his
Occasion? Has not this wide Breach, given great Advantage to the Adversary?

And is this a time for us to Contend one with another, when the GOD of Heaven
is thus awfully Contending with the Land? Shall we suffer the Ship to Sink
under us, rather than leave Contending to stop the Leaks?

And what can we propound to our Selves by continuing this Quarrel?

We cannot plead the Interest of God calls for it, and will suffer if we leave
off; It had been in better case had we never begun. We are not able to say, We
cannot desist with a good Conscience, since it is hard to discern how a good
Conscience can be preserved in the prosecution thereof. But who can Express the
Confusion and Misery we are threatened with, if it be Continued? Let us
seriously Consider, what Account we shall give up unto God of these things, and
whether they will be for our Honor from the Lord! But

(2) Let us have this Matter ever in our View, make it the scope of our Lives,
and reach after the same with greatest Earnestness, that God in all things may
be Glorified.

Particularly,

Let us endeavor to Honor God by a Solemn, Serious, and Devout spirit and
behavior in all Sacred Administrations; as those that feel the Power of
Religion, and have our Hearts deeply impressed with a sense of the Presence,
Perfection and Glory of God.

Let us Honor God by putting forth a due Zeal against Sin; and especially
against the Sins that prevail among those that are under our Care. Let us not
fail to Warn the Wicked, lest they perish in their Sins, and their Blood be
required at our Hands, Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18.

We must lift up our Voices like a Trumpet to show unto our People their
Transgressions, Isa. 58. 1. And we must take notice of and be deeply affected
about the Sins that are in the Land.

Let us lay out our selves in Endeavors after the Conversion of Sinners; and
see that our Public Discourses be adapted ^o that end, viz. To open men's Eyes,
and turn them from Darkness to Light, Act. 26. 18. And we must Endeavor to be
Patterns and Examples of Holiness. Our own Light must shine before men, (
Mat.5.16.) that God's Honor and Glory may be advanced.

We must be Patterns of Humility, of Temperance, Diligence, Self-denial, doing
our own Business, Tit. 2. 7. In all things showing thy self a pattern. If we
are not Faithful, GOD's interest will suffer, Iniquity will prevail, many Souls
will be lost, and we shall have a sad Account to give up at last. But if we
give our selves to these things, and attend Faithfully hereupon, we may prevent
much Sin, keep off Judgments, and save Souls. The difficulty and hazard of our
Work is great, yet it is Honorable, Necessary and Sweet; and the
Encouragements to Faithfulness and Diligence are many and great. We are assured
of the Presence of God, if we are faithful; and it will be a very Comfortable
thing to us at last, if we are then, able to say to Him that has appointed us
our Work; We have glorified Thee on Earth, we have finished the Work given us
to do. Surely their last Trial shall be found unto Praise, Honor and Glory in
that Day: For when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, they shall receive a Crown
of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Those that turn many to
Righteousness shall shine forth as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3.

3. Lastly, I would Propose this Work, with its Promised Reward, more generally
to the Whole Body of the People, and to each Hearer who is able to discern
between good and evil. Let us each one look upon our selves to be Concerned.
The Work is given to each one of us to attend, and the Crown of Glory Promised,
is held out to every one of us for our Encouragement. And here,

Let us Honor God by a suitable deportment of ourselves under His mighty Hand.
GOD has had a Controversy with the Land for a long while, and its abundantly
evident it is not at an end: Gods hand is yet stretched out against us; and it
declares to us, there is that among us that is Displeasing unto him. And indeed
our transgressions are increased; our Land is full of Sin.

Let us seriously Consider our Ways; Let each one say with himself, What have I
done? Let us make free and humble Confession of our Sins* and greatly Bewail
them; be even as Doves of the Valleys, Mourning every one of us for our
Iniquities, Ezekiel. 7. 16 Yea, Let us Mourn for the Sins of the Land, Ezekiel. 9.4
Let us Justify God, under his awful Rebukes, Acknowledge His Righteousness, and
our Rebellion. Lev. 26.40,41. If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled,
and they accept of the punishment of their iniquity. --

Let us be Speedy, Unfeigned and Thorough, in turning from all Sins to God,
Jer. 18. 11. Return you now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and
doings good. We have had many Loud and Solemn Calls to Repentance and we have
made many pretenses hereto; Let us be Sincere and Hearty herein. Repent and
turn your selves from all your Transgressions; so Iniquity shall not be your
Ruin; Cast away from you all your Transgressions, etc. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31.

Let us Honor God by a devout and steady Attendance on all his Ordinances. It
casts Contempt on God, when his Holy Ordinances are neglected, or not attended
upon in a due manner.

Let us Honor God by Holiness in our Conversations. A Holy Life is a constant
Glorifying of God. By Holiness of Life, we show forth the Praises of him who
has called us, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Let us Honor God by Improving our Talents, and by a Faithful Discharge of the
Duties of our respective Places. 1 Pet. 4. 11. That God in all things may be
Glorified.

Let us Honor God, by giving due Honor to those whom God has raised on high,
and himself put Honor upon. Romans 13. 7. Let us consider their Relation unto
God, and entertain a high and reverend Esteem of them on that account. There
are those that Despise Dominions, and are not afraid to Speak Evil of
Dignities; but its a very Dangerous thing to Despise those that God Honors, a
dreadful Adventure in any to try to pull down such as God has set on high. 1 Samuel 24. 6. God forbid I should do this thing, to stretch out my hand against
the Lords anointed. Let us freely afford them all helps we can in the Discharge
of their Trust, let us be Obedient unto them; Accept their doings for us
Thankfully; Willingly afford them Supports Needful and Convenient; And let us
ever Remember and give them an Interest in our Sincere and Earnest Prayers. And
were this Counsel but heartily embraced and followed, it would Conduce much to
our Happiness; then should our Light break forth as the Morning, and our Health
would Spring forth speedily. Be we then Willing and Obedient. Let us turn
Unfeignedly, from Sin to God* Yield up our selves wholly to do his Will: Let us
Know him, and Serve him with a Perfect Heart and a Willing Mind: Yea let us
continue Patiently in well doing, seeking for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality. And now, The Lord make us Perfect in every good Work, to do his
Will, Working in us that which is Well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ; to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

