A Practical Discourse Relating to the GOSPEL-MINISTY.

Preached By Thomas Foxcroft, A. M. At His Ordination to the Office OF Pastor
of a CHURCH in Boston, on Wednesday, November 20. 1717.

Published and Enlarged at the Urgent Request of a Gentleman of his Auditory.

With a Preface by the Reverend Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth, Pastor of the said
Church.

BOSTON: Printed for Nicholas Buttolph, at his Shop at the lower end of
Cornhill, 1718.

THE PREFACE.
THAT the Office and Work of the Gospel Ministry is founded on Divine
Institution, may easily appear to those, who read the Scriptures with serious
unbyas'd thought and observation. Its a work, the right performance whereof is
attended with many and great difficulties; partly from the various, frequent,
furious Assaults of Satan; partly from the Lusts of Men, variously discouraging
or opposing of it; and partly from the weaknesses and remaining corruptions,
even of the best of those, who engage in it. Yet it is a Work very honorable in
it self, and of vast Weight and Importance. It must needs be thought so, if we
rightly consider, that it is the Infinitely Great, Glorious, Holy,
Heart-searching God, who (in His Providence) Calls and Commissions Men to this
Work; that the main Scope of the Work is, to batter down Satan's Kingdom, to
pull down the strong holds of Lust in the Hearts of Men, to promote the Glory
of Divine Grace through Christ, in saving Men's Precious Immortal Souls, one of
which is more worth than a World; and that those who engage in this Work, must
give up a strict account of their Management, to that God who employs them, who
cannot be deceived and will not be mocked, and who will require at their hands the
Blood of those Souls that perish through their neglect, as well as graciously and
abundantly reward them if they are Faithful. These brief hints show, that the
Work of the Gospel Ministry is exceeding great, weighty and important. If the
sense hereof made Paul (who came not behind the chiefest Apostles) to cry out,
Who is sufficient for these things; how much more might it make the ablest of
Ordinary Ministers to do so? A great variety of Gifts and endowments (not to be
obtained without a course of intense laborious Study and Prayer) deep Humility
of mind, unfainting application and unshaken resolution, unwearied supplies and
fresh anointings from Christ the Head of Influences, are needful to a right
discharge of the Work of the Ministry. These things should be seriously
considered of, by those who think of engaging in that most weighty Work; that
so with due Preparations of Soul, and dependence on God, they may enter upon
it. They should gladly use such helps, a^ tend to fit them for, and quicken
them to, a right discharge of their duty. Among such helps, the following
Sermon may well be numbered. 'Twas Preached (though not so large as it is now
Printed) by the Worthy Author, on the Day of his Ordination; and it is now
Published, in Answer to Importunate Solicitations, and at desire also the
Enlargements were made. This Importunity argues not his backwardness to oblige
Friends; but his modest opinion of his own performances, and his unwillingness
to appear so early in Print, (being very Young) lest any should censure him for
too much forwardness. Such a censure in this case, would be very groundless.
His principal design in Studying this Sermon (as he declares) was not so much
the instructing of others in the Work of the Ministry, as the learning more
clearly his own duty, and getting the sense of it more deeply impressed on his
own mind. But now it is Published, I wish others may be as much benefited in
Reading, as he was in Studying, of it. Those Sermons, which are most worthy of
Commendation, have least (or no) need of it; they commend themselves; I think
this may be numbered among such. Sure I am, the things contained herein, are
highly worthy of the deepest and most serious consideration, of all
Gospel Ministers. I hope by perusing of it, I am more humbly sensible of my own
deficiencies, then I was before; and my desire is, that for the future I may be
quickened to act in my Station, more agreeably to what is here very solidly and
cogently inculcated. I wish that all Ministers would (as this Sermon directs)
make it their chief Business to Preach Christ, to show Men their need of Him,
and His suitableness and sufficiency for them; endeavoring that they may be
rightly acquainted with Him, united to Him, and more conformed in heart and
life to His Image, Precepts and Example. Thus to Preach Christ, is more the
duty and honor of Ministers, than to show the greatest Learning in other
matters, or to get the greatest applause for it. I esteem it a rich mercy of
God to our Land, that He continues and smiles on our College, and thence sends
forth from time to time, able Ministers, to serve His Holy Churches in this
Wilderness, as well as in some other Places: Praise be to God the Father of
Lights, for this Great Blessing. This is the distinguishing Glory of
New England, wherein it differs from all other Plantations and Dispersions of
the British Empire. I Pray, God continue our College a rich Blessing to His
Churches, as long as the Sun and Moon endure. And I esteem it as a rich
Blessing to that Flock of our Lord Jesus, to which I am an unworthy Pastor,
that the Worthy Author of this Sermon, (my Dear Brother and Fellow Labourer,)
was so unanimously and peaceably called to, and settled in, the Pastoral Office
among them. I Pray God, long to continue his Life and Health, and greatly and
constantly to increase the Gifts and Graces of His Good Spirit to him; and to
make him very Faithful and Successful in the weighty important Work he is
engaged in, and then to take him safe, though late, to His Heavenly Kingdom. And
as for the Flock themselves, I Pray that they may be (and thanks be to God they
are) a Blessing and a Comfort to those who watch for their Souls. My hearts
desire and Prayer to God for them is, that they may be saved; that those who
Preach and those who hear, may meet with Joy at Christ's Right Hand in the
Great Day.

BENJAMIN WADSWORTH.

A Practical Discourse Relating to the GOSPEL MINISTRY.
COLOS. I.28, 9. WHOM we Preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in
all Wisdom; that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus: whereunto I
also labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily.


FORASMUCH as it has pleased the Great Shepherd of the Sheep (whose are all
our ways, and who turns the hearts of Men as the rivers of Water) to direct,
and incline his People of this Flock (which He has purchased of Old, whose
goings are seen in this Holy Mountain) to Elect and Invite me (who am less,
than the least of all Saints, and not worthy to be allowed to be put in trust
with the Gospel) to take the Ministerial Charge, and Oversight of them in the
Lord; and Forasmuch as now the Set and Solemn time is come for my Public
Investiture in awful manner (by Prayer, with laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery) into the Sacred Office (whereunto He has called me, and unto which
I would in all Humil^ty and Fear, under a sense of the Greatness of the Work,
and conscious of my own insufficiency, in hope of the Promised Divine Presence,
with utmost Sincerity, bind my self in the Lord before many Witnesses.) I would
learn my Duty, move my Affections, and take Encouragement from the Passage of
Scripture before us -- Whom we Preach, warning every Man, etc.

THEY are the Words of the Apostle Paul; and herein he has left a bright
Specimen of his own conduct, for direction and incentive unto Ministers in the
Service of the Gospel; and which therefore will afford reflections not
unseasonable for the present Solemnity.

I shall not spend any of the few Minutes allotted for this Discourse, in
stating the Coherence, and relation of the Words unto the Context, but
immediately apply my self to form some proper remarks upon them, under a more
abstract consideration. And I trust, that none will pervert, or transfer those
things, which I design for immediate cautions to my self, as charges, or
personal imputations on any other; and that none will now look upon me as
standing here this Day, to dictate and prescribe unto others, so much as to my
self.

To begin, we may

1. OBSERVE, What was the Apostle's great Work and Business. viz. Preaching. We
Preach, says he: We -- either (as some say) including the other Apostles, and
Faithful Ministers of Christ with himself; or else (as say others) rather
putting the first Person Plural, for the first Person Singular, which was
customary with him, as it is with us.

HOW ignoble, how trivial and minute soever this Work may appear to some, how
contemptible soever this foolishness of Preaching, yet the Great Doctor of the
Gentiles, a Star of the first Magnitude, 2 Cor. 11.5. Act. 22.3.
not a whit behind the very Chief of the Apostles, bro't up at the feet of
Gamaliel, and having profited above many in all the Learning both of Jews and
Christians, though it it no stoop to give himself to the Ministry of the Word. Acts
6.4. Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Timothy 1.12. Act. 20.24
Unto me (says he) is this Grace given that I should Preach --. For the which
also I suffer, nevertheless I am not ashamed, neither count I my life dear to
my self, so that I may finish the Ministry I have received of the Lord. To.
11.13.
He took all occasions thus to magnify his Office, and in all his Writings we
find interspersed with a most pleasant variety, such notes of holy triumph and
glorying in his Work.

THE OBSERVATION here is this, namely,

THAT Preaching is one great, and noble part of the Pastoral Duty.

THE Ministers of the Gospel are styled Stewards of the Mysterys of God: 1 Cor.
4.1. -- 9.17.
The Dispensation of these is committed to them. Out of the Storehouse and
Repository of Divine Truths, Mat 13.52 2 Timothy 3.15, 6. 1 Pet. 4.10. Act. 20.28.
They are, as the good House-holder, to bring forth things new and old, things
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and instruction in
righteousness, as every Man has received the gift, feeding the Flock over
which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, testifying the Gospel of the
Grace of God. ver. 24.
How does our Savior inculcate this, with the most pathetical expressions of
endearing affection, upon Peter, and in him on every Minister, saying, Love
thou Me? Feed my Lambs. Joh. 21. --
As thou love Me, Feed my Sheep, feed my Sheep. And with what Solemn
Vehemence does the Apostle adjure, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2
and exhort his Son Timothy? I Charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at His Appearing and Kingdom, --
1.8. 1 Timothy 4.13
Preach the Word, etc. Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord. Give
attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine.

PREACHING then is an Ordinance of Heaven, and therefore not to be declam'd
against, as mean or superfluous. 1 Ths. 5.20
How vile then are they, that despise Prophesying, and forsake the Assembling
themselves together, Heb. 10.25
as the manner of some is, and load Faithful Preachers with the most
contemptuous indignities? Good Ministers are Lights to the World, Mat. 5.13,
14. 2 Ki. 2.12. 2 Cor. 8.23. -- 5.20. 1 Timothy 5.17 Isai. 49.5. 1 Cor. 4.13.
and Salt unto the Earth, the beauty of Jacob, The Chariots and the Horsemen
thereof; The Glory of Christ, and Ambassadors for Him, and worthy of double
honor. Though Israel acknowledge them not, yet they are glorious in the eyes of
the Lord. Though they are reviled, despised, buffeted, made the filth of the
World, a perpetual hissing, and the offscouring of all things to this day, yet
they appear in the sight of Heaven, with beams of distinguishing glory,
entitled to double honor, even the excellency of dignity. As it is written,
Isai. 52.7. To. 10.15.
How beautiful upon the Mountains, are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel
of Peace? Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder and perish.

AND let none think it a disparagement to his Greatness, to be employed in
Preaching the Gospel, and grow too big for this work, as fit only for Men of
low degree, and least esteemed in the Church.

TO excel here is true dignity and glory. King Solomon esteemed it a
first^ate-honour, and a brighter Ornament than his Crown. Eccl. 1.12.
That is his Style, The PREACHER, King over Israel. Yea, and a greater than
Solomon, the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, JESUS the Son of God,
Heb. 2.3. Act. 10.36
was a Preacher of the Gospel, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord.

THIS was one grand Article of His Commission, Luke 4.43.
and the chief business of His Life. He continued faithful herein even to the
Death, -- 24.19.
a Prophet mighty in Word and Deed before God and the People, -- 4.15.
being glorified of all; yea, after His Resurrection He returned to His wonted
pleasant Employ, Act. 1.3.
speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

YE see then, Brethren, your Calling, how that some Wise Men, some Mighty, some
Noble Personages, and the highest Names have honored the Institution of
Preaching.

AND how do these excellent Patterns countermine the dumb and idle Shepherd,
that leaves the Flock? Isa. 56.10. Zech 11.17 Isai. 56.11. Act. 20.29
and condemn the greedy dogs, (as they are called) which can never have eno',
and spare not the Flock, yet will only watch them by Proxy.

II. OBSERVE, What was the Subject Matter of the Apostle's Preaching, viz.
CHRIST. Whom we Preach, says he, i. e. Christ, Whom he had expressly mentioned
in the verse immediately preceding. -- Christ in you the hope of Glory, Whom
we Preach, -- Christ was the Sum and Substance of his whole Preaching, either
directly or reductively; Gal. 6.1^. -- 1.14.
not Circumcision, and the Jew's Religion after the traditions of the Fathers;
nor Gentile Philosophy and vain deceit after the rudiments of the World, Col.
2.8.
and the doctrines of Men. No; so he speaks, I dertermined not to know any
thing among you, save Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 2.2.
So also he says elsewhere* We Preach not our selves, 2 Cor 4.5.
but Christ Jesus the Lord. Act. 5.42.
Thus likewise it is said of the other Apostles, They ceased not daily to Teach
and Preach Jesus Christ.

AND the excellent Pattern, which They Have set, Challenges a perpetual imitation
from all the Ambassadors of Christ. All their Sermons are to be framed to this
Standard.

DOCT. CHRIST is the Grand Subject, which the Ministers of the Gospel should in
their Preaching mainly insist upon.

1 Cor. 3.11.
NO other Foundation can any Man lay, than that which is laid. The Apostles
according to the Grace of God given to them, as wise Master Builders, have laid
this Foundation, Act. 10.36.
and unto this do all the Prophets give witness; let every Man then take heed
how he builds; 1 Pet. 2.
let the Builders beware, they refuse not this Chief Cornerstone, the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

CHRIST is the Center of Revelation, and the adaequate Subject of Preaching;
and He must be the Substance and Bottom of every Sermon. Men must not lavish
away their Ministry on petty matters of doubtful d^sputation, or empty
speculation; but they must Preach the solid and weighty truths that are
according to Godliness, Ephesians. 3.8, ^.
the Unsearchable Riches of Christ, to make Men see what is the fellowship of
the mystery, which from the beginning has been hid in God.

THERE are some giddy-headed Opinionists, who pretend to see with infallible
Eyes, and set up for indubitable Oracles, transforming themselves into Angels
of Light, yet speak with the tongue of Men, and the miserable dialect of
corrupt nature, belching out the romantic forgerys and false visions of a
distempered brain for the Faith once delivered to the Saints; Jer. 14.14.
Prophesying lies and a thing of ^ought, the deceit of their heart, and the
shadows of a dream, having no better light, than the Moonshine of unsanctify'd
reason.

THE Mystery of Christ, which our holy Apostle often mentions, and that for
ever with admiring rapture, These Men, the Scoffers of the last day, with pert
and ^^refac'd presumption hoot at, and hunt down as mad enthusiasm, insipid
cant and jargon; "They make it their bauble to play with, and their eyesore"
to spurn and snarl at. Here they set their silly and sooty wit to brisk up, and
vent it self in fleering sarcasms, or sneering burlesque; Here they rave or
droll; and prate against the faithful Preachers of Christ, 3 John 10.
with malicious words, painting 'em under their own colors, as Fools and
Bablers, as fanatical, and fantastic, as Men of slavish minds, and weak
understandings. How justly do these malevolent sounds reverberate upon
themselves?

SUCH are filthy dreamers, empty clouds, 1 Timothy 6.4.
knowing nothing, who consent not to wholesome words, and to the Truth, as it is
in Jesus. These are Enemies to the Cross of Christ (whose end shall be
according to their works) and are removed from Him unto another Gospel, Gal.
1.6.
and so lie open to that awful Anathema denounced by the Apostle, saying, Though
we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, -- ver. 8.
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. -- Oh, my Soul,
come not into their secrets; Genesis 49.6.
unto their Assembly, mine honor, be not thou united.

THEY, that are Friends of the Bridegroom, Joh. 3.29*
who have so learned Christ, as he is taught in the School of the Prophets and
Apostles, and with whom the truth of the Gospel does continue, are not ashamed
to Preach the Cross, and count all things, Phil. 3.8.
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ and Him Crucified. What
is the Chaff to the Wheat? says the Lord. J^. 23.2^.
What is the vain Philosophy of the Greek, and the exact righteousness of the
Pharisee^, but dung and dross to the riches of the Glory of this mystery?

Joh. 6.35.
JESUS CHRIST is the Bread of Life; and nothing but this, will suit the nature
and inclination of the Spiritual Appetite; nothing but this, will beget and
maintain the vital flame of Spiritual Life; every thing else will prove either
a Stone, or a Serpent, unnatural and jejune, or poison and pernicious.

MINISTERS then must study to entertain their Flocks with a continual Feast on
the glorious fullness there is in Christ; must gather fruits from the BRANCH of
Righteousness, Jer. 33.15.
from the Tree of Life, for them that hunger, feeding them not with the meat
which perishes, but with that which endures to everlasting life. They must
open this Fountain of living Waters, the great mystery of Godliness, into which
all the Doctrines of the Gospel, that are branched forth into so great a
variety, do, as so many rivulets or Streams making glad the City of God, flow
and concentre.

THEY must endeavor to set forth Christ -- In the dignity of His Person, as
the brightness of His Fathers Glory, Heb. 1.3. 1 Timothy 3.16
God manifest in the Flesh. -- In the reality, necessity, nature, and exercise
of His threefold Office of a Prophet, of a Priest, and of a King, "both in His
State of Humiliation, and Exaltation. -- In the glorious benefits of His
Redemtion, the Justification of them that believe, the Adoption of Sons,
Sanctification, and an Inheritance that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4.
reserved in Heaven for the Saints. -- In the wonderful Methods and means, in
and by which we are called into the fellowship of the Son our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.9.
and "made partakers of the Redemtion by Christ. -- In the nature, and
signification, the excellency and worth of all the Ordinances, and Institutions
of Christ, with the obligations on all to attend upon them; and the like.

WHATEVER Subject they are upon, it must be some how pointed unto Christ. All
Sin must be witnessed against, and preached down, as opposite to the holy
nature, the wise and gracious designs, and just government of Christ. So all
duty must be persuaded to, and preached up, with due regard unto Christ; to His
Authority commanding, and to His Spirit of Grace assisting, as well as to the
merit of His Blood commending; and this, to dash the vain presumption, that
decoys so many into ruin, who will securely hang the weight of their hopes upon
the horns of the Altar, without paying expected homage to the Scepter, of
Christ. All the Arrows of sharp rebuke are to be steeped in the Blood of
Christ; and this, to prevent those desponding fears and frights of guilt, which
sometimes awfully work to a fatal issue. Dark and ignorant Sinners are to be
directed to Christ, as the Sun of Righteousness: convinced Sinners are to be
led to Christ, as the Great Atonement, Mal. 4.2.
and the only City of Refuge; Christ is to be lifted up on high, Joh 3.14, 5
for the wounded in Spirit to look unto, as the bitten Israelites to the brazen
Serpent of old. The Sick, the Lame, and Diseased are to be carried to Christ,
as the Great Physician, the Lord our Healer: the disconsolate, Mat. 9.12.
and timorous to be guided to Christ, as the Consolation of Israel and in us
the hope of Glory. Luke 2.25. Col. 1.27.
Every comfort administered is to be sweetened with pure water from this Well of
Salvation, which only can quench the fiery darts of the evil one. Isai. 12.3.
The Promises of the Gospel are to be applied, as being in Christ Yea, and in
Him Amen, to the Glory of God. 2 Cor. 1.20.
So the Threatenings of the Law are to lighten and flash in the eyes of Sinners,
as the terrors of the Lord, and sparks of the holy resentment of an incensed
Savior, which hover now over the Children of disobedience, and will one day
unite, and fall heavy upon them. The Love of Christ to us is to be held forth
as the great constraining motive to Religion, and the Life of Christ as the
bright, engaging pattern of it. Progress and Increase in holiness are to be
represented, Joh. 15.4. Ephesians, 4.15, -- ver. 13.
under the notion of an abiding in Christ, and growing up into Him, who is the
Head, even Christ: Perfection in Grace -- as the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; Joh. 17.24
and Eternal Life, as a being for ever with the Lord where He is, Mat 25.21
a beholding His Glory, and dwelling in our Masters Joy.

THUS (in imitation of the Apostolical way of preaching) there must be a
beautiful intertexture of references to Christ; "a golden thread" twisted into
every Discourse, to leaven, and perfume the same, 2 Cor. 2.14.
so as to make it express a savor of the knowledge of Christ. Thus "every m^te
cast into the treasury of the Temple must bear this inscription" upon it,
(which was once the humble language of a pious Martyr in the Flames) NONE but
CHRIST, NONE but CHRIST; that so every one, beholding in the Word Preached, as
in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, may be changed into the same image from
glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.18.


III. OBSERVE the Apostle's manner of preaching; and that is with Impartiality,
Wisdom, and diligent Application.

1. OBSERVE His IMPARTIALITY -- warning (says he) every Man, and teaching every
Man. -- Here he amplifys his work by the two principal instances of it, viz.
Admonition and Instruction. [Hence it is the Office of Ministers to rebuke, as
well as to direct; Tit. 2.15.
and the order of the words seems to hint, that reproof for Sin commonly goes
before, to open the door for the entertainment of Instruction in duty; till Men
are convinced of Sin, they will not be instructed in Righteousness.] And the
Apostle declares his Fidelity and Impartiality, as to both -- warning every Man
and teaching every Man. He taught every where in every Church, 1 Cor 4.17. Act.
20.31. Romans 1.14.
and ceased not to warn every one Night and Day with tears, both the wise and
unwise; reckoning himself a Debtor to the Jew first, and also to the Greek, and
accordingly applying himself to every one, neither fearing the faces, nor
sparing the faults of any.

DOCT. IT becomes the Ambassadors of Christ, to maintain unspotted Impartiality
in all their Ministerial Dispensations to their Flocks. HENCE, we have that
solemn adjuration of our Apostle to Timothy -- I Charge thee before God, 1 Timothy
5.21.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these
things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.
Ministers ou't not in any of their Administrations to be swayed by personal
kindness, nor prejudice: They must not be biased by sinister views of private
advantage and disadvantage; neither smiles, nor terrors may stop, divert, or
stacken 'em in their work: with all indifference, and indiscriminating regard
to outside pomp or poverty they are to warn and to teach every Man in every
sphaere. All Souls are God's; as the Soul of the Father, Ezekiel. 18.4.
so also the Soul of the Son; as of the Master, so of the Servant likewise.
Have we not all one Father? Mal. 2.10.
Has not one God created us? The Rich and the Poor stand upon a level in the
things of God, and are rated at the same value in the Book of Life, Where there
is neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Col. 3.11.
bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all; for of a truth I perceive that
God is no respector of Persons. Act. 10.34.
The prerogatives of birth, honor, estate and the like, do not commend unto
God; They should not then be accepted of Men, the Ministers of Christ, so as to
beget contempt on the one hand, or slavish dread on the other: " external
relations bear no weight at the Gospel-beam": the Balances of the Sanctuary
are, then, to be held steddily with an equal hand.

ON the one side, as to counsel and advice; Ministers must be as willing and
industrious to instruct the Servile as the Honorable, Tit. 2.9.
the Poor among the Brethren as the Rich in this World. They must not despise a
Soul the more, nor value holiness the less, for being wrapped up in the garments
of filth, and lying abject on a dunghill. They must not disdain to enter into
smoaky cottages, nor think it beneath 'em to dress the Vineyard of the poor,
whom God has chosen -- heirs of the kingdom. Rev. 23.10 Jam. ^.5.
God is often better served, and more honored in the Poor Man's hovel, than in
the goodly palaces of the Great. The humble valleys are often more fruitful,
than the high, and swelling hills. If Ministers despise the poor, -- ver. 4.
are they not then become partial in themselves?

AND on the other hand, as to censure and admonition; they must be impartial
Monitors, and faithfully warn the Rich, Jer. 25.34.
and principal of the Flock, as well as the base and mean; neither to be bribed
nor bugbear'd, neither to be wheedl'd nor huff't out of their duty and work.
They must beware, not to compliment quality, and distinction, nor court popular
influence and plentiful fortunes. Here indeed the best are too apt to daub, and
palliate; to shut their eyes, Isai. 30.10. Ezekiel 13.18
or stop their mouths, or prophecy smooth things, and sow pillows, tempering
their speech to the corrupt palate, and the itching ear, indulging the most
fatal endearments, and unjust complaisance unto wickednesses in high places.
But what a foul indignity is this to the Sacred Character? Mal 2 8, 9.
This is corrupting the Covenant of Levi, a being partial in the Law, Prove 24.23
and accepting Men's persons in judgment which is not good.

The Grandees of the World have too many fawning Parasites often, that stroke
and sooth them, biased by the hopes of favor, and influenced by the fear of
frowns.

BUT Ministers must not stand dumb, and idle, afraid of haughty greatness, when
bold invasions are made on the kingdom of Christ, His Laws trampled under foot,
and His Honor laid in the dust; here they must know no difference between
Prince and Peasant; Now they must be touched with concern, flame with zeal, and
burn with jealousy for the Lord of Hosts, Cant. 8.6, 7
the coals whereof are to be a most vehement flame, which many waters cannot
quench, nor the floods of the ungodly drown; and if a man would give all the
substance of his house for a bribe, it must be contemned utterly. Jer. 1.17.
They must gird up their loins, and set their foreheads as an adamant, harder
than a flint, and arise, Ezekiel. 3.9. -- 11.
and lift up their voice, and cry in the ears of these Sons of belial, saying,
Thus says the Lord, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear:
exhorting, and rebuking with all authority, Tit. 2.15. 1 These. 2.2, -- 4, 5. 2
Cor. 5.16.
being bold in God to speak the Gospel, even so not as pleasing Men, but God,
who tries the heart, neither at any time using words of flattery, not knowing
any Man after the flesh. The modest Young Man Elihu, has left an imitable
Example hereof unto us -- Days (says he) should speak but great Men are not
always wise, Job 32.
neither do the aged understand judgment; therefore hearken unto me, I will
answer my part -- and let me not (I pray you) accept any man's person, etc. in
so doing my Maker would take me away. The very Pharisees themselves gave that
testimony to Christ, -- Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the
way of God in truth, Mat. 22.16
neither carest thou for any man; for thou regardest not the person of men.
When David the King himself despised the commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.
to do evil in his sight, faithful Nathan dealt plainly with him. So did
Elijah, 1 Kin. 18.
very jealous for the Lord God of Israel, reprove Ahab; unmoved at the terrors
of the King. So did good Nehemiah contend with the profane Rulers and Nobles.
Nehem. 13. Mat. 14.4.
So did John Baptist admonish Herod the Tutrarch, undaunted at a Crown and
Scepter. Act. 24.25.
So Paul a prisoner in bonds, did with great freedom and plainness reason of
the Faith in Christ, of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, before
a corrupt and wicked Judge, 'till he struck the stout and bold transgressor
into trembling horror.

THUS Ministers must with the rod of their mouths and the breath of their lips,
cast down the wicked to the ground, Isai. 11.4.
even them that ride on the high places of the earth: Ezekiel. 6.2.
Thus the huge mountains of Israel must be touched (as well as the little
Hills) though they shoot out their arrows with fiery indignation, and fortify the
height of their strength.

Mat. 4.19.
MINISTERS are called Fishers of Men: now the Net of the Gospel (to allude to
what One has faithfully and wisely observed concerning humane Laws) is not to
be like a Spiders web, to catch small flies, and let the great escape.

1 Cor. 4 1.
AGAIN. They Are styled Stewards; and it is required of a Steward, that a Man be
found faithful in giving to every one his allowance, feeding all the Family,
one as well as another.

Man 9.37. 1 C^r ^.8 ^ 2 T^m. ^^
AGAIN, They are termed Husbandmen, that sow and water; and they must cultivate
and improve every piece of Land; They must tend every plant that grows in their
nursery. They must know the tall tree and the low shrub, even all the trees,
from the Cedar in Lebanon to the hyssop that spring^ out of the Wall.

^
AGAIN, They are called Shepherds and Pastors; and must take hee^ to all the
Flock, putting no diffe^^^nce.

AGAIN, They are called Watchmen; Ezekiel. 3.17. Cant. 3.3.
the faithful Watchman walks the rounds, and inspects the whole Town, not
confining his care to this, or that particular house: so they that keep the
watch of the Lord at the gates of the temple, ^ Tim. 4.5. Act. 5.42.
must walk circumspectly, watch ^t all things, and to every house. They must be
clothed with the Sun, and their going forth must be from the end of the
Heaven, and their line throughout all the Earth. They must not suffer the most
filthy corner to escape their view, nor let there be any place, where their
voice is not heard. They must be full of Eyes within, without, Rev. 4.6, 8.
before and behind, looking about every way; setting the watch round, and
riding the circuit through.

AGAIN, They are styled Soldiers; 2 Timothy 2.3.
and they must lift up their voice as a trumpet to warn every Man, lay the
Siege round about, draw the Sword of the Spirit upon every adversary, setting
the point thereof against all their gates, smi^ing every one, as well Agag the
King, 1 Samuel 15.
as the meanest Amalekite, not sparing the best of the spoil, any more than the
vile and refuse.

THE golden rule of Charity, and tender pity to the Souls of Men, immutably
obliges and loudly summons Ministers to such fidelity, and impartiality in
their Administrations. It should melt them into tears of holy indignition, and
move their bowels of compassion to behold wretched Men, wronging their own
Souls, Prove. 8.36.
swallowing deadly poison, playing on the hole of the asp, and casting
firebrarnds, arrows and death; and they should be quickened solemnly from God
to charge and check such, 1 Timothy 6.17
even the rich and great, and by all the dear and seasonable disswasives of
love to bank up their way, stop their carrier, and turn 'em from the error of
their ways unto the wisdom of the just.

SO also the natural law of self-preservation, and the eternal rules of
compassion to their own Souls, infer the strongest obligations unto this duty
If they do not cry aloud to show transgressors their ways (what bulk and figure
soever they are of) admitting there be not the most palpable grounds to despair
of success in the admonition, they are looked upon by the chief and unerring
Judge as interested in the guilt, and accessory to the ruin of such as perish
through their neglect; and they shall receive a just recompense in themselves,
Psalm. 9.12.
when God shall come to make inquisition for blood.

THE transmigration of Sin from perishing Souls unto unfaithful Watchmen is no
platonic dream, or airy notion, but a doctrine according to godliness taught in
the School of Christ. The mouth of truth has spoken it -- He that is not with
me is against me, Luke 11.23 Ezekiel. 3 18 Lev. 19.17.
and he that gathers not scatters. If thou speak not to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, and in any wise to rebuke him to save his life, he shall
die in his iniquity, but thou shall suffer sin upon him, and his blood will I
require at thy hands. As Ministers then would deliver their own Souls, and at
last appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ pure from the blood of all Men,
Act. 20.26
they must warn every Man, and teach every Man without fear of undue censures,
or threatening dangers.

2. OBSERVE, The Apostle's WISDOM in the discharge of his Work -- warning and
teaching every Man in all Wisdom. Wisdom is the Soul, that wings and gives life
to the most industrious application in the pursuit of any end propounded,
without the help whereof, to concert proper measures, all possible endeavors,
in some cases, may starve and miscarry. The Apostle therefore, that he might
not run in vain, (...) 9.26. (...)
nor sight as one that beats the air, made it his sollicitous concern to order
his affairs with discretion, and to work as a wise Master Builder. He taught
every Man in all Wisdom, speaking with the tongue of the wise, which uses
knowledge aright, Prove. 15.2.
and exercising the pen of the ready Scribe, Mat. 13.52
well instructed to the kingdom of God.

DOCT. THE Ministers of the Gospel had need be very wise and prudent in all
their Administrations. THEY that are to win Souls must be wise. Prove 11.30 --
26.6.
Solomon says, He that sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the
feet and drinks damage. As a Man without feet, so is a Messenger without
wisdom The highest improvements, separate from that spirit of wisdom, which is
profitable to direct, Eccl 10.10
will prove but of little and uncertain benefit.

AS Policy, if not tempered with a due proportion of Piety, may be called a
malignant Comet; so Piety, without Policy, some have compared to a dark
Lanthorn; as giving too faint a light, to direct a Minister in his work, that
is so full of important duty, and a great variety (sometimes) of uncommon
difficulties, and unlooked for emergent cases, which demand the most sagacious
eye, a penetrating though it, a commanded presence of mind, sound experience, and a
well-poiz'd judgment.

AGAIN, Zeal not according to knowledge, is but an erratic fire, that will often
lead us into boggs and praecipices; ardour of spirit, without a temperature of
prudence and discretion, portends nothing but wild confusion.

SO Magnanimity, if not in conjunction with dexterity, courage of heart without
the orderly Steerage of a wise head, will seldom do any great exploits. "A
brazen face fixed to an empty skull" -- is but a miserable tool to be employed
in any affair of consequence and intricate involvement; and will prove, but as
the sounding brass, or tinkling cymbal. An unwise, imprudent Minister is a
Solaecism in terms, as to say a dark Sun, an empty Fountain, a blind Watchman,
Isai. 56.10
or an ignorant Guide, that cannot discharge their proper duty, nor any wise
answer their next ends. Ministers can never assert the just honor of their
Station, nor fulfill the noble design of their institution, without some
tolerable degree of Wisdom; this is an excellent talent, which it behooves and
becomes them to search for, as for hid treasures, Prove. 2.4.
l^fting up their voice for understanding, and bowing their heart to wisdom as
the principal thing, as a crown of glory, -- 4.7.
and an ornament of grace.

BUT let us here enter into a few particulars, wherein this Ministerial Wisdom
is to be displayed.

IT might be premised,

. 1. MINISTERS must be very Wise in ordering their private conversation, that
they don't allow any thing that may extenuate their influence, and enervate
their administrations.

Act. 6.3. 1 Timothy 3.7.
THEY must be of the most approved morals, of honest report, well spoken of for
good works. A spotless, clear, and unblemish't credit, will add a forcible
authority unto, and reflect a beautiful charm upon, their public Preaching.
The want of this unhinges the door, and opens the gate to floods of contempt;
unpins the whole frame of their Ministry, makes the very pillars shake and
totter, puts the foundations out of course, and threatens all with shipwreck
and dissolution. Tit. 1.7.
Wise therefore is that solemn advise of the Apostle to Titus, -- Let no Man
despise thee -- Do nothing, that shall blast or blot your reputation, but
always so act, and speak, and govern your self, as to preserve an untarnisht
luster on your character; This will command an affectionate veneration to your
Person, and shed rays of light, and heat to recommend, and animate your
Preaching.

IF a Man's Name be as precious Ointment, it will cast an odor of a sweet
smell on his Ministry, give it a grateful savor, and an agreeable relish. But
if the Sons of Eli, the Priests, 1 Samuel 2.17
make themselves vile, it will cause all the Assembly to abhor the offerings of
the Lord, Mal. 2.8.
to despise his Altar and stumble at the law.

EXAMPLE strikes quick and sinks deep; carries in it a peculiar s^vereignty,
and a much more controlling power, than dry rules, and the mere demonstrations
of reason. Let Ministers, then, 1 Cor. 13.1.
speak with the tongue of Angels, and harangue with se^aphic art and ardour
against the Vices of the age and place they live in; if soiled and tainted
themselves, this will be a standing bar in their way a dead weight in c^rrupt
minds against the impression of truth, and will be of fatal tendency to fasten
the bands of wickedness, and strengthen the hands of evildoers, Jer. 23.14.
that none shall return from his wickedness.

IMPENITENCE will insult and defend itself against the authority and force of
their Instructions by this, Mat. 23.3.
They say and do not -- and give a killing blow to their most just
reprehensions, by objecting that invidious Proverb, Physician, heal thy self;
Luke 4.23.
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou, that
judge, do the same things. Yea, Romans 2.1.
the ill life of Ministers cast such a m^st before the eyes of many, as to make
'em resolve even Religion itself into nothing but superstitious whimsy, or mere
frenzy, and think all their most zealous Sermons upon it are but imposture and
a m^ck-shadow, the bubblings of a disturbed fancy, or the babblings of cunning
hypocrisy; that they do but act a part, and preach only because it is their
occupation, and by this craft they get their ^^ing; so branding all as
religious policy, to prepare and pave the way to filthy lucre, 1 Timothy 6 5.
supposing that ^ain is all their godl^^ess

THIS indeed is the most unwarrantable logic: yet unreasonable Men giddily
stagger into the sad conclusion over the stumbling block, which Ministers throw
in the way by their dissolute practice. Ministers had need dread the pernicious
consequence of thus putting a rock of offense before the blind; and see to it,
1 Pet. 2.15.
that by well doing they put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men. They must
keep themselves unpolluted from the corruptions, that are in the World through
lust; be blameless and flee these things; 1 Timothy 3.2, -- 6.11.
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness and
holiness in all manner of conversation; 2 Cor. 6.3.
giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed. "They must be
Orthoprax, as well as Orthodox." Unto purity of doctrine they must add
unspotted Piety of Life; and transcribe their public Sermons in their private
visible actions and behavior, as ever they would preserve the dignity of their
Character, or promote the efficacy of Gospel Truths.

THEY must carefully keep at the utmost distance from every thing, that looks
like sensuality, or indulgence; not only not run to the same excess of riot
with others, but inflexibly curb themselves, and with due severity guard
against too near an approach at any time to the vanities of the World; cautious
not to venture to the utmost limits of innocent liberty, lest others quite
transgress the line; and then gild over their own license with a vain pretense
of imitation, and think themselves not a little justified by transferring the
like follys upon their Ministers. The mere appearance of evil, or any vergency
toward it in these, they think will sufficiently excuse the reality in
themselves.

MINISTERS had need ponder the path of their feet, lest they get too near the
brink; and look heedfully to their goings, that their footsteps slip not:
strait is the gate and narrow the way, hedged up on every side; malice and envy
are perpetually spies upon 'em, spread a net for their feet, and watch for
their halting; and the least slip or side-step, Jer. 20.10.
a single inadvertency shall be caught at by an ill-natured, captious World,
and aggravated into a crime of the most flagrant guilt, which the entire series
of a prudent, exemplary deportment (in all other instances) can never atone
for; and though Ministers are Men subject to like passions with others, Acts
14.15. Jam. 5.17.
and are "but Candidates for Perfection while here" yet this will not serve for
any plea of abatement, nor stop the mouth of calumny, but the very common
impotencies of humane nature (incidental to the best*) shall be unfairly
improved to slurr the fairest name, and draw a cloud over the brightest and
most just reputation.

GREAT is the difficulty of forming and securing so unsullied a Character, as
is necessary to maintain that reverence, which is due to Ministers, and is so
requisite to preserve the solemnity, and facilitate the success of all their
ministerial Performances. However, they must exert their utmost care and
endeavor, and use all innocent arts (being wise as Serpents and harmless as
Doves) to obtain and keep an interest in the good opinion, Mat 10.16
and kind acceptance of the World, but all with a pure design to advantage the
discharge of their trust, as that is a preparative of the mind, and a door of
entrance into the Soul.

. 2. MINISTERS must use great Wisdom and Discretion in the managing of their
Public Discourses.

1. THEY must see to it, that the Subject be adapted to the present
circumstances and necessity of their Hearers. They must preach necessary
truths, and seasonable.

IN the discharge of the Pastoral Care, Prudence demands a distinction to be
made between one season, Eccl. 8.6 -- 3.11.
and another. For to every purpose there is time and judgment, and every thing
is beautiful in its season. A Word in the present day may be proper and
beneficial, which at another time may lose its efficacy, or be of pernicious
consequence. That which is a cup of consolation at one time, may prove a deadly
draught at another. The Counsel of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.7
says Hushai, is not good at this time. It is given in, Eccl. 8.5.
as a property of the wise Man, His heart discerns both time and judgment. He
is a Physician of no value that does not understand the true constitution of
the Patient, the several aspects of the distemper upon him, and does not
observe critical junctures for application, both by way of remedy, correction
and antidote or prevention.

MINISTERS must carefully endeavor to discern the face of the times, and
observe what symptoms a^tend the Body of Christ and know when to change their
voice, Gal. 4.20.
and how to conform themselves to that variety of cases they meet with; their
Peoples wants being always to govern 'em in the choice of Subjects, and not
their own ease, nor fancy.

HENCE, it is the duty of Ministers to visit, as much as they conveniently can,
from house to house, that they may kn^w the state of their Flocks, Prove 27.23
"take cognizance of particular Persons, and Cases," and get understanding of
the times, 1 Chapter 12.32
to know what Israel ought to do in the present circumstance and condition. If
Ministers are not wise as to Law, and Judgment, Esth. 1.13.
and are unknowing in the times and seasons, they may well be compared to the
Pilot, who can never steer a safe and even course, without an acquaintance with
particular coasts, rocks, quicksands, channels, winds and the like; for though he
may have very good insight into the abstract notion, and general theory of
Sailing, yet for want of practice and experience, he is often non-plus'd with
emergent difficulties, and should beyond the f^rce of his reason by untho't of
contingencies, that he becomes Ludibrium vent^^ ^ssed about by every wind and
raging of the Sea and to avoid danger on one hand sometimes ru^s into
destruction on the opposite shore.

MINISTERS may, for want of knowing the true State and Case of their People
their humors, and distempers, inclinations, and affairs, what Sin^ (...) most
^^e among them, what temptations they a^e most in danger of, what duties are
m^st commonly ^mitted, what things are most ready (...) what principles they
live and act upon and ^he like, allow an undue proportion of their Ministry to
Subjects of less importance, unseasonably Preach up some truths and duties, and
Preach against some errors and vices to the accid^^tal damage and disservice of
Religion.

MINISTERS must not indeed shun to declare the whole Counsel of God; Act. 20.27
Howbeit there are some times, when a truth is not to be insisted on, because
un^easonable, in that the minds of People are not prepa^ed for the reception
thereof. Thus said our Savior; I Have yet many things to say unto you, Joh. 16.12
but ye cannot beat them now And so the Apostle to the Hebrews; of Whom, Heb
5.11, 2
i. e. Christ we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered; see^ng ye are
dull of hea^ing, -- and are such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

THERE are different degrees of growth in the Flock of Christ, and that which
may be a very proper entertainment for one Soul, may be very unsuitable food to
another. The Stewards of the pel must see to it then, that they make a wise
distinction in their dispensations according to the various necessities, and
different improvements of the Family; ver. 13, 4.
feeding the babes with the sincere milk of the Word, (with easy truths, and
first principles of the Oracles of God,) but dealing out strong meat (Doctrines
of a deeper search, and more difficult of digestion,) ^o them that are of full
age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercis^d to discern
both good and evil.

2. WISDOM will direct Ministers to handle the Subject that they treat upon, in
a manner suited to the capacity of the Hearers, and the dignity of divine
truths. The matter must be fit, and so the manner. The Preacher must seek to
find out acceptable Words and a suitable method; Ecc. 12.12
so as to inform the understanding, and inflame the affections, so as neither
to "offend the weak, nor give advantage to the malicious" -- so as to secure
his administrations from contempt, to further the design and maintain the
dignity of Preaching; Act. 26.25.
always speaking forth the words of truth and sober^ess, with propriety and
decency, with clear light, good order, and plain demonstration, without
impertinency, confusion, and empty vociferation; so as at once to charm the
ear, reach the mind, and touch the heart.

(1) THEY must adapt their Discourse to the capacity of the Hearers

[1.] AS to Method. Their thoughts must be di- into proper order, and disposed
in the most rational, easy, natural method, without tumultuary perplextness, or
a dry exactness. Scholastical accuracy, and Metaphysical distinctions, a great
reach of though it, and a Systematical thread of reason, are proportioned to but
very few Auditories. An Argumentative way, and too strict adhaerence to the
nice rules of the ART of reasoning, does but amuse common Hearers ("Strong Wine
is more heady than hearty,) and therefore ought to be avoided.

[2.] AS to Style. The truths of the Gospel must be represented to the
understanding in the most intelligible Language, with perspicuity, and easiness
of expression. The Apostle say to the Corinthians, 1 Cor 14.9.
Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. And then he says, ver.
18, 9.
I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than you all: yet in the Church I
^ad rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might
teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. The pompous
Oratory of the Schools, and luxuriant strains of Rhetoric* Academical terms and
Philosophical nicety of diction, are above common capacities, and to be
perpetually dealing in these is to speak into the air, and raise the dust to
blind Men's eyes. When Ministers study rather to be florid, than solid, and
labor continually for lofty phrases and great swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet.
2.18.
they are only spinning a Spiders web; and the Orator perhaps may win applause,
but the Minister in the mean time not win a Soul, the divine end of Preaching.
They must follow the Example of CHRIST, the Great Teacher sent from God, who
came not with excellency of Speech, and the enticing words of Man's wisdom, but
with much plainness of speech. As it was prophesied concerning Him, He shall
feed his Flock like a Shepherd, Isai 40.11.
He shall gather the Lambs with His arm, and carry them in His bosom, and shall
gently lead those that are with young: which expressions decipher to us
Christ's tender care of Souls, His humble familiarity in teaching His People,
attempering His provisions to every taste, clothing His instructions with
language calculated to every capacity. Herein it becomes Ministers to imitate
Him, and not tower aloft above low understandings in lawless Altitudes of
expression, (as the manner of some is) but using a Style level to the unlearned
and unskilful, delivering their tho'ts with a natural turn of speech, and in
the most entertaining images, which, where the matter is weighty and important,
is voted by the best Judges to be the truest eloquence However (no doubt) some
particular Occasions, Auditory's, Subjects, etc. will bear something more of
politeness without vanity, than one would ordinarily choose.

(2.) THE Discourse must be suited to the majesty, and importance of the divine
Subject.

[1.] AS to the Language. Ministers in Preaching must use such words, as will
exhibit the most bright and clear idea of every truth, and set it forth in its
whole emphasis, light, and genuine beauty, to the best advantage. They must
endeavor for as through an understanding and penetration into the mysteries of
Godliness as they can, and labor to draw the images thereof in their Sermons,
as near as possible in their full proportion, and their native purity and
complexion with the most lively colors; neither clouded with those dark
shades, which sometimes stain the luster of divine truths, nor varnished over
with the false paint of art, which dazzles the sight, and entangles the ey^,
that they cannot see the true light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 4.6.
As Ministers must not indulge a vain affectation of gawdiness, and glittering
Ornaments: so neither, on the other hand, may they allow themselves to appear
wrapped up in a rude and slovenly dress. The Masters of divine oratory forbid
those odd turns and forms of expression which sound so very harsh to a polite
ear, and look so very unshapely to a critical eye; and condemn those homely
metaphors, and improprieties of speech, which adulterate the sincere milk of
the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
spoil the pure taste of spiritual truths, and are justly nauseous and unsavory
to Men of a nicer sensory, and more delicate palate. They recommend "a mixed air
of simplicity and majesty," decent neatness and elegance without slanting pomp
and gayty; when a Man descends to the ordinary understanding, 1 Pet. 4.11.
and yet speaks as becomes the Oracles of God, agreeably to the dignity and
weight of the sacred Subject, with those serious and solemn, pathetical and
moving words, that will not so much entertain curiosity and a wanton
imagination* as affect the Soul, and persuade the mind -- words, that will be
as goads and nails fastened by the Master of Assembly's, Eccl. 12.11
that will enter the Conscience, and breath heavenly fire to melt and enliven
the dead affections.

TO dress up divine truths in a loose, course and sordid garb, is too often but
to draw a veil over them, and to invite contempt, where the deepest and utmost
humble veneration is due, to faithful sayings, worthy of all acceptance. And
therefore (as one says) "He that affects to act the rustic "clown in Preaching
-- is as likely to forfeit the great design of the Ministry, as he that plays
the sinical Orator; all the difference between them being this, that while one
clouds the Window with paint, the other dawbs it with mud, -- both ecclipsing the
light, rendering the vision as the words of a book that is sealed, and
darkening counsel by words without knowledge. The speech of both is as wind,
but how forceable are right words, Job 6 25.
that neither soar above the reach of the Audience, nor grovel beneath the
sanctity, and noble quality of the Subject?

[2] AS to Method, and Argument. It behooves Ministers in their Discourses to
keep a steady train of though it, to observe a good connection, and regular
transitions; to rank and range every part or particular into their proper post
and place, adjusting the whole into the best and most becoming Scheme. So some
understand that of the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.15
Study to show thy self approved -- rightly dividing the word of truth, i. e.
duly methodizing and martialling Gospel Truths, unfolding and distributing the
several branches of each truth in the most apt and apposite manner. It wounds
the beauty, slacken the nerves, and emasculates the power of the great
Doctrines of Religion, for the Preacher to vent his tho'ts upon 'em all in a
confused huddle, shuffl'd together in a wild and inconsistent manner.
Methodical pertinence and cohaerence then are to be studied for. Order is the
strength and glory of all thing. --

SO likewise Ministers must endeavor to prove every truth with the best
Arguments; and to press every duty with the most prevaling motives, with all
the artifices of persuasion, and the strongest enforcements of reason.
Dogmatical assertion and a magisterial air seldom do, without the aids of sound
demonstration, and the proper arts of insinuation. Ministers must conform to
the Example of Christ, who taught the people as one having authority, Mat. 7.29.
i. e with pious ardency, and uncommon majesty, with persuasive eloquence, and
the most forceable energy. So of the Apostle it is said, that, as his manner
was, he reasoned with the people out of the Scriptures; Act. 17.2. -- 18.4.
that he reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and
the Greeks; i. e. He set things in the clearest light to the eye of the
understanding, offered the most convincing demonstration to the judgment, and
addressed the affections in the most sensible and moving manner, to rouse and
engage them: and by this rule he resolved to try and examine the Preaching of
those flourishing, and fine-spun Doctors at Corinth, who so excelled in the
charms of a smooth and plausible tongue; I will come (says he) to you shortly,
if the Lord will, 1 Cor. 4.19, 20.
and will know, not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power, for
the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. The excellency and efficacy of
preaching does not lie in an accumulation of fine phrases and elegant
sentences. The most elaborate contexture of soft and fashionable words, and
harmonious periods, without a good blaze of though it, a bright flame of reason,
the vital Spirits of sound understanding, and the sinews of good argumentation,
is but a lifeless image, or a flatulent shell, without solidity, or strength;
like an Edifice with painted walls, without pillars, and set on a weak sandy
foundation, of little service, and short standing, easily pelted down, and then
all evaporates into dust and smoke. Even so vain and insignificant is the
greatest pomp of words, in a Sermon, pack't together without the nerves and
substance of solid reason.

MINISTERS then in Preaching must labor, to digest the materials into good
order, to make all things plain, obvious and intelligible to the mind, and to
recommend them to the conscience, and practic powers, with satisfactory
evidence, and the most winning force of persuasion.

THUS, as to the Style, method and spirit, the outward dress and inward frame
of their Public Discourses.

3 THE delivery, and outward gestures must be natural, unaffected, grave and
decent.

(1.) THE voice must be well-governed and formed to an audible, distinct, warm
and affectionate pronunciation. If the subject matter be never so substantial
and edifying, and the style, method and argument framed to all possible
advantage, yet an awkward and unpleasant sound, or any considerable indecency
in the prolation of a discourse may mar the goodliness of the fashion thereof,
screen the vigorous flame, and give a chilling damp, and suspension to the most
sprightly pulse. Great care then ou't to be taken to tune, and modulate the
voice to a pleasing utterance and agreeable elocution; this will add a
wonderful grace and force to the whole, and be a good seasoning to the most
accurate composition.

(2.) THE gestures must be composed to a decent gravity. The public exercises
must be managed with a becoming mine, and the most profound seriousness, to
give them weight, influence and authority. Some kind of postures and motions
there be, which are of the most unpleasing aspect and appearance to the
Spectators; which suggest improper reflections to c^rrupt fancys, and are too
often the criminal occasions of that contempt, under which Religion groans.
These things very much abase the majesty of the Pulpit, degrade the dignity of
a venerable institution, 1 Cor. 1.21.
and put a strong temptation before some to cry out, -- This foolishness of
Preaching! Act. 17.18.
What wou^d the Babbler say? Therefore in point of prudence, Ministers must
study to compose their looks and form their behavior to the utmost decency and
most solemn air, as they wou^d not defeat their great design, unravel their
work, and prevent the good entertainment of their message.

TO proceed,

. 3. MINISTERS must be very wise in managing their applications in private, and
less public dealings with Souls.

A Minister's work does not all lie in the Study and Pulpit. It Is not a hare
preparing for, and circulating through the common Set of public exercises, that
is a fulflling the Ministry; 2 Timothy 4.5.
but proper occasions are to be wisely chosen, and faithfully improved for more
retired endeavors. Ministers cannot speak with that pungency, plainness and
freedom to some certain cases in public, as they can in private; and what is
sometimes more generally treated of in the House of God, may be prosecuted, the
blow be followed, in particular addresses to Persons, and Families by
themselves And indeed a ^esson in a few words immediately directed and set home
in a proper manner, yea a sober check or solemn hint let drop by the by, in
ordinary converse at some critical junctures, will frequently have a more happy
impression, and affecting influence, than a formal, labored speech to people
in common. Hence, we read of the wise and holy Apostles. Act. 5.42.
that not only daily in the temple, but in every house, they ceased not to
teach and preach Jesus Christ. And thus Paul the unwearied Apostle and faithful
in all things, solemnly appealed to the Elders and People at Miletus, Ye know,
Act. 20.20.
after what manner I Have been with you at all seasons, -- how I have taught you
publicly, and from house to house. And conformable to his example is that
exhortation of his to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.2.
Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, i. e. (I presume,) in a
fixed, stated course in public, and also occasionally, at all convenient
opportunities, in private. Private inspection, or Pastoral visitation is of
necessity to the same purposes, as the public administrations. Hence, we have
Ministers described under this Character, -- The watchmen, Cant. 3.3.
that go about the City; and it is observable what follows, they found me, says
the Spouse; they found out her, and not she them, -- a plain intimation, that
the Ministers of the Gospel must diligently seek out, and look up the
wandering, and straying, and maintain a watchful inspection over their stocks,
even as the good Shepherd looks after his Sheep, going about, and taking
particular notice of all; or as the Husbandman walks about in his garden, and
fields, to observe the growth, and decays of things, and make all needful and
suitable applications. Hence, Ministers must arm themselves with a becoming
courage and resolution, and shake off that false modesty, that tame and and
vicious dread of offending Men, which too often wretchedly prevales to the
entire omission, or but sorry performance of this necessary and important duty;
and apply themselves with all fidelity, and holy boldness hereunto. But then,
they must take heed to manage all with utmost prudent caution, and discretion;
careful not to use the instruments of a foolish Shepherd, but in all points to
concert such measures, Zech 11.15
and improve such means, as are best adapted to answer the end, that their work
may succeed.

1. IN administering reproofs to offenders -- Wisdom requires due care, that a
proper decorum be observed, in addressing Men according to their different
Styles, and external character, and quality. An Elder (says the Apostle in his
directions to Timothy) rebuke not, 1 Timothy 5.1.
but entreat him as a Father -- Elders in age, gifts or office are not to be
insulted and outrag'd with magisterial censures, and unmannerly satyr, with
rough imperious austerity, and a rude assuming air of superiority, but to be
treated with due distance and deference in proportion to civil difference, and
distinctions. Wise Nathan in admonishing King David, has left an Example of
ministerial humility and respect, worthy of every one's imitation.

AGAIN, Prudence will direct them to see to it, that the charge proceed upon
reality, (1) an overt, visible f^lt, and (then) full convincing evidence. They
must take care, not to charge Persons at random, or on every light occasion.
They must take heed, how they rebuke a pityable weakness, and how they
denominate any act a crime by an ill gloss, or perverse innuendo^s: and then,
they must see to it, they go upon substantial grounds and plain matter of fact,
and beware how they draw the bow upon bare surmise, or doubtful report, and
hearsay, lest all be stigmatized as meddling curiosity, or unchristian calumny.

AGAIN, Wisdom will awaken a just concern, and direct how, to suit the reproof
to the temper of the Person, and proportion it to the quality of the offense.
As Physicians in their applications consult the constitution of the Patient,
with the nature, and degree of the distemper; so Ministers must study the
tempers of Men, and the size of their guilt, and make a difference in treating
with 'em as their respective cases demand. As to some, gentle lenitives are
proper and expedient. Rep^ehensive administrations must sometimes be dashed
with an infusion of spiritual suavities, to give them a better relish; the
unpleasant hook must be baited with artificial guises, and set off with a
specious air, that it may with less reluctance be taken down; even as the
workman, that would drive his nail home with less difficulty, first dips it in
oil. Others must be handled with sharp, and stinging Corrosives. Some Maladies
require stronger Physic, and some constitutions will bear a bigger potion, than
others. An inveterate, and impostumated wound must be lanced to the quick, and
dealt more roughly with, than a green and slight scratch. Tit. 1.
Accordingly the Apostle gives that direction to Titus concerning some unsound
and corrupt Professors -- Rebuke them sharply. In some cases, there must be
some keenness and poinance, some warmth and smartness, to strike proper
convictions into the secure mind, and fasten an admonition on the brawny
Conscience: The arrow must be drawn up to the head, 2 Cor 13.10
and discharged with Spirit and vigor, according to the power, which the Lord
has given to edification, and not to destruction. Ironical Jeers and the
vibrations or jerks of a flurting tongue may tickle, but not terrify, and
rather recreate than reform. "A nibbling, or squibbing kind of reproof, is like
an ignis lambens, Jude 22, 3.
as soon off, as on." Of some (says the Apostle) have compassion, making a
difference, but others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; i.e. in
haste and by force, without compliment or formality, as one would snatch up
another, that is fallen into the flames However, They must always beware, their
zeal and as^erity do not degenerate into fury, and envenomed bitterness. Real
necessity must ever be the parent of heat and severity; and this must be
tempered, and directed by Wisdom.

AGAIN, Prudence must govern in the choice of a proper season. There Is a
strange diversity in the humors, and inclinations of a Man at distinct times,
and under different circumstances. There are particular mollia fandi tempora,
certain calm and lucky seasons, when a tender touch will lodge a more sensible
and lasting impression, than an heavy blow at other times; Prove 25.11
when a word shall be spoken upon Wheels (as 'twere) and shall glide with
facility and speed into the conscience; shall grate on the darling lust, and
not awaken undue resentments. A word thus fitly spoken, is like apples of gold
in pictures of silver; how goodly and beautiful? As an ornament of gold, --
ver. 12.
so is a word in season, and a wise reproof upon an obedient ear: but as
vinegar upon nitre, so is a reproof out of season; it is like a foot out of
joint, like burning coals, and wood to fire, often times. Amos 5 10.
They that rebuke in the gate must therefore watch for, and embrace the most
seasonable opportunities. The faithful, Mat 24.45
and wise Servant will endeavor to do all in due season.

2. IN defending truth against the invasions of error, Tit. 1.9.
(which is one peculiar branch of the work of Ministers) They must (1.) Let
Prudence single out the Antagonist, one of temper and ingenuity, of parts, and
modesty: for some there are, 1 Cor 1.20. 2 These 3.2. Jam. 3.6.
the disputers of this World, unreasonable Men, who will bark and bawle, and
make a perpetual larum, whose tongues seem to be set on fire of Hell, are
unruly evils, and full of deadly poison; no reason will stop their mouths, nor
the most unanswerable arguments put their burning lips to silence. These, Prove
26.23
Ministers will be wise to avoid, rather than to exulcerate the spirit of
delusion, boil up the fumes of their unsanctify'd spleen, and raise a clamor:
for through the weakness, and simplicity of the common Herd, impudent noise, and
sturdy nonsense, generally come off with triumph, and One fool wins louder
Acclamations, than Seven men that can render a reason. Again, Prudence must
direct, and choose the season. The calm and cool of the day, when the mind is
open, and unclouded, and the passions sedate and unruffled, is the best time to
enter the stage, and try the combat. Again, Wisdom must preside in ordering the
manner. Points in difference must be stated with utmost calmness, and all
possible allowances; and truth be defended under the united influences of
meekness and wisdom. The Wise Man observes, Prove 2^.1^
it is the soft tongue that b^eaketh the bone, that dissolves the mind, and
bends it by a strange, and secret efficacy to the acknowledging of truth,
commands the light to spring up and shine out of darkness, and gently rolls
away the mists of error and prejudice, even as the rising Sun, silently
shedding abroad its pleasant beams, carries off the gloomy shades of the night,
and chases away the morning-clouds without any bustle or blustre. It becomes
the Advocates of truth always to offer unbroken reason, (that shall master and
over-match the understanding) softened with calm persuasion, (that will nor
alarm and chafe the passions) so debating in measure, staying the rough wind,
and not blowing with too stiff a gale. Violent gusts too often make shipwreck
of the Faith.

TO assume the instructing and directing of others, looks like an usurping
jurisdiction over their judgments, which Man's native pride can hardly stoop
to; and therefore the Ambassadors of Christ, when they undertake to convince
Gainsayers, had need set a watch before their mouths, and keep the door of
their lips, Prove. 15.1.
laying aside all hard speeches, and grievous words which do but stir up anger,
and lanch out Men's inflamed resentments. They may contend earnestly for the
Faith, Jude 3.
and not charge with thunder, or spit the venom of untemper'd zeal, which is
the grand original of most of those sad confusions, that have ever infested the
Christian World. Ja. 1.20.
The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, but too often genders
to more ungodliness, overthrowing the faith of some, and confirming the
unbelief of others, opening the ear to soliciting errors, and steeling the
mind against the dint of sound convictions.

WHEN Men carry the poison of asps under their lips, and are all wildfire and
flame, waspish, and huffy, the strange unhallowed incense of their stormy
passions, and opprobrious invectives will darken the air, cloud the light, and
make the truth of God of none effect. Rom 3.13.


THE Italians have a Proverb, (I Have somewhere met with) that, Duro con duro non
sat bon muro, hard stones heaped up will not make a good wall, without
something of a more plyant quality to cement and bind them together.

3. IN healing of wounded Consciences. They must labor (1.) to discern the
true state of the Person distressed -- his natural temper, the nature, cause,
degree, symptoms and prognostics of the spiritual disease labored under.

AGAIN, They must lead the Patient himself into a right view of his own
circumstances; and this, to dispose him to receive advice and listen to
direction.

AGAIN, They must time their applications well. Generally the sooner, the
better, a green and fresh wound is easier healed, than an old and fester'd one.
A distemper seasonably applied to in its state of infi^mity, may be checked and
suppressed, which perhaps, if neglected, may soon get head, and run beyond the
reach of control. And some critical junctures there are, wherein there is a
desirable concurrence of most advantageous circumstances to further and
facilitate their operations. Wisdom will here be needful and useful to direct.

AGAIN, Wisdom must regulate the manner of their dispensations. All possible
skill must be used, in laying open the wound, in choosing the methods of cure,
in dressing the sore, and applying the means of healing. The wound must be
searched to the bottom, but Prudence must govern and guide the probe^ and
manage the instrument with a gentle and ten^er hand. Spiritual Physicians must
beware, lest by indirect and indiscreet methods they shove Men at any time into
the terrible convulsions of desponding fear, stretch forth upon 'em the line of
confusion, and lay them gasping under the impetuous ferment of their ill
humors, and convictions. And on the other hand they must beware, lest by
improper applications they throw Men (as 'twere) out of a burning fever into a
lifeless palsy; and deluge 'em in the dead sea of secure presumption; lest
they see visions of peace, Ezekiel 17.16
where no peace is, and a time of health, when the day of trouble must abide;
lest they daub with untempered mortar, ver. 10.
and slightly heal the hurt of the daughter of my people, says the Lord, and
so merely trucing the anguish or smart, and working only a palliative, or
superficial cure, the wound should rankle within, the clouds return after the
rain, and the things that remain die irrecoverably; and so "the Physician turn
Executioner.

A Minister must here do all by number, weight and measure, holding the
balances even, and meting out by a just Ephah, dividing aright the word of
truth, opening the door of hope, or lifting up the gates of fear, as the matter
requires; dispensing terror to whom terror belongs, comfort to whom comfort,
giving to every one his proper share, as becomes a good Steward of the manifold
grace of God; 1 Pet. 4.10. 2 Cor. 4.2.
by manifestation of the truth, commending himself to every man's conscience in
the sight of God.

THIS indeed is a workman, that needs not to be ashamed; a Scribe well
instructed to the kingdom of God; and an Interpreter, Job 33.23
one among a thousand! Can we find such a one as this, Genesis 41.38
a man, in whom the spirit of God is -- a man so discrete, and wise.

THUS much for the Second particular.

3. OBSERVE, The Apostle's Diligence, Zeal, and unwearied Activity in his holy
calling; whereunto I labor, striving, says he. The first term [ labour] bears
reference to the Husbandman, whose work demands utmost care and vigilant
inspection, with painful patient toil. The other term [ striving] is an
allusion to the Olympic games, and the celebrated Grecian exercises of old,
such as wrestling, racing, cuffing, etc. where several parties strove for the
mastery, 1 Cor. 9.25
-- agonized -- It imports the most intense endeavor, a straining, and pushing
forward and putting forth all one's might to out do. It speaks a masculine
valor, and unshock't resolution; ^acing death, and defying danger, above the
power of charms or frowns.

AND this representation the Apostle elsewhere justify's, where he gives us a
detail of his services and sufferings, and his inflexible, unmoved courage
under all. In labors (says he) more abundant than any of them, in journeying
often, 2 Cor. 11.
in deaths more frequent, in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness, and besides these
things that are without, that which comes on me daily, the care of all the
Churches: but none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear to my
self, Act. 20.24.
that I may finish my course with joy. Such a frame, spirit, and unmovable
application to their work, well becomes all the Ministers of the Gospel.

DOCT. LABORIOUS diligence, ferver, and indefatigable application, should be
the Character of every Gospel-Minister.

TO be oscitant, drowzy and indifferent in their awful service, is a reflection
on their Master, a disparagement to their profession, and will defeat their
expectation, and the end of their Ministry. Their Station is a stage of action,
a flowing series, and scene of boundless labors, of that importance and
weight, that they would suit the Grandeur of the brightest Intelligences in the
excellent Glory, and then, so hard and difficult, attended with such burdens,
and uneasy fatigues, as call for the patience and the powers of the World to
come. The inspired Apostle under this apprehension, brake forth into that
solemn expostulation -- Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.
Here the most improved talents bear no proportion. Here the brightest
Intellectuals will sometimes be strangely put upon the rack; and the most
volatile, sanguine and athletic Genius be foiled and baffll'd and expire in
impotent, successless essays.

IT is no easy and light matter to provide one-self with such a stock of good
knowledge, as is requisite to make one apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2.24. Neh. 8.8.
to enable one to give the sense of the Law, to convince Gainsayers, to speak a
word in season to him that is weary, to edify the Body of Christ, Isai. 50.4.
and to make one ready to every good word and work; no, but much labor, and
the most awakened intention are necessary to this end, whatever an
illiterarian, enthusiastic spirit may surmise. It is glaring impudence, and
daring presumption to dream of immediate irradiation from above. The deep
things of God must be dug out, and fetched up from the mine in the common
way of study, reading, and converse, with Prayer for a blessing on the means
improved. Hence, the Apostle exhorted Timothy; 1 Timothy 4.15
Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them. Be in them (as the
original has it) bend all your powers to a close and diligent inquisition into
these things. Agreeably the Apostle himself sat an example; He could not live
without study, 2 Timothy 4.13 conf. cum. ver. 6.
he could not die without his books and parchments, which he sends for, from
his Prison, (no proper place (one would think) to study in) under the near
views of his approaching departure. The most elevated capacity, that wears the
sacred Charecter, needs still further advances in knowledge. Hard Study, then,
is the duty of all, and though this be a weariness to the flesh, Ecc. 12.12
yet they that have the true spirit of their calling, will account it their
meat and drink, and its own exceeding great reward.

AGAIN, There is a large circle and variety of public administrations, and
private dispensations to the Flock: which demand the joint influences of light
and labor, and require the loins of the mind to be perpetually girded about,
and the active powers continually upon the wing and stretch; that Ministers be
burning and shining Lights, well-stor'd with pure oyl-olive, beaten, Ex. 27.20.
to keep the lamps of the tabernacle always burning, and that they move in
their respective orbs, as the Sun, Psalm. 19.5.
which is as a Bridegrom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong
man to run a race; it seems as 'twere, to leap and sparkle with rays of joy,
when it rises to it is work, and runs its course with admirable steadiness,
constancy, and inimitable celerity: So Ministers must be flames of fire,
clothed with zeal, in their Master's work; Men of unstiffen'd agility, and
quick dispatch, laying aside every weight to run the race set before 'em; Men
of exalted vigor, and unwavering stanch resolution; not slothful in business,
but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; delivering all the counsel of God,
affirming constantly, the whole truth, Act. 26.27.
each truth in its proper season, and nothing but the truth; giving out line
upon line, and precept upon precept, laboring in the word and doctrine,
ministering to every one according to their necessity, capacity and appetite;
being instant in season, out of se^son, 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Cor. 15 58 Gal. 4.19.
always abounding in the work of the Lord; travailing in birth until Christ be
formed in Souls; fighting the good fight of faith, with unchill^d ardour, and
fidelity unwarp'd, resisting unto blood, Heb. 12.4.
striving against sin; nothing being able to unfix their constancy, to slacken
their endeavors, or justle 'em out of the line of duty.

THE Glory of God who employs them, the necessity and dignity of the Souls
entrusted to their care, the object and end of their Ministry, do with united
importunity call for, and speak their obligations to, such zeal, watchful
concern, and sedulous attendence on their work. Without this, they will never be
able to rive Men off from their beloved lusts, or to form the divine image in
any Soul. The word is often "like a hollow sound in the air", which soon
languishes and expires: The Hammer of the Lord finds the heart of Man, obdurate
as the Stone, unsusceptible of any impressions; or unstable as water, the
traces made on it are quickly effaced; or like melted wax, which now turns as
clay to the Seal, but by and by it hardens again and becomes impenetrable, that
the Founder melts in vain. Jer. 6.29.
These considerations challenge of the spiritual Artificers, a fervent industry
and most indefatigable applications; as they would not entirely forfeit the
efficacy of their attempts, and in all things come short of the Glory of God.
For the lazy drone, as well as the contemtible weakling, must needs be unequal
to this arduous and difficult task.

IV. OBSERVE, The design and intention of the Apostle in all his
administrations -- that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. What
he aimed at, was to lead men into a saving acquaintance and living union with
Christ, to lift them into His service, to mould them into His image, to take
'em off from the old stock of corrupt nature, and to insert them into the true
Vine, Joh. 15.1.
and then to advance such to a spiritual maturity, to build them up on their
most holy Faith, an habitation for the Lord through the Spirit, Jud. ver. 20 Ephesians.
1.22.
fitly framing them together, and helping them to grow up in all things into
Him, who is the head, and in the final upshot, to present them complete in
Christ, when the top of the noble structure shall soar as high as Glory.

UNTO this was the bent and ambition of his Soul; this was the vital motive of
all his study, and diffusive labors. The pulse of his heart beat high and
strong in desires to do good; his breast flowed with pious concern, and was
fired with a most lifey zeal to serve and save Souls, enkindled with a coal
from off the Altar, entirely pure from the smoke of corrupt and dark designs.

SEE those pathetical breathings of his dis-interested, affectionate Soul, 2
Cor. 6.11. 2 Cor. 13 9.
-- Our mouth is open unto you, O ye Corinthians, our heart is enlarged: This
we wish even your perfection. 1 Cor 10.23
I please all men in all things not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved. And elsewhere, I Have covered no man's gold, or
silver, or apparel. Act 20.33.
Did I make a gain of you, or of Men sou't I glory? 2 Cor 13.17
I speak before God in Christ, I do all things, dearly beloved, for your
edifying. 2 Cor 12.19 1 These. 2.8.
Being affectionately desirous of you, we are willing to impart not the Gospel
only, but our own Souls, because ye are dear unto us; Phil. 1.8.
for God is my record, how greatly I long after you, in the bowels of Christ. 2
Cor 12 14, 15 -- 7.3.
I would gladly spend and be spent for you, and you are in our hearts to live
and die for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved; for
I seek not yours but you; laboring night and day, Phil. 1.4. 1 These 3 10 -- 8
I preach unto you the Gospel of God (always in every prayer also for you all,
praying exceedingly) that I might perfect that which is lacking in your faith;
for now we live, if ye stand fast in the faith, we are glad when we are weak, 2
Cor. 13 9.
and ye are strong. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 1 These
2.
Are not even ye in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?

WHAT an uncommon pitch of divine heroism is here? What sublime strains of true
generosity, and the most noble chastity of intention?

AND this bright Example preaches to all the Ministers of Christ this most
important Doctrine.

DOC. THAT in all their ministerial labors, they should make the conversion,
and edification of Men in Christ, their governing view, and sovereign aim. (I
don't mean in contradistinction to the Glory of God, but to poral interest,
honor, etc.)

THIS divine and excellent end, the good of Souls, must be primary in their
intentions; This must give law and life to all their administrations. They must
enter upon the Ministry with this exalted view, and this must be the master
spring of their motion in it. All their labors in the word and doctrine, in
prayer, in government, etc. are (like so many lines falling into a center) all
to conspire and meet in this generous design; and all private advantages are
readily to be sacrificed for the promoting of it.

THUS runs the Apostle's solemn charge in this matter -- Feed the Flock of God,
1 Pet 5.2, 3.
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being Lords over God's heritage. Hence,
Ministers must neither engage, nor act in this work from the low principle of
necessity, (to get a living; crouching for a p^ece of silver, 1 Samuel 2.
saying, put me into the priest's office that I may eat a morsel of bread,) nor
from the simoniacal incentives of paltry avarice (teaching for hire and
divining for money, Mic. 3.11. Jude 11.
thirsting after the wages of unrighteousness, and running greedily after the
errors of Balaam, for a reward) nor from the false scent of popular applause,
(led by the bait of honor, hunting after a name, putting on the solemn airs of
the Zealot, and acting a part with subtle artifice, out of a vainglorious
ostentation; Preaching Christ even of envy and strife; Phil. 1.15. Gal. 4.17. 2
Cor. 4.2. 3 John 9.
not sincerely, but in pretense, zealously affecting men, but not well, walking
in craftiness to draw away disciples after 'em) nor from the lust of dominion,
(loving to have the pre-eminence, and to lord it over God's heritage, and to
walk in an empty show. These are four abominations, Neh. 13.29
that defile the tabernacle of the Lord, stain the Priesthood, and are the
blackest prostitution of the Ministerial character: and to be abhorred and
abandoned, as earthly, sensual, devilish, as what sink men into the line of
Judas, Demas and Diotrephes, which were some of the dreggs of the children of
corruption, and into the doleful clan of voracious Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, who devoured widows houses, and for a pretense made long prayers,
Mat 23.14
and loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God, and therefore
receive the greater damnation.

UNCOUNTERFEIT self-denial then is an important lesson; and it is of the last
concern to Ministers, that they don't give way to a mercenary, or a
self-exalting spirit, not using at any time a cloak of covetousness, 1 These.
2.5.
not using their liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, nor a cover to disguise
any servile, and sordid affections whatever. The great Judge has a Window into
the breast, and can see through the most finished piece of refined hypocrisy into
the impure scenes acted in the secret recesses of the mind, which no mortal eye
has seen, or can see: and the awful day is coming, when the fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is, 2 Cor. 3.
and in this shall the Children of God be manifest and the Children of the
Devil, whosoever has not preached Christ in simplicity and godly sin^erity,
but with fleshly wisdom, handling the word deceitfully, is not of God, Mat. 25.
and must take his portion with the unprofitable servant, and with them, unto
whom the Judge will say, I never knew you! -- 7.23.


MINISTERS then must act all from a natural care for Souls, Phil. 2.20.
and with an inviolable regard to the Glory of God in the Conversion of
Sinners, and the Edification of Saints, as they would approve themselves unto
God, and have even their most abundant labors be of any account in the day of
retribution.

V. OBSERVE, The Apostle derived all his minister^al accomplishments from Jesus
Christ -- He preached in wisdom, and with diligent labor, according to the
working of Christ. All his talents and abilities, his knowledge, prudence,
zeal, fidelity, sedulity etc. were of the operation of Christ, and the
effusions of His free bounty. Hence, elsewhere he says, 1 Ti. 1.12.
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, furnished me to the work
of the Ministry with suitable endowments. I was made a Minister of the Gospel,
Ephesians. 3.7.
according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me, by the effectual
working of his power

Note, IT IS Christ, who sits and qualifies Ministers for the Sacred trust and
duty.

Col. 1.19.
IN Him, it has pleased the Father, should dwell the treasures of wisdom,
riches of glory, and the fullness of everlasting strength, to furnish their
whole man, both the directive and executive powers; and no man receives any
thing, but what comes down from above, Jam. 1.17.
from the Father of Lights, unto whom are owing every good gift, and every
perfect gift. It Is the inspiration of the Almighty, Job 32.8.
that begets understanding, and the unction from the Holy One, that gives the
spirit of a sound mind. He puts the treasure in the earthen vessels, and lights
up the lamps of the sanctuary, and keeps them burning. Ministers are Stars,
shining with light borrowed from the Sun of Righteousness. He sets forth, and
sets forward the spiritual Racer. He spirits and equips the spiritual Soldier,
provides him with arms and artillery, inspires him with military art and
dexterity, gives him martial prowess to speak with the enemy in the gate, Psalm.
127.5
and girds him with strength unto the battle, and makes his way perfect It Is
Christ the Lord, that does all these things.

HENCE, It behooves Ministers to be very much in the exercise of Prayer. They
that would bec^me fit for, and faithful in the Ministry of the word must give
themselves to prayer continually. Act. 6 ^.
The prayer of the upright, is the most likely method to procure the tongue of
the learned, the diligent hand* and an able head. The more fervent and frequent
one is at the throne of Grace, the better prospect he has of excelling in
strength, of growing mighty in the Scriptures, and skilful in the word of
righteousness To be often in the mount, having his con^ersation much in Heaven,
will admirably both i^adiate* and warm him in his work, will make his
affections glow with an holy heat, and his m^nd sparkle with rays of glorious
light, Ex. 34.35.
even as the face of Moses when he had been with God in Sinai

AGAIN, Hence Ministers must be contented with their Lord's dispensations and
allotments to them. He is Master of his own favors, and according to the
counsel of his own will he makes one star to differ from another in glory,
dividing to every man severally as he pleases. 1 Cor 12.11 Mat 25.15
To one he gives ^ive ta^ents, and to another one. The Sovereign Potter forms
the holy Vessels of the temple with a just and admirable variety, as to the
make and constitution, (This is finer and that courser, this is weaker, that is
stronger, this of gold, 2 Ti. 2.20.
and that of silver, this of wood and that of earth,) and then, as to the
extent, capacity, and size, as also to the figure and fashion, aptitude and
usefulness, etc. And there is none may say unto Him, Isai. 45.9.
What do Thou? or Why make Thou me thus?

LET not, then, the Men of low degree, and of small account in their Father's
House, who are forced to creep in the dust, and lift up plow-shares and
pruning hooks, instead of swords and spears, I say, let not us look upon our
selves with discouragement and discontent, neither with envy and emulation upon
others, that move in an higher sphere, distinguished with brighter visions, and
more abundant honor; Mat 20.15
for may not the Lord do, what he will, with his own? Let us be faithful in a
little, and 'twill abound to our account. And on the other hand, let not those
despise the less noble, and weaker vessels. Let not the golden Candlesticks
look, either upon the earthen Lamps with supercilious contempt, or upon
themselves with elated pride; 1 Cor. 4.7.
for who makes thee to differ? and what have thou, that thou did not
receive? Now, if thou did receive it, why do thou glory? Let such, as perch
on the pinnacle of the temple, take heed, lest they grow giddy at any time, and
give the Prince of the power of the air an advantage against them. Pride goes
before a fall.

VI. OBSERVE The extraordinary divine Aids, and happy Success graciously
vouchsafed the faithful Apostle -- Striving (says he) according to His working,
which works in me mightily. This may be considered under a double aspect, as
intimating his Assistence in his Ministry, and the Success of it. The Lord
wro't in him mightily, and by him upon others savingly.

1. WE may understand by it the Assistences he met with, the supplies of grace
and strength he received from above, from the fullness of Christ. The Lord Jesus
Christ did furnish this great Apostle at first with an unusual stock of divine
gifts and graces to trade with for his Masters use, but this would soon have
been impoverish't and exhausted with his more abundant fatigue, sufferings,
services and cares, had he not been recruited with fresh supplies from the Head
of Influences. Without a flow of sap from the root of Jesse, and the vivific
beams of the Sun of Righteousness to animate, strengthen, and sustain, this
most fruitful Vine would soon have withered, his excellent gifts been under a
blast, and the fair blossoms have dropped off. Jer. 49.2* Lam. 4.
This polished shaft and most precious of the Sons of Zion would quickly have
degenerated into an earthen pitcher; the gold have become dim, and the fine
gold changed.

BUT this was his happiness and honor; He had the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ continually burnishing and brightening up his talents, divine virtue
from on high preserving and improving them, the spirit of Christ abiding in
him, invigorating him by powerful assistences, 2 Cor. 12.9.
every way sufficient for him; so that he, who was not sufficient of himself,
Mic. 3.8.
was full of power by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, strong in the Lord and
in the power of his might; and when he was pressed out of measure, 2 Cor. 1.8.
and above strength by labors, and troubles, yet he did not faint, nor fail,
but performed all things, endured all things, through Christ strengthening of him,
Phil. 4.13.
and working in him mightily.

NOW, These things were written for our consolation and encouragement, upon
whom the ends of the World are come, that we should not fear nor be dismayed at
any time.

HENCE, then, we may take up this useful Observation, namely, That Faithful
Ministers may expect from the Lord Jesus Christ all those supplies both of
skill and strength, they need in order to the fulfilling their Ministry.

SUCH, as are true Men, and faithful Servants, may depend upon Him, that has
put 'em into a military condition, for all the assistence, they need in order
to the warring a good warfare. 1 Timothy 1.1^
He will teach their fingers to fight, and the arms of their hands shall be
made strong by the mighty God of Jacob; He will anoint them with fresh oil,
and renew their bow in their hand, will make them a new heart, and new spirit,
give power to 'em, Isai 40.29. -- ver. 31, Romans 12.7.
when they are faint, and when they have no might, increase of strength. They
that wait upon the Lord, that wait on their Ministry, shall renew their
strength as the Eagles, and mount up with wings; They shall walk and not faint,
run and not be weary, being upheld by the greatness of his might, who is head
over all, and without whom (the mouth of truth has spoken it) they can do
nothing. Joh. 15.5,
They are his Ambassadors, and as long as they act by his authority, and keep
to their credentials, He will bear them up, and bear 'em out; "He will strive
with them, and work for them". The fountain of Jacob shall cover 'em, and
underneath be his everlasting arms. The blessing of Asher shall come upon them,
as their days are, so shall their strength be. Deuteronomy. 33.
The God of Jeshurun will be their refuge and the shield of their help; His
strength shall be made perfect in their weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.
Refreshment shall come from the presence of the Lord, the Heavens shall drop
down dew, and the Sun afford superior influence to help their infirmities, and
impregnate them with vigor and resolution to carry on their work. He, who
walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1 Isai. 49.7.
will hold the Stars in the shadow of his right hand, until he shift the scene
and take 'em into his bosom, and heavenly embraces. Such trust have we, through
the promises, to Christ-ward.

2. I pass now to the other sense of the phrase; which works in me mightily,
i. e. with conquering efficacy, and apparent power, to purpose, with great
success. The pleasure of the Lord prospered in his hands, and the whole
efficiency he resolved into the energetical presence of Christ with him. Hence
Note, The Lord Jesus Christ is the Author of all success in the work of the
Ministry. The efficacy of the Word preached is not owing to the influence of
men's wisdom and eloquence: It does not depend upon (...) of argument, or the
charms of moral suasion, nor upon the natural energy, or virtue of the Word
itself, or any external means; but it is to be attributed entirely to the
special ope^ion of Christ. He is the author, and finisher of the whole affair,
effectually working in his Ministers; in Peter to the Apostleship of the
circumcision, Gal. 2.8.
and the same was mighty in Paul toward the Gentiles. He must both open their
^p^ to speak, and the peoples hearts to receive. A door must be opened of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 2.12.
a door of utterance, and a door of entrance. The Father of Glory (with whom
are the words of eternal life) must utter his voice, and that a mighty voice,
commanding the light to shine out of darkness, else the Sinner in his frozen
grave, dead in trespasses and sins, Jer. 6.4.
on whom the shadows of the evening, and the chains of darkness are stretched
forth, will not hear nor open his eyes to discern the things of God. Unless the
Sun of righteousness arise with healings under his wings, Rev 3.18.
anointing their eyes with eye-sa^e, and taking off the scales, the most bright
and dignified Luminary's in the center of light and fullness of meridian glory,
1 Pet. 2.9.
would never be able to call men out of darkness into the mavelous light of
the knowledge of God. (...) 369 ^ 37^.
"This renovation ( ^ys a most reverend Divine) is an instance of the same
glorious power, which exerted itself in the first ^reation of things, and in
the Resurection of Christ, though not altogether after the same manner. " This
change is called a new creation, as if -- men were ^ded and fashioned over
again, transformed -- and had such a change wro't in them, as the creating
power of God made, in bringing this beautiful and orderly frame of things, out
of their dark and rude chaos". Romans 6.4.
And like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we
also are raised to newness of life, according to the operation of his mighty
power. Ephesians. 1.^0.


THEREFORE, Unless the Creator of all the ends of the earth, Joh 12.38, 9, 40.
Jer. 5.13. -- 6.17. Psalm. 58.45
the God who raises the dead, reveal his arm and make known the exceeding
greatness of his power; the Prophets shall become wind, and none shall hearken
to the sound of the trumpet. All shall be like the Adder, deaf to the voice of
the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. Ministers are appointed to edify the
Body of Christ: but except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1
They labor in vain: and to take heed to the Flock of Christ, but except the
Lord keeps the city, the watchman waketh but in vain: and to form Christ in
Sinners, but though they rise up early, work while the day lasts, sit up late,
and eat the bread of earnest care; it will all be fruitless and abortive,
unless the power of the most High overshadow the Souls of Men: and to fight
against principalities and powers, (the powers of the old man, and the
confederate forces of the strong man armed,) but unless they go forth in the
strength of the Lord of Hosts; they will only make an empty flourish, and scuffle
to no purpose. Unless the Light of Israel be for a fire, and his holy One for a
flame; Isai. 10.17
unless the Captain of the Host of the Lord ride on the heavens for their help,
and in his excellency on the skies, shaking his hand againsts the haughty with
terror, and he^ing down the high ones of stature with iron, the army of the
aliens will put the holy Tribe to the ^out, consume their glory and sweep them
away as a spider's web, either by strength o^ stratagen^ The Dragon will rage
and taar them to pieces, or the serpent will play upon 'em and trepan 'em with
his wiles, that none shall be recovered out of the snare of the Devil, for
verily this is the work of the Lord of Hosts, Jer. 50.25.
with whom is everlasting strength, who opens his armor, and brings forth
the weapons of righteousness, sending judgment unto victory. Mat 12.20
An arm of flesh can give but feeble and ineffective blows; It Is utmost efforts
alone will make no more impression upon the habitation of the strong, Jer.
49.19.
than the light touch of one's finger upon a wall of stone. It is the arm of
the Lord that brings Salvation, Isai. 63.5.
that breaks in pieces the Leviathan, and takes from him all his armor
wherein he trusted, Luke 11.22
and brings out his host by number.

IF he gird the sword of truth on his thigh, Psalm. 45.3.
and ride forth in the Chariot of the everlasting Gospel, if he lift up his
standard and ascend on high, he will make the place of his feet beautiful and
glorious, and his right hand shall teach him terrible things, he will lead
captivity captive, Isai. 59.19. Luke 10.18
and make the enemy, that comes in as a flood to scatter and fly as a cloud,
and Satan to fall like lightning from Heaven. He will turn the wise men back,
Isai. 44.25.
and make their counsel foolishness, but he will confirm the word of his
servants, and perform the counsel of his messengers, by the greatness of his
might; -- 40.26.
for that He is strong in power, not one fails, where He appoints the Sword
and gives it a charge. The Archers shall not return ashamed; He will give the
enemy as dust to their spear, and as driven stubble to their bow, in the day of
his power. Surely then, the least of the Flock shall put a hook in the Lion's
nostrils and dragg him out of his den; the grasshoppers pursue the Anakims,
Psalm. 60.12 Psalm. 68.28
and two put ten thousand to flight; through God they shall do valiantly, who
commands their strength, and strengthens that which he works for them; 2
Cor. 2.14. Genesis 3.15.
In Christ they shall triumph, who breaks the Serpents head, bruiseth Satan
under their feet, reins in the power and malice of the Wolves that would devour
the Flock, Psalm. 11.4.
and who bows the heart of the people by the saving strength of his right hand,
turning the rock into a standing water, and the flint into a fountain of rivers.

Romans 9.16.
SO then it is not in him that wills, nor of him that runs. The race is not
to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, Eccl. 9.11.
nor yet favor to men of skill; but when the lot is cast into the lap, the
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Prove 16.33
and sometimes indeed he is pleased to seal up the hand of many wise men after
the flesh, Joh 37.7. 1 Cor. 1.26.
and chooses the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the
weak things of this world to bring to naught the things which are mighty, that
no flesh should glory in his presence. It Is to the honor of the Agent to work
the noblest effects by contemtible. and impropable means. Therefore out of the
mouth of Babes, and Sucklings he ordains strength to still the enemy and the
avenger; Psalm. 8.2.
and dignify's despised, broken vessels to be the illustrious, and most
effectual instruments of his glory, that all men may know his wo^k; and that
their faith should not stand in the wisdom of man, 1 Cor. 2.5.
but in the power of God, which works all in all.

HENCE, Let Ministers be entirely resigned to Christ, the Lord of the Harvest,
as to the fruit of their labors; Though they spend their strength for naught,
and in vain all the day long stretch out their hand to a gainsaying and
rebellious people, yet surely their judgment is with the Lord, Isai. 49.4.
and their work with God. If they sow much, though they reap little or nothing;
though the V^neyard does not yield fruit meet for them, Heb. 6.7.
by whom it is dressed, not receiving the blessing from God, but degenerates
into an howling wilderness, or barren desert, bearing thorns and briars, nigh
unto cursing, or at most affords only, -- ver. 8.
as 'twere, the grape-gleanings of the vintage, yet this may administer comfort
to the faithful Servants of Christ, that they have discharged their duty and
acted their part, and the want of success shall be no bar to their acceptance,
for they are unto God a sweet ^avour of Christ, in them that are saved, 2 Cor.
2.15.
and in them that perish. Though Israel be not gathered, yet they are glorious in
his eyes, with whom they have to do, and though they lose their labor, they
shall not lose their reward. The battle is the Lord's, and not theirs, 2 Chr
20.15
he umpires the success of every campaign, and if they are good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, Isai. 28.6.
though they do not turn the battle to the gate, and the spirits be not subject
to them, Luke 10.20
yet this may be their crown of rejoicing, that their names are written in
heaven; For in this case, if there be first a willing mind, and then a diligent
hand, it is accepted according to that a man has and not according to that he
has not. Their acceptance and reward is in proportion to the degree of their
care and pains, and not to the event and success; 'ti^ measured by their
fidelity, and not by the efficacy of their labors, for this is wholly of the
Lord, and their sufficiency is of God. 2 Cor. 3.5.


AGAIN, Hence, Let Ministers wait upon Christ for success Those, that labor in
the harvest, must sow in tears, and with strong crying, they must sleep their
seed in prayer, and seal instruction with supplication. They must ascend on
Jacobs ladder up to mount Gerizzim to fetch down a blessing on Zion, and her
provision; upon ^evi, and his substance, o^ the fruit of his lips, and the work
of his hands. For this, they must with irresistible importunity besiege the
Throne of Grace, breath out their most ardent requests, agonize with holy
violence at the foot of the mercy-seat, wres^ing down from the Father of Lights
a word of blessing on their persons and administrations, to enrich them unto
all ability and success, 2 Cor. 9.10.
both ministering bread for food, and multiplying their seed sown, and
increasing the fruits of their righteousness.

Col. 4.12.
AND all this must be never-ceasing and perpetual, even as Epaphras labored
always fervently in Prayers. Ex. 17.11.
If they let down their hands, Amalek will prevail. 1 Cor. 10.4. -- ver. 12.
If then they expect and desire to have the weapons of their warfare mighty
through God, they must hold up, and keep their hands steady until the going down
of the sun. Thus the "Closet must crown the Field with success.

AGAIN, Hence, Let not people rely upon, nor glory in Men. Some trust in
Chariots and some in Horsemen, but, be ashamed O Israel, put not your
confidence in man, that is a worm, or the son of man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, and whereof is he to be accounted? Dependence upon Ministers is a
derogation from the Lord of Glory, whose appropriate and sole prerogative it is,
Psalm. 29. -- 27.
to give strength unto his people. The Lord is their light and life, the sword
of their excellency, and the rock of their salvation. 1 Cor. 3.5.
Who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers, by whom ye believed, according
as the Lord gave to every man? Ye are his building, his workmanship, 1 Cor.
3.9. -- 7.
his husbandry; so then, neither is he that planteth, any thing, nor he that
waters; but God that gives the increase. Instruments must be owned and
honored in their order and due measure. 1 Cor. 4.1.
Let a man so account of them, as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
mysteries of God. They must not be over-rated, nor under-valu'd. There is a
great and just respect to be paid their character. Unto Christ is due the glory
of efficiency, but to them the honor of instrumentality. Christ is the
Master Builder; they are Under-labourers, working together with God. 1 Cor. 3.9.
They are then to be esteemed highly in love as such. But let people take h^ed,
that their " respect do not degenerate into sinful admiration of men's
persons", and a factious and dangerous partiality, magnifying this and
nullifying that. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollos, 1 Cor. 3.4.
are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 4.6.
Let People learn then not to think of men above that which is written, that no
o^e -- be puffed up for one against another. "Raised expectations from man, may
provoke God to blast the most promising mean's".

AGAIN, Hence, Let Ministers give Christ the glory of all that success, they
meet with in their labors. When the spiritual Husbandman takes a view of his
field, and sees the full corn in the ear, Mat. 1^. Isai. 28.25. -- 61.3
plants of renown, trees of righteousness, and principal wheat, growing in the
good ground, that bears fruit to perfection, let Christ reap an harvest of
glory from him. Do the Gospel Fishermen draw their net to the shore full, and
gather of the abundance of the Seas? Then, let Christ have a tribute of honor,
without whom, they might toil all day and night and catch nothing. Are any
built up an habitation of God? Let Christ have the rent, and revenue, the
profit and praise. At the laying of every living stone in the holy temple, let
there be the shout of Grace, Grace; and glory to God in the highest. When the
word preached is the ministration of Life, and an odor of a sweet smell, let
Ministers beware of burning incense to themselves.

THE Apostle was peculiarly tender of the honor of Christ in this point. He
took all occasions to magnify and exalt the Grace of God which was given to
him, yea at the very time, he is giving an account of his own services and
successes, and vindicating himself from the aspersions of malice and envy, he
takes infinite care always to secure unto the divine power and blessing the
entire glory, and with the most profound humility, sinks himself to the dust
under a view of his own nothingness. I am become (says he) a fool in glorying,
2 Cor. 12.
ye have compelled me: for I ou't to have been commended of you: for in nothing
am I behind the very chief of the Apostles, though I am nothing. But by the grace
of God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in
vain; but I labored more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me.

THE humble temper and spirit of this great Apostle would well become every
Gospel-Minister. Let none boast or so much as begin to commend themselves. 2
Cor. 3. Isai. 10.15.
Shall the pen boast itself against the Writer? or the ax against him that
heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify itself against him than saweth it?
as if the staff should lift up itself, as if 'twere no wood.

THE most divine Preacher is but an Instrument: the excellency of the power is
of Christ, and therefore the excellency of dignity, and the praise of all is
owing to Him.

LET Ministers then ascribe unto Him the glory that is due unto him, sing forth
the honor of his praise and make his name glorious. Ascribe ye strength unto
him, Psalm 68.34, 35
whose excellency is over Israel, and his power and glory are seen in the
sanctuary. He is terrible out of his holy places; the God of Israel is he that
prepares mercy and truth, for his people, and makes his ministers a flame of
fire. Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in
the mountain of his holiness. When therefore Ministers fight the battles of the
Lord, and their arrows are made sharp in the hearts of the King's enemies,
Psalm. 45.
let them return to the mount to meet the Lord with the high praises of God in
their mouth. They must not upon any victorious achievement divide the spoils,
they must not divide the glory, nor crown themselves with the laurel, as if by
their own holiness or power, Act. 3.12. Prove 25.14
they had done this thing, boasting of a false gift, and rearing up a trophee
to their own dexterity, activity, parts or pains: No; but let them cast their
crowns at the foot of Christ, and erect a monumental pillar for a memorial of
gratitude, making their boast in Him alone; according as it is written, he that
gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord, 2 Co. 10.1^
upon every signal instance of happy success, raising the highest notes of
doxology to the exalted Redeemer, and of thankful triumph over the powers of
darkness, "Singing to the humble tune of [Psal. 115.1.] Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory". Neither by bow, Hos. 1.7.
nor by sword, neither by horses, nor by horsemen, neither by night, nor
multitude, but the spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3.3. Psalm. 98.1.
his right hand, and holy arm has gotten us the victory. Once have I heard
this, yea twice that salvation belongs unto the Lord: unto the Lord belongs the
victory, the power and the glory. In all these things, we are conquerors through
Him that has loved us. Romans 8.37. 2 Cor. 2.14.
Now thanks be to God, who always makes manifest the ^avour of his knowledge by
us in every place.

THUS I Have rio^ over the several Observations that lay in the T^a^^, and given
some general view of the copious Subject. I confess, I Have gone but a little way
in so wide a field, yet I Have taken so large a compass, that your patience
commands me to draw to a close.

I shall therefore only add; Upon the whole, we see, the dignity; importance,
and auwful difficulty of the Pastoral trust and province. How then should such
tremble at their unworthiness and insufficiency, who are engaged in or are
entering upon it? If any man desire the office of a Minister, he desires a goal
work -- but verily a work, that calls for superior skill, dexterity and
acuteness, for extraordinary force and staidness of mind, for much care,
dispatch and expedition, with the most wakeful unfainting application. And if
here we subjoyn the consideration of their own impotency and deficiency, with
the difficulties they meet with from the lusts and exorbitant passions, the
adamantine and unmalleable tempers of some Leviath^n-Rebels, and from the fiery
rage of the infernal Host; and "many other circumstances of discouragement"
they are unavoidably under; with the strictness of that awful account they are
ere long to give up to the chief Shepherd, etc. Here Is ^^o' to dis^nimate and
appale the stoutest and most puissant of mere Mortals. The Ministry is justly
called magnum opus, sed gravis sarcina, a great work, but yet an heavy burden,
a station of honor, but yet a post of the most difficult service, and can
never be maintained and discharged without distinguishing aids and uncommon
supplies from above.

SUCH, as engage in this sacred and solemn work, should well weigh, what an
insupportable burden they take upon their Shoulders, -- to keep them humble;
and the People also should duly consider it, -- to keep them from adding to the
Load. Serious reflections on this should biass them to christian tenderness,
and move the bowels of holy compassion. The difficulty and weight of Ministers
work and duty, speak 'em the just objects of pity, and should teach people to
speak comfortably to them, that teach the good knowledge of the Lord. It is very
unkind and ungenerous in people ( not to call it the most savage barbarity,
that will mightily inflame their accounts in the day of reckoning) to clogg and
embarrass faithful Ministers in their work by the swelling waves of gainsaying
and heady Corahism, (insolently and insultingly rising up against them, as if
they took too much upon 'em) by cruel mockings, rancour, and humoursome
carriage, by shameless Chamism, uncovering their nakedness, and exposing their
frailties, by entertaining or spreading groundless jealousies, by rash
censures, and unfair comments, and criticisms on their words or actions,
proceedings, or preaching, by selfish contraction of spirit, Mal. 3.8. 1 Cor
9.14. 1 Timothy 5.17 Gal. 6.6.
and close-handed niggardliness in the maintenance of them -- the blackest
instance of uncharitableness, not to call it the most abominable injustice, and
sacrilegious impiety. These things, and the like, wound and sink their spirits,
enfeeble their hands, hamper their feet, and take off their chariot-wheels,
that they drive on heavily; and watch for Souls, not with joy but with grief,
Heb. 13.17
which (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) is unprofitable for you.

I speak not these things under any suspicion, or fear of meeting with such
unhappy treatment from that kind and religious People, among whom the lines are
fallen, and this grace given to me, (however unworthy) that I should preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ. The great and obliging respect, honor and just
veneration they have paid unto the many Excellent Worthies, that have ministered
unto them in holy things, is a good assurance of the forwardness of their mind.
2 Cor. 9.2.
And the most becoming unanimity in the choice they made of so unfit a person
as my self, was what rendered it peculiarly endearing; that I flatter my self
it looks like a comfortable omen, and a desirable prelude to mutual happiness,
furtherance, and joy of faith under the divine blessing, and through the supplies
of the spirit of Jesus Christ.

I rejoice therefore, Brethren, 2 Cor. 7.16. Phil. 1.
that I Have confidence in you in all things. And I thank God upon every
remembrance of you, making request for you all with joy, from the first day
until now. And from my inward affection more abundant toward you, this I pray,
that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment,
and that in all things we may approve your selves clear in this matter, keeping
a conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward them, that are your
Servants for Jesus-sake. 2 Cor. 4.5


-- 9.4.
NEVERTHELESS, lest happily I (that I say not you) be ashamed in this same
confident boasting, I though it it not superfluous to exhort the Brethren, as
touching the administration of this service, 2 Pet. 3.1.
and to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance and caution, though ye be
established in the present truth, -- 1.12.
that ye may be mindful of the words, which were spoken before by the holy
Prophets, and of the commandment of the Apostles; How they said, Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves; know them that admonish you,
and esteem them highly in love for their works sake. Furthermore then we
beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, 1 These. 4.1.
that as ye have received -- how ye out to walk -- so ye would abound more and
more. Let them that labor among you experience your candor, pity and kind
assistence at all times and in all things. Do all you can to alleviate their
burdens, and by all possible means endeavor to hearten and comfort them. Lend
a hand to strengthen and further them in their work. Cast the mantle of
christian charity over the multitude of their weaknesses and defects; Be not
too severe in animadverting on them at any time, but make all ingenuous
allowances for their imperfections: always put the fairest gloss upon their
speech and behavior. "Remember (says one) they are earthen vessels, and your
own too, and take heed you don't throw 'em to the ground", and dash them to
pieces presently upon spying a little flaw. Let your moderation be known unto
all men; approve your selves peaceable and faithful among the tribes of Israel:
and laying aside all malice, 1 Pet. 2.1.
and all evil-speakings, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. -- ver. 2.
Let your profiting appear to all; Let them that toil in the Garden of Christ
see in you the fruit of their labors; this will turn to your Salvation, and
take off from the difficulty of their task; hereby you will be benefitted and
they will be supported and encouraged, and go on with alacrity over their
wearisome stage of duty.

AND to all this sail not to add your most importunate intercessions for them
at the throne of Grace. So great an Apostle as Paul the aged, furnished with
large abilities, extraordinary gifts, and distinguishing grace, 1 These 5.25 2
These. 3.1. Heb. 13.18
was often requesting the favor, (under an humble sense of his necessity,) of
an interest in the Prayers of the Saints. And it becomes ordinary Ministers
much more to importune their People herefor, and it mightily behooves People to
grant their request. This is a debt of service as well as a tribute of respect
owing to their Ministers, and at the same time an act of charity, and a deed of
kindness to themselves. "A praying People (says one) is the most hopeful means
to make a profitable Ministry". The fervent prayers of the righteous avail
much; Ja. 5.16.
These auxiliary forces are mightily serviceable to Ministers in pulling down
the strong holds of Satan, and in building up the temple of God. Helping
together by prayer for us, said the Apostle. 2 Cor. 1.11.


LET then what has been said engage and persuade all the People of God, to keep
up a spirit of Supplication for those that wait at the Altar. The Chief-Priest,
and Master-workman needs the help and benefit of your Prayers, as well the
inferior Levites and meaner Servants; among whom your unworthy Monitor this
day, humbly and earnestly begs (as he greatly needs) a peculiar share in your
most solemn addresses.

BUT more particularly, I would recommend my self to the constant, and most
fervent Prayers (1) Of my Reverend FATHER, (who, having obtained help from God,
yet survives in this ministry received of the Lord, with whom I am now (though
most unworthy) to be set apart an Helper unto the kingdom of God, and with whom
by divine grace, I shall gladly serve, Phil. 3.22.
as a Son with a Father in the Gospel) and also of my beloved BRETHREN, the
People of this Flock, over whom I am awfully now to be set a Watchman in the
Lord. Rom 15.30
Now, I beseech you for the love of the spirit, and by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him, that ye strive together with
me, and wrestle in your Prayers to the great Master of the Assembly for me: and
continue herein laboring fervently, with unceasing ardours of holy
importunity; praying that I may be furnished with suitable gifts to make me
wise to win Souls, and with grace sufficient to make me faithful: that I may
come unto you with joy by the will of God in the fullness of the blessings of
the Gospel of peace; that the power of Christ and a double portion of his
Spirit may rest upon me, and that through Christ strengthening of me, I may take
heed to the Ministry to fulfill it: that my lips may be touched with a coal from
off the Altar, that the opening of my mouth may be of right things, which
become sound doctrine* that the Refiners fire may purge away the dross of
earthly affections, and the ^ullers soap make me clean to bear the Vessels of
the Lord; that I may be strong in the grace, which is in Christ Jesus; and so
take heed to my self, that when I Have preached to others, I my self may not be a
Castaway; that it may not be my unhappy Lot to serve only to light others to
Heaven, and be my self at last abandoned to utter darkness; but that I may me
taught of the Lord, how to behave my self in the house of God, which is the
church of the living God, and how to behave my self, in word, in conversation,
in charity, in faith, in purity, worshipping God in the spirit and in truth,
serving him in the spirit and power of godliness, with humility, and fidelity,
watching for Souls, as one that must give an account, that I may save my self,
and them that hear me; that I may have a nail in the holy place, and may with
you be co^orted, when the times of refreshment shall come from the presence of
the Lord.

LET this be your hearts desire, and prayer to God for me. Now, the God of
Peace be with you all.

AMEN.

