LETTER TO His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of CHESTER, With
the Governor's SPCEEH From the Bench, at a Court of Oyer and Terminer, held at
Chester the 15 th Day of April, 1718,

PUBLISHED at the Request of the Representatives of the Freemen of this
Province, in General Assembly met at PHILADELPHIA The 5 th Day of May, 1718.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed, and Sold by ANDREW BRADFORD. MDCCXVIII.

To my worhty Friends His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County of
Chester in the Province of PENNSILVANIA.
Gentlemen;
YOUR dutiful Respect to Government, as well as your diligent Application to
the Service of your Country, but more especially your Commendable Deportment at
the last Affizes, held for your County, justly deserves to be acknowledged as
Examples worthy of Imitation.

I have sent you the enclosed Copy of what I thought proper to say in Court
upon that Occasion, because I could not tell how to refuse any Thing that you
so Unanimously and Eearnestly desired; But could I have foreseen this Request,
I would have, at least, endeavored to have made the Performance better worth
your Perusal than upon Review I find it to be.

MY chief Aim was to enforce a due Execution of the Laws in this Province, made
for the Preservation of the public Peace, by declaring my firm Resolutions to
Support the Constitution in the Established Magistracy.

AND as I conceive the whole Course of that Trial, did sufficiently demonstrate
the absolute Necessity, that there was for so doing, I cannot but also think
the universal Satisfaction, which upon the Issue of that Solemn Affair did
Evidently appear in every Countenance, will certainly produce all the good
Effect which we may reasonably expect from such decent Harmony in our judicial
Proceedings.

BUT, howsoever that may happen, being my self present all the time of the
Trial, it becomes me to say, That the Judges, the Officers of the Peace, the
Lawyers, and the Jurors, did all of them, according to the Best of my Judgment,
acquit themselves in their several Stations with great Integrity and Candor,
to the Honor of this Province, which will ever remain a very Satisfactory and
agreeable Reflection to, Gentlemen

Your very Faithful Humble Servant, W. Keith.

Immediately before the Arraignment of the Prisoners Indicted for Murder at a
Court of Oyer and Terminer, held at Chester, the 15th Day of April, 1718. the
Governor spoke, as follows,
WE Shall not find any one Circumstance in Life, which more evidently discovers
the Stamp of our great Creators Image upon Mankind, than when we are met
together in our proper Stations, under a good Government, in order to minister
Indifferenly, and distribute equal Justice amongst our selves.

THIS Reflection will become more Familiar and Useful, should we suppose that a
Stranger's Curiosity had accidentally led him into this Place, where the first
thing that struck his View, was the Gravity and Awful Deportment of the Judges
upon the Bench, Charging by Turns, the Jurors. To consider with what Solemnity
it is, that they Affirm or Swear in the Presence of Almighty God (before whom
they expect one Day to account for their Performance) that they will true and
faithful Judgment make and Deliver of the Evidence given betwixt our Sovereign
Lord the King and the Prisoner at the Bar.

THAT they will carefully remember how that the Fact this Day to be Tried, is
an Offense of the Highest Nature, said to have been committed in open Defiance
of the Laws both of God and Man.

THAT the Consequences of it have already blasted the Public Justice of this
Province in General, and will more particularly affect the Reputations of those
who are now called, and may hereafter be summoned on Juries of this Kind.

THAT as all the Laws in force for the Preservation of the Public Peace, and
the Penalties thereby imposed on any Breach thereof, were Framed and Enacted
only to secure that Safety and Quiet which every Man claims to be his Right,
and must naturally covet to Enjoy; We are therefore all equally and highly
concerned to see those things duly Performed and Executed, without which we
cannot hope or pretend to reap and possess the most common Benefits and
Necessaries of Life.

THAT the Heart of Man being for the most Part corrupted and defiled with evil
Habits, or the Folly and Unreasonable Violence of his Passions, the same
Justice which every one of us would demand and expect in the like
Circumstances, commands that an impar^^^^ and strict Scrutiny be made, in order
to discover the naked Truth, upon which our Judgments, for or against one
another, are to be Simply Founded.

That the Constitution of our Mother Country, happily derived and extended to
us here, has not only provided and settled a certain Measure of Legal Evidence,
to infer Conviction upon the Prisoner, but also has given him the noble
Privilege or Birthright of an English Subject, to make his Neighbors and
Equals, being of one Mind and Consent, the sole and only Judges of that
Evidence, upon which his Liberty or Life it self may depend.

THE pernicious Consequences therefore and great Importance of the Fact to be
thus Judiciously proved.

THE Solemnity of the Judgment or Sentence thereupon to be given

THE Severity of the Punishment to be inflicted.

The Quality of the Person to suffer, your Neighbor and your Equal.

AND Lastly, the wholesome Effect that such a Public Example will, doubtless,
produce, are so many Considerations now before us, which Sufficiently
demonstrate, That a Righteous Man, while he is Employed in giving Judgment upon
or concerning his Neighbor, may be then most properly said to bear the
Likeness of his Great Creator's Image, viz. Truth and Justice.

BUT further let us suppose the Listening and Impartial Stranger to cast his
attentive Eyes upon the Melancholy and Dejected Countenance of a Prisoner at
the Bar, who is called upon to be charged with his Indictment.

With what a confused Mixture of Pity and Horror will not his Mind be filled,
when it comes to be set forth, How that in Cold Blood this poor unhappy Object,
by the Instigation of the Devil, did Wilfully and most Inhumanly Murder his
Innocent Neighbor!

WILL not every by-stander be ready to start and shrink at the Monstrous
Appearance of a Man thus represented in the Shape of a Devil?

WILL not even his own Relations and Old Acquaintance be apt to say amongst
themselves, with Surprise, How have we been deceived in our former good opinion
of this Man?

AND shall not every one of us reflect with the utmost Concern, how that we
cannot possibly secure our own Lives, nor enjoy the desirable Liberty of
quietly attending our Lawful Affairs abroad, whilst such Unruly Monsters are
permitted, with Impunity, to walk at large, and live amongst us?

Methinks I hear the Prisoner called upon with an Air of more than Common
Austerity, Hold up thy Hand; Speak; What can thou say for thy Self? Guilty,
or not Guilty?

BUT because it is rare to find Men endued with so much true sense of Religion,
as openly to confess their Crimes, and throw themselves upon the Divine Mercy,
without regarding the painful Consequences of human Judgment, we shall here
suppose this Man to plead, Not Guilty, and submit himself to be Tried by his
Country.

THEN will our attentive Stranger have Opportunity to observe with what Wisdom
and Caution our happy Constitution has provided, as much as possibly could be
done, against the Iniquity of any Man's being injured by False Testimony. For
the Witnesses being called and acknowledging themselves to be Christians, they
are most Solemnly Affirmed or Sworn To declare the Truth, and nothing but the
Truth that is, they being made sensible of the horrid Sin against Almighty God,
that is alleged to have been committed by the Prisoner, and the indispensable
Duty that is laid upon Mankind by God himself, to Assert the Truth, in Defense
of his Laws and Omnipotent Authority, they are understood to make this Solemn
Affirmation or Oath Willingly and Freely, not for the sake of any thing here
upon Earth, or only because they are thereunto Legally required, but rather for
that they know it is the Service of God unto which they are in Duty bound, and
for the Faithful Performance whereof they Expect one Day to Account before God
himself.

BUT further, to supply the Imperfection of human Knowledge, which in many
cases cannot attain to a Mathematical or Demonstrative Certainty of the Truth,
the Law will not permit that any Christian shall incur the Penalty of his Life,
except upon the full and plain Testimony of Men openly professing their Belief
of the same Faith in our Blessed Savior Christ, and his Holy Doctrine* So that
we being all Christians, and it is to be hoped, endued, as we ought to be, with
that Brotherly Love and Universal Charity which is Inherent and Essential to
our Profession, We must Suppose, it cannot enter into the Thoughts of any good
Man to disbelieve or suspect his Brothers Testimony, when delivered in that
Solemn Manner, as if he was actually in the visible Presence of Almighty God;
at least, since we must acknowledge, that under the State and Imperfection of
Human Affairs, This, preferable to all others, is the surest and best method to
discover the Truth of any Fact done or committed without the Sphere of our own
certain Knowledge and Privity. None can pretend to object against the Justice
and Equity of this Proceedings, unless it be those, who by their public
Misdemeanors and Detestable Crimes have lost all sense of Religion or Virtue,
and would seem to deny the Power of God, as well as the Authority wherewith
the Civil Magistrate is Clothed to punish Wickedness and Vice.

IF then a Stranger may justly be supposed thus to reason, and be affected with
these things, how much more ought we of this Province to be highly satisfied
and pleased? That our Lives and Liberties are so well Fortified and Secured
from any Arbitrary Incrochments, Uncertainty, or other Deceitful Hazard
whatsoever. That Notwithstanding the Infancy of this Colony, yet, (God be
praised) we have a set of as worthy and sufficient Men upon the Bench as any of
the Neighboring Provinces can boast of. That the Generality of our People
appear not only to be Industrious as any of their Neighbors, but likewise
quietly and peaceably disposed to submit themselves unto, and thankfully to
enjoy the necessary and good Effects of an impartial Administration of Justice
and Government.

TO the End therefore that those Blessings which we possess, and are more
plentifully receiving daily from the kind hand of Providence, may not be
misused or despised.

I do in the Name of our Sovereign Lord, King GEORGE, and by Virtue of his
Royal Authority, strictly Command and Charge all Persons whatsoever to pay the
same Respect, Submission and Obedience unto the Judges upon this Bench, which
is known to be usually paid, and of Right to belong unto his Majesty's Justices
in Air or Judges of Assize in England.

AND I do Earnestly Recommend it to you, Gentlemen, upon the Bench, That if any
Person or Persons shall presume and dare to act contrary hereto, so as in any
sort to Lessen, Impugn or With-stand the Constitution and just Authority of
this Government, you will in such Case Immediately proceed to Punish the
Offenders, as the utmost Severity of the Law shall direct.

AND whilst I have the Honor to Govern this Province, all Persons, of what
Rank or Degree soever they be, may certainly expect, or they will be made to
know, that the Order and Judgments of this Supreme Court are to be punctually
Obeyed and duly Executed.

FOR whatsoever Notions may have been heretofore framed with design to Baffle
and Weaken the Hands of the Magistracy, you may all be assured, that I am
Absolutely determined to Maintain and Support the Constitution of this
Province, as it is by Law Established.

FINIS.

