A Glorious Espousal.

A Brief ESSAY, To Illustrate and Prosecute the MARRIAGE, Wherein Our Great
SAVIOR offers to Espouse unto Himself the Children of Men. And thereupon to
Recommend from that GRAND PATTERN a Good CARRIAGE in the Married Life Among
them.

An ESSAY Proper and Useful in the Hands of those who Travel on the Noble
Design of Espousing the Souls of Men unto their SAVIOR. But more Particularly
and Seasonably to be presented, where a MARRIAGE is upon a Celebration.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for B. GRAY, and J. EDWARDS, at their Shops on
the North and South side of the Townhouse in King Street. 1719.

THE Best Espousal.
BOSTON, 14 d. IV. m. 1719.
JEREMIAH III. 14. I Marry my self unto you.
AND is this thy Voice, O Our SAVIOR? A most wonderful Word! What? The Great
GOD who formed all Things; (...) Omnipotent GOD, speak such a Word, unto Frail
Creatures, that are the Works of His Hands! I Marry my self unto you. The Most
High Possessor of Heaven and Earth, speak such a Word unto Poor Creatures, who
have nothing but what He gives unto them! I Marry my self unto you. The most
Holy One, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, speak such a Word, unto
Vile Creatures, which are all gone aside and all together become filthy! I
Marry my self unto you. O Wonderful! O Wonderful! But so it is. O Lord GOD,
Thou art that GOD, and thy Words are True, and thou have promised this Goodness
unto all that are willing to become the Objects of it!

Great is the Honor which the Glorious GOD has put upon the Married State. He
Honored it, when He Appointed it in Paradise, and made it an Institution for
our First Parents, while they were yet in their sinless Integrity. He Honored
it, by doing at it the First of those Miracles, wherein His Divinity shone
forth under the Eclipse of His Humanity. He has Honored it, in the Desirable
Effects of it, and the Glories of Mankind, which it has produced in Successive
Generations. On such Accounts Marriage is Honorable in all. But we have no
small Addition to the Accounts on which it is so, In that our GOD has made a
Marriage to be the Figure, by which He will have to be livelily described unto
us, the mavelous Relation, and Affection, which He bears unto His Chosen
People.

Israel, Backsliden from GOD, is advised and Exhorted unto a Repentance: which
being obtained, they shall be returned from their Dispersion among the Nations;
though there should be but One to be found in a City, or Two in a Tribe dispersed
among the Nations, yet they shall be brought back unto their Ancient Sears, and
God will show wonders to the dead. The COVENANT between the Glorious God, and
His Backsliding People, is brought as an Argument for the Repentance that is
called for. And the Nature, the Import, of the COVENANT is declared. It is a
Covenant of Marriage; I Marry my self unto you says the Lord. It is thus
Actively, to be expressed, I Marry my self, rather than I am Married. Indeed
the Argument here used, is urged with a Compassion scarce to be found among the
Hard-hearted Children of Men. Adulterous violations of the Covenant between the
Married, especially, if Repeated, if defended, if long persisted in; These
render all Accomodations between them forever hopeless. An Everlasting Divorce
is all that can be hoped for. The word Return, is never heard any more. But, my
Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord.
Our compassionate God says unto a People in Covenant with him; Thou have played
the Harlot with many Lovers, yet Return again unto me. And the Marriage that
has been so horribly Violated, is made the Argument for this Return. Our God
will yet own the Marriage; and go on with all the Testimonies of Love that can
be agreeable to a Marriage; and all former offenses will be forgiven and
forgotten, and be as if they had never been at all. How Unchangeable the Love
of our God! Because I change not, Therefore says our God, O Sinners, you are
not consumed. A Goodness, at which, O Sinful Children of Men, how can we but be
astonished! But with our Astonishments, how much is a Repenting Soul, having
such a Marriage in view, to be encouraged! Well, who is the Lord that says, I
Marry myself unto you? Truly It Is the Lord whose Name is JEHOVAH. Now the Son
of GOD, who is the God that is the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
but who becomes Incarnate in our Jesus: This is He whose Name is JEHOVAH. We
have all the evidence which the Oracles of our God can give us, That the God of
Israel, in the Old Testament is the same that appears in the Character of the
Redeemer, our Immanuel, the Word made flesh, in the New. It is our Glorious
CHRIST, who says, I Marry my self unto you.

My Doctrine that is to drop as the Rain upon you, will be this.

Our Great SAVIOR, The Great GOD our SAVIOR, bringing His People into a
Covenant of Grace, does most graciously MARRY Himself unto them.

It is to distill as the small rain upon the tender Herb. And therefore it shall
be broken into some Heart-melting Propositions.

I. It is to His CHURCH in the World, the People whom He calls out of the
World, into His Covenant, that our SAVIOR says, I Marry my self unto you. It Is
the Church, that has this Dignity put upon it; Rev. XXI. 9. The Wise to the
Lamb of GOD. Of the Church does our SAVIOR say, It Is the dearly Beloved of my
Soul.

The Church Universal is to be first of all considered, as thus Married unto
the Son of GOD. Even that whole Body of People, who come into the Hands of our
SAVIOR, that so they may glorify God, and enjoy Him forever. There is a
COVENANT, which GOD our SAVIOR has made with His Eternal FATHER, concerning a
people, which he has chosen, to be the Vessels of mercy in Glory forever. In
this Covenant of Redemption, GOD our SAVIOR has engaged, That He will recover
this His People out of the Ruins, which by their departure from God they are
fallen into; That He will therefore make Expiation for their offenses, by the
Sacrifice of Himself, and so reconcile them unto God: And that He will then put
the Fear of God into their hearts, and show them the path of Life, and Quicken
them to live unto God, and at last raise them from the dead unto Everlasting
Life. In every Age, and in every Place, the Almighty Spirit of God, finds out
these Elect, and makes them willing, that GOD their SAVIOR should accomplish
these His Engagements for them; willing to be Saved, and Led, and Ruled by this
mighty SAVIOR. The method of Grace, which the Covenant of Redemption has laid
out, for our Salvation by a Glorious CHRIST, is brought unto us, in the Gospel
of our Salvation, as a Covenant of Grace, which we are to come into. The Gospel
is the Covenant of God; it brings to us a Covenant of Grace. By being made
willing to have our Savior do for us, what He has promised His Father to do
for His People, and be concerned for us, as our Peacemaker, our Instructor,
and our Governor; we come into His Covenant. The People brought into this
Covenant is the Church of God. Now, unto this whole People does our dear
Savior say, I Marry my self unto you.

There is one whole Book of our BIBLE that appears written on purpose to
Represent and Celebrate, this Heavenly mystery. It Is the Book which we call, The
CANTICLES. In that Song of Songs, written by Solomon, there is introduced a
Prince, who has upon him some Resemblance of David, the admired Father of
Solomon; but yet it is in the Quality and Apparel of an High Priest that this
Prince is here exhibited. And this Illustrious Person here Marries Himself unto
a Lady, with many mutual Endearments. It Is our SAVIOR, who is the Bridegroom;
It Is the Church which is the Bride, in this Dramatic Poem. The Emblem thus
prosecuted by Solomon, is but an Enlargement upon what he had learned from the
Forty fifth Psalm, which his Father David had composed for him. From hence it
is that the Jews have their curious Traditions, of the Marriage between
Tipheret and Malcuth; between the Beauty and the Kingdom, that is to say,
between the Messiah and the People that submit unto Him. We have now and then
occurring in our Sacred Pages, the Marriage of an Hero, which is attended with
circumstances, that lead us to think, on our Savior saying to His People, I
Marry my self unto you. The Condition of things between our Savior, and the
People of His Covenant, is the Original from whence the Marriage allowed and
ordained, and common among the children of Men, is Copied. But the most notable
Copy taken from that Original, was the Marriage of our First Parents, in the
Garden of God. Of that marriage, our Apostle speaking, presently adds; Ephesians. V.
32. This is a great Mystery; but I speak of Christ and the Church.

The Inchoation of this Marriage, is in this World. The Elect of God coming to
say, I am the Lords, and Avouching a Glorious CHRIST for their God and Savior,
the Grand Affair of the Marriage is carried on. It Is come to a Contraction. But
the consummation of the Marriage is in the World to come. 'Twill be at the
Second Coming of our Savior, that there will be that voice heard, as the voice
of many waters, and the voice of mighty Thunderings; Rev. XIX. 7. Let us be
glad and rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His Wife has made
herself ready. Then, then, twill be that our Savior will present it unto
Himself a Glorious Church, not having any thing that will be distasteful unto
Him* Then, then 'twill be, that our Savior will call her Hephzibah and Beulah,
because He will Delight in His Church, and it shall be Married unto Him: yea,
as a Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God Rejoice over thee.

But as an Appendix, to this Contemplation, it is to be added; That a
particular Church, is also to be considered, as Married unto the SON of GOD. A
particular Church, or a Company of whom our Savior says, Gather my Saints
together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice: Even to
such a company combined in the Evangelical Church State, our Savior says, I
Marry my self unto you. Of such a Church, He who gathered it, said, 2 Cor. XI.
2. I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a Chaste
Virgin, to CHRIST.

O Church of the Lord; Remember thy Marriage unto thy Savior. Do nothing to
grieve Him; Do not Incur His Frowns; Do not provoke Him to withdraw from thee.
Be faithful in His Covenant. Observe His Institutions, with a due Loyalty and
Purity; preserve them from Violations. Be mindful of that Charge; Psalm. XLV.
11. He is thy Lord, and Worship thou Him. Thy Title shall be, An Elect Lady;
yea, Thou shall be a Kings Daughter, if thou Hearken to such Admonitions of GOD.

II. To every Individual Person, coming into the Church of the Living GOD, and
Laying hold on His Covenant, our SAVIOR also says, I Marry my self unto thee.
As it is in the Metaphor of a Temple. The Church in general is a Temple of GOD.
And every Individual Believer is also a Living Temple; An Habitation of GOD
through the Spirit. It is the same in the Metaphor of a Marriage. Our SAVIOR
does Marry Himself unto the Church in general. But He does also Marry Himself
to every Individual Believer, and say to every Soul that receives Him as a
SAVIOR, what we have, Cant. IV. 8, 9. Come with me, my Spouse. Thou have
ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse. O Solicited Soul, When thou come
into the Church of GOD, and heartily say, I am willing to be Listed among the
People who look for Blessedness under the Conduct of the LORD, who is to break
the Head of the Serpent; From this Moment thy SAVIOR Marries Himself unto
thee. When thou come into the Covenant of GOD, and heartily say, I am
willing that GOD manifest in the Flesh of my JESUS, may produce Good Terms with
Heaven for me, and may fulfill in me all the Good Pleasure of His Goodness; From
this Moment thy SAVIOR Marries Himself unto thee. It may now be said, Isai.
LIVE. 5. Thy Maker is thy Husband.

I am now directed and arrived unto the Management of the most Important
Action, that it is possible for any among the Children of Men to be concerned
in.

A Minister of the Gospel is called; Joh. III. 29. A Friend of the Bridegroom.
The chief Scope, the main Work of our Ministry is, To Woo, Oh! may we have the
Wisdom and Success, to Win, the Souls of our People, for an Espousal to our
only SAVIOR. The Motion is to be now made; And, O our Dear People. Despise it
not, Reject it not, Neglect not so Great Salvation. Hearken to a Friend of the
Bridegroom now arguing with you. Hearken to me, that GOD may hearken to you
another Day. Yea, Hearken, O Daughter, in a fair way to be made a Daughter of
GOD, and Consider, and Incline thine Ear; Forget also the Amusements of a vain
World, which have kept thee at a Distance from Him who is to be thy Lord,
forever to be Adored. We read of a famous Transaction; The Steward comes, and,
Genesis XXIV. 35, 49, 58. He said, The Lord has blessed my Master greatly, and he
is become great; and unto his son he has given all that he has: -- And now,
if ye will deal kindly and truly with my Master, Tell me. -- And they called
Rebeckah, and said unto her, Will thou go with this Man? And she said, I will
go. Let us now in like manner go on with our proceedings. I bring you this
Advice; The Blessed GOD has a SON, unto whom He has given all that He has: He
is Lord of all. It is now propounded unto Thee, O Poor Soul, whether thou art
Willing to give thy self unto Him; Willing to have Him take Possession of thee;
Willing that He should Supply thee, Instruct thee, Govern thee; and render thee
Fruitful unto GOD. And now, will thou treat thy SAVIOR well; or Deal kindly
and truly with thy self? Say, Will thou go, and Live with thy SAVIOR, and Live
upon Him, and Live unto Him? Upon thy Hearty speaking of this One Word, I will
go; or, I will be the Lords! -- the Point is gained; and thy Triumphant Song
may be that; Cant. II. 16. My Beloved is mine, and I am His.

But there must be more particularity used, that we may have a distinct view of
the Mystical Marriage, which is now Prosecuting; I hope, I may say,
Celebrating, and that you may come into it.

O Our Evangelized People, Your Great SAVIOR does make to every Soul among
you, the Proposal, O Gracious and Mavelous Proposal! of an Espousal unto Him.
Your SAVIOR is this Day fulfilling that Word; Hos. II. 16. At that Day, says
the Lord, thou shall call me, Ishi; That is to say, My Husband. That ONE WORD
heartily spoken, will assure you of His being so.

There is to be a Regular Proceedure in the Marriage. Wherefore,

First; There is the Fathers Consent in the Matter. GOD the FATHER has given
His Consent unto it, that Thy SAVIOR should Marry Himself unto thee. It is a
Match of the Fathers making. We read, Mat. XXII. 2. A King made a Marriage for
His Son. It Is the Marriage of thy SAVIOR, unto Thee, O thou Soul now under
Invitations unto thy SAVIOR. Of our SAVIOR we find it said, Unto us a Son is
given; His Name shall be called, Wonderful. GOD the Father has given His own
Son, to be Married unto thee; A Thing that is Wonderful! He is Thy Father too;
Though thou have Rebelled against Him; wandered from Him. Return, O Prodigal,
Return unto thy Father. Then does He also give thee unto thy SAVIOR. Thou will
be found One of those, of whom thy SAVIOR says, Joh. XVII. 9. Those whom Thou
have given me. And that thou may be Married unto thy SAVIOR, it is a Thing
which our Heavenly Father does devise means to bring it about. The GOD who
retains the Right of a Father over thee, and has thee at His Disposal, does
Countenance, Encourage, Command, thy Marriage unto thy SAVIOR. None come unto
the Son, except the Father draw them.

Secondly, Thy SAVIOR does Offer to be unto Thee, all that the Best Husband in
the World can be; All that can be expected from a SAVIOVR Espoused unto thee.
What thy SAVIOR does in the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed GOD speak unto
thee, is This; I would Marry my self unto thee. How amply it is Expressed! Hos.
II. 19, 20. I will Espouse thee unto me for ever, yea, I will Espouse thee unto
me, in Justice and in Judgment, and in Kindness, and in Mercies. I will even
Espouse thee unto me in Faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.

But will thou more Particularly ponder on the Heartbreaking Tenders of thy
SAVIOR, who is now Espousing of thee! Oh! Hearken to them; And at the very
Moment when thy SAVIOR Tenders Himself with His Blessings to thee, reply unto
Him; O my SAVIOR, I Accept thee; Be thou unto me, such a SAVIOR. The Thing
admits of no Deliberation.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it: Shall I make thee One with me; so much One with me,
that in my Fulfilling of all Righteousness, and in my Rising from the Dead, and
in my Sitting in the Heavenly Places, and in my Receiving the Promises of GOD
for the Righteous, Thou shall be considered as with me in the doing of it. This
is according to what we read of the Believer; Romans XVI. 7. He is in CHRIST.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I bring thee to have my Father for thy Father?
This is according to what He speaks to the Believer; Joh. XX. 17. I ascend unto
my Father and your Father.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I invest thee with my Unsearchable Riches? Bring
thee to be a Joynt-Heir with me, and Inherit all things! This is according to
what He speaks to the Believer; Prove. VIII. 18. With me are durable Riches.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I Feed thee? Yea, Feast thee with Meat indeed,
with Drink indeed; With the Food of Angels? This is according to what we read
of the Believer; Rev. VII. 17. The Lamb shall feed them, and shall lead them
unto living fountains of Waters.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I Cloth thee with the Garments of Praise? Defend
thee with a Durable Clothing, and Adorn thee with a Covering of spangled
Robes, which are inlaid with Golds This is according to what we read of the
Believer; Rev. XIX. 8. Granted, to be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white;
the fine Linen of the Righteousness of the Saints.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I Instruct thee, Direct thee, Advise thee, and
help thee always to know the Things of thy Peace? This is according to what He
speaks to the Believer; Psalm. XXXII. 8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in
the way which thou shall go; I will guide thee with mine Eye.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I be a Shield unto thee, and shelter thee from
every thing that may threaten to injure thee? This is according to what He
speaks to the Believer; Zech. II. 8. He that touches you, touches the Apple
of mine Eye.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I dwell with thee, and make thee sensible that I
am near unto thee; and by the influences of my Grace render thee Fruitful unto
GOD; Zealous of Good Works, and Fruitful in them? This is according to what He
speaks to the Believer; Hos. XIV. 8. From me is thy fruit found.

Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I multiply the Expressions of my Love unto thee?
Shall I give thee to find that I have meant unto Good, all that occurs in my
Dispensations toward thee? Shall I Comfort thee under all thy Sorrows with
speaking of those Good Words unto thee, which will gladden an Heart s^ouping
with heaviness? This is according to what He speaks to the Believer; Jer. XXXI.
3. I have loved thee with an Everlasting Love: Therefore with Loving kindness
have I drawn thee.

Once more; Thy SAVIOR Offers it; Shall I bring thee into my Fathers House,
and the King bring thee into His Chambers, and then fill thee with Joy
Unspeakable and full of Glory, from wondrous, endless, inconceivable
demonstrations of my Love unto thee; and shall I give thee to enjoy all the
Spiritual Blessings of the Heavenly Places? This is according to what He speaks
to the Believer; Joh. XIV. 2. In my Fathers House there are many Mansions. I go
to prepare a Place for you.

O most Heart-melting Proposal! How Vicious, How Obdurate must be the Heart,
which will not hearken to it! The Heart which will not comply, like an Abigail,
when an Espousal unto a David was proposed unto her; Let me be Received among
the Servants of my Lord!

This brings on the Finishing Stroke.

Thirdly. Upon ONE WORD Heartily spoken in Compliance with the Offers of thy
SAVIOR, the Best Husband in the World is become Thine; Thy Espousal to thy
SAVIOR, is become Unquestionable. Thy SAVIOR saying, I would Marry my self
unto thee; Let thy Heart now speak that ONE WORD unto Him, Do it, O my SAVIOR!
It Is done immediately. The Echo's of Devotion to the proffers of the Espousal,
will settle the matter. We find such Echo's of Devotion; in Psalm. XXXVII. 8.
Seek ye my Face: On hearing this my Heart did speak to thee; Thy Face, O Thou
ETERNAL God, Thy Face now I will seek. Verily, GOD is not only Sought, but also
Found, by an Heart making such an Answer as that ONE WORD unto the Demands of
Piety. Thy SAVIOR offering to be Thine, and to make Thee His Own, Let thy
Heart answer this ONE WORD unto Him, O my SAVIOR, Be Thou unto me all that
thou do offer to be: Thou have now found Him, and art sure of Him.

That ONE WORD, the Hearty speaking whereof, will Espouse thee to thy SAVIOR,
and secure thy Eternal happiness; I will set before my Hearers the Dispositions
which it is to be spoke withal.

And, First; Shall not thy Mind be struck and filled with Admiration at the
Grace of thy SAVIOR; That ever such an One should say, I would Marry my self
unto thee! The Handmaid of the Lord said; Luke I. 43. Whence is this to me,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me! But how much more may thou say,
Whence is this to me, that my Lord and SAVIOR should Espouse Himself to me!
Who, Oh! Who is the LORD, that would Espouse Himself unto thee? A LORD, who is
Lord of Lords, and Lord of all! The LORD of Hosts; and One who has All Power in
Heaven and Earth given unto Him! A LORD, who is King of Kings, and the King of
Glory! A LORD, who is Worshipped by all the Angels, and who Humbles Himself to
behold the Things in the Heavens; What then, to Espouse Himself unto sorry
things upon Earth? Yea, a LORD who is Equal with GOD, and very GOD; No less
than the Being who is Over all, GOD Blessed forever. For such an One to say
unto us, I would Marry my self unto thee! O Peerless Goodness! O Matchless
Mercy! O Unparalled Condescension! But, then, who art Thou, O Despicable
Creature, who art Thou, That ever this Glorious LORD should Espouse thee unto
Him? A sorry, silly, sinful Creature! For such a Monarch to Marry such a
Beggar; One so wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked! For One
so Beautiful in all Perfections, to Marry one full of such loathsome
Infirmities, and shocking Deformities! For Him to see thee cast out unto the
Loathing of thy Person, and yet now be the Time of His Love unto thee! Oh! When
and where can we find a Parallel! Soul, Admire the Grace of thy SAVIOR. With
the Transports of an Admiring Soul, Cry out, O my SAVIOR, That ever Thou
should Espouse unto thy self, a foolish and a filthy Creature, worthy of
nothing but the utmost Abhorrence, and a Condemnation to a Devouring Fire, to
Everlasting Burnings! I am amazed! I am amazed!

Secondly; Though the Hearty speaking of ONE WORD, will Espouse thee to thy
SAVIOR, yet sensibly feel, yet sensibly own, thy self unable to speak that One
Word, until thy SAVIOR shall please to enable thee. The Faith, by which we
come into an Espousal to our SAVIOVR, has this very truly affirmed of it, It is
the Gift of GOD. Soul, If thou would have it given thee, the way is to count
it so. Would thou be Espoused unto thy SAVIOR? Thy SAVIOR must then hear
that cry from thee, Cant. I. 4. O Do Thou draw me. In the Day when thy SAVIOR
does Espouse thee, He must also Quicken thee. Thou art lying Dead in Trespasses
and Sins, putrefying in thy Sepulcher, when thy SAVIOR says, I would Marry my
self unto thee. Until He do Himself bring thee into the Life of GOD, and speak
a Word of Life into thee, thou art not fit for His Embraces. What can thou do
till He Quicken thee? The first Effect of thy Quickenning from Him, will be,
thy being made willing to be Espoused unto Him. Such is thy Corruption, such is
thy Malignity, such is the Enmity of thy Carnal Mind against thy SAVIOR, and
such an Aversion have thou for an Espousal unto Him, that though the speaking of
ONE WORD would bring it about, yet thou will never speak it, until He bring
thee to it, until He help thee to it. Lydia was not Espoused unto her SAVIOR,
until, The Lord opened the Heart of Lydia. Prostrate in the Dust, cry from
thence unto thy SAVIOR; O my SAVIOR, subdue my Will; give a New Heart unto
me; Let it be a Day of thy Power with me, that shall make me willing to be
Thine. I perish, I perish, if thou art not stronger than I, and if thou do not
prevail over me.

Lastly. A Word of CONSENT unto the Espousal propounded by thy SAVIOR; It Is
the Hearty speaking of that ONE WORD, that is now waited for, now urged for. Of
them, whom our SAVIOR does Espouse unto Himself, there is this Account; Psalm.
CX. 3. They are a Willing People. Now ONE WORD that shall really declare thee
to be One of that Willing People; upon the Proposal of thy SAVIOR, this ONE
WORD, I am Willing; This will determine all. O Soul Wooed by thy SAVIOR, Utter
that ONE WORD, Luke I. 38. Behold the Handmaid of the Lord; Be it unto me
according to thy Word. That ONE WORD, will possess thee of the Best Thing that
Heaven can give unto thee!

Thy SAVIOR has designs of Good upon thee. ONE WORD giving the Consent of thy
Soul, unto these Designs, does Espouse thee to Him. It was the Song; Isai. 26.
12. O Lord, Thou have wrought all our Works in us, and for us. Thy SAVIOR does
propound; Shall I do in thee and for thee, all the works that must be done, to
bring thee into Peace with GOD, and help thee to live unto Him? Heartily speak
that ONE WORD, O my SAVIOR, Do all thy Works about me! Thou art now Espoused
unto Him. Thy SAVIOR is made Wisdom and Righteousness and Holiness, and
Redemption, to those to whom He is Espoused. Heartily speak that ONE WORD; O my
SAVIOR, Be Thou all of this unto me! Thou art now brought into the Espousal.
Thy SAVIOR prepares and strengthens to do the will of GOD, those to whom He is
Espoused, working in them that which is well-pleasing in the sight of GOD.
Heartily speak that ONE WORD, O my SAVIOR, Do thou for me all of this! Thou
art now brought into the Espousal.

But then thy Resignation of thy self unto thy SAVIOR must accompany it. In
ONE WORD Resign thy self unto Him: Resolve to be His; Engage to be For Him and
not for another. Thy SAVIOR, willing to be Thine, does also propound This; Art
thou willing to be Mine? And now let that ONE WORD heartily come from thee;
Psalm. CXIX. 94. Lord, I am Thine, save me. The Point is gained. Yea, but in
this Act of Resignation there must and will be nothing less than thy very All
included. Resign thy Spirit unto Him, and say, O my SAVIOR, I desire that all
the Faculties of my Soul may be filled with thee, and used for thee. Resign thy
Body unto Him, and say, O my SAVIOR, I desire that my Earthly Tabernacle may
be a Temple for thee, and all the Organs of it, the Instruments of thy
Righteousness. Resign to Him all thy Possessions, all thy Capacities* and say,
O my SAVIOR, I desire that all my Talents may be ever employed according to
thy Direction, and for the service of thy Kingdom. All this is in that ONE
WORD, Lord, I am Thine. But Remember, Thou art as well to Renounce as to
Receive. Taking thy SAVIOR for thy Espoused Lord, all other Lords and Lovers
are to be shaken off: All Creatures to be abandoned. No more must any Creatures
be to thee, what is to be found in a Glorious CHRIST alone: And the Temptations
of Satan must be no longer hearkened unto. Thy Soul must now say, Lord, Other
Lords, even the Flesh, and the World, and the Devil, have had a dominion over
me; But now Thou only shall be my Lord and my God. Thy Language must be that;
Hos. XIV. 8. What have I any more to do with Idols?. This ONE WORD has tied the
Indissoluble Knot. Thou art without any more ado Espoused unto thy SAVIOR.

Finally; Thy SAVIOR makes His Demand upon thee, Prove. XXIII. 26. Give me thy
Heart. Speak now that ONE WORD, O my SAVIOR, I Give my Heart unto thee. Upon
this ONE WORD, there will come the Great Voice out of the Temple of Heaven from
the Throne, like that which is to come on another occasion, Saying, It is done!
It is done! Thou art the Soul, of which I may say, Rejoice over her, O ye
Heavens, for the Good that is done unto her. Thou art the Soul, to which there
is heard that Word from the Heavens, Arise, and shine, for thy Light is come,
and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee!

There was once a Marriage proposed, wherein the Person concerned, had it said
of him, Ruth. III. 18. The man will not be at rest, until he have finished the
thing this Day. The Mystical Marriage now proposed should have such a Dispatch
given to it. Oh! Be not at Rest, but on this very Day let the Thing be
Finished. Here, Here, if ever, Happy is the Wooing that is not long a doing! To
forward the matter, Oh! that these EXPOSTULATIONS may have their Efficacy!

Expost. I. The SAVIOR who so kindly stoups as to say, I Marry my self unto
you; Is He not a SAVIOR infinitely worthy to be Adored and Embraced!
Infinitely worthy to be with a Soul full of Loves, and Wonders, and Praises,
accepted of? What can there be Desirable in any Person, which you cannot see in
the Glorious Person, that now does be speak your Espousal to Him? Is He not
Fairer than the Children of Men; Yea, Altogether Lovely! Are there not all
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in Him? Is He not the Heir of all Things? Can
any thing be so Good as this Lamb of GOD! Oh! How Great is His Goodness, and
how Great is His Beauty! Is He not a Great Kings, whose Name is Venerable? Is
He not gone into Heaven, where He is on the Right Hand of GOD, Angels being
made subject unto Him! And is there any Number of His Armies? Is He not the SON
of GOD; and the Creator whom an Eternal Power and Godhead must be ascribed
unto? Has He not with a Condescension forever to be marvelled a^ already
Married Himself unto our Nature? Verily He took not on Him the Nature of
Angels; But He has taken our Nature, when He took the Man JESUS, to be One
Person with Himself. And Oh! the L^ve by which He has Commended Himself unto
us, in that while we were Sinners He has died for us! Ah! Perishing Soul; Has
thy SAVIOR so Loved thee, as to Give Himself for thee; And will thou not so
Love Him, as to Give Thy self to Him? Has the Love of thy SAVIOR to Thee been
Strong as Death; made Him willing to Dye for thee? And have thou not so much
Love to Him, as will make thee willing to Live with Him? How, How can thou
Resist the Overtures that such a Glorious Lord makes for thy Espousal to Him!

Expost. II. Will it not be a Joy unto the Heart of your SAVIOR, to see you
Espoused unto Him? Of Solomon we read, Cant. III. 11. He was Crowned, (A Crown
on the Head of the Bridegroom, was of Old one of the Matrimonial Ceremonies,)
in the Day of his Espousals, and in the Day of the Gladness of his Heart. Soul,
May this be the Day of thy Espousal to thy SAVIOR, 'twil be the Day of the
Gladness of His Heart. Oh! The Satisfaction with which thy SAVIOR will say
upon it! Now do I see the Travail of my Soul, and what my Blood has purchased!
Now do I see another added unto the Children of GOD, and unto the Number of
them that shall be saved! Now is my Father Glorified, and I have one Object
more for me to do Good unto; the Good in the doing whereof my Delight is
Infinite! And now, will not thy Heart have a Share in the Gladness! Oh! Give
thy self unto thy SAVIOR, This Hour! This Hour! 'Twill be the Best Hour that
ever thou saw! The Hour, that will bring thee into a State, that will see a
Succession of none but Good Things for Eternal Ages.

Expost. III. Can you Comprehend the Blessedness, which your Espousal, to your
SAVIOR will bring you to? No; It Is Incomprehensible. O Soul Espoused unto thy
SAVIOR, How Enriched art thou in the Enjoyment of a SAVIOR, who Lives for
ever, and Whose Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, and who does according to
His Will, in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth! A
SAVIOR to whom are due those Doxologies; Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and
the Power, and the Glory; For all that is in Heaven, and in the Earth, is
Thine: Both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou Reignest over all! Art
thou not now Espoused unto a SAVIOR, with whom thou will have that Portion; 2
Pet. I. 4. Exceeding Great and Precious Promises? It Is a SAVIOR who will be a
Sun and Shield for those that are Espoused unto Him; will give Grace, and give
Glory to them, and withhold no Good Thing from those to whom He has Espoused
Himself. If the LORD Himself be Thine, what need of any more to fix thee in the
most assured, the most Finished Blessedness? An All sufficient GOD is He, whom
thou art Espoused unto: And thou may sing at that rate; The LORD is my
Portion; I have a goodly Heritage! Truly, Thou art Espoused unto a SAVIOR, who
is Able to Do for thee, far beyond all that thou can Ask or Think. But having
Espoused Himself unto thee, will He not be as Willing as He is Able to do for
thee! Oh! What will He do for thee! What will He do! All Words are swallowed
up. What He will do? It Is Unutterable! It Is Unutterable! Oh! What Mavelous
Loving Kindness will He show thee, in the Strong City that He will bring thee
to!

Expost. IV. Upon your Espousal to your SAVIOR, what Exultations, what
Acclamations will there be among the Angels of GOD? If it be as we read, Luke
XV. 10. There is Joy in the presence of the Angels of GOD, over one Sinner that
Repents: Be sure, the Espousal of a Soul unto GOD, must produce a Joy among
His Angels. It Is the Repenting Sinner, that is Espoused by our SAVIOR. The
Angels of GOD are Spectators of what is done for the Espousal of a Soul unto
their Lord; and the Witnesses of the Transaction that is carried on. O Soul
Espoused unto thy SAVIOR, Thou art a Spectacle to Angels. And, Oh! What a
Gladsome Spectacle! Upon the view of thy Closure with thy SAVIOR, the
Morning-Stars will sing together, and the Sons of GOD will shout for Joy. An
Epithalamium will be heard among them, of that Importance, Glory to GOD in the
Highest; for the Good Will now passing between Him, and the Children of Men!

And, O Thou Spouse of the Almighty KING, How ready will the bright Angels be,
to act in Ministrations for such an Heir of Salvation! Always on the Wing to do
thee Good Offices! With what Alacrity will they attend thee, Befriend thee,
Carry thee in both Hands like tender Nurses, and be thy Guardians? Will such a
Thought as this, do nothing with thee? How much will thou then deserve to be a
Prey to Devils? Yea, Thou shall become a Prey to the Terrible Ones; a Lawful
Captive to them.

Expost. V. Is there no Danger in the Delay of such a Matter, as your Espousal
to your SAVIOR? Your SAVIOR does insist upon a speedy Answer, a present
Answer; He is upon those Terms with you; Heb. III. 7. To Day if ye will hear
His Voice. O Soul under the Invitations of a SAVIOR; It Is insisted on, Will thou NOW, this very Day, come into an Espousal to thy SAVIOR? Yea, Do thou
at this Moment, I say, At this Moment! Give thy self up unto thy SAVIOR, and
say, O my SAVIOR, Take Possession of me! Certainly, There is nothing more
Uncertain to thee, than the Time of thy Departure out of this World. Thou may
say, I know not the Day of my Death. But if the Dark Day come upon thee, before
thou art Espoused unto thy SAVIOR, how forlorn, how undone art thou! How can
thou escape those Hands, which it will be a fearful thing to fall into? Or,
suppose thou may yet have Goods laid up here for many Years; To put off a
Compliance with a SAVIOR, who does Beseech thee to be Espoused unto Him, and
be Reconciled unto GOD, will not this Dilatory trifling in a Thing of such
Concernment, Grieve and Vex His Holy Spirit, and provoke Him to Depart from
you? But, Oh! Woe unto them, if I depart from them, says the Lord! There will
be nothing done to purpose, in thy Espousal to thy SAVIOR; but thou will be
Damned unto Eternal Blindness and Hardness; and go on under a Spirit of
Slumber, unto a Damnation that Slumbers not.

Expost. VI. If you will not give a Right and a Fit Answer to the Motion which
your SAVIOR makes of your Espousal to Him, I Pray, think on some Answer to an
Awful Question, with which I am now to come upon you; An Awful Question, which
indeed all the Angels in Heaven can give no Answer to! It Is that Awful Question,
Heb. II. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so Great Salvation? I must say
unto you; See that ye refuse not him that speaks. For, if you Refuse an
Espousal unto a SAVIOR, who does now solicit for it, what can you expect,
when He shall be Revealed from Heaven, with His mighty Angels, in Flaming Fire,
to take Vengeance on them that obey not His Gospel? Yea, If you Refuse and
Rebel, you shall be devoured, by that Fiery Indignation of GOD which is to
Devour His Adversaries; The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it For you to think
on the inexpressible Glories, whereto our SAVIOR will then advance those whom
He has Espoused unto Himself; and feel your selves banished into intolerable
Torments, with the Devils to whom you would now rather give your selves than to
your SAVIOR: But then to think, My seasonable speaking of ONE WORD would have
saved me from all of this! Oh! The Regret, Oh! The Remorse, Oh! the
Unsufferable Anguish, that your F^rsaken Souls must be thrown into! Oh! Think;
What shall I do, when the SAVIOR whom I now refuse, rises up and comes down,
and when the GOD whose Visits of Love I now refuse, does Visit in His Wrath,
What shall I answer Him?

Expost. VII. O Our YOUNG PEOPLE, Can it be Too soon, for you to come into an
Espousal unto our SAVIOR? Too soon for you to become United unto Him, who
sends this Message unto you, I Love them that Love me, and they that seek me
Early shall find me? Our SAVIOR said unto some; Jer. II. 2. I remember thee,
the kindness of thy Youth, the Love of thine Espousals. Oh! That our YOUNG
PEOPLE may be prevailed withal, in their Youth, to have a Kindness for their
SAVIOR, and be drawn by His Love into an Espousal unto Him! Child, Thy SAVIOR
puts it unto thee; Art thou willing to be mine? Reply to Him, Lord, I am Thine!
O make me willing to be Thine! Thy SAVIOR will say upon it, O my Dove, I hear
thy Voice, and sweet is thy Voice unto me!

A very Prudent Constitution once made in the Low Countries, That none should
be Married, until they could recite all the Answers in the Catechism used in
the Churches there, produced as Well-Catechized a People as ever was in the
World. Oh! How well would it be for Thousands of Souls, if they would order it
for Themselves, Never to Marry any one until they are first Espoused unto their
SAVIOR!

Such of you as are not yet Married unto a Neighbor; yea, Such of you as are
not of the Age for Marriage; How Wisely, How Jus^ly, How Reasonably would it be
done of you, to take up this Purpose; I will be first Married unto my SAVIOR,
before I will allow any other Marriage to be talked of! It may be, if you so
S^ught first the Kingdom of GOD, you might have Other Things added unto you, in
better Circumstances. This then is the Demand with which I come unto you; Jer.
3. 4. Will thou not from this time cry unto me, My Father, Thou art the Guide
of my Youth? In becoming thy Husband, O Soul, He becomes the Guide of thy
Youth. With a Consenting Soul, Now Oh! make Him so!

I have done.

And now, a Soul come into an Espousal with a Lovely SAVIOR, most certainly
will above all things desire and study to Please Him. O Soul Espoused unto the
SON of GOD, By this Mark, Thou shall know that thou art so; Know that thou art
passed from Death to Life. There will nothing in this World so powerfully deter
thee from every thing that the Light of GOD in thee shall condemn as an Evil
thing, as this, My SAVIOR will be offended at it! Nothing will be unto thee
such a powerful incentive and persuasive to Patient continuance in all
well-doing, as this, My SAVIOR will be gratified with it!

Yea, The Espousal will oblige thee, to press after the most Consummate Union
with thy SAVIOR, and thou will never be at ease in thy mind, until thou art
entirely ONE with thy SAVIOR; ONE in Will, ONE in Aim, ONE in Interest; until
thou feel the Blood of thy SAVIOR warming thee into a Resemblance of His
Holiness in all manner of Conversation, and running warm in thy Veins; until
thy SAVIOR become All in All unto thee, and thou being Dead with Him, and unto
every thing but Him, HE ONLY shall be thy Life; the Strength of thy Heart, and
thy P^rtion for ever.

Oh! May such Glorious Seize, be more aspired unto!

A COROLLARY.
BUT it will be a very proper Thing to make an Improvement of the ESPOUSAL
between our SAVIOR and His People, for the Direction of Persons in the Married
State, what should be their Carriage toward one another in it.

When the Gracious ENDS for which the Married State is Instituted, have come
into an Enumeration, the Servants of GOD have demanded a Room for this; To be a
Lively Exhibition of the Union between our SAVIOR and His People. It is
impossible for Married Persons, more compendiously and more effectually to
consult their own Welfare, and make their Yoke easy and pleasant unto them,
than by perpetual endeavors to Exhibit what passes between a Glorious CHRIST,
and the Church, whereof He says, I Marry my self unto it.

And indeed, the Crime of Adultery [I have seen an Horrible Thing, says the
Lord!] has in this thing a very singular Aggravation. As it is the blackest and
vilest Injustice that can be committed, and a most Flagrant Perjury violating a
most solemn Oath of GOD; So it is an abominable Breach upon that Conformity to
the Union between our SAVIOR and His People, where of Marriage is Ordained for
an Exhibition. Shall not I visit for such Things, says the Lord, and shall not
my Soul he avenged on the Married, who do such Things? Indeed, though some
Countries make it Capital, yet for the most part, An Evil and Adulterous
Generation so prevails, that the Crime rarely meets with any due Punishment
among the Children of Men, But GOD will not let this wickedness of them who
forget the Hand joined in Hand, go unpunished. It Is mavelous to see, how
Adultery is punished by the more immediate Providence of a Holy and a Righteous
GOD, who of all the secret Wickedness, I know it, and am a Witness of it, says
the Lord! The Criminals are pursued in their Estate. A Fire, one can scarce
imagine, How, does Consume their Increase. They are followed with one strange
Impoverishment after another upon them. They are punished in their Offspring.
The Hope of their Family is cut off by praemature Mortality; or Lives to
consume their Eyes and grieve their Hearts. They are punished, with a wounding
dishonor on their Name, and a Reproach that is never to be wiped away. Into
what a Bed of Tribulation, does the LORD, who says of such Things, I hate them!
by'nd by throw these Malefactors! Their Hearts are first prodigiously Hardened;
but afterward they fall into Terrors of GOD. Anon, with and from the Impure
Flames that were ever glowing in them here, they go down to Eternal Burnings.
Behold the Justice of Heaven in all of this. The Affront given to a Glorious
CHRIST, in the Crime, is enough to procure all of this; Great Plagues and of
long continuance.

The Principal Direction for a Good Carriage in the Married State is that; Ephesians.
V. 24, 25. As the Church is subject unto CHRIST, so let Wives be unto their own
Husbands, in every Thing. Husbands, Love your Wives even as CHRIST also has
loved the Church. I do not stay upon the Observation, That the Duty of the Wife
is here, as elsewhere prescribed before that of the Husband; Because there may
be more of Difficulty in Her Duty than in His; And, Because His cheerful doing
of His Duty, will very much depend upon Her doing of Hers. But this I observe;
The most Comprehensive prescription that can be given, for the Duties of the
Married State, is in this One Word; Conform to what passes between the Blessed
JESUS, and His Espoused People. Of Enoch we read, He walked with GOD, and he
begat Sons and Daughters. The Married, who continually Think, What passes
between my SAVIOR, and the Church, which having Loved as His own He Loves unto
the End? -- These Walk with GOD in their Marriage, and through their Pilgrimage.
Here, Here is an admirable sense of Marrying in the Lord; Even to Marry with an
Eye unto what passes between the LORD, and His Beloved; and Regulate the whole
Conduct of the Married Life, with an Imitation of it. And where is the Wit,
that can soar high enough, Ad Enarrandam Faelicitatem hujus Matrimonii; to
tell, what an Happy Pair it is that is United in such a Marriage!

Many Counsils have been given, and should be taken for a good Carriage in the
Married State; but this is the chief of them all, and they are all most
curiously Summed up in this, and the Work is cut short in Righteousness with
it. My Friends, Consider how your SAVIOR treats His Church; consider how the
Church treats her SAVIOR; and Conform unto it; Oh! Treat one another
accordingly.

Having left with you this ONE Admonition of the Lord, I need say no more; It
will be enough if I consign the work of applying it, over to another Preacher,
which is always attending upon you. CONSCIENCE hearkened unto, will do the
rest. CONSCIENCE, Do thine Office.

Let the HUSBAND often consider; How does my SAVIOR Love His Church, and
Receive it, and Value it, as the precious Gift of His Father to Him!

With what a Favorable Eye does my SAVIOR Look on His Church, and what a
Fellowship with Him does He bring her to!

What Gifts does my SAVIOR present His Church withal; Above all Giving Himself
unto her!

Is not He always Doing something or other to Testify His Love unto her? Yea,
what is there that He is not willing to Do for her? He has even Died for her.

How kindly does my SAVIOR speak unto His Church! Good words, Comfortable
words!

How careful is my SAVIOR, to provide for His Church, all that may be needful
and useful for her!

How full of Compassion is my SAVIOR to His Church, in all the Distresses that
come upon her!

How notably does my SAVIOR appear to plead the cause of His Church, when
Harms are like to be done unto her!

What means does my SAVIOR use for His Church, that she may have the knowledge
which may be for her Advantage, and her Ornament?

If my SAVIOR see any Thing in His Church, that it were to be wished were
otherwise, how wisely, how kindly with what Suitable Remedies does He pursue
the Healing of it? And how does His Love cover a multitude of Sins?

Above all, How much does my SAVIOR make it His Concern, that His Church may
be full of God; Filled with all the Fullness of God?

Now, go do likewise.

Let the WIFE often consider.

How does the CHURCH Love her SAVIOR! None in all the World so dear unto her!

How loathe is the CHURCH to Be or to Do any thing that may be grievous, to her
SAVIOR? How grieved if any thing in her have been so?

But, Oh! the Pleasure that she takes in every thing that gratifies Him!

How ready is the CHURCH, to comply with the will of her SAVIOR? Delighting to
do thy will, O God!

What Contentment has the CHURCH, with whatever Condition her SAVIOR does
order for her?

How tender is the CHURCH of what belongs unto her SAVIOR? what her tenderness
for all that He sets a value on!

In-fine; If the CHURCH has entertained any Jealousy, about the Love that her
SAVIOR bears unto her, and said, My God has forgotten me; how ready is she
anon to see her error in it!

Now go do likewise.

A Marriage carried on, with such a Regard unto the Second Adam in it; what a
Rare Course is herein taken, to abate, and prevent, much of the Curse, which
every Marriage in this World, is likely to be more or less Encumbred and
Embittered withal! What a Rare Course is taken, that instead of cause to have
it said, It is Good that a Man should not touch a Marriage, it shall still hold
Good, It is not Good for Man to be alone!

What a rare course is taken that the Marriage may have all the Gracious Ends
of it answered! Yea, What Miracles will be wrought in and for a Marriage which
thus has the presence of our JESUS at it! By such PIETY, My Friends, you will
also prepare your selves for that Higher State in which they Marry not, nor are
given in Marriage, but are Equal to the Angels of GOD.

Jer. XXXI. 32. I was an Husband unto them, says the Lord.
FINIS.

