Vicious Courses, Procuring POVERTY Described and Condemned. A Lecture SERMON,
Preached at Boston, Feb. 19. 1718, 19.

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston, N. E.

Prove. 23.20, 21. Be not among wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh.
For the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty; and drowziness shall
cloth a man with rags. Prove. 24.30, 31. I went by the field of the slothful
and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding; and lo it was all grown
over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down. Boston, Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at
the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill. 1719.

(...) Order of (...), the GOVERNOR.

Vicious COURSES Procuring Poverty.
Prove. 6.11. So shall thy Poverty come, as one that travelleth; and thy want as
an armed man.
SIN is the worst of all Evils, it provokes God, and hurts men. Whosoever Sins
against. GOD, wrongs his own Sout. Sin deserves Endless Judgments in the future
World, and often procures many miseries in the present Life. And among the
miseries of the present life, pinching Poverty, mentioned in our Text, is one;
and it is mentioned as a fruit of Sloth and Laziness. v. 6. Go to the Ant thou
Sluggard; consider her ways and be wise. The Ants use diligence, and observe
the proper time and season to provide their food; herein their example is
worthy to be imitated by men. v. 9. How long will thou sleep, O Sluggard? This
is a sharp reproof to the Lazy and Slothful, who indulge Sleeping, when they
should be Working. Such lazy persons are supposed to say, as v. 10. Yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. No,
thinks the Lazy Drone, I will not rise yet, I Will lie till the Clock strikes once
more; I Will lie a while and take the other Nap. Thus he indulges himself in sloth,
in needless sleep and 'drowziness; when he should be working for a Livelihood.
And what is the fruit and issue of such a lazy Course? Why, Pinching Poverty, as
our Text declares: So shall thy poverty come, as one that travelleth; and thy
want as an armed man. Such a lazy course tends as directly to bring pinching
poverty, as a steady pace tends to bring a Traveller to his Journeys end. Yea,
to the lazy and slothful, pinching distressing want will come as an armed man;
there is no avoiding, withstanding, or resisting it. The same words in our Text,
and the preceding verse, viz. a little sleep, a little stumber, etc. are
repeated, Prove. 24.33, 34. So that the Holy Ghost by the Pen of Solomon, even
twice over in the same words, inculcates this consideration, viz. That
sluggishness brings Poverty.

The words may fairly afford us this general Observation, viz.

DOCTRINE.
There are Sinful Courses, which directly tend to bring persons to miserable,
pinching poverty. There are degrees of Poverty. Some are poor negatively, that
is, they are not rich, have not such plenty and abundance, as some of their
Neighbors have. Yet possibly by God's Blessing on their prudent diligent
Labors, they want neither Food nor Raiment convenient for them.

Again, Others are very poor, are not able to provide themselves a comfortable
Dwelling, nor comfortable Food or Raiment; but as to what they can do
themselves, they are in pinching flraits, wants, necessities. It Is this sort of
Poverty, that seems to be specially intended in our Text. This Poverty is very
distressing, and too often puts persons on wicked practices. Prove. 30.9. Lest I
be poor and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain

Again, We may consider, This Poverty is not a Sin, but a misery. In its self
considered, it is no Sin to be poor. Though the Foxes had holes, and the Birds
of the air had nests, yet our Holy Redeemer had not where to lay his head. Mat.
8.20. Though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor. 2 Cor. 8.9. So the
precious Saints of God, of whom the world is not worthy; are sometimes poor in
this world, though rich in faith. Jam. 2.5. They Are sometimes destitute,
afflicted, tormented, (Heb. 11.37.) naked, and destitute of daily food. Jam.
2.15. We read of the poor Saints at Jerusalem; and of the necessity of the
Saints. Romans 12.13. and 15.26. Yea, it is possible, persons may sometimes come
to pinching poverty; yet not for any particular, remarkable Sin or fault of
their own, that men know of. Consider Job's poverty. It may be in many
Instances of Poverty, it may be said as of the man born blind. Joh. 9.3.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his Parents. That is, no particular,
remarkable Sin beyond what all generally are guilty of, has brought the
affliction. Their poverty may possibly be occasioned, by some long illness,
weakness, or lameness of body; by Fire consuming what they had; by Storms
wasting their Substance by Sea or Land; or by the failing or falseness of those
who had the main part of their Estates in their hands; or their Estates may be
taken away by Thieves, Robbers, Pirates, open Enemies, or Persecutors, who
spoil them of their Goods. Heb. 10.34. When Persons are Impoverished by such
ways as these, they are not to be blamed for, but rather pitied and relieved
in, their affliction.

But notwithstanding these things, yet very often vicious wicked practices, do
evidently and directly bring pinching Poverty on persons; and they well deserve
sharp rebuke for those practices. Well,

Q. What are those sinful Courses, which directly tend to bring persons to
miserable pinching Poverty?

Answ. I Will mention some.

1. Sloth and Laziness. This is the Vice, which our Text more immediately
refers to. God has made both our Bodies and Souls, we should glorify him with
both, 1 Cor. 6.20. All our powers and abilities, should be employed as God
directs. God does not give us Talents, to be wrapped up in a Napkin, out to be
employed in his Service. Our Hands were not made, merely to be folded up in
Sleeping, but to be employed in Working. Adam while Innocent, was put into the
Garden, to dress and keep it. Genesis 2.15. Note by the way, Innocence and
Idleness cannot dwell together. If man would have his Bread, he must then Work
for it in the sweat of his Brows, and that as long as he lives, even till he
returns to the Ground. Genesis 3.19 The Sun arises, man goes forth to his work,
and to his labor until the evening. Psrl. 104.22, 23. The day then, is to be
spent in Labor, not in Laziness. How plain are those words? Exodus 20.9. Six
days shall thou labor, and do all thy work. Surely then the slothful Servant,
is a wicked Servant. Mat. 25.26. Study to be quiet, and to do your own
business, and to work with your hands as we commanded you, that ye may have
lack of nothing. 1 These. 4.11, 12. Here Is a plain command of God, that persons
should do their own business, should work with their own hands, to supply their
own wants. 2 These. 3.10. This we commanded you, that if any would not work,
neither should he eat. Those who are unwilling to work, are unworthy to eat. We
should Work as well as Pray, for our daily bread; and should be, not slothful
in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Romans 12.11. Those honest
and diligent in lawful business, by God's blessing, commonly get a comfortable
Support for themselves and theirs; and are also able to give to him that
needs. Ephesians. 4. 28. But Laziness, Idleness, does as it were directly,
naturally, necessarily lead to Poverty. Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor, that
deals with a slack hand: but the diligent hand makes rich. Prove. 20.13. Love
not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou shall be
satisfied with Bread. Prove. 23.21. Drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags. By
much slothfulness, the building decays; and through Idleness of the hands, the
house droppeth throngh. Eccles. 10.18. It Is plain from the Word of God, from
the light of reason, from the natural tendency of second causes, from
experience and observation; that Sloth and Idleness tend to bring plaching
poverty. Therefore it is very wicked, to be lazy and idle; whether persons have
Estates or not, they should be diligently employed in some lawful business,
tending to promote the glory of God, and good of Mankind. None should indulge
Idleness, neither Rich nor Poor, Young nor Old, Men nor Women, though it is not
necessary that all should be employed in the same business. God will call all
to to an account, how they employed their time and abilities, whether as he
commanded them or not.

A Grave Author ( Durham on the Commands, Octavo, p 341.) says, When God gives
men ability of body on mind, it is sad that they should be useful for nothing,
nor active in any thing but to Sin, and be snares and reproaches to Christians,
and Christian Religion, as all idle persons, bearing the name of Christians,
are, whoever they be, whether Gentlemen, or others.

Idleness is called, Master omnium vitiorum et Noverca omnium virtutum; that
is, the Mother of all Vices, and the Stepmother of all Virtues.

Indeed Idleness is a breach of God's Law, it is contrary to the plain Precepts
of Christianity, it dishonours the Christian Religion, provokes God, gratifies
the Devil, hurts men as to their Bodies and Souls, their Persons and Families;
and so hurts the Public too on various accounts. Yet many indulge Idleness,
they are so lazy or proud, or both, that they will not work. Pride and Idleness,
were two of the Sins of Sodom. Ezekiel. 16.49. Are there not many, so poor, that
they want necessaries; and yet will not stoop to do this or that inferior
laborious sort of work, no, they scorn it? Possibly they will Beg or Steal,
rather than do it. If their Particular Trade fails, possibly they will think,
they have a warrant to be Idle; and will not turn their hand to other business; or
if they cannot have their full price, they will rather be Idle than work for mean
Wages But their Pride and Sloth are abominable to God, and ought to be abhorred
by men.

So, some are so proud, fond and foolish, that they will not let their Children go
out to Service, to be used to business, earn their Living; no, they will rather
keep 'em at home, or playing in the Streets, training 'em up in Ignorance,
Idleness, Hunger and Nakedness. Are there not too many Instances of this? Some
Parents are so proud and fond, that they had rather their Children, Daughters
especially, should want necessaries' at home; than go to Service, where they
might learn more, be better. and live better on all accounts. Such Pride and
Fondness are hateful in Parents; and unspeakably hurtful to their Children. For
this bringing up Children in Ignorance, Pride, Idleness, eminently fits them
for the Devil's Service; it often leads to Lying, Stealing, Fornication,
Drunkenness, and various sorts of wickedness.

Well, since Idleness is thus wicked and pernicious, surely diligence in lawful
business is a Virtue, and those exemplary for it, are so far praiseworthy.
Prove. 22.29. See thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before
Kings, he shall not stand before mean men. So, those are praiseworthy, who
bring up their Children in the good knowledge of Religion, and diligently
employed in proper business. For Children should be trained up in the way,
wherein they should go, Prove. 22.6. If you would not have them live like lazy,
useless Drones when grown up; then don't Educate them so, while they are young.

'Twould also be praiseworthy, to study, contrive, and promote some methods
for Employing the poor, even Men, Women, and Children; that if they want
business, they may be set on work, and may eat their own bread. 2 These. 3.12.
It Is a better Service to God and men, to employ the poor, that they may get
their own Living than to supply them by Alms in their Sloth and Laziness.

2. Intemperance. This also is one sinful method, which leads directly to
pinching Poverty. Alas, how many sorrowful Instances are there, which are plain
proof, of this? Inspired Solomon says, Prove. 23.20 21. Be not amongst
Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh. For the Drunkard and the Glutton
shall come to poverty. Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure, shall be a poor
man: he that loves wine and oil, shall not be rich. When persons will indulge
themselves in Pleasures and Pastimes, in eating and drinking of the best, the
most pleasant and delicious though very costly, as though nothing less would serve
their turn; this directly tends to bring pinching poverty. The Prodigal Son,
wasted his Substance with riotous living; and became so poor, that he would
gladly have filled his belly with hogs-meat, if he could, Luke 15.13, 16.
Persons should eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.
Eccles. 10.17. When persons indulge themselves in eating and drinking to
excess, this tends to destroy their bodily Health, to waste their Estates, to
bring them into pinching straits and wants, to make them unable to provide for
themselves and Families unable to pay their Debts, unable to do what they ought
to support both Church and State. When they indulge Intemperance, it unfits
them to serve either God or men; it commonly dulls, weakens, stupifies their
natural abilities, both of body and mind. Hos. 4.11. Whoredom, and Wine, and
new wine take away the heart. What an heap of mischiefs, does this Sin procure?
Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? Who has contentions? Who has bablings? Who has
wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at the
wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Alas, no tongue can fully tell, the Sins
and mischiefs proceeding from Drunkenness. When persons are heated and inflamed
with strong drink, how often do they set their mouths against the heavens, and
their tongues walk through the earth? Psalm. 73.9. How often do they abound in
profane Oaths and Curses? How often do they talk about, and condemn persons and
things which don't concern them? How often are they filthy, unclean in their
words and actions. How often do they jangle, quarrel, fight, both give and
receive wounds without cause? Indeed, numberless are the mischiefs proceeding
from Intemperance. It is an old saying, Plures gula quam gladio pereunt, more
die by Intemperance, than by War. Drunkards have a Woe denounced against them by
God. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them. Isa. 5.11.
Isa. 28.1. Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim! Drunkards shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. (1 Cor 6.9, 10.) therefore their case is wofub indeed.
Intemperance tends to ruin persons in this World, and damn them eternally in
the next; therefore it is unspeakably vile and wicked, for any to indulge
themselves in this Vice. Among the Heathen, some have purposely made their
Slaves drunk, that their Children seeing them in that worse than beastly
posture and condition, might be warned and cautioned against the Vice of
Drunkenness. As for Drunkards, how often is shameful spuing on them? Hab. 2.16.
It Is abominable for any to eat and drink to excess, though possibly they don't
do it to that degree, as to set them a vomiting like Dogs, or wallowing like
Swine in their own filth. Isa. 5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine
and men of strength to mingle strong drink. If they have strung heads, and can
bear much without reeling and staggering; yet if they drink to excess, more
than is for bodily health, then there is a Woe from God denounced against them;
they abuse God's Creatures to gratify their lusts; their God is their belly,
they glory in their shame. Some look on Drunkenness, as a breach of all the Ten
Commandments; because it tends to make persons break every one of them. Since
Intemperance is so vile and base, and makes men on some accounts viler than the
beasts; since it provokes God, and gratifies the Devil; since it hurts the
Body, the Credit, the Estates, the Families, the Souls of persons; since it is
so, surely it must needs be foolish and sinful, for persons to company together
merely to tipple, and trifle away precious time.

Here I might propose a few Quaeries, Viz.

1. Is it not vile and wicked, for any ( Town Dwellers especially) when they
have no real business or occasion for it, to get together to Taverns, Tippling
Houses, and there spend several hours together, possibly whole Evenings, and
till late at night, if not great part of the day too; I say, is not this vile,
shameful, wicked? Surely it is. Taverns were not appointed for Town-Dwellers to
laze, and tipple, to sot and doze in; but for Strangers and Cravellers, who
being distant from home, must seek elsewhere for Lodging, Food and drink that
are needful for them. When Town-Dwellers, indulge themselves in such a needless
haunting of Taverns; to me it seems, that their Consciences are asleep, (if not
seared with an hot iron. 1 Timothy 4.2.) or misguided and erronions, else they
would severely sting, lash and wound them for such practices. Is this practice,
a minding of things that are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good
report? Phil. 4.8. What, is needless haunting of Taverns a thing of good
report, is there any virtue or praise in it? Is this practice, an abstaining
from all appearance of evil, as we are commanded to do? 1 These. 5.22. Do these
practices fit persons for the better Serving of God or men? Do they bring glory
to God, or good to men? Do they bring honor to the Christian Religion; or
well-grounded peace to their own Consciences; or due preparedness for Death and
Judgment? Surely no, none of these things. Again,

2. Is it not vile, that persons can scarce make a Bargain, make up Accounts,
Pay or Receive a little Money; but that they must needs go to a Tavern, and
Solemnize the Matter as it were, by swallowing down Strong Drink; though possibly
neither the time of day, nor state of their Bodies, calls for any such thing?
Cannot Tradesmen finish or bring home a piece of Work, but must almost think
themselves wronged, if they are not treated with Strong Drink?

3. Is it not vile and wicked, for persons to tempt and prompt others to drink
to excess; and think they can scarce make them welcome, if they don't make
them drunk? It Is criminal to make others (or our selves either) sick with
bottles of wine, those who are so, commonly Stretch out their hands with
Scorners. Hos. 7.5. Yet how often are many made Sick, disordered, discomposed,
inflamed with Wine, yea and with Rum and Brandy also, and what they mix with
it? How many bottles, how many quarts are often spent in excess? God is the
giver of Corn, Wine, Oil, of all the Creature Comforts we enjoy; now to prepare
these for Baal, (Hos. 2.8.) or abuse 'em to excess, to the gratifying of our
lusts; Oh how vile is it! And if we do make our selves Sick, disorder and
Inflame our selves with excess; no wonder if we stretch out our hands with
scorners; no wonder if we become guilty of various follies. How common is it,
for persons to transgress by Wine? Hab. 2.5. They also have erred through wine,
and through strong drink are out of the way. Isa. 28.7. Wine is a mocker, strong
drink is raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise. When persons
are enraged with strong drink, what wickedness is there almost, which they are
not ready to commit? Therefore it must needs be vile, for persons to prompt or
tempt one another to drink to excess. When persons will get into Gangs, or
Clubs, and have their appointed Meetings (whether in Taverns or Private Houses)
chiefly if not merely, to Swill and Drink more than is needful for their
Health; Oh how vile is this? How provoking to God, how pleasing to the Devil,
how ruining to their Souls, and stupifying to their Consciences? What account
will they give of this, when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, and render to every one according to his deeds? Romans 2.6, 16. Woe is to
those, who indulge Intemperance in themselves, or prompt others to it. Hab.
2.15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to
him, and make him drunkea also. Possibly some will count this good
fellowship; but really and truly it is damning wickedness, I say, it is damning
wickedness; it is in a sort, a murdering both the Bodies and Souls of our
Neighbors, for it tends to destroy both. Again,

4. Is it not vile and wicked, for Tavern-Keepers, Inn-holders, merely for
their own gain, to suffer their neighbors unseasonably, and needlesty to spend
their time and money with them? And is it not still a more aggravated crime to
suffer this, when they know that the Families of such Neighbors do pinch and
suffer, for want of what is thus wickedly guzled away? Is it not vile and
wicked for any (whether Inn. holders or Retailers) to Sell Strong Drink to the
Poor and Vicious, when they know that they don't really need it; and that their
Families want Necessaries at the same time? When Drink-sellers do thus, are
they not partakers of other men's Sins, and shall they not be partakers of their
plagues? 1 Timothy 5.22. Rev. 18.4. Is this practice agreeable to those Scriptures.
Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; but rather
reprove them. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not have thy Brother in thine heart, thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbors; and shall not suffer Sin upon him. Or
as some read it, that thou bear not Sin for him. When persons thus gain money
by selling Drink, to the known wrong and prejudice of others; don't they gain
the wrath and ourse of God with it? Are they not instrumental of hurting and
ruining their Neighbors, and their Families; while they greedily thirst after
such unjust, unrighteous gain? Alas, What stupify'd Consciences have those, who
can thus Indulge their Neighbors in Sin; to the great and evident hurt of
themselves and Families?

Let any one who believes the Holiness of God, the truth of the Scriptures, and
the strict and awful account to be given in the Day of Judgment; I say, let any
such a one judge, whether these practices now mentioned, are not vile, wicked,
and abominable. Will the plea's and reasonings used for these practices; avail
any thing before the awful Tribubunal of the Holy and Glorious God, who cannot
be deceived, and will not be mocked?

5. Since Intemperance is so Impoverishing, so many ways hurtful and
pernicious: should not all possible conscientious care be taken, that Licenses
for Tavern-keeping and Retailing, be not needlessly multiplied? Those empowered
to act in these matters, must give an account to God for what they do in it. If
they will evidently endanger the Public Good, for the gratifying a particular
Friend, or Importunate Petitioner; they will be guilty before God for doing it.
If persons fail in their Trade or Business, must the next thing be, a License
to Sell Drink? Does not this method of Supporting one Family, too often ruin
several? Let an understanding, serious Conscience, well regulated by the Word
of God; make its Judgment of these things. I now proceed to another head.

3. Pride and Extravagancy, tend directly to prinching Poverty. When persons in
Building or Buying of Houses, in finifying or furnishing them, in the
Costliness of their Food, Drink, Clothes; I say, when in these things they act
above their abilities, and spend more than then Estates will bear; this
directly tends to pinching Poverty. Yet how frequent are these things? How
common is it, for persons to look big, go fine, make a topping show, live at an
high and costly rate; and yet not be able to do this without wronging of
others, by lying unreasonably long in Debt; and it may be sometimes they never
pay at all? For persons to lie long in Debt to Merchants, Shopkeepers,
Tradesmen, and poor Laborers; to lie long in debt for what they eat, drink,
wear, and for the very Wood they burn; and yet make a great and topping show,
and will scarce bear to be asked to pay their debts; this, I say, is vile and
abominable. No wonder if their Pride, Injustice, Extragancy bring them low,
such practices are Unchristian, countrary to that express Law of Christ. Luke
6.31. As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to Them likewise.
Solomon says, Prove. 13.7. There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing:
there is that makes himself poor, but has great riches. Some are of such a
base, niggardly spirit, that they will pretend Peverty, though they have
considerable Wealth. On the contrary, some are so proud and vain, that they will
make fine shows, live at an high and costly rate, as though they were very rich;
when possibly if Accounts were made up, and all had their due, there would
nothing remain to them. If every Bird had its own feathers, possibly they would
be left naked. How often does Pride prompt persons to be thus extravagant; though
it tends directly to Poverty? Nay, is there not too much of this Pride, even
among some so poor and low, that they can scarce subsist without Alms? Possibly
some who are very poor, who can scarce get Necessaries, will yet have a Gold
Ring, it not several of them, Jewels, Laces, Silk, more or less, Ribbons, etc.
even some marks of distinction or finery, which would be high enough for them,
if they were worth some Hundreds of Pounds. And is not this abominable Pride?
Such things as these. Rings, Jewels, etc. and sundry silly modes and fashions,
are not necessaries of life,; and yet to Indulge these, and at the same time to
need Alms, seems very foolish and wicked. To be very poor and very proud, how
common, and how shameful is it? Let any one judge, whether it be not foolish
and wicked, to feed Pride, and yet deny the proper desires of a craving
Stomach? To have Pride nourished in Shows of Finery, and the Body pinched with
cold and hunger, is vile and base; and proves the persons guilty, to be much
influenced by the Devil and their own Corruptions.

4 Keeping bad Company, this also tends to pinching Poverty. Prove. 28.19. He
that tilleth his Land, shall have plenty of bread; but he that follows after
vain persons, shall have poverty enough. Those who are fond of vain, loose,
idle Company, lose for nothing much of their time which should be spent in
working for a Living; and as they lose their time, so probably they spend some
Money in Gaming, (...), Frolicking. Or if they have not moner to pay down,
possibly they meet with some fools that will trust them, and let them run upon
tick; but this method tends directly to Poverty. These who love Vain Company,
seldom care for work or business; it may be they spend whole days in Idleness,
and nights too in wicked frolicks. When vain Companions get into Clubs and
Gangs for Night-walking and Revelling, and affront, affright and disturb many;
these their cursed, hellish works of darkness, tend to Impoverish them in this
World, and to damn them in Hell for ever. Yea, such an endless ruin shall
certainly be their portion, if speedy, hearty repentance and reformation
prevent not. For a Companion of fools shall be destroyed; the God who cannot
lie, tells us so. Prove. 13.20. It Is said, Prove. 9 6. Forsake the foolish and
live. Those who would live comfortably in this World, or happily in the next;
had need avoid foolish and vain Companions.

5. Filthy unclean practices, these also tend to bring Poverty. Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Such persons are going in the broad
way to Hell; yet they often meet with sore Judgments in the present life,
before they sink (if repentance prevent not) into Eternal Flames. The course
they take leads to poverty and misery in this present World. He that keeps
company with harlots, spends his substance. Prove. 29.3. For by means of an
whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, and the Adulteress will
hunt for the precious life. The Prodigal Son devoured and wasted his substance
with harlots, and riotous living. Luke 15.13, 30. If any will indulge
themselves in filthy unclean practices, Fornications or Adulteries; no wonder
if they soon come to pinching straits, wants and poverty.

Oppression, false dealing, promise-breaking; these tend to bring poverty.
Doubtless many think to increase their Worldly Estate by these practices, but
they tend to the contrary. God's blast and curse, often follow these vile
methods: We should not squeeze, extort, oppress, nor sell at racking
unseasonable rates, especially the Necessaries of Life. We should follow that
golden rule, of doing as we would be done by. Mat. 7.12. But those who act
contrary. often get a blast of Heaven on themselves. 1 These. 4.6. That no man
go beyond, or defraud his Brother, in any matter; because the Lord is the
avenger of all such. If persons gain some Pounds, Shillings, or but Pence, by
fraud or injustice; they gain the wrath and vengeance of God with it. God
smites his hand at dish mest gain (Exek. 22.13.) abhors and will punish it. Woe
to him that builds his house by unrighteousness Jer. 22.1^. Woe to him that
increases that which is not his. Woe to him that ^^^^^eth an evil ^^^^^eousness
to his house, that he (...) set his nest on high. Hab. 2.6, 9. Why, what hurt
to such? See v. (...). And thou shall be for (...) unto them. Those who spoil
and deal treacherously; deserve to be spoiled and (...) treacherously with. Isa
33.1. He that oppresses the (...) riches, and he that gives (...) to the
rich, shall (...) come to want. So when persons will whiffle, (...), this tends
to Impoverish them. Possibly they may serve some present turn, and gain a while
by these wicked tricks; but when they once come to be known, who will trust
'em? Who cares to employ, trust, or deal with false, deceitful persons; whose
word and promise are nothing worth, and not at all to be depended on? When
persons fairly promise to do such a piece of work, or pay such a debt, and that
by such a time, which they precisely mention; and yet fail of doing it; In such
a case, does not Justice and Ingenuity oblige them to go to the person to whom
the Promise was made, and plainly and honestly tell the reason, how they were
hindered from fulfilling their word; and so ask to be excused, and well thought
of? But instead of this, when they have broken their promises, how often do
their guilty Consciences make 'em shun the person they promised to? They don't
care to come near him, if they see him at a distance in the Street, possibly
they will shear off and go another way, on purpose to avoid a speech with him.
But is there any Justice or Ingenuity in their practices? Surely no, Indeed
such false, deceitful, promise-breaking persons, are scarce fit for Humane
Society; because what they say, is not to be regarded. When they show
themselves false and deceitful; they don't deserve to be believed or trusted.
For what end, I pray, should we hear those speak; whom we have no reason to
believe nor trust? Indeed it is a crying shame, an horrid scandal, that any who
call themselves Christians, should be thus false and deceitful, or Patrons of
such practices. Such falsifiers and deceivers, act more like the Children of
the Devil, that Father of Lies; than like the Followers of the Holy Jesus, that
true and faithful witness. This falsifying and promise-breaking, whatever any
think of it, is an heinous, scandalous wickedness; directly contrary to such a
practice as the Scripture requires. To be thus false and deceitful in words and
promises, what shall we say of it? What, is this to have our Conversation in
simplicity and godly sincerity? 2 Cor. 1.12. Is this, to be followers (that is,
Imitators) of God, the God that cannot lie? Ephesians. 5.1. Tit. 1.2. Is this, to
walk uprightly, work righteousness, speak the truth in our heart -- and though we
swear to our hurt, yet not to change? Psalm. 15.2, 4. Is this to put away lying,
and speak every man truth with his neighbor? Ephesians. 4.25. Is this, so to speak
not as pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts? 1 These. 2.4. Is this, to
exercise our selves to have always Consciences void of offense, toward God,
and toward men? Acts 24.16. Indeed, if Heathens, Mahometans should be
falsifiers, deceivers, promise breakers; this would not bring so much, so great
dishonor to God, as when profefs'd Christians are guilty of it. They name the
name of Christ, and therefore should depart from iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19. When
Christians are thus wicked, it may truly be said to them as to David in another
case. 2 Samuel 12.14. By this deed, thou have given great occasion to the enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme.

A backwardness to maintain Gods public worship; this also tends to Prverty.
God requires that his People should be at cost and charge, to support and
maintain his worship in the world; and if they heartily and readily do this,
they shall be not losers but rather gainers by it, even as to their worldly
estate. Prove, 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine Increase: so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty and thy
Presses shall burst forth with new wine God requires, that his Ministers (who
are especially Employed to promote his worship) should be maintained; it is
Gods ordinance and command that it should be so. 1 Cor. 9.14. Even so has the
Lord ordained, that they who preach the Gospel; should live of the Gospel, Gal.
6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in
all good things. But when persons are coveteous, niggardly, unwilling to
maintain God's Worship, and Ministers; this their negligence tends to Poverty.
Gods Providence often brings a Blast and Curse on men's trade, business and
outward affairs; for this their Sacrilege, in the time of the Prophet Haggai,
the Jews were blasted, frustrated in their affairs, They looked for much and it
came to little; the heaven was stayed from due, and the earth from her fruit.
God called for a drought on the land, the corn, new wine, oil, on that which
the ground brings fort, on men, and cartle, and on all the work of their
hands; So they (...) much and brought in little. Indeed they did cat, but had
not (...) drink, but were not stilled; did cloth themselves, but were not
warm; the wages they earned, were put into Bags with holes. Hag. 1.6, 11. Thus
they were Blasted, Straightened, Pinched, Impoverished; and why so? because of
Gods house (his Temple) which lay wast, and they ran every one to his own
house. verse. 9. They minded their own houses, would have them ceil'd, verse. 4.
made fine; they pursued their own worldly gain and Intrest, and would not be at
proper cost and pains to build Gods house, and support his worship; therefore
God diminished, straitn'd and impowerish'd them for their Sacrilege in
witholding Gods due, was a robbing of God, and he cursed them for it. God said
Mal. 3.8-10. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation.
Bring ye all the tithes into the Storehouses, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open
you the windows of heaven, and your you out a blessing, that there shall not be
room enough to receive it. These things plainly show, that a backwardness to
maintain Gods public worship, is one way to bring pinching poverty, even a
blast and curse of God on our outward affairs; and that a cheerful doing our
proportion to maintain his worship is one proper method for the obitaining even
those outward supplies, which are suitable for us. Therefore if we are reduced,
straitn'd, impoverished, can scarce rub along; surely it is not amiss to
inquire, whether this has not been one provoking cause of it even our
backwardness, unwillingness to support Gods public worship

A backwardness to relieve the poor and needy, tends to poverty. As we have
oppurtunity, we should do good to all men (Gal. 6.10) be rich in good works,
ready to distribute willing to communicate, (2. Tim. 6.18.) given to
hospitality, distributing to the necessity of the Saints, Romans 12.13. It Is said
Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord; and that which
he has given, will he pay him again. Those that are liberal to the poor, are
often blessed for it, and gainers by it; even here in this world, as well as in
the next; but those that are backward to such deeds of mercy, are often blasted
and diminished for being so. Prove. 11.24, 25. There is that scatereth, and yet
increases: and there is that witholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to
poverty. The liberal Soul shall be made fat; and he that waters, shall be
watered also himself. Prove. 22.9. He that has a bountiful eye, shall be
blessed; for he gives of his Bread to the poor. But how awful is that
Scripture? Prove. 21.13. whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor; he also
shall cry himself but shall not be heard. Indeed as for the poor who can work
and yet wont, they are proper objects rather of Correction than of Alms; but
as for those who are really necessitons, and through age, weakness or lameness
are not able to maintain themselves, they need pity and relief; and to be so
cruel and unmerciful as to neglect such, tends to bring the Impovershing curse
of God on our selves.

USE. Thus I have mentioned some of those vicious courses, which tend to bring
pinching poverty on persons. Let us therefore examine our selves, so far as we
have been guilty of any of these (or any other) vicious practices, we should be
deeply humbled before God for it, and should penitently fly to the blood of
Christ for pardon. For the future also, we should watch against, and avoid, all
those vicious courses which tend to make us miserably poor. We should avoid
Idleness, Intemperance, Uncleanness, bad company, oppressing, cheating,
promise-breaking; We should cast off pride and extracaganey, not live above our
abilities and so make a prey of our neighbors, while we really spend and sink
their Substance. We should be diligent in lawful buisiness: children and
servants also should be well Instructed in Religion, well governed, well and
diligently Employed in business proper for them. We should be true to our word
and promise, Just, upright and honest in all our dealings; readily and
seasonably pay every one his due; do our part honestly to support both church
and state, to maintain Gods worship, to relieve the poor and nerdy; and we
should pray to God for his blessing on us. If we take this course, we need not
fright our selves with the fear of distressing poverty. Indeed the growing
difficulties and necessities of this Town (as well as Land.) Loudly call for
Prudence, Diligence, Frugality, Good-husbandry; lest pinching poverty come upon
us as one that travelleth, and distressing want as an armed man that cannot be
resisted.

To conclude all, let us be chiefly concerned, that our Souls may be well
supplied and provided for; for they are of more worth than our Bodies. What is a
man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul, or what
shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Mat. 16.26. Let us follow those
heavenly counsels and directions. John 6.27. Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for that meat which endures to everlasting life; which the Son
of man shall give unto you. Mat. 6.19, ^1. Lay not up for your selves treasures
on earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and thieves break through and steal:
but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
does corrupt and where thieves do not break through and steal. For where your
treasure is, there will your bears be also. Yea, if we make it our main
business to please God, and lay up treasures in heaven; this in general is the
best way we can take, to escape even pinching poverty on earth. For godliness
is profitable for all things having the promise of the life that now is and of
that which is to come. a Tim. 4.8. O fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is
no want to them that fear him. The young lions do lack and suffer bunger, but
they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 34.9, 10. Our
Blessed Redeemer, speaking about food and raiment. even the necessary supports
of this present life, said, Mat. 6.33. But seek fust the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

FINIS.

