A Discourse SHEWIMG THAT GOD Deals with MEN As with Reasonable Creatures IN
A SERMON Preached at BOSTON, N. E. Nov. 23. 1718.

With a brief account of the State of the Indians on Martha's Vineyard, and the
Small Islands adjacent in Dukes County, from the Year 1694. to 1720.

By the Reverend Mr. EXPERIENCE MAYHEW, Preacher of the GOSPEL to the Indians
in Martha's Vineyard.

Ezekiel. 34. last. And ye the Flock of my Pasture are MEN, and I am your GOD.

Hos. 11.4. I Drew you with cords of A MAN, and with Bands of Love.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop, 1720.

GOD Deals with MEN AS WITH Reasonable Creatures.
ISAIAH I. 18. COME now and let us reason together, says the LORD, --.


THE Great GOD that formed all Things, and in particular formed the Spirit of
Man within him, has been pleased to distinguish him from, and exalt him above,
all other Creatures in this lower World, Genesis 1.26, 27.

IN his Nature, Man was herein more especially advanced, that he was endued
with an Understanding and Reasonable Soul, and so made capable of acting as a
Cause by Counsel, and of governing his Inferior Powers by Moral Principles and
Rules; and in this way, of aiming at his chief and highest End, which is to
Glorify the Great GOD his Creator, and be happy in the Enjoyment of Him for
ever.

THUS has GOD ^ught Men more than the Beasts of the Earth, and made them wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven, Job 35.11.

AND as GOD has greatly (...) Man in Making him such an Excellent Creature; so
He has done the like also in the way of his Dealing with him, ever since He
first gave him his Being.

THUS GOD has done, while He has continually treated Man as a Creature, in
respect of his natural Powers, capable of understanding his own Duty, and of
aiming at his proper End, of choosing his own way, and weighing the Obligations
which he lies under, to serve the Lord; and of considering the Equity of His
Dealings with him, and pursuing those things that are of the greatest
Importance and Advantage to him.

ONE Instance of GOD's dealing thus with Men we have in the Words now under
Consideration. Toward the beginning of the Chapter, He does by the Prophet
Expostulate with His Covenant People of Judah and Jerusalem, on the Account of
their many heinous Transgressions; and in particular He upbraids them with the
want of Consideration, as the Cause of all their other Miscarriages. Verse 3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib; but Israel does not
know, my People does not consider. He blames them for this, That though they were
Rational Creatures, yet they did not improve their Reason and Understanding as
they ought to do.

FROM the 5th to the 9th Verse, He declares unto them what heavy Judgments
they had exposed themselves unto by their Iniquities; and because they were too
apt to Plead their own Righteousness, in respect of the many Outward Religious
Services, which they Performed; GOD does from Verse 10. to 15. reject all these
Services of theirs as vain and unacceptable to Him, because while they
performed them, they continued still in their wicked and most abominable
Practices. He therefore exhorts them unto Repentance and Reformation, as the
sure and only way to escape His Judgments, and come to enjoy His Favor, from
Verse. 16. to 19.

AND whereas this People were often too ready to think GOD dealt hardly with
them, when their Outward Performances found no acceptance with Him, as in Isa.
58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see it not, etc. He
offers in the Wards before us to argue the Case with them, and invites them
as Reasonable Creatures, to a Rational Discussion of the Matter in Controversy
betwixt Him and them, that so He might in this way clear up the Equity of His
Dealings with them, and make it evident that the Terms of Peace were very
reasonable, yea very gracious, which He now propounded to them.

I am not now to consider the matter then in Controversy betwixt GOD and that
People; but the Invitation it self, which the Lord was pleased to give them to
come to a fair Debate upon the Point, Come now and let us reason together,
says the Lord.

THE meaning of the Words is not, that GOD would Visibly appear to them, and
Dispute with them Face to Face, as one Man Disputes with another, (though there
seems to be in the Words an Allusion unto such a Dispute) but GOD here speaks
unto His People after the manner of Men, and the design of His Words is to
signify to them that as He had to do with reasonable Creatures; so His Dealings
with them were such as Reason would justify and discover to be most just and
equal, yea and exceeding Merciful also, as they themselves, upon a due
Improvement of their Understanding might evidently see.

THE DOCTRINE I would observe from the Words is this, Viz.

DOCTRINE, THAT, GOD Deals with Men as with Reasonable Creatures.

FOR the clearing up of this Truth, I shall endeavor, 1. To show that GOD does
indeed thus Deal with Men. 2. To give some Resons why He does so.

I. I SHALL Show that GOD does indeed Deal thus with Men. And this I shall make
evident by an Induction of several Instances, wherein He Deals thus with them.

As,

Instance, 1. GOD Deals thus with Men, In that He takes Care, and uses
Means to instruct them in Sublime and Excellent Mysteries, which only Rational
and Intelligent Beings can uderstand. Very Great and Excellent are the
Mysteries which the Blessed GOD is in the way of His Dealing with the Children
of Men, taking Care to Instruct them in. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great
is the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World,
received up into Glory.

THE Doctrine of the Trinity in the Unity of the Godhead, and of the Decrees of
GOD and His Providence, and the Incarnation of the Son of GOD; and the way of
Redemption and Salvation by Him, and the like; are Mysteries very wonderful
indeed. They are Mysteries which the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet 2.12
They are fitly called, The deep things of God, 1 Cor 2.10

BUT such things as these, GOD is pleased to be making known unto Men, by His
Word written in the Holy Scriptures; and by His Ministers, whom he sends to
explain His Oracles unto them. He has written to them the great things of His
Law, Hos. 8.12. And is by His Servants making known to them the Rich and
Glorious Mysteries of the Gospel. as Ephesians. Chap. 3. and Col. 1.25.27.
the Apostle Paul does in his Epistles declare: And those Mysteries He
Reveals savingly by His Spirit, to as many as He pleases as 1 Cor. Chap. 2.
throughout.
the Scriptures also testify.

THAT GOD thus takes Care and uses Means to Instruct the Children of Men in
the Great Truths and Mysteries of the Gospel, does certainly suppose them to
have Excellent Understandings in them, capable of receiving the Instructions of
Wisdom which are by Him designed for their Illumination; and GOD herein
treats Men as Creatures that have a Capacity to Know Wisdom and Instruction,
and to perceive the Words of Understanding, Prove. 1.2.

Instance, 2. GOD Deals thus with Men, In that He directs them to him at a
most Excellent End, and by the most proper and suitable means to pursue it.
Thus to Glorify GOD, and to enjoy Him for ever, is the Great End which He
requires Men to aim at, and in order to their compassing this End, they are
commanded to make use of the most suitable Means, and in the Improvement of
these, to Work out their own Salvation, Phil. 2.12. Unto this End Men are
required diligently to attend and improve all the Means of Grace that GOD is
pleased to favor them withal. This is what is intended by their Hearing of
Wisdom, watching daily at her Gates, and waiting at the Posts of her Doors,
Prove. 8.34.

NOW thus aiming at a determinate End, and fixing upon, and making use of the
most proper and suitable Means for the attainment of it, does certainly suppose
Reason and Understanding in those that do or ought to do it; and when GOD puts
Men upon thus acting He treats them as Intelligent and Rational Beings, and
Honors them as Creatures capable of the highest Views, and the most Excellent
Employments and Enjoyments.

Instance, 3. GOD Deals thus with Men, In that He Deals with them in the
way of a Covenant, which the Unreasonable part of the Creation are utter by
incapable of. It is certain that GOD has always dealt with Mankind in a
Covenant way. When Man was first Created, GOD entered into a Covenant of Works
with him, promising Life to him, on Condition of perfect and perpetual
Obedience; and threatening him with Death in case of the least Failure, Genesis
2.17. Gal. 3.10, 12. And after Mankind had in Adam their Common Head and
Representative broken that Covenant, GOD was pleased to propose another
Covenant, unto them, viz. The New Covenant or Covenant of Grace, according unto
which they might be delivered from the Curse and Death due to them on the
Account of their Violation of the Covenant, first made with them, and might
also obtain Eternal Happiness through a Glorious Redeemer provided for them.

THIS Covenant was, though in obscure. Terms, proposed for the Relief of Sinful
Man, soon after his Fall into Sin, Genesis 3.15. but has been more fully opened
and explained, unto Sinners since in the Scriptures, especially in those of the
New Testament, as in Joh. 3.16. Romans 10.8. to 10. and elsewhere.

IN these Covenants are expressed the Duties which Men owe unto GOD, according
to the Tenure of them, and the Sins also which are contrary unto these Duties.
Here also are set down the Rewards and Punishments, which Men are to expect
according as they do or do not keep Covenant with the Lord their GOD, as in
Deuteronomy. Chap. 28.

UNDER one or other of these Covenants all Mankind are. Those who have not laid
hold of the Covenant of Grace, or Accepted the Terms of it, are still under the
Covenant of Works, and must stand or fall according as they do, or do not
fulfill the Conditions of it; which since the fall it is impossible any Man in
his own Person should do. Therefore such as are under the Law of Works are
under the Curse, Gal. 3.10, 12. Those who lay hold of the Covenant of Grace,
are by GOD dealt withal according to the Tenure of that Covenant, Rome 6.14.
Gal. 3.7, -- 9.

THUS GOD treats Men in the way of a Covenant, and every Man must receive a
Reward according to the Tenure of that Covenant, wherein he stands related
unto GOD; and while GOD does thus deal with Men in a Covenant way, He Deals
with them as with Rational Beings; He treats them as such as are capable of
Understanding the Nature of a Covenant, the Conditions of that in which
themselves are; and so the Terms wherein they stand with GOD, who has been
pleased to enter into Covenant with them, as also of weighing on the one hand
the Advantages they may have by complying with what is in the Covenant required
of them; and on the other, of Counting the cost of their neglecting, or
refusing so to do.

Instance, 4. GOD Deals thus with Men, In that He puts them upon making
their own free and del^^^^^te Choice, and that in Cases wherein their Choosing
well, is of very great Importance. There are innumerable Cases every Day
occurring, wherein Men are called to choose either what is best to be done, or
most desirable to be enjoyed, or most carefully to be avoided, etc. Indeed all
those Actions wherein Men are obliged to distinguish themselves from Bruits,
ought to be ordered and governed, by a Free and Wise Choice of their several
Objects, Means, manner of Performance, and Circumstances of Time and Place,
with whatsoever else is necessary to render them every way good and profitable.

BUT there is especially one Case wherein GOD puts Men unto their own free
Choice, wherein their choosing well, is of the last Importance to them; and GOD
in putting Men to their Choice in such a case as this, does evidently treat
them as such, as have good Understandings in them, capable of making such a
Choice as they ought to do. In such a weighty Case Israel, were in the most
solemn manner, put upon the (...) Deuteronomy. 10.19. I call Heaven and Earth to
Record this Day against you* that I have set before you Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing; therefore choose Life, that thou and thy Seed may Live.
So in, Josh. 24.15. If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, Choose you this
Day whom you will serve, etc. GOD does not here leave Men unto their Liberty,
whether they will serve him, or other Gods; but does require them to make use
of their Reason and Understanding in making such a Choice of the Object of
their Worship, as may be for their own best Good. GOD accordingly commends such
as choose well for themselves. Luke 10.42. Many has Chosen that good part,
that shall not be taken away from her.

Instance, 5. GOD Deals thus with Men, I^ that upon all Occasions He uses
Arguments with them, proper unto Rational Beings, to press and excite them unto
their Duty, and to diswade them from doing those things that are evil in His
Sight. When GOD calls upon Men to fear and serve Him, He still urges them to
their Duty herein with such Arguments as none but Intelligent and Rational
Beings can understand, and be influenced by. GOD never requires any Service of
Men without giving them good Reason for it.

SOMETIMES indeed GOD presses Men to Obedience from the Consideration of His
own Sovereign Authority and Dominion over them, as in Lev. 19.30. Observe all
my Statutes and all my Judgments, and do them. I am the Lord; but what can be a
more strong and forceable Reason for Obedience than this is? Nay unless this
Influence Men in what they do, there is really nothing of Obedience therein.

SOMETIMES the Reason with which Obedience is pressed is taken from the
Excellency of the Things required as in Micah 6 8. He has showed thee O Man
what is good, and what not the (...) require of thee, but to do (...), and love
Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

SOMETIMES the Good that GOD has done to and for Men is urged as a Reason to
excite their Obedience unto Him as in ^ Sam 12.24. Only fear the Lord, and
serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider how great thines He has
done for you.

AGAIN Sometimes Men are pressed unto Obedience from the Consideration of the
Great Advantages they may receive thereby This Argument (...) used in our
Context Isa 1 1^ If ye are willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
Land, and Psalm 37.3 Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou aw^^^ in the
Land and verily thou shall be fed.

THUS also when GOD would dissuade Men from doing those things which are evil
in his Sight; He always gives them good Argument for what He says to them

SOMETIMES He urges them with the Considerations of the Intrinsic evil of
those Sins he would restrain them from, So in Lev 18 18. It is an Abomination,
and Jer. 44.4 O do not this Abominable thing that I hate.

SOMETIMES Men are informed that (...) doing such things they will greatly
provoke a Holy and Jealous GOD, and Incense His Displeasure against them; and
that thus to do is the greatest (...) 1 Cor. 11 22. (...) provoke the (...) to
Jealousy (...) than He?

SOMETIMES Again, GOD lets Men know how unworthy and disingenious they will
show themselves to be, if by their Iniquities they Reward Him Evil for His
Goodness. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise? Is He
not thy Father that bought thee? Has He not made thee and formed thee? When
GOD thus Argues with Men He certainly Deals with them as with Reasonable
Creatures.

Instance, 6. GOD Deals thus with Men, In that as occasion does require, He
uses Means to Convince them of the unreasonableness of their Actions and
Carriages toward Him. As GOD would in a Rational way restrain Men from Sin; so
when they have Sinned, He uses Rational Methods to convince them of their
Folly and Madness in Departing from Him, and to bring them unto a due sense of
the unreasonableness of their Deportment and Behavior before Him.

TO this end GOD shows such as have departed from Him, and by their Sins
provoked Him, That they have no good Plea or Excuse to make for their so doing.
So in Judge. 2.2. Ye have not obeyed my Voice: Why have ye done this? Hear how
GOD argues with Israel to this purpose, Jer. 2 5, 6 What Iniquity have your
Fathers found in me that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
Vanity and are become vain? Neither said they where is the Lord that brought us
up out of Egypt, etc. Also Micah 6.2, 3. The Lord has a Controversy with His
People, and will plead with Israel, O my People, What have I done unto thee,
and wherein have I wearied thee? Testify against Me. Thus GOD convinces His
People that they have nothing to allege against Him as a Reason of their
forsaking of Him.

TO the same End GOD frequently shows Men now unreasonable their Carriages
are in respect of the Ingratitude of which they are guilty in them; so in Isa.
1.2, I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against
me. Also Isa. 63.9.10. In all their affliction he was afflicted; and the Angel
of his Presence saved them, in his love and in his pity be redeemed them, and
he have them, and carried them all the Days of old. But they rebelled and
vexed his Holy Spirit. Deuteronomy. 32.9, -- 19, Jer. 6 24.
This Argument is much insisted on in Scripture, GOD would have Men see that
such a deportment before Him, is very unreasonable.

WITH the same design GOD sometimes shows Men how absurd and ridiculous their
Practices are, that so He may make them ashamed of their Abominations. Thus GOD
by a Prophet said to Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.15. Why have thou sought after the
gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thy hand?
In this way GOD would have made Israel ashamed of their Idolatry, Isa. 44. from
ver. 9. to 18. where having at large exposed the absurdity of their first
making gods and then falling down and worshipping the same; He in Verse 19.
speaks thus to, and of them. None considers in his heart, neither is their
knowledge, nor understanding to say, I have burnt part of it in the Fire; yea
also I have baked bread upon the Coals thereof: I have roasted Flesh and eaten
it; and shall I make the residue thereof an Abomination? shall I fall down to
the Stock of a Tree?

WHEN GOD thus shows Men how unreasonably they act in Sinning against Him, He
Deals with them as with Reasonable Creatures.

Instance, 7. GOD thus Deals with Men, In that as need calls for it, He
clears up to then the equity of His Dealings with them. Men are very apt to
find fault with GOD; and to quarrel at His Dispensations; they are often ready
to think that GOD Deals hardly with them: but He is ever ready to give proper
and suitable Answers to what they have to Object against Him, and to make it
evident that He no way wrongs them. Thus in our Text, GOD calls His People to
Reason with Him* that so He might make them see the Equity, yea the Kindness of
His way of Dealing with them.

GOD indeed sometimes Answers Men's proud and unreasonable cavils against Him,
by asserting His own absolute Soveraignity over them, and so His Right to do
with them, what seems good in His sight. But even then, when GOD pleads His
own absolute Dominion over Men, He still deals with them as with Rational and
Intelligent Beings, in that He shows them that it is highly Reasonable, that
He should exercise such a Dominion over every thing that He has made. To this
purpose GOD argues with Men, in Romans Chap. 9. Ver. 19. Men are brought in thus
Disputing against GOD, Why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his
will? Unto which cavil GOD by the Apostle thus answers, Verse 20, 21. Nay but
O Man, who art thou that replyest against God? Shall the thing formed say unto
him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over
the Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel unto honor, and another to
dishonor?

SOMETIMES GOD is pleased to answer Men's Objections against Him, without thus
insisting upon His own absolute Sovereignty. Thus in Ezekiel. Chap. 18. GOD
answers the Objection made by the People against Him, That the Fathers had
eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens teeth were set on edge; by which was
meant that the Children were punished for the Sins of the Parents, and from
this the People inferred, That the way of the Lord was not equal.

IN Answer unto this Objection, GOD showed the People their great mistake, in
alleging that Children were punished for their Parents Sins. He showed them at
large, that the Soul that Sins shall die; and that the Son shall not bear
the Iniquity of the Father; neither the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son,
but that every one shall be Rewarded according to his own Works; and then He
proceeded thus to Expostulate with them. Ver. 29. Yet ye say the way of the
Lord is not equal. Hear now O house of Israel, Are not my ways equal? Are not
your ways unequal?

THUS also GOD clears up the Equity of His Dealings with His People with
respect to the Means He afforded them for their good. GOD considers Men as
Reasonable Creatures, and therefore affords them sufficient Means for the
Ends He obliges them to pursue and prosecute. He puteth a Price into their
hands to be improved for their Advantage, Prove. 17 16. He distributeth Talents
unto one and another, according to their respective Abilities, and requires
them to trade with them Mith. 25.14, 15, 16. And if it be needful, He
convinces them, that nothing has been wanting on His part, that could
Reasonably be expected of Him, in Order to the promoting of their Happiness.

THUS GOD Convinced the Jews of the Sufficiency of the Means and Cultivations
He afforded to them, Isa. 5.1, -- 5. Where speaking of them under the
Similitude of a Vineyard. He (1.) declares that He had Planted this Vineyard
of his, in a very fruitful Hill, and had fenced it, and gathered out the Stones
thereof, and planted it with the choicest Vine, etc. thereby signifying what
Means He had used, and what Cost and Pains He had been at, for the good of His
People. (2) He shows them the Expectation He thereupon had that His Vineyard
would have brought forth good Fruit, He looked that it would have brought forth
Grapes (3.) He declares the disappointment He had with respect hereto, It
brought forth Wild Grapes; bad Fruit, instead of good. (4.) He hereupon thus
Reasons with His People, this Vineyard of His. And now O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, judge I pray you betwixt me, and my Vineyard; What
could have been done more to my Vineyard than I have done in it? Wherefore when
I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth Wild Grapes?

SURELY, this is to deal with Men as with Reasonable Creatures; GOD does here
Appeal unto His People's own Reason and Conscience, whether He had not dealt
very well by them, in affording a sufficiency of Means to them; so that their
unfruitfulness did evidently appear to be from their own unreasonable and
culpable neglect; and was not in any wise to be Charged upon Him. He let them
know that He dealt not by them as those unreasonable Men their Egyptian Task
masters had formerly done, in requiring Brick of them in full Tale; but not
affording them Straw, Exodus Chap. 5.

Instance, 8. GOD deals thus with Men, In that He clears up to them, the
fairness of the Process at the Great Assize or Day of Judgment; and the Justice
of the Sentence, that shall then be passed upon both Good and Bad. As Men are
fully assured that there will be a Great and General Day of Judgment, in which
all Rational and Intelligent Creatures, must give an Account of themselves and
of their Actions unto GOD, (as it is Reason they should do,) Acts 17.31. Romans
13.12. So GOD also assures them that the Proceedings of that Day shall be most
Just and Reasonable. He does assure Men that things shall not in that Day be
managed in a way merely Arbitary, without respect to Reason and Justice; but
that all Causes and Pleas shall be then duly heard and considered, and that
Right Judgment according to Law and Evidence, shall then proceed.

THE Books therefore are then to be Opened, and the dead, ( i. e. those that
were so) are to be judged according to the things written therein, according to
their Works, Rev. 20.12. Therefore, Every Work must be then brought into
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil,
Eccl. 12.14. There will be no partiality then used, but Sentence will be given
without respect of Persons, Romans 2.6. -- 11. Then as many as have Sinned
without the written Law of GOD, shall be Punished without it; and as many as
have Sinned under the Law, shall be judged by it, Romans 2.12. -- 16 Every one
shall then be convinced, that the judgment of GOD is according to Truth,
against those that do such things as Men shall be punished for The End of the
last Judgment as it respects the wicked, is not only that they may be punished
but also that they may be convinced of their wickedness, and of the Justice of
GOD, in the Sentence passed on them. For behold the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all the hard speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken
against him, Jude, ver. 14.15. Not only the Consciences; but even the Mouths of
wicked Men shall then bear witness against themselves. Luke 19.22, 23. Out of
thine own Mouth will I Judge thee, thou wicked Servant, etc.

HOW fair the Process of the Great and last Day of Judgment will be, and how
just the Sentence, both with respect to the Righteous, and the wicked; Jesus
Christ the Great Judge, does Himself assure us, Math. 25.31, -- 46 where the
reason of the Sentence, with respect unto both, is distinctly cleared up, that
every one may see the Justice and Equity of it. GOD in dealing thus with Men,
and in leting them know beforehand that they shall be thus treated, deals
with them as with Reasonable Creatures.

AND to add but one thing more,

Instance, 9. GOD deals thus with Men, In that he often puteth them upon a
deep and serious Consideration of those things wherein, or wherewith, as
Rational and Intelligent Beings, they are concerned. As GOD has made Man a
Creature capable of thinking, so He treats him as such a Creature, in putting
him upon such a use and improvement of his Reason and Understanding, as does
become one that is endued with such noble and excellent Powers as Man is; and
GOD is displeased at it, if Man show himself bruitishly inconsiderate, Isa. 1.3.

HOW often do we find GOD in Scripture, putting Men upon the Study and
Consideration of those things wherein His Glory is concerned, and which the
Consideration of, may be of Advantage to themselves. Thus GOD requires that
Men Know and consider in their hearts, that the Lord he is God in Heaven above,
and in the earth beneath, and that there is none else, Deuteronomy. 4.39. And that
they Stand still and consider the wondrous works of God, Job 37.14. That they
Consider what great things God has done for them, 1 Samuel 12.24. And that they
also Consider what He in His Word says to them, 2 Timothy 3.7. They ought also to
Study how to show themselves approved unto God, 2 Timothy 2.15. And should
Consider their ways, and GOD's Dispensations toward them. Hag. 1.5, -- 7. GOD
does moreover require that Men Examine and Consider, Whether they be in the
Faith or not, 2. Cor. 13.5. And that every Man should by serious Consideration,
Prove his own Work, Gal. 6.4.

THESE and many other things of the like Importance, GOD is in His Word,
putting Men upon the Consideration of, and it is certain that He herein
treats them as Rational and Intelligent Beings capable of proper Meditations
and Reflections upon the various Objects proposed to their Contemplation; which
that they really are, has been supposed in all that has been said to prove that
GOD deals with them as with Reasonable Creatures; and that He does so, has
been now made sufficiently evident. I shall therefore proceed,

II. TO give some Reasons Why He does so. And they are such as here follow, viz.
Reason, 1. GOD deals with Men as with Reasonable Creatures; Because such
they are, and it is very suitable that they should by GOD be dealt withal in
such a Way as is agreeable to the Natures by Himself given unto them. As there
is an excellent Harmony among the Divine Attributes; so there is a very
remarkable agreement among the Divine Operations: This appears in GODs
delighting to work in, with, and by Second Causes, in a way agreeable to the
Natural Qualities and Dispositions, which He Himself has put into them In this
He shows His Wisdom, and puts an Honor upon the works of His own Hands: He
hereby shows that it is not in vain that He has put such Principles and
Qualities into them, seeing He makes use of them, and works with and by them
in the Government of the World. As therefore Inanimate and Irrational Creatures
are governed in a way suitable to the Natures given unto them; so also
Rationable and Intelligent Beings, as Angels and Men, are ruled and ordered in
such a way, as is agreeable unto the excellent Natures with which they are
endued. Man therefore being a Reasonable Creature, GOD constantly deals with
him as such an One, treating him in a way agreeable to his Nature, and
influencing of him by such Means as none but Intelligent Beings can be moved by.

Reason, 2. GOD deals thus with Men, Because the Nature of the Government
which He has set up over them does Necessarily call for it. As GOD made Men
capable of being governed by Laws with Sanctions, which Irrational Creatures
are not; so He has determined to govern them by such Laws, viz. Precepts and
Prohibitions, with Promises and Threatenings: But now the Nature of this kind of
Government does require that Men be dealt withal as Intelligent and Rational
Beings, capable of acting as Free-Agents; and of being influenced by Moral
considerations; and if they were moved in any other way, as by mere Physical
Influence, this would not agree unto the Nature of a moral subjection unto GOD,
which consists in a Spontaneous, or Voluntary Obedience and Submission unto His
Will: Therefore if Men should in these things be dealt withal in any other way
than as Reasonable Creatures, they could be no more said to obey GOD in their
Motions, than Irrational Animals, and Creatures without Life, may be said to
do; which would be very far from that Reasonable Service which GOD requires of
Men, and will only accept at their Hands.

Reason, 3. GOD deals thus with Men, Because this way suits well with His
Design of displaying His own Glory, and being admired on the account of it.
Though GOD might have been Perfectly and Eternally happy in the Enjoyment of
Himself, though no Creature had ever been made; yet it has pleased Him to create
the World to be a kind of Mirror wherein His own Glory may be seen and admired;
and to make a Number of Creatures capable of viewing His Perfections shining
forth therein, and of giving Him Glory on the account of them.

UNTO this Number Mankind belong, and as they are capable of glorifying GOD in
an active way, so this is the Sum of what He requires of them: And that He may
effectually oblige them to perform their duty herein, He treats them as
Reasonable and Intelligent Beings, capable of Understanding their Duty and
doing it, and of seeing the Obligations they lie under, willingly to engage in
the Great Work incumbent on them. He requires them to behold and admire His
Glory, which appears in His admirable works of Creation, Providence, and
Redemption; and then to show forth His Praise unto Others, by Psalm. 96.3. and
105.2.
Talking of the Mavelous things that He has done. And when they are
defective herein He lays great blame to them on the account thereof. He lets
them know Psalm. 96.7, 8. Rev. 15.4.
that Glory is due to Him, and how reasonable a thing it is that they should
render it to His Name.

AND GOD does not only thus call and require Men to give Glory to Him but gives
rational Answers to all such Objections as they are ready to make against it.
He takes up all the stumbling Blocks out of the way, that nothing may hinder
them from performing their duty herein; and if there be any thing that seems
to reflect Dishonor upon Him, He plainly and fairly removes it, as in James
1.13, 14.

NOW in all this, Men are treated as Reasonable Creatures, and that they should
be so, tends so much to GODs Glory, and suits so well with His Design of
exalting His own Name, that this may be looked upon as one Reason of His
dealing thus with them.

Reason, 4. THERE is much to be ascribed unto the Sovereign good Will and
Pleasure of the blessed GOD, with respect to His thus dealing with Men.
Whatsoever Reasons may be assigned for His dealing thus with them; yet it is
certain that as the case now stands, GOD's doing thus is very much to be
ascribed to His Condescending Grace.

Mankind have by their Apostasy from GOD forfeited all the Advantages which in
their Estate of Integrity they had some right unto; so that in point of
Justice, Men do not now deserve to be by GOD treated as they are; but on the
contrary, that GOD should deal with them in a way of Wrath and Displeasure
only: There therefore now appears in the way of GOD's treating the Children
of Men, much of His Condescending Goodness; and here-unto must His dealing with
them in such a Manner as now He does, be very much ascribed.

THAT now GOD persuades Men, Reasons the Case with them, answers their sinful
Cavils, and vain and foolish Objections, with so much Patience, and
Long-suffering, as He still does; must needs be attributed to His Great Mercy
and Kindness. It is certain, this is that which moves Him to treat such as have
exceedingly provoked Him, as He does these unto whom He speaks in our Text,
when He calls them to come and reason with Him, about those things wherein
their Eternal Welfare is concerned.

APPLICATION.
USE, I. DOES GOD deal with Men is with Reasonable Creatures, Then have Men no
just Cause to complain of His Dealings with them; but great Reason to
acknowledge them to be very Wise, Just, and Merciful.

1. IF GOD deals thus with Men, He certainly deals Wisely with them, in
that He treats them in a way agreeable to the Natures He has given to them.
GOD perfectly knows what kind of Creatures Men are; and has set up such a
sort of Government over them, as is suitable to the Nature of such Creatures as
they be; and He manageth His Government of them in such a way and manner as is
agreeable to the Laws by which He Rules them, as well as unto their Natures. He
makes known His Laws to them, shows them the Equity and Goodness of them, the
Advantages they may have by keeping them, and the Miseries they will expose
themselves unto by breaking them; and when at any time they transgress against
Him, He shows them how Reasonable a thing it is that they Repent of their
Miscarriages, and Reform their Lives and Conversations; and that their future
and Eternal Well being does depend upon their so doing. He uses Means for
their Instruction and Illumination, shows them how Justice may be satisfied for
their Offenses; and how they may be reconciled unto GOD, against whom they have
offended. He proposes Arguments for the overcoming, and gaining of cheir
Wills; and makes Representations to them, that are suitable to work on their
Affections. Thus He draws them with the Cords of a Man, Hos. 11.4. And He
herein doubtless deals very wisely with them, because in a way suitable to
their Nature, and the Great design He is managing with them.

THUS also GOD dealth wisely with them, in suting His Providence unto the
Circumstances they are under. GOD wisely considers the Condition that Men are
in. He duly weighs their Estate and Circumstances, and so what may be
necessary for them, and what hurtful to them; and then orders out Comfort, and
Afflictions, and proportioneth them, as in His Wisdom He sees necessary, Isai.
27.8.

MEN have, on these accounts, great Reason to acknowledge that GOD deals very
wisely with them. If they speak truly, they must confess, He has abounded
toward them in all Wisdom and Prudence.

2. IF GOD deals thus with Men, He also deals very Justly with them. His
dealings with them are such that nothing can be rationally and fairly objected
against them.

GOD can, in point of Reason and Equity, Justify all His Actions toward the
Children of Men; so that if He should enter into a calm debate with them about
the Justice and Equity of His Dispensation, allowing them to talk with Him of
His Judgments, and should not suffer His Terrors to make them afraid; He could
so fully answer all Objections that they could possibly make with respect to
the Justice of His dealings with them; that if it were not their own fault,
they might clearly see the Reasonableness of them. He will not, He does not,
lay upon Man more than is Right, that he should enter into Judgment with GOD:
Or have just Reason to complain of His dealings with Him, Job 34.23.

MEN are very apt to complain of GOD, as if He dealt very hardly by them, or as
if His Ways were unequal; But GOD can, and does afford them matter of Rational
Conviction that they have no good reason for such Complaints. Thus stood the
case betwixt GOD and His People, Ezekiel Chap. 18. But He said that to them which
either did, or should have fully satisfied them, that His dealings with them
were very reasonable. Whatever some Men may think of GOD, yet He is, and in the
Issue, will appear to be, Righteous in all His ways, and Holy in all His works,
Psalm. 145.17. GOD will shortly so fully clear up the Justice of His dealings
with His Creatures, that they shall see and acknowledge the Equity of them all,
and be obliged to Glorify Him on that account. It will appear that neither Men
nor Angels have had any good reason to complain of Him.

AND I shall here observe, That though Sovereignty be an Attribute of GOD, who
does, and may do according to His Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay His Hand, or say unto Him, What
do thou? Dan. 4.35. Yet is GOD's Justice and Sovereignty are distinguishable
one from the other, so it is not to be supposed that GOD ever so exercises His
Sovereign Power as to act any ways contrary to Justice or Equity. We must
remember that the object of Divine Sovereignty, is What with respect to GODs
other Glorious Attributes, may be either fitly done, or not done; and it is
with respect to such things as these that GOD does in Scripture Justify His
Actions on the Account of His Sovereign Power and Lordship: As therefore GOD by
His Sovereign Power, neither does nor can act any thing Contrary to His
Infinite Wisdom, and Unalterable Truth; so neither can nor will He by the same
Power and Authority do any thing contrary to His most perfect Justice: And thus
there appears a most exact Harmony among the Divine Attributes; and herein I
conceive the Holiness of GOD eminently to consist.

AND hence, as it is a true Proposition, That whatsoever GOD does is very just
and equal; so it is no less true, that there are some things that are in their
own Nature unjust, and therefore such as GOD neither can nor will do. This
Truth is supposed in all those Ezekiel. Chap. 18. Neh. 9.33. Job 34.10, 11, 12.
Places of Scripture, wherein the Justice and Equity of GOD's Dealings with His
Creatures is vindicated, and His Care to deal Righteously by them is asserted.
But here poor simple Men must be very cautious, and not be over confident with
respect to particular things, either that they may be justly done, or not,
least they Sin in charging GOD foolishly. To be sure it is a good Rule, that
whatever GOD does, is very Just and Righteous, whether Men see the Equity of
it, yea or no.

3. IF GOD deals thus with Men, He deals very mercifully and kindly by
them. In this not only His Justice, but even his Mercy and Kindness toward Men
appears. In the Condition that Mankind now are, GOD in treating of them as He
does, while He is dealing with them as with Reasonable Creatures, does show
abundance of undeserved Favor and Kindness unto them. How kindly does GOD
treat Men, when He speaks to them as in our Text, and the Words immediately
following, Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: Though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like
Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Thus GOD draws Men with the bands of Love,
Hos. 11.4. Allures them, and speaks Comfortably unto them, Chap. 2. ver. 14. He
swears to them, that He takes no pleasure in their Death, but on the contrary
that they should turn from their own evil ways and live, Ezekiel. 33.11.

THUS kindly does GOD deal with Men. To be sure if they duly consider how He
treats them, they must acknowledge He deals very well by them.

USE, II. DOES GOD deal with Men as with Reasonable Creatures, Then surely Men
ought to deal thus with one another. If GOD, who is Infinitely Superior unto
the greatest Men in the World, does yet not disdain thus to treat them, How
much more may they expect to be thus treated by those who are Acts 27.16.
of one Blood with them, and so by Nature equal to them.

Mankind was not made to be Goverened by mere force and violence and driven to
and fro, as those Inferior Creatures were that were put in Subjection to them.
GOD Himself does not so Exercise His Authority over them; He considers and
deals by them as MEN, and would have them know themselves so to be, and expect
to be dealt with accordingly, and would have others also observe it, in order
to their treating of them in such a manner as is suitable to so noble a Species
of Being as they are.

ACCORDING to this we find that though Israel be Metaphorically spoken of as a
Flock of Sheep under Shepherds, unto whose care they were committed, Ezekiel.
Chap. 34. Yet they were in the close of that Chapter, by GOD put in mind of
what they really were, Verse. 31. And ye my Flock, the Flock of my Pasture, are
Men, and I am your God, says the Lord God. If GOD's Flock be Men, their
Shepherds ought to carry it toward them accordingly, by treating them as
Reasonable Creatures 1 Pet. 5.3
Not lording of it over them; but showing them their Duty, and by whose
Authority they are called to it, and what Obligations they are under to perform
it. These should therefore be Men able to render a Reason, and by solid
Arguments, to prove what they say, and to Convince gainsayers; for if Men's
Reason and Consciences be not convinced, all the Curses denounced from
Mount-Ehal, will avail very little to oblige them to their Duty, nor will
External force and compulsion, if used, make any good Impressions on them.
Ministers therefore who treat with Men in GOD's Name should, like Paul, Reason
about the Things of which they Discourse, He Reasoned of Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come, and Faelia trembled, Acts 24.25. And this
seems to have been Paul's ordinary way, Acts 17.2. And Paul as his manner was,
went in unto them, and three Sabbath Days Reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures. This course also Samuel took with Israel, 1 Samuel 12.6, 7. He said
unto them, -- Stand still, that I may Reason with you before the Lord. --

USE, III. DOES GOD deal with Men as with Reasonable Creatures, Then surely Men
should take heed of every thing, which tends to render them incapable of
being thus treated, with Advantage or Success. As GOD made us Rational
Creatures; so He condescends to Reason and Argue with us, about things that are
of the greatest importance and concernment to us; He is willing that Reason
should decide every case wherein He has to do with us: And if there be any
matters of Controversy betwixt Him and us, He invites us to argue with Him upon
them, and gives us leave to bring forth our strong Reasons, if we have any
such, Isa. 41.21.

AND are Men thus called to argue the Case with GOD, to hear Reason from Him,
and to give good and wise Answers unto Him; surely they had need be well
prepared for this, that in the things wherein they have to do with so wise and
holy a Being as He is, they may behave themselves as becomes Rational and
Intelligent Beings, and not dishonor themselves by a carriage unworthy of the
Character which they bear, and of the Honor that GOD is pleased to put upon
them, in treating of them as He does; and they had need take special heed of
every thing that tends to unfit them for behaving themselves well, when they
are called to Reason with Him.

AND I shall here mention Three Things which People had need on this account,
take great heed of, viz.

1. GROSS Ignorance. This exceedingly unfits Persons for being treated as
Reasonable Creatures with Advantage. I speak here of such Ignorance as is
opposed unto Knowledge, that may be acquired by an Industrious use of means.
Though Persons have never so good natural Parts, yet if they are grossly Ignorant,
how exceedingly does this unfit them both for understanding Reason themselves,
and speaking Reason unto others. See Mr. Wadsworth's Preface to his Exposition
on the Assemblies Catechism, p. 4.
Thus there are many who for want of common Learning, can hardly understand the
Language in which People ordinarily speak; and to be sure are far from
understanding much of the Language wherein GOD in the Scriptures speaks to
them. Such Words as Justification, Adoption and Regeneration are hard Words to
them; and they have little benefit by the plainest Sermons, because they cannot
understand them.

NOW how miserably qualified are such is these, to be treated in a Rational
way, about things that have any difficulty in them Persons should take care
that they may be more capable of understanding what GOD says to them, and the
force of the Arguments He uses with them; and Heads of Families should take
care that their Children and Servants, may not want those Instructions that are
necessary unto this end.

2. STRONG Prejudices. These do also exceedingly unfit Men for being treated in
a Rational way, to any good Purpose, either by GOD or Men. When GOD deals
with Men as with Reasonable Creatures, He doubtless would have them use their
Reason very freely, and put forth the Powers of their Souls unto the utmost, in
weighing and examining the things proposed to them, to be considered by them,
and GOD says nothing to Men, but what will bear the strictest Examination and
Trial.

BUT now if Men suffer their Judgments to be forestalled, and their Minds
prepossessed with Prejudices, against the things that GOD would persuade them
unto, they do hereby render themselves exceeding unfit for such a Treaty as GOD
is seeking to manage with them; and when it is thus, the plainest and most
forceable Reasons and Motives will have very little Influence upon them. Thus
when Men's Minds are filled with Prejudices against Religion and Godliness, and
the Idols of Sin and the World are set up in their Hearts, if they be urged
with the strongest Arguments to forsake those, and live Religiously; they will
be ready to say with those in Jer. 2.25. No, for we have loved strangers, and
after them we will go. They cannot now Hearken to the voice of the charmers,
charming never so wisely, Psalm. 58.5.

I SHALL mention one thing more, viz.

3. DRUNKENNESS. How evidently does this unfit such as are addicted to it, for
being treated as Persons that can use their Reason and Understanding well? How
unfit are Drunken Men to be argued withal as with Reasonable Creatures? Such as
are actually Drunk are indeed more like Beasts then Men. They are like the
Horse and Mule that have no understanding, Psalm. 32.9. Nay rather like some
other Beasts, with which wicked Men are compared in Scripture, 2 Pet. 2.22.
When Persons are Drunk, they are unfit to be treated by Men in a Rational way,
about the Affairs of this Life; and how much more unfit are they to be treated
by the Blessed GOD, about the Affairs of their Immortal Souls, and the Eternal
World? Can we think Drunken Men fit to be spoken unto by a Wise and Holy GOD,
as GOD speaks to Men in our Text, Come now, and let us Reason together, says
the Lord? No truly, they are very far from it. Yet some that are given to
Drunkenness are scarce ever willing to Discourse about the things of GOD and
their Souls, but when they are Drunk, and so utterly unfit to be treated about
them.

BUT this is not all; for those that do frequently inflame and intoxicate
themselves with Strong Drink, do generally, if not always so stepify their
Senses, and impair their Understandings by it (though they themselves know it
not,) as almost to unfit themselves to be treated as Rational Creatures at any
Time.

LET therefore such as Rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow after
Strong-Drink, and continue until Night, till Wine inflame them, Isa. 5.11.
seriously consider, when they are in such a condition as to be capable of it,
how much worse than Bruits they are frequently making themselves; and how much
it concerns them to Reform their Lives, before they so far lose the use of
their Understandings, as to be incapable of receiving any Benefit by those
Rational Methods, which GOD is still making use of with them.

USE, IV. DOES GOD deal with Men as with Reasonable Creatures, Then ought Men
to take great care to carry themselves as Reasonable Creatures ought to do,
toward GOD, that so in the Things wherein they have to do with Him, He may
have no just Reason to blame or condemn them. Since GOD is pleased to deal with
Men as with Rational Creatures, certainly Men should see to it, that they carry
themselves so, that Reason will justify them, whenever GOD shall call them to
give an Account of their Actions, or shall enter into a Debate with them about
them.

WE are always accountable unto GOD, for what we do; and He has many ways to
bring the Reasonableness of our Actions into Trial. In His Word He deals with
us about them. Our Consciences are His Vicegerents to Judge of them, and to
Justify or condemn them. There are Men Authorized by Him to examine as with
respect to many of them. There will be a Great and General Day of Judgment,
wherein we must give an Account of all of them, 2 Cor. 5.10. Eccl. 12.14. GQD
will shortly call us to an Account as Reasonable Creatures, how we have behaved
our selves in the World, He will bring us to a fair Trial, that it may appear
whether we can by Reason justify our Actions and Carriages, or not. It must
therefore needs greatly concern us to see to it, that our Case be good when GOD
calls us to answer for our selves. We had need therefore say and resolve as in
Hab 2 1. unto which I may here allude, I will stand upon my watch, and will set
me upon the Tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I
shall answer when I am reproved, Or, as it is in the Margin, argued withal.

INASMUCH also as GOD puts a great Honor and Respect upon Men, in His treating
of them as Reasonable Creatures, and deals very kindly by them; how vile a
thing will it then be in Men, if they carry themselves unreasonably and
bruitishly toward Him. How fitly may GOD say unto Them, as in Isa. 46.8. Show
your selves Men. GOD justly expects that we should behave our selves suitably
to the dignity of our Natures, and to the honorable Way of His treating of us,
and how base and unworthy shall we show our selves, if our carriage and
deportment toward Him be wholly Unanswerable to His dealings with us, and
expectations concerning us? GOD justly complains of Men, when they carry it not
toward Him as Reasonable Creatures ought to do, Jer. 4.22. My People are
foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children and have none
Understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no Knowledge.
And Jer. 8.7. The Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed times, and the
Turtle and the Crane and the Swallow, observe the Time of their coming; but my
People know not the Judgment of the Lord.

IT is then highly necessary, that we do endeavor in all points to behave our
selves toward a Wise and Holy GOD, as does become Reasonable Creatures; and
those that are by Him treated as such, to do: And as such we are Obliged wisely
to consider such things as these, and thus to Argue with our selves.

HAVE we not Reason to believe that there is an Eternal GOD of Infinite
Perfections, who has Created the World, and all things therein? How else came
all these Things, which we behold, by their Being?

HAVE we not Reason to believe that GOD made Reasonable Creatures, to render
unto Him a Reasonable Service? Such as He made them capable of, and that He
would therefore, some way or other make known His Mind and Will to them?

HAVE we not Reason to believe that the Scriptures are of Divine Original? Or
were given by Inspiration of GOD, to direct Reasonable Creatures in their Duty
toward Him? Is there not the stamp of His Authority upon them? Are they not
worthy of such a One as He is, and every way suitable to such an End, as to
teach Men how they may Glorify GOD, and come to the Enjoyment of Him?

IS there not good Reason that Men should firmly believe all that GOD does in
the Scriptures say unto them; yea, though they cannot comprehend some of the
Mysteries therein delivered? And is not their Sin great, if they make Him a
Liar, by not believing what He speaks, and testifies unto them?

IS it not good Reason that we should Obey the Laws of the Great JEHOVAH, which
are in His Word given unto us? Or should not He that Made us, and Continually
Keeps us, also Rule and Govern us?

HAVE we not abundant Reason to acknowledge that Mankind have fallen from GOD
by Sinning against Him, and so become justly liable to innumerable, and endless
Miseries?

HAVE we not Reason to believe the Record that GOD has, in the Gospel, given of
His SON? Should we not look upon it as a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners? 1 Timothy 1.15.

HAVE we not Reason to Esteem the Terms of Peace propounded in the Gospel, as
very Reasonable, and very Gracious? Or have we the least Reason to think that
GOD deals hardly with us, in holding us unto such Terms? This is the case
that GOD invites Men to Reason with Him about in the Text, as by the Context
does appear.

IS it not a most Reasonable thing, that Sinners should sincerely Repent of
their many Sins against the blessed GOD, and turn to Him from them with all
their Hearts and Souls; and that they should willingly accept the Terms of
Peace offered to them through a Redeemer? And is not their folly exceeding great,
if they refuse thus to do?

FINALLY, Have we not good Reason to acknowledge, that if Men disobey and
dishonor the Great GOD; if they despise His Authority, and will not hearken to
His Voice; if they will reject His Mercy, and not believe in His Son; but
trample His precious Blood under foot, and utterly refuse that He should Rule
over them. Have we not then I say, good Reason to confess that GOD will be very
Just in bringing His wrath upon them unto the uttermost, and in Raining on them
Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest Psalm. 11.6.
and in punishing them with everlasting Destruction, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the Glory of His Power, 2 These. 1.9.
that, As He has called, and they have refused, stretched out His hands, and
they not regarded it; but set at naught, His Counsels, and would none of His
Reproofs; so He also should laugh at their Calamity, and mock when their Fear
comes, when their Fear comes as Desolation, and their Destruction as a
whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon them, Prove. 1.24, -- 27.

HOW necessary is it that Men as Rational Beings, should seriously ponder such
things as these, and affect their Hearts with the consideration of them? O that
they were wise and would so do, that they would consider their latter end.
Deuteronomy. 32.29.

BUT how has Men's Apostasy from the Blessed GOD depraved their Souls, and
unfitted them for the due exercise of those Faculties and Powers, which as
Rational Beings, they are endued withal! Man is now in his Natural Estate,
after a sort, beside himself, Luke 15.17. His understanding being darkened, he
is Alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in him, because
of the blindness of his heart, Ephesians. 4.18. He therefore Receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, but they are foolishness unto him, nor can he know them
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

IN Order therefore unto Men's coming to their Right Minds, and being actually
prepared for the due Exercise of those Powers, with which as Reasonable
Creatures they are endued: They must have a supernatural Change wrought in them
by the special Operation of the Holy Ghost; They must be Renewed in Knowledge,
after the Image of Him that Created them, Col. 3.10.

WE must therefore Pray unto the GOD of all Grace, to Open the Eyes of our
Minds for us, and Fill us with all Wisdom, and Spiritual Understanding: This
being done for us, Right Reason will then Influence and Govern us; and GOD's
way of treating us as Reasonable Creatures, will have a good Effect upon us.
And then we shall be prevailed withal, to Present our selves a living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto Him; which is our Reasonable Service.

A Brief Account of the State of the Indians on Martha's Vineyard, and the
small Islands Adjacent in Duke's-Country, from the Year 1694 to 1720.
MArtha's Vineyard is an Island lying in about the Latitude of 41. and is about
22 Miles in length, from East to West, Chapaquidick and Capoag, near adjoining
at the East end, being included; the said Island being about 8 Miles in breadth
toward the East end of it, and about 3 toward the West end, but the Soil of
much of it, is very barren and uncultivated. The Sound on the North-side is
about 3 Leagues over, viz. to Falmouth on the Main, and to Elsabeth's-Islands,
which lie South-Westward of Falmouth.

From the Gayhead at the West end of the Island, to Rhode Island; it is about
12 Leagues, and from Edgartown Harbor at the East end of it, to Nantucket; is
as Vessels sail, about 10.

The Island called No-mans-land lies Southward from the West end of Martha's
Vineyard, about 4 Miles from the Gayhead.

Concerning the Conversion of the Indians on these Islands, and places adjacent
on the Main, there was a brief Narrative written by Matthew Mayhew, Esquire Eldest
Son of the Rev. Mr. Thomas Mayhew, who first Preached the Gospel unto them;
which Narrative was Printed at Boston in the Year 1694. and Reprinted at London
the next Year, under the Title of, The Conquests and Triumphs of Grace, etc.
The same, for Substance, being again Printed some Years after, in Dr. C.
Mather's History of New England.

I shall begin my Account of the State of the Indians from the time the said
Book was first Published, that being about the time that I first began to
Preach to them.

The Number of Indians on these Islands is very much diminished, since the
English first settled on Martha's-Vineyard, which was in the Year 1642 there
being then as was supposed on that Island about 1500 Souls. At present there
are in the Vineyard six small Villages, containing in all of them, about 155
Families, and the Number of Souls may be about eight hundred.

Each of these Villages is provided with an Indian Preacher to dispense the
Word to them on the Lord's Days, when I am not with them. They meet for the
Worship of GOD twice a Day on the Sabbath, and after Prayer, sing a Psalm; then
there is a Sermon Preached on some Portion of Scripture, which being ended*
they sing again; while the Days be of a sufficient length; and then conclude
with Prayer.

Besides the Indians on the Vineyard, there is a small Assembly on Winthrop's
Island, the Eastermost of Elsabeth's Islands before mentioned; and these also
have ordinarily an Indian Minister to Preach the Word of GOD to them, and Mr.
John Weeks an Englishman formerly Preached to them; but has lately, as I am
informed, desisted from that Work.

At Tucker's-Island, and at Nashaun or Slocum's Island, which lie near
together, Westward of Winthrop's Island, are about 12 or 14 Families, and
these, though their Number be small, are provided with an Indian Preacher.

At the before mentioned No-mans-land, there are now so few Indians left, that
they have none to Preach constantly to them.

Besides the Indian Assemblies already mentioned, there is one Assembly of
Anabaptists at the Gayhead; but the number of People belonging unto this, is
very inconsiderable.

Though there are many Indians on these Islands, who are very negligent as to
their Attendance on the Public Worship of GOD; yet I know of none, but what do
make some Profession of Religion, and will talk soberly, when treated withal
about it; having made a trial on some that have been most suspected.

And though there are among these Indians, a great many who are very defective in
their Morals; yet there are a considerable number, even of those not yet joined
in Church Communion, who live soberly, and Worship GOD in their Families.

There has, from time to time, been much care taken that the several Villages
might be provided with Schoolmasters to teach the Children to Read and Write;
yet some of them have not been so constantly supplied, as is to be desired; and
generally when the Spring of the Year comes on, the Indians take their Children
from School, alleging they want them for Tillage of the Land; and so the
Schools fail till the Fall; and this has much hindered their Progress in
Learning: Nevertheless, I think the greatest number can Read, either in the
English or in the Indian Tongue; and some in both.

There is also care taken to Catechize the Youth, For besides what is done in
this kind, by the Indian Schoolmasters and Preachers, I frequently examine the
Young People my self, and have determined to attend this Service once a
Fortnight, in some or other of the forementioned Villages; and this Method will
I hope, prove very advantageous, many grown People as well as Children,
attending these Exercises.

The Indian Church at Martha's-Vineyard, whereof Mr. Japheth Hannit an
excellent Indian Minister was formerly the Pastor, but died in the Year 1712.
had after his Death another Pastor, called Sowomog: but he being an Old Man
when he was first called unto that Office, lived but a very few Years.

The Name of the present Pastor of that Church is Joash Panu, who is a very
serious prudent and pious Man, of a good Conversation, and one who drinks no
strong drink, but is much grieved at those of his Countrymen who do err by
means of it. If it please GOD to continue his Life, he is like to prove a good
Instrument; but being lately fallen into a Languishing Distemper, I fear what
the issue of it may be.

The number of Communicants, both Men and Women, in this Church, is about 110.
the most of these are Inhabitants of Martha's-Vineyard, but not all; there
being a few that have joined themselves there unto, not only from Elsabeth's
Islands, but from the Main Land also, lying next unto the Vineyard.

The Lord's Supper is ordinarily Administered in that Church about 7 or 8 times
in a Year, and Discipline is in some measure kept up in it. Unto this End,
besides other Church Meetings, there is constantly on the Thursday or Friday
before that Sacrament is Administered, a Meeting of the Church, wherein such are
suspended from the Lords Table as having been over-taken in any fault, have not
given due satisfaction. At this Meeting also there is ordinarily a Sermon
Preached suitable to the occasion.

It must be acknowledged that as the Indians are many of them much addicted
unto strong drink; so some of the Members of the Indian Church have been
sometimes found very faulty, on this account; yet it is also true, that such as
these have generally appeared very Penitent. And though some have fallen quite
away, and so have been cut off by the Sword of Discipline; yet others through the
Grace of GOD, have been so far recovered out of the Sins into which they have
fallen, as that it may be hoped they will not again return to them; and there
have all along been, and still are, a considerable number, whose Conversation
is, so far as I can understand, very blameless, and who may be justly looked
upon as Exemplary Christians; what ever such English Men as are filled with
Prejudices against the Indians, may say to the contrary.

Some Years after I first began to Preach to the Indians, the Church on
Martha's-Vineyard, did on a day of Fasting and Prayer appointed for that End,
solemnly renew their Covenant with GOD, engaging to endeavor to forsake those
Sins with which they confessed they were too easily beset; and there was after
this, for a Time, some Reformation: but I observed that two or three of the
Brethren that could not be persuaded to join in the Action, soon after fell
into Scandalous Misdemeanors.

I also observed, That after the Church had thus renewed their Covenant, the
Means of Grace offered unto the Indians, seemed for a time to be attended with
more of the Presence of GOD, and the Influences of His Spirit, than they were
before, or have been since.

It was then frequent to see Persons at the Hearing of Sermons, very much
affected, and some times as soon as Sermon was ended, there would stand up
several, one after another, and make very Penitential Confessions of their
Sins, with Promises to endeavor to Live new Lives, desiring also the Prayers
of the People of GOD for them.

About this time there joined in full Communion unto that small Church on the
Vineyard, in one Year, at least 30 Persons, the behavour of many of whom did
very much resemble that of the Jailor, at his Conversion, Acts 16. GOD showing
us herein that He can make the Indians as well as Others a willing People in
the Day of His Power.

There is an Increase of Knowledge among these Indians, though it must be
confessed that their progress herein is but slow, by reason of the want of a
Learned Ministry constantly to Instruct them. Their ordinary Preachers having
but little Learning, are not so able to feed them with Knowledge and
Understanding as is to be desired; yet some of these have Gifts not to be
despised in a day of small things.

These Indian Ministers as they are Members in full Communion of the Church on
the Vineyard, so they do not engage in the work of the Ministry without the
Consent and Approbation of that Church, as well as of the English Ministers
that Preach unto the Indians, and have an Inspection over them.

Having now Preached to the Indians upward of Twenty-five Years, I have never
yet had any special charge of any one single Congregation committed to me; but
have visited the several forementioned Assemblies alternately, as I have
thought most necessary; Preaching ordinarily, unto some or other of them every
Lord's Day, and on working days once a Fortnight; constantly also attending
their Church-Meetings, to assist and direct them.

The Indians when they are Sick, generally send for their Ministers, and some
times other Christians with them, to visit them and Pray with, and for them. I
have some times been with them on such occasions, and heard them profess a
great concern about their Souls; declaring that they did not regard any thing
in this World, so they might obtain an Interest in GOD's Favor; and I have
known many of them who have professed a good hope through CHRIST in their Death,
and who have behaved themselves on all accounts as does become dying Saints;
nor have I any doubt, but that many of them have died in the Lord.

The Reverend Mr. Josiah Torrey, Pastor of the English Church in Tisbury on the
Vineyard has also for many Years past Preached as a Lecturer unto the Indians
on that Island, having for that End learned their Language. He Preaches in
some or other of their Assemblies once a Fortnight, and goes frequently to
their Church-Meetings, to advise and assist them; so that the Indians have a
Sermon every Thursday Preached to them, either by Mr. Torrey, or my self: And
we strengthen the hands of one another, by going together to these Weekly
Exercises.

The Reverend Mr. Samuel Wiswall Pastor of the Church in Edgartown, has also
now almost learned the Indian Tongue, with a design to do what Service he can
among that People.

The Indians on Martha's Vineyard and the adjacent Islands, do hitherto
understand the Indian Tongue much better than that of the English; and
therefore complain much for want of Indian BIBLES, having now but very few
among them. Nor are there any to be had; the last Edition being now gone. These
Indians are therefore very desirous of another Impression of the Bible, if it
might be obtained; and diverse of them have told me, as well as some of those on
Nantucket, (whom I have diverse times visited) that they should be willing
according to their capacity, to contribute to it.

But the disadvantage which the Indians are under through the Scarcity of BIBLES
is somewhat helped by the Care of the Honorable Commissioners to supply them
with other useful Books in their own Language, viz. The New England Confession
of Faith; Several Catechisms; The Practice of Piety; Mr. Shepard's Sincere
Convert; Mr. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. And several Sermon Books of Dr.
Mather's, etc. besides the Psalter, and the Gospel of JOHN, Printed in the Year
1709. And the Indian Primer Printed this Year, in Indian and English. All which
Books are now very useful unto them.

As to their Civil Government, the Indians in Dukes County, (as well as in
other Places) are wholly under the English; But because their State does yet
somewhat differ from that of their English Neighbors, there are several Laws
made by the General Court of this Province, with a particular regard to the
Indian Inhabitants of the same: And there are some English Justices especially
Commissionated to take care of the Indians Inhabiting the several Counties of
it; and these are directed to Nominate and Appoint several Officers among the
Indians themselves, to assist under their regulation, in the Government of that
People.

In ^^kes County, Thomas Mayhew Esquire Second Son of the forementioned Mr. Thomas
Mayhew, who first Preached to the Indians on the Vineyard, was long improved in
the Government of the Indians there, and was both singularly Spirited and
Accomplished for that Service; as he was on diverse other accounts, a very
excellent Person: But he finished his course July 21. 1715. And his Son Zacheus
Mayhew succeeding him in that necessary but troublesome Office and Employment,
does good Service in it.

There are yet but few Indians on Martha's- Vineyard that have Houses of the
English fashion, though the number of these is of late increased; but in respect
of their Apparel, they are generally Clothed as the English are, and they by
degrees learn the English way of Husbandry: Several of them have good Teams of
Oxen, with which they Plough and Cart, for themselves and Neighbors, as the
English do. Many of them have also Horses, Cows, Sheep and Swine. They have
also among them some that have learned Trades; as at Martha's-Vineyard there
are several Weavers, One or two House-Carpenters, One Wheel-wright, who is so
good a Workman, as to be frequently employed by his English Neighbors. There
are several Tailors, and one if not more Shoe-makers, and one Blacksmith, who
not only took his Trade himself, but also made his Bellows, and other Tools;
and one Cooper, viz. William Charles, who is a good Workman. And though some of
these may not be so accurate as our English Tradesmen, yet this shows that as
the Indians are capable of Learning such Callings as English Men follow; so
they begin to come to it.

Experience Mayhew.
June, 2 d. 1720.
FINIS.

