A SERMON Preached before His Excellency SAMUEL SHUTE Esquire His MAJESTY's
COUNCIL, and the ASSEMBLY of the PROVINCE of the Massachusetts Bay in
NEW ENGLAND, May 31. 1721.

Being the Day for the ELECTION of His Majesty's Council there.

By SAMUEL MOODEY, A. M.

Pastor of the Church at York. N. E.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by Nicholas Boon, Printer to the Honorable House of
Representatives. 1721.

An Election SREMON,
LUKE IV. 14, 15. And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee:
and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about. And he
taught in their Synagogues, being Glorified of all.
GOOD news from a far Country, Prove 25. 13, 25. v. Comp.
by the hand of a faithful Messenger, is at all times very acceptable. What
better news then Salvation for Sinners? What farther Country then Heaven? What
more faithful Messenger then the Lord Jesus Christ?

THE Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, Isai. 6^. (...).
because the Lord has anointed me to preach Good Tidings. Which here, in the
immediate Context, the Increated Angel of the Covenant Applies to himself; And
there was delivered unto him the Book of the Prophet Esaias; and when he had
opened the Book, Luke 4.15, 22.
he found the place where it is written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, etc. And he began to say unto
them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. And all bare him
witness, and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth.

BUT in the preceding Context, we have a more Ancient Prophesy fulfilled, Genesis
3.15.
viz. That Original Gospel Promise, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise
the Serpents head: For the Son of God, being now the Son of Man; and having
been owned both by a Voice from Heaven, and the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
him at his Baptism, as in the foregoing Chapter, in the last verse of which
Christ is called the Son of Adam; We have him, in the beginning of this
Chapter, obtaining a complete Victory over the Devil that mighty Conqueror,
who finds the Second Adam his overmatch, v. 1. to 13, which brings us to our
Text: And when the Devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for
a season. And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there
went out a fame of him through all the Region round about. And he taught in
their Synagogues, being Glorified of all.

IN which two Verses three or four things are Observable.

1. WHAT it was that fitted Christ for his Mediatorial Offices, particularly
that of a Prophet: it was the Spirit which he received, not in a limited
degr^^, as Water is contained in a Vessel; but immeasurably, as living Waters
in a flowing Fountain. He returned in the Power of the Spirit, and Tau't.
Observe.

2. THE Place where Christ now began his Public Ministry; Isai. 9. 1.
it was in a remote and obscure part of the Country, Mat. 4. 16.
even in Galilee. Thus the People which sat in Darkness, saw great Light: and
to them which sat in the region and shadow of Death, Light is sprung up.

MAY the Gospel be still and further sent to the Dark Parts of these Provinces,
Prove. 29. 18.
where Thousands of Precious, Immortal Souls, have been perishing for lack of
Vision.

3 TO sum up diverse things together; we may Observe the Occasions Christ took,
the wise Method he Used, and the Success he had in his Ministry. When they were
met togther in the Public places of their Solemn Assemblies, the great Master
of Assemblies was present to Instruct them. He taught in their Synagogues.
Prove. 1. ^0, 21.
Wisdom cries without, she utters her Voice in the Streets. She cries in
the chief place of Concourse; etc. He cast the net where were a multitude of
Fishes: But he did not take them by force, or carry them away blind told: it
was in his Commission to open their Eyes, Context. v. 18. He therefore Taught
them; informing their Understandings, that he might persuade their Wills; which
brings to the last thing that falls under our Observation. In Dividing the
Text, viz. The welcome reception Christ found in some of his first Sermons, in
the Country: Multitudes were mightily affected. They had never heard such a
clear and powerful Preacher, in any of their Synagogues. He taught them as one
having Authority and not as the Scribes. There was in his Discourses, such an
unparalled Conjuction of Majestic Authority, and gracious sweetness, that many
of his Hearers were filled at once with Love and Awe; the effect whereof was
Admiration and Praise. There went out a Fame of him through all the Region
round about.

He was Gorified of all. Besure, all that heard his Internal, Efficacious
Voice, counted it the joy of their Hearts, and made it the business of their
Lives to show forth his Praises. All were Obliged to Glorify him; But some
were constrained to do it. The Great Truth before us is this.

DOCTRINE. THAT all who hear the Gospel are Obliged, and as many as do
experience the Power of it, will be constrained to Glorify the Lord Jesus
Christ.

This Important and all concerning Truth may be considered under several
Propositions.

PROP. I. CHRIST is Doctrinally revealed in the Gospel, and by the P^^aching
thereof as (...) of all Honor and ^word (...).

FOR it is the Gospel that (...) the Mystery of Mysteries, Mat 28. 19*
in the Doctrine of the Trinity; (...) Co^ 13. 14*
and reveals our Lord Jesus Christ, (...) Joh (...) 7.
to be the Eternal Son of God by ineffable Generation: P^o 8 2^. and 30 4.
and as such, he is held forth as a Party in the Eternal Covenant of
Redemption; J^^^ 3.16.
which is the Foundation of all Hope and Comfort to a ^^st World. Psalm. 89. 19
37.


THE Chosen People of God, Isai 49. 1. and 5. 50. 5. and on with the whole 53.
Chap.
being given to his Son, to be Redeemed from Sin and Wrath; He undertook to
Answer all their Debts and Obligations, Bonds and Forfeitures, unto the great
Creditor: And to that end himself became Bound, as their Surety, to take on him
their whole Nature, that he might bear their Sins in his own Body, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
on the Tree; and make his Soul an Offering for sin: Isai. 53. 10.
On the Credit of which Obligation it was, Heb. 11. 39, 40.
that the Old Testament Believers were Saved by the Lamb, Virtullay Slain from
the foundation of the World. Rev. 13 8.
And in this Faederal Transaction from Eternity, was the Foundation laid for
everlasting Revenues of Glory to the Crown of Heaven. And according to
Engagement, in the fullness of Time, the Son of God became the Son of Man, and
Immanuel dwelt amongst his People, and they beheld his Glory.

THIS is the greatest Work of Wisdom, Gal. 4. 4.
Power and Grace that ever was known. Heb. 2 16.
One brings in the Blessed God, Joh. 1.14.
as Speaking after this manner; I will make a World, Heaven and Earth by my
Word: but this is not such a Glorious Work as I am able to do. I could make ten
Thousand Worlds; and when I have made them, I could make as many more, and more
Glorious: But I would perform a Work wherein I might manifest my Glory to the
uttermost. What Work must that be? Why, to take the Nature of Man into Personal
Union with my Divine Nature, in the Person of my Son: And it is impossible for
Men or Angels to imagine through Eternity, any Work wherein it were possible
for God to express more of his Wisdom, Power and Glory. Great is the Mystery of
Godliness; God was manifest in the Flesh. 1 Timothy 3^ 16.


AND now, as a Second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Christ is set forth in the Gospel, Mat. 5.17.
as fulfilling the Covenant of Works for us, Heb. 12.2.
and working the Condition of the New and better Covenant of Grace in us. Act.
5.31.
The First Adam represents all his Natural Seed; Romans 5. 12, 19.
the Second Adam becomes a Head to all his Spiritual Seed. Genesis 2.17.
Adam breaking the Law and First Covenant, himself and Posterity (then in his
Loins) incurr the Penalty which is Death, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal.
Christ kept the Law, fulfilled all Righteousness, Mat. 3.15.
Stood the Trial, eat no forbidden Fruit, conquered the Devil in all his
Temptations, 1 Cor 15 (...).
and secured the Happiness all that were in him. Yea, he not only bare their
Hell for them, and purchased Heaven for them; but Faith also to lay hold of his
Justi^vng Righteousness, and so of Eternal Life; Joh. 14.19.
that because he lives they may live also.

AND thus Christ executes a Threefold Office, both in his State of Humiliation
and ^xa^ta^ion; Mat. 11 27
that he might not only reveal the mind and will of God to us, Joh. 1 18.
in the Scriptures, Ephesians. 1. 2
for our Salvation; and the Governing the World for the good of his Church,
(...) Cor 15. ^5.
restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies; Joh. 16 8
as well as to obey and su^fer for us: Psalm. 110 3.
but, by his Spirit convincing us of our Sin and misery, enlightening our minds
in the knowledge of himself, and renewing our Wills; he does persuade and
enable us to embrace a whole Christ, with all our Souls for complete Salvation;
Rev. 22. 17
as he is freely offered to us in the Gospel. Heb. 7. ^5.
And we shall doubtless find him able to save to the utmost, as we come unto
God by him.

THERE are moreover belonging to Christ, as he is Prophet, Priest and King,
Isai. 9. 6.
a sweet and wonderful variety of Relations; for he is a Father, a Brother,
Heb. 2. 11. 12.
a Bridegroom, a Shepherd, a Friend, Mat. 9 12, 15.
a Physician, etc. He is altogether lovely in these and all the Relations he
stands in to his Church. John 10, 11.
There is nothing lovely but what is in Christ; Cant. 5. 16.
there is nothing in Christ, but what is amiable, and every thing in him is
altogether so: As would in part appear, if we should but touch a little on any
one of these mentioned.

IS Christ a Physician? Behold! He comes unsent for to a Diseased World, that
he might cure wounded Souls, taking in hand such as are mortally sick, and
bleeding to Eternal Death, at ten thousand deep and ghastly Wounds. He applies
his Hearts Blood as the only Remedy. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
The Physician is wounded and dies, to restore the sick and dying Patient. And
instead of demanding largely for his infinitely costly Medicines, time and
expense, skill and practice, he entreats and even hires perishing Souls to put
themselves under his tender and infallible Hand, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
that he may not only make them sound and whole, John 5. 40.
but immortal and invulnerable, yea, Eternally youthful and joyful, beyond
conception! And though this wonderderful Physician has ten thousand Patients in
distant Countries, at the same time under his Cure, yet is he always at hand,
and within Call to every one of them; he has Servants that he makes use of as
under Physicians, but is ever present himself, even with the poorest and
meanest, to make their bed for them in their sickness; and attends them (...)
night and day, never slumbring nor sleeping; and which is further marvellously,
astonishingly singular and obliging; He Adopts and Marries all that he Cures,
Gal. 4.4, 7.
and will be sure to answer this double Relation also, 2 Cor. (...). (...).
of a Parent and a Husband, as well as all the rest before mentioned or not
named; concerning each of which, a great deal might be easily said; but we must
pass to the next Proposition, Acts 10. 42. 17. 31.
when we have only further hinted, that Christ is moreover in the Gospel
Revelation, Rev. 1. 8.
discovered to be the Judge of Quick and Dead, who is speedily to come with his
mighty Angels, having the Keys of Death and of Hell at his Girdle, Mat. 25. 1.
and on compared with 32.
to the amazing surprise of great and small, whether in the Infidel world, or
sleeping Church* to render his Anger with fury, Isai. 66. 15.
and his rebukes with flames of fire -- taking vengeance on them that know not
God, 2 These. ^. 7. 10.
and that obey (...) Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his Power; When he shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, and admired in
all them that believe: because says the Apostle, our Testimony was believed,
etc. The Word of Faith came with Power: Which brings us to the

PROP. II. Some of those that hear the Gospel of Christ, do experience the
Power of it upon their Souls.

THE Gospel was preached to our Father Abraham, Gal. 3. (...)*
and it came to him, not in Word only, but in Power, for he rejoiced to see
Christ's Day; John 8. ^6.
he saw it, and was glad. Yea, long before Abraham was, he whose Name is I AM,
was revealed by the Gospel, to the Fathers that lived before the Flood; and
that in such power, that dead Souls were Raised to the Life of Faith. We read
in the Eleventh to the Hebrews, of Believers from Abel to David and the
Prophets; and sure we are, that their Faith which wrought by Love in such
Memorable Instances of Doing and Suffering, was wrought in them by the
exceeding greatness of the Divine Power, Heb. 1^. 2.
working in and by the Gospel of Christ, who is the Author and finisher of
Faith. It Is so both as to more ordinary and extraordinary Believers. The Great
Apostle joins himself with the believing Ephesians, and breaks out into
Admiration at the Efficacy of the Gospel upon them by the same power that
raises the Dead, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Three thousand felt the power of the Gospel
at once. 2 Cor. 4. 6. 7.
Acts 2. 41. And many hundreds of thousands have done, Genesis 9. 27.
do or shall experience its all-conquering power. Joh 6.37.
First on their Minds, by Illumination, Tit. 3. 15.
and so on the Will and Affections, by infallible persuasion. Christ, now in
this Day of our gracious visitation, becomes Amiable in the Eye, and Dear to
the Soul of the Renewed and Translated Man, John 16. (...).
as the Apostles word is, Col. 1. 13. We here presuppose Conviction of Sin; as
to the Fact, the Fault, the Filth, the Folly, the Fruit and the Fountain of it;
as Mr. Henry distinguishes; for the whole need not the Physician, Mat. 9. 12.
but the Sick. And Christ is now more precious to the Conscience-wounded and
Law-condemned Soul then Rocks of Diamonds or Mountains of Gold. 1 Pet. (...). 7.
And thus are we brought to Believe in Christ, Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15
with such a Faith, Romans 5. 1
as not only Justifies our Persons, Acts 15. 9
but also Purifies the heart, Gal. 5. 6.
works by Love, 1 John 5 4. (...)
overcomes the World, Ephesians. 6. 16.
quenches the Fir^ Darts of the Wicked, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
endures affliction, 2 Cor. 7. 4.
and even rejoy^eth in tribulation, as seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11^ 27.
and fetching strength from the Almighty, Ephesians. 6 10.
to Answer the Obligations laid on us by the Gospel; so that we find our selves
constrained to give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name; which is the
last Proposition.

PROP. III. AS the Gospel obliges all that hear it, so will it constrain every
one that fa^ls under the power of it, to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ.

THERE are two or three Questions that must be answered; and then we may Apply
the whole.

Quest. 1. WHEN may the Lord Jesus Christ be said to be Glorified? What is it
to Glorify him, and who are they that do it?

Answ. A full Answer to this Question would comprehend the whole Body of
Divinity, both Doctrinal and Practical; all that we are to believe, and all
that we are to do being reducible under this Head of Glorifying God in Christ:
I may therefore only touch on some things cursorily, under certain General
Heads.

As, 1. WHEN secure Sinners, being awakened and convinced, Ephesians. 5. 14.
do Repent and Believe the Gospel; Man. 1. 15
then they begin to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ. Zech. 7. 5 6.


THE Unconverted cannot go an hairs breadth beyond self. Romans 8. (...).
Such as are in the Flesh cannot please God; Heb. 11. 6.
For without Faith it is impossible to please him. When our Lord calls on all
to Honor the Son as they Honor the Father, John 5. 23. he immediately
subjoins, by way or vehement Asseveration, the necessity of Faith in order
thereunto, v. 24. Good Works do Glorify the Lord, Mat. 5. 16.
as they are the Fruit of Faith which works by Love. Gal. 6. 5.
When the Jews enquired of Christ, what they should do that they might work the
Works of God? Joh. 6. 28. Jesus answered and said unto them, v. 29. This is the
Work of God, that ye Believe in him whom he has sent. And when the Lord Jesus
shall have his full Glory from his own Nation; Z^^n. 12. 10
they shall with the Eye of Faith, look on him whom they have pierced, and
mourn; -- giving Glory to the Son of God, by confessing their Sins.

2. WHEN believing Penitents do confess Christ before men, they give Glory to
the Son of God. With the heart man believes unto Righteousness; Romans 10. 10.
and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. Peter Glorifies the Lord
by the Public Confession he makes, Mat. 16. 16. And Thousands of his Hearers
afterward, no sooner had their Eyes opened to see Christ, but they first
Repented of their Sins, and then further Glorified the Lord, by a public
profession of him, and of his Gospel, Acts 2 36. to the end. Whereas such as
are ashamed of Christ before men, Mat. 10. 33.
do greatly dishonor him, Luke 9. ^6
and he will be ashamed of them, Ma^k 8. 33.
when he shall come in his own Glory, and in his Fathers, and of the Holy
Angels.

3. WHEN Professors do live answerably to their Heavenly Calling; Ephesians. 4. (...)
Walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, C^^^ 10.
and have their Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1. 27.
then do they indeed glorify god their Savior. More particularly,

1. WHEN Christians square their Lives by gospel Rules, and after the Example
of their Lord and Master, this will be much to his Declarative Glory.

WE have here a spacious Field, opening it self to our view; in which we can
take only some few steps.

A good Foundation being laid in deep Humiliation, Faith unfeigned, and
Repentance unto Salvation, not to be repented of; we must in order to our
further Glorifying God our Savior, make Religion our Business Luke 2. 49.
being zealous and prudent, Gal. 4. 18.
as well as sincere and upright therein: Man. 10. 16.
working out our own Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12.
and giving diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1. 10.


WE must love God in Christ, Luke 10. 27.
with all our Heart, Soul, Mind and Strength; and our Neighbor for Christ's
^ake, Mat. 7. 12.
with the same sincerity and constancy that we do our selves: Gal 6. 10
Doing by others, as we would have others to deal by us; Tit. (...). 2.
Watching over our Covenant Brethren, Mat. 5. 44.
and being watched over by them, according to Gospel Rules; doing good to all
men; speaking evil of no man; loving: such as hate us, and praying for them
that despitefully use us; Ephesians. 4. 32.
forgiving all Injuries, as God for Christ's sake, Romans 12. 14.
has forgiven us; and if it be possible, Heb. 12. 14.
as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men; following after the
things which make for peace, Romans 14. 19.
and things wherewith one may edify another. Romans 14. 18.
For he that in these things Serves and Glorifies the Lord Jesus Christ, is
acceptable to God, Gal. 2. 10.
and approved of men. 1 Pet. 5. 7.


WE must live the life of Faith, casting all our care upon him, Heb 13. 5.
who cares for us; Phil. 3. 20.
having our Conversation without Coveteousness, and in Heaven; Col. 3. 5.
our affections mortified to the things of time and sense, Luke 21. 19.
being content with such things as we have; and in our patience possessing our
Souls, Col. 3. 4.
whatever may be our Trials; 2 Pet. 3. 12.
Living continually on Christ as our Light and Life, Luke 12. 40.
Righteousness and Strength, solace and complete Salvation; waiting, wishing
and preparing for his Coming, by Death or Judgment.

IN the diligent and faithful improvement of our Time and Talents, 2 Pet. 4. --
9.
Ordinances and Providence; 2 Pet. 3. 18.
We must, having escaped the corruption that is in the World through lust, be
adding one Virtue and Grace to another, living in the constant and lively
exercise thereof, and growing in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; Being steadfast immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord. 1
Cor. 15. 58.


WE must discharge and fulfill the several and respective Duties of all the
Relations we sustain, whether Civil, Ecclesiastical or Domestic; as also of
every State and Condition of Life, Ecles. 7. 14.
both prosperous and adverse, with undissembled sincerity, Phil. 2. 9, 10.
and unfainting constancy. This is also to adorn and honor our Profession of
the Gospel; this is to Glorify God our Savior.

AND le^t we be driven back by violence, or circumvented by subtilty, we must
put on the whole Armor of God, 2 Cor. 11. 3.
watching as well as praying, Ephesians. 6. 10 -- 18.
that we enter not into Temptation; avoiding the occasions of sin, abstaining
from the very appearance of evil: Mat. 26. 41.
And herein exercising our selves, Job 31. 1.
to have always a Conscience void of offense, 1 These. 5. 22.
toward God and man. Acts 24. 16.
This will be to our own rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
and for the Honor and Glory of Christ.

FINALLY, whatsoever things are true, -- Honest, -- Just, -- Pure, -- Lovely,
Phil. 4. 8.
and of good Report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, we
must think of these things; but not to honor our selves, so much as for the
praise and glory of the Son of God; who is thus Honored, Mat. 5. 16.
as the Father. So shall our Light shine before men, and others seeing our good
works, will Glorify the Father and the Son.

NOW in all these things and many more, we are to be followers of those, Heb.
6. 12.
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises; for herein did they
follow the Precepts and Pattern given them by Christ. John 13. 12. -- 17.
And if in any thing our Lord Jesus may be Glorified by us, 1 John 2. 6.
surely it must be in the Imitation of his Example, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22 23
and by walking as he walked; who did no sin, Heb. 7. 26
neither was Guile found in his Mouth -- Was holy, Joh 8 29.
harmless and undefiled, Mat. 26. 39.
separate from sinners: -- universally Obedient and Submissive to the Fathers
Commanding and Disposing Will; John 2. 13. 17.
and Zealous for his Glory: Mat. 23. 33.
Zealous for what concerned his Worship: Zealous against sin; Mat. 16. 23, 23.
impartially reproving the Greatest, and not sparing such as were nearest, Luke
10. (...).
and dearest, Mark 3. 5.
and most officious to him: Compassionately laying to Heart the sins and Soul
Maladies, Mat. (...). 12.
the sorrows and bodily miseries of the Children of men. Mat. 8. 47.
Fogiving the gratest Injuries and Indignities that were offered him; Luke 23.
34.
for with his dying Lips, he Prayed for his bloody Persecuters and Murderers.
Luke 2. 42, 49.
But while he lived; John 9 4.
How early did he enter upon, and with what unfainting resolution and diligence
did he prosecute, John 19. 30.
'till he had finished the Business, about which his Father sent him into the
World? How did he redeem Time for Communion with God; sometime, Luke 16. 12.
spending the whole Night in Secret Prayer? How fruitful and profitable was his
Converse with men; improving, as well, every occurring Object, as every Season,
for the Instruction and Admonition of all about him? No corrupt Communication
ever preceeded out of his Mouth; (not so much as one Idle Word, in his whole
Life on Earth) but that which was Good to the Use of Edifying. What humility
and lowliness of mind did he also express; for a further Pattern to his
Disciples! How content with course and slender Fare, mean and hard Lodging,
poor and ignoble Attendants; Mat. (...). 20.
and yet washing the dirty feet of the meanest of them all! John 13. begin.
How unparalled and astonishing his exmplary Self-denial: His leaving the
King, his Fathers Court and Bosom, Prove. (...). 30.
where he was embraced with infinite Delight, and worshipped by Millions of
Glorious Angels; to take on him the Form of a Servant, and appear in the
likeness of sinful flesh; to labor in sorrow, to be tempted of the Devil; to
bleed and die that shameful, painful, Deuteronomy (...) 23
accursed Death of being Hanged on a Tree; Gal 3. ^3
and to drink the wine of the Wrath of Almighty God; Acts 5 30
even the full Cup of his Indignation; it infinitely exceeds all Example. Had
Michael or Gabriel condescended to have dwelt in a dunghill Worm, for
Thousands of Years, it had been no low stoop, compared with the Humiliation of
Christ: Nor can all the sorrows and Pains in the World, from Abel to the last
Child that shall be born, with the Pangs of their Mothers that bare them be
worthy to be compared with what Christ suffered, in his Soul and Body, for us;
that we might not think much of our light afflictions, ^word which are but for
a moment, 2 Cor 4. 16, 17.
and do work for us, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

I have omitted many things, John (...). 2^.
of equal weight and concernment with what I have mentioned. I have said
nothing of the care Christ took, as well as the Precepts he has given, to carry
Inoffensively, and very Respectfully to such as God has Dignified with
Authority; Mat. 17. 27.
or of the Miracle he wrought to Exemplify his Command; for there would be no
end, no seasonable end; besure in speaking of, though we should only barely
mention one Quarter Part of those Things wherein our Lord has gone before us,
as a Pattern of Good Works; in every thing that is Holy Just and Good: and we
Glorify Jesus Christ, even by our imperfect Writing after his Copy.

2. PROFESSORS do then Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ when their Frames and
Lives do Answer the Discoveries that are made in his Gospel. As to give an
Instance or two.

(1.) WHEN the amazing Depths of the manifold Wisdom of God, and the
astonishing Dearness and arderous, vehement flame of the Divine Philanthropy,
John 3. 16.
or Love of God in Christ to a lost World; both which are equally immense and
unfathomable, by Men or Angels, ^ph. 3. 19.
through Eternity: When the Discovery (I say) of these, Psalm 85 10.
together with the rest of Gods Attributes, in a Glorious surprising Harmony,
which is abundantly made in the Gospel, Romans 11. 33 to the end.
does mightily excite our humble and joyful Admiration and Praise; 1 John 3.
16, 17.
drawing forth at the same time, our suparlative Affections to God and Christ;
1 John 4. 7 -- 1^.
and our endeared Love to Persons and Things, as they stand Related to him:
Then do we Glorify God in Christ Peculiarly. Again,

(2.) WHEN the Heat-piercing Representation which the Gospel makes of the
horrible evil of sin, Heb. 6. 6, 7, 8.
and the irraconcilable Hatred of the infinitely Holy God against it, in the
Red Glass of Christ's Sufferings, above what ever could be made, by the Purity
of the Divine Law, Heb. 10. 28, 29.
by the direful Plagues and Judgments that the World has been filled with; or
even by Eternal Torments, in the flames of Tophet it self: When this discovery
of sin, in its evil Nature and Consequents, makes us to loath it, Mat. ^6. 74,
75.
with utmost detestation and Self-abhorrence; Luke 22. 61, 62.
in bitterness of Spirit, to Confess it, and to shun it as an only and infinite
Evil; then is our Frame and our Way as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and the
Holy Jesus is Glorified.

(3.) THEN also do we adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior by an agreeable
Deportment, and therein Glorify the Lord; When we have, maintain and express a
high Value for our own Souls, Heb. 13. 17.
and the Souls of others; especially such as are committed to our charge, Ephesians.
6. 4.
whether in Church, School or Family; and all the Souls over which we are under
Covenant Bonds to watch, as those that must give an Account; so as that we dare
not omit any thing that may be done, Romans 14. 13.
to prevent their Loss and eternal Ruin; Mat. 16. 26.
avoiding every thing also, that might be a stumbling block, or occasion to
fall in our Brothers way: Acts 20. 28.
For it is the Gospel only that fully discovers the inestimable worth of
Immortal Souls; 1 Pet. 1. ^8, 19.
and at what a Rate they are set by the Lord that bought them.

WE should now had there been time for it, have proceeded to a Third more
General Answer to the First Question; and have shown how Professors do Honor
Christ by living up to the high and Glorious Privileges of the Gospel, and the
exceeding great and precious Promises of the New and everlasting Covenant; when
they resemble the Children of the King of Glory, not in Worldly Grandeur, but
by trampling under foot perishing Riches; and soaring above the lower Region of
Aie^y Applause and Vain Glory: as knowing that they are Born from Above, and
Heirs to a Kingdom that cannot be moved; to an Inheritance, and c. -- See the
following Texts, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. chap. 7. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Romans 5. 1.
and on -- chap 6. 2, 12, 14. John, 16. 33. Romans 8. 12, to the 18, and v. 28 to
the end. 1. Cor 10. 13. 1. These. 2. 13. 2 These. 1. 1^, 11, 12. Heb. 12. 28. 1
Pet. 1. 4. 1. John 3. 1 -- 3. For there may not be allowed half so much Room
for the Answers to be given unto both the remaining Questions, as has been
already been taken up in Answering the First.

WE proceed therefore to Inquire,

Quest. 2. HOW are all, to whom the Gospel of Christ is sent, Obliged to
Glorify the Lord Jesus?

Answ. MUCH every way; in Point of Duty and Interest, Honor and Gratitude: For
the Gospel is a Part of Gods Revealed Will: It is, indeed, the most excellent
Discovery that ever the Lord has made, Ephesians. 1. 9, - 12.
of the Council of his Will, Mat. 16. 17.
for the Mnaifestaton of his Glory; showing far beyond what the Light of Nature
and Work of Creation could possibly do, how the Holy blessed God is to be
Glorified, that he may be Enjoyed. Now this is the Will, of God, Revealed in
the Gospel, that all Men should Honor the Son as they Honor the Father, John
5. 23. Nor can any Part of Gods Will be done aright, if this be left undone,
which is the end of all, and Comprehends all: This part then of the Divine
Will, being Obligatory, as well as any other, yea mightily and distinguishingly
Obliging; we are now Bound and must Obey. Nay, the Love of Christ should
constrain us: 2 Cor. 5. 14.
His Dying Love to save us from Hell; John 14. 2, 3.
his Ascension Love, to prepare Mansions of eternal Glory for us in Heaven;
together with the Alsufficient Provision he makes for us by the Way, and the
Assurance he has given us, that he will fetch Home, in the End, all that come
to him, as the Way; All this Obliges us in point of Gratitude, to do him
Honor; and such as Refuse it are guilty of Rebellion, which is as the sin of
Witchcraft; and of the most horrid Ingratitude in the World. Prove. 8. 36.
Yea they hate their own Souls and love eternal Death.

THERE remains only one Enquiry more to be Made and Answered, before we Apply
the Doctrine.

Quest. 3. WHENCE is it that such as fall under the power of the Gospel, do
find themselves constrained to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ?

Answ. IT is because the Eyes of their Souls are opened to ^ee what a wonderful
Person Christ is; and how infinitely worthy to be had in Eternal Honor, by
Angels and Men. And why did the Angels Glorify our Savior, Heb. 1. 6.
not only when he was Begotten from the Dead, and after he Entered into his
Glory; but when he lay in the Manger? Read Luke 2. 11, 14. and you will find it
was the Knowledge they had of his Divinity, his Dominion, and his
All Sufficiency to Save the Believing World; to resque which from the lowest
Hell, the God of Angels stooped thus low, to become a Worm, Ps. 22. 6. It was
this that Constrained multitudes of the Heavenly Host to Glorify God, and
Honor the Son as the Father. Why did the Disciples Glorify Christ, by
forsaking all to follow him? One of them tells us, John 1. 14. They beheld his
Glory, as of the only Begotten of the Father. And if you cast your Eye into the
next Chapter, v. 11. you will find, that upon Christ's manifesting his Glory --
his Disciples saw the Son of God in the Son of Mary, and gave him Glory by
believing on him. And the reason why so many that hear of Christ, withold
from him the Glory due to his Name, is because they believe not the Report of
the Gospel concerning him; they see no form nor comeliness in him, Isa. 53. 1,
2. The God of this World has blinded the minds of those that believe not, 2
Cor. 4. 4.
lest the light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, (who is the Image of God)
should shine unto them.

BUT it is impossible to see him with the Eye of Faith, and not Glorify him.

2. AS there are Beams of supernatural Light darted into the Minds, or
irradiating the Understandings of those who come under the power of the Gospel;
John 21. 15, 16, 17
so is there a holy fire of Love blown up in their Hearts; and Love we know has
a mighty constraining efficacy, through its mysterious influences, C^^. 8. 6.
Love is strong as Death. -- It Is fire has a most vehement flame, -- that many
waters cannot quench, nor the Floods drown. Now Christ is the Believers Head;
Ephesians. 5. 22. -- 32.
not only of Dominion, as to the Angels, but by way of Conjugal and Vital
Union; and as it is natural and necessary for the loving Spouse to seek and
rejoice in the Honor of her Bridegroom, to whom she is as it were a second
self; and so for the Members in the Natural Body, to exert and expose
themselves, in love and honor to the Head; in like manner, Ephesians. 5. 30.
when the Gospel has Espoused the Soul to Christ, and we are made Members of
his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bone; we must then, not only violate the
nearest of all Relations, but do violence to our new Nature it self, if we
should not Honor the Lord Jesus Christ, and give Glory to the Son of God: For,
besides that all the Glory which is given to the Lamb, Rev. 19. 7, -- 9.
will reflect beams of Light and Honor on the Bride his Wife; she loves his
Person, and is therefore willing to be dishonored, that her Lord and Life may
be Glorified.

THUS, as all that hear the Gospel are obliged, so every one that falls under
the Power of it, will be constrained to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ.

NOR can the Almighty Spirit of Christ (...) wh^m the Lord says Joh. ^ sh^^^
(...) and (...) you (...) Spirit of (...) all (...) fa^l of his (...) that
falls under his ^^^^cious Ministration, with Light and(...) and (...) is
expressly (...) may be Glorified. John 1^. 14.
Which (...) have been (...), as a (...) to the (...) Question; and (...)
s^e^^^ (...) have been given, (...) evidence (...) Bu^ ^ ^.

USE I.

(...) the Lord Jesus Christ, and (...) him, Revealed and Offered (...) the
Gospel, and by the great Ordinance of Preaching? What a Mercy (...) then, (...)
how thankful should (...), that we have (...) our Birth and Education in a
(...) of Sa^bath^ (...) and Ministers; (...) Christ (...) been, and is (...)
Preac^^^ (...) much, (...) any Kingdom, (...) World? (...) considering.

1. That (...) ^peakable Gift (...) this People, (...) a Design (...) Love, Jer
31. 3.
unto Thousands of (...), that they might escape the place of Eternal Torments,
and he made (...) happy, for ever and (...) Grace in (...), and Heaven (...)
him, could make them. Yea, Thousands we trust, a^^ already safe^y arrived to
that Region (...) ^ight and Joy; (...) 16.
where they are giving Glory to God in the Highest (...) their Lot in a place
so (...) goodly an Heritage* A^^ it may be charitably supp^^ed. (...) of this,
(...) who are now (...) this (...) the Glory of Christ, (...) how he is to be
Glorified, whom their Souls love, Jo^ 17. (...).
will (...) a little time, both perfectly Glorifie^ him, and be Glorified with
him.

BUT then, you are concerned for your (...) Children, most of which, some of
them at least being yet Unconverted. Be it so, (...) rejoice in hope that they
are involved (...) same ^^^^^^strable design of Love. (...)
The (...) the power of God for their Salvation. They are the Children of the
Covenant, Acts 39. 3. 25.
and the Promise. They also shall be taught of God. 2 John 6. 45.
Though they are blind, yet shall they be brought by a Way that they have not
known. Isai. 42. 16.
Though they have rocky hearts; Ezekiel 36. 26.
God will take away the heart of stone, and give an heart of Flesh. Isa. 54. 13.
All thy Children shall ^e taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of
thy Children; Isa. 44. 3.
the Lord will pour waters on the thirsty, Isa 59. 13.
and floods on the dry ground; his spirit on thy seed, and his Blessing on thy
Offspring: His Spirit shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord from
henceforth and for ever. This is his Promise, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
this is his Covenant; and these the grounds of Encouragement, Prove. 22. 6. 43.
for your Children! Bless God then for the Gospel! Ephesians. 6. 4.
But let not duty be neglected.

2. AS we and ours are sanctified and saved by the Glorious Gospel, which makes
it so precious to the Saints, above Gold, or their necessary food; so every
thing, Psalm. 19. 10.
(our Civil Liberties, our Secular Employments, our good things, our evil
things;) Job 23. 12. (...).
every thing is sanctified to us by the Gospel; according to that of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. Every Creature of God is Good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanskgiving: For it is sanctified by the Word
and Prayer: Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure, Romans 8. 28.
and we know that they shall work together for Good to such as (by the Gospel)
are called, Psalm. 25. 10.
etc. into the Love of God, Psalm. 103. 17, 18,
all whose ways are Mercy and Truth, to such as keep his Covenant: yea, his
Mercy is from Everlasting to Everlasting upon them that fear him, and his
Righteousness unto Childrens Children; to such as keep his Covenant, and to
those that remember his Commandments to do them. 2 Samuel 25. 3.
So that this Well Ordered Gospel Covenant being as sure as the Word and Oath
of God, Heb. 6. 18.
those two immutable things can make it, 2 Cor. 9. 15.
it becomes all our Salvation, and all our Desire. Thanks be to God for his
unspeakable gift.

USE II. IS it the peculiar Privilege of some, that they do experience the
efficacious, all-conquering Power of the Gospel on their Souls? How dangerous,
Romans 2. 17, 20.
how ruinous a thing, then must it prove, for any (and there be many that do
so) to rest in the bare doctrinal knowledge of Christ, and the way of
Salvation; or what may be learned by Reading, Hearing, Studying, etc. without
any renovation of the Understanding, 1 John 5. 19, 20.
Will or Affections, Ephesians. 1. 17-20.
by a sanctifying work of the Almighty Spirit? 1 Cor. 13. 1. 3.
And there is a double consideration to be hinted, which should make us
extremely jealous and cautious here, John 9. 40, 41.
viz. That there is nothing external, that does infallibly distinguish a
Convert from a Formalist, Legalist, or refined, close and self deceiving
Hypocrite; and many that fall short of a saving Work. Yea, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
there be some such who, though they be never Converted, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
yet do they really experience certain Supernatural Operations of the Spirit,
on their Minds and Consciences, Hearts and Affections; And to be deceived in
what so nearly concerns an Immortal Soul, the Last Judgment, and a State of
Happiness or Mysery that will be great not only above expression, but far
beyond conception, and endless in its duration; How amazingly dreadful the
Deceit! Rev. 2. 23.
To avoid which the solicitous and self-jealous Soul may, as under the Eye of
Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine its Knowledge and Experience, John 6. 69.
which is then right and good, sanctifying and saving, when it gives us
assurance of the Truth of the Gospel; 1 John 5. 7 -- 11.
even that there is indeed Righteousness and Life in Christ, for the Soul that
is Dead in Law, Romans 7. (...) 9.
self-condemned; helpless and hopeless, as to all that Men and Means can do;
Rev. 21. 6. 22. 17.
and that upon its coming to Christ, and accepting of him, Acts 13. 39.
as freely offered in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
it shall be pardoned and saved. And then such as have this Evangelical
Knowledge, do see a superlative excellency in Spiritual Things; 1 Cor. 2. 9 --
15.
not only as the getting and having of them, is necessary to deliver us from
Wrath; but by Intuition, the Spiritual Eye discerns an Innate Excellency in
Grace and Communion with God for it self, which it could never discover before
it experienced a mavelous Change, which thus represents all things, (the
World, Sin, Grace, Christ and Heaven with an aspect, altogether new.)

AGAIN, Sanctifying Knowledge is very humbling; 2 Cor. 9. 17.
the more the Soul has of it, Job 40. 4.
the less, and the viler it is -- And upon any fresh Anointings, Ephesians. 3. 8.
gracious discoveries, how does it wonder at the Riches of free and
super-abundant Grace, Job 42. 5, 6.
so distinguishing of the very Chief of Sinners: John 14. 21. 22.
It wants words to express its Admiration, 1. Tim. 1. 16.
and Self-abasement. Moreover, 1 Pet. (...). 11.
it is this Knowledge that begins and maintains the Holy War, Gal. 5. 16, 17.
in the Renewed Soul; and those never ceasing Conflicts, between the Flesh and
Spirit, the Object of which is not only Groser Corruptions, and the out
breaking thereof; but Self-love, By-ends, the lusting of the Unrenewed Part to
Pride and Envy, James 4. 5.
Covetousness or sensual gratifications; our proneness to Vanity, and deadness
coldness and wanderings in Duty; James 3. 2.
and that too when best satisfied of our good Estate; even then these
remainders of Corruption will sorely grieve us; though we know they shall not
Condemn us. And we shall be constrained, Romans 7. 14. 24.
very often, to groan out our Complaints before the Lord, and sometimes into
the Bosom of a Christian Friend, that can sympathize, -- as being weary of our
Lives, though filled with outward comforts, because of In-dwelling Sin. Nor
will the New Man rest in fruitless complaints; Gal. 5. 24.
but will effectually, though gradually, Crucify the Flesh, with its
affections and lusts. And to mention no more; It is a Property that belongs to
all, and only to such as are Begotten by the Gospel, and Born of its
incorruptible Seed; 1 Cor. 4. ^5.
That they love Christ with such a Superlative, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
Conjugal Love; that neither the whole Earth, with all its Treasures, Dignities
and Delights; Psalm. 73. 25.
nor Heaven it sel^, could satisfy, without the Enjoyment of him, who as one
said, Can make as many Heavens as he pleases, and is worth as many Heavens as
he can make. Yea, wherever they see the Image of Christ, Gal. 1. 4.
be it on a Person weak in Gifts, Psalm. 119. 63 compared
poor in Estate, and low in Esteem with the World: Or suppose, Psalm. 16. 3.
of different Sentiments from us, and possibly disaffected toward us, yet the
Image of Christ, visible on them, will, like a Loadstone, draw and engage our
peculiar, endeared and uniting affections unto them: And how solicitous, now,
about the Things which concern the Kingdom of Christ; Psalm. 122 6, -- 9. with
137. 5, 6.
our Dear and Dread Sovereigns Honor, and Jerusalems Peace? which things do
lie with little weight on our Minds or Hearts, before the Gospel has Converted
our Souls; for self, either more gross, or double refined, is all in all to the
Unconverted; Zech. (...). 5, 6.
but to the Regenerate, Col. 3. 11.
Christ is All.

USE III. Do all those, and those only, who are sanctified by the Word of
Truth, and Spirit of Grace, working effectually thereby; find themselves
constrained to Glorify God in Christ, from their Hearts, and in their Lives?
How excellent a thing then, is Sanctifying Grace?

If it be (which none will deny) the most excellent Thing that any Creature can
possibly perform, or ^e concerned in, to Glorify the LORD; (and it is the
Excellency of God that he can do no other than Glorify himself) and if it be
Sanctifying Grace, and nothing short, that does or can dispose and enable us to
aim at, and live to the Glory of God in Christ; which has been shown in the
Preceding Discourse; then this Grace is surely the most excellent thing in the
World Consider it absolutely or comparatively, in its Divine Original or
Mysterious Production, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
in its spotless Purity or durable Permanency; in its exact suitableness to the
Nature of man, James 1. 17.
and as the only Remedy for Sin; John 3. 8
(As in the Disease of the Immortal Soul, Grace is the only Cure; 1. Pet. 1.
(...).
by the Application of the Spirit, in the Virtue of Christ's Blood) Consider it
further, in its wonderful Efficacy and Universal Usefulness, to all Persons and
Societies; at all Times, in all Places and very Thing; while we live, when we
ome to die, and to all Eternity -- I say, if we so Consider the Grace of
Christ; What may compare with it? What is External Beauty, Pro. 3. 13. 18.
or Bodily Strength, Earthly Riches or Worldly Honor; 1. Cor. 13. 4.
Natural Wisdom or Humane Learning; Moral Virtue, Heb 6. 4, 5, 6.
or even Supernatural Gifts when Unsanctified? All these together, though they
may be of much Usefulness to those that have them, much more to others who may
have the sanctified use of them (Indeed Gifts are too often abused, unto God's
dishonor, the great mischief of others, and to the Owners everlasting and
aggravated ruin) yet make the most and the best that can be made of them, they
will never dispose and enable us to Deny our selves, and Honor Christ, 1. Cor.
1^. 31.
as the least measure of Sanctifying Grace has a natural and necessary tendency
to do: Much more, when rich Gifts and many Talents are Matched with and
Consecrated by superior Degrees of Grace. The Truth of Grace makes the
Righteous more excellent than his Neighbor; Prove. 12. 26.
the strength of Grace makes one Saint to excel another; Romans 4. ^0.
but excellent Gifts do set off more excellent Grace, and make it manifold more
useful as well as shining, Luke 1. 3.
then otherwise it could be; that so God in Christ may be the more Glorified;
Which brings to the

The main U S E. And that which the Subject in Hand, the Work of the Day,
together with the Temptations that may attend it, the Providence of God, in the
present, sore Visitations on the Province; and the Eternal Interest of this
whole Assembly do, with one Voice, Call for. Take the Call in the words of the
Prophet, Jer. 13. 15, 16. Hear ye and give ear, be not Proud; for the Lord has
spoken. Give Glory to the Lord your God before he cause Darkness, and before
your feet stumble upon the dark Mountains; and while ye look for Light, he turn
it into the shadow of Death, and make it Gross Darkness. And,

1. Let the Congregation, in General, hear this Call of the Gospel, which,
indeed, Comprehends in it all that the Gospel Calls for; Psalm. 111. 9.
and let us Glorify the Holy and Reverend, Cant. 1 3
Precious and Mysterious Name of the Son of God Incarnate; Prove 30. (...)
admiring his Perfections and Operations, Isa. 9. 6.
and being Devoted to his Fear and Service.

But to make the Call more distinct, Intelligible and Significant; while we are
waiting on the Almighty Spirit of Sovereign Grace, to make it Effectual: Let us
Glorify Christ, as God, and as Mediator.

(1.) As God; who is therefore the First Cause, the Chief Good, the Supreme
LORD, and the Last End.

[1.] As Christ is the Alpha, Rev. 1. (...).
the Beginning, the First Cause, in whom we live, Acts 17. 28.
move and have our Being; and by whom all things were made and do Consist; Col.
1. 16, 17.
we Glorify him by acknowledging him as the Creator and Upholder of all
things; John 1. beg.
depending entirely upon him, Heb. 1. 3.
and trusting for ever in him, Isa. 16. 4.
and in his Infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Truth, to Defend us from Evil,
to Supply our Wants, Psalm. 57. 2.
and to do every thing for us: John 19. 11.
Since there is no Second Being that can do any thing for us, Mat. 4. 4.
or against us, without him. Every Creature is that to us, which he is pleased
to make it, and no more or less.

[2.] Christ, as God, is also the Chief Good; Psalm. 73. ^5.
and we Glorify him as such, when we Choose him as the only Soul*satisfying
Portion of the Rational Creature, Psalm. 37. 4.
in whom alone, therefore, we take up our full Contentment, he is Highest in
our Esteem; (...) 43.
all our Delight is in him and he is our exceeding Joy. For (...) Mr. Caryl
observes, Whatsoever God has put, of sweetness, suitableness, and variety of
Excellency, (...).
into the Creature; he has reserved this to himself, (...).
to be the exceeding great Reward of his People; their Portion, their
Inheritance, their All; even the Center of their Everlasting Rest.

[3.] Christ, as God, is the Supreme LORD of All; absolute, (...) 9. (...)
unlimited and uncontrolable in his Sovereign Dominion. And we give unto the
LORD the Glory due unto his Name by a sincere, Den. (...) 34* (...), 36.
ready, N^^^. 24 (...) 19.
reverend and constant submission to his Preceptive and Providential Will;
Psalm, 46. ^6.
which is both the Rule and Reason of our Obser^ance and Subjection.

[4.] We must give unto God in Christ the Glory that belongs unto him, as he is
the Last End of all things; by Magnifying his Works. and his Name on the
Account of them: Job 36. ^4.
by designing, ultimately, his Glory in all our Tho'ts, Words and Actions;
whether Natural, Civil or Religious. For of him, (...).
and through him, and to him are all things; to whom he Glory, for ever, Amen,
Romans 11. 36.

(2.) Our Lord Jesus Christ is most worthy to be praised and Glorified, 1 Timothy
^ 5.
as Mediator; Heb. ^. 6.
and our Text and Doctrine call aloud on us all to give unto the Great Immanuel
the Glory due to his Name, Isai. 7. 14.
as he is the infinitely Wise, Righteous, Deuteronomy. 1^. 15.
Gracious and Powerful Prophet, Luke 7. 16.
Priest and King of the Church; by acknowledging him as the Author and Fountain
of all that Light and Truth, Heb. 4. 14. 10. 21.
which is Doctrinally contained in the Old Testament, Psalm. 2. 6.
as well as the New; and that all Gifts and Grace are from him; Joh. ^. 9, 16.
^^.
on whom therefore we depend entirely, that he will by his Spirit. Expound the
Scriptures to us, 1. T^m. 2. 1.
and open our Understandings and Hearts to receive the Truth in the Love of it;
Luke ^^ 27. and ^ 3^. 45.
Guiding our feet into the way of Peace. Acts. 26. 4.
-- By depending everlastingly on that one Sacrifice of his Body and Soul, Heb.
10. 14.
which our Great High Priest Offered unto God; Heb. 7^. 25.
both for our Good, and in our stead: Not doubting of the Prevalency of his
Intercession; 1. John 2. 1.
since, in the Quality of an Advocate, he is Ascended to his Father, John 2^. 7.
and our Father; of whom he asks but what himself has purchased, and the Father
has promised; (...) is himself also infinitely willing to bestow. I will pray
the Father, says Christ, John 14. 16. and yet he says again, cha. 16. 26. -- I
say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: For the Father himself
loves you, because you have loved me, and believed that I came out from God,
Heb. 7. 24, 25.
v. 27. Believe we then, that Christ is able to save to the uttermost, chap. 9.
12.
all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives, in the virtue of his
Blood, to make Intercession far them; And this will be to the Glory of his
Priesthood.

As King of Sion, and Head over all things to the Church; Psalm. 3. 6, 11, 12.
our Lord Jesus Christ is further to be Glorified. Ephesians. (...). 20 to the end
For the Son of God has not only a Natural Right of Dominion over all his
Works, and their Works; Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
but, by Donation and Purchase, he has a Mediatorial, Delegated. Phil. 2. 6, --
11.
Kingdom, derived from the Father; which extends to all Times and Places, Dan.
7. 13. 14.
Persons and Things; whereby he Guides and Governs the whole Frame and Course
of Nature; Rev. 1. 6. 19. 16.
manages all the affairs of States and Kingdoms; Mark 4. 39, 41.
Governing and Overruling, Prove. ^8. 14, 15, 16.
to the Glory of God and the Churches best Good, the Hearts, Counsels and
Administrations of the Wise and Great, whether they be Friends or Enemies to
him, and his Cause. He especially Builds and Rules his Church; Mat. 16 18
having both Legislative and Executive Power of Authority, Mat. 28. 18
and Power of Strength, to do according to his will; Rev. 1. (...).
and he is Lord of the Conscience. He Calls, Qualifies, and Improves Men, as
Officers under him, whether in Church or State; lengthning out or shortning
their Lives according to his sovereign Pleasure: And it is this King of Sion
and Governor of the World, who wisely orders out all the Trials of Persons and
Societies: By a Hearty Loyal and Practical Acknowledgement of all which,
together with the Efficaciousness as well as Righteousness of our David's
Administrations, whereby he carries all his Designs, for the Glory of his
Father, and ^he Salvation of the Church, Mat. 16. 18.
Completely through; notwithstanding all the Power and Policy of Earth and Hell,
edged with extreme and inveterate Malice, are continually Fighting against him:
When this, as was said is acknowledged, then is the Anointed King Jesus
Glorified: And thus we are all, in our several Places, Stations and Capacities,
bound to Exalt our Lawful and Rightful Sovereign; Mat. ^1. 9.
making it the greatest Solace of our Minds to Contemplate his Majesty and
Meekness, Ezekiel. 1. 8.
with all his Wonderful Perfections and Mysterious Managements; and alike
making it the Business of our Lives, to do every thing that may be Pleasing to
him; while we are satisfied with every thing that he does; as whatsoever the
King (his Type) did pleased all the People, 2 Samuel 3. 16. And thus we are to
Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ, in all his Offices; that the Father, who
Anointed him thereunto, for the Churches Safety, Solace and Salvation, may be
Glorified in in him.

I might suggest something by way of Motive, Psalm. 33. 1.
to be Revolved in our Minds, if peradventure we might, thereby find our Cold
and Dead Hearts something excited to this most excellent Work, of Glorifying
our Lord Redeemer. Psalm. 148. 13.
And why should not the Excellency of the Work engage all our Time, Talents and
Powers, in it? I say, the whole of what we are, have and can possibly do, for
the Honor of Christ; since it is most certain, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
That is the very Thing we were sent into the World about. And we have nothing
else in the World todo; but to be Loving, Praising, Serving and Glorifying God
in Christ. And what is there that we could Desire to be, now and for ever
employed about; Rev 5. 11 -- 14.
that is Comparable to this, chap. 4. (...) end
for Honor and Pleasure? No Saint or Angel in the Upper World has a sweeter or
higher employment, 2 Coro^. 9 7
then ^o Please and Honor the King of Heaven. If Solomon's Servants were happy
in waiting on their Royal Master; Luke. 11. 31.
Behold! a greater then Solomon is here. And then, to Consider how the Heart of
God the Father, has from all Eternity, been set on Glorifying his Son Jesus.
All the Eternal Counsels of his Will, and puposes of his Grace, were for this;
all the Works of Creation, too, and Providence, as well as Redemption are for
this, and no other End Ultimately; but that God and his Messiah might be
Equally Glorified. And he will be Glorified, whether Gospel Sinners will or no:
The fullest Vials of Gods Wrath; 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.
the very hottest Flames of Hell are prepared to torment, forever such as
despise, reject and refuse to Honor the Lord Jesus Christ. Isa. 5. 4.
In a Word, What could the God of Heaven do more, as to means, than he has
done, to engage us in this Blessed Work, Mat. 25. 41.
that is its own Reward? John 3. 36.
Could he Threaten a greater Evil then Banishment from his Glorious Presence,
(...) 33.
and the full, Dead Weight of his Almighty, Vindictive (...) Eternal Wrath,
(...) 90. (...)
to work on our Fear? Or, (...) Co. 1 4. (...)
to manage us by the other main handle of the Soul; (...) John (...).
our Hope; Could he Promise a greater Good, then the Beatifical Vision! (...)
16.
That far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory* those Rivers of Pleasure
that a^e, with fullness of Joy, at his Right Hand forevermore? (...) 3. (...)
And to sit with Christ on his Throne of Glory, -- but I must forbear -- and
Pass over what Christ is in himself, having all possible perfections, both of
the Divine and Humane Nature. united and concentring in his Mysterious Person,
(...) 7. 14. (...) 6.
who is the Wonder of both Worlds -- What he has done and suffered for us; Rev.
1. 5
how he has Distinguished, John 14. (...)
Especially some of us, who have been among the least of Mortals and greatest
of Sinners; C^ne. 4. 9 (...). 5.
yet Favored! The dearness of his Love! (...) Cor. (...) 9 (...) 7.
The Riches of his Bountiful Liberality! His unwearied Patience, and constant,
tender and effectual Care! Surely all these Things, and a Thousand more, not to
be enumerated, bespeak a deep and abiding sense of our Obligation to a Glorious
Savior; even such (...) will (...) ^ but^ of all possible Honor and Ho^^age,
John 17. 4.
unto him. I will only further add, that the Immense and Eternal Revenues of
Glory, that God in our Nature has bro't in, to the Crown of Heaven, beyond what
all Men, Angels and Worlds could possibly do; might serve instead of a Thousand
Motives, to excite the highest and fullest ascriptions of Glory to Christ, Acts
^2. 24.
from such as have learned Obedience to the First and Great Command, Rev. ^2.
11.
and do make the Glory of God their Ultimate End. As I said; Mat. 22. 36, -- 38.
I will add no more, by way of Motive; not to much as to Index the Heads. --
which would Challenge much Room, for enlargement; were I engaged in a full
Discourse or Treatise, on the Noble and Super-Caelestial Theme, of Honoring
the Son as the Father. There would also be Demanded, Room, for ^^^y Heads of
Direction, to be sub^^^^^ed; but here also, I am under Re^^^aint: Only,
inasmuch as the Exhortation we are upon, followed close upon the last of the
Three Preceding Uses, or Inferences, respecting the Excellency of Sanctifying
Grace, for the Use of Glorifying the Lord Jesus; 'twill be Natural to take the
Hint, and wait on the God of all Grace, who is able to make all Grace abound
toward us; that -- we may be furnished to (This which comprehends) every Good
Work. And because they are Pleading, James 5. 17.
Argumentative Prayers, that, after the Example of our Saviors most excellent
Prayer, John 17. do Prevail with God; I might touch on two or three Pleas to be
made, and enlarged upon, when we are on our Knees; begging for Grace, that we
may Glorify the Lord. And

1. We may plead the Strength of our Corruptions, with the Advantage Satan has
thereby, to hinder us from, or in our Work. Ignorance and Unbelief are the Root
Causes why Christ has so little Glory, from us -- Lord! That our Eyes may be
opened -- Lord, Increase our Faith. Self-love Diverts us, and an Earthly Mind
is a Dead Weight on our Hearts, clogging our progress in the Service of the
Lord, and obstructing the Elevation of our Souls, that we cannot Soar high in
his Praises. -- Plead we, then, that God would make Good his Word unto us, in
which he has caused us to Hope, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
by Circumcising our Hearts to Love him; and then it will be Natural and easy
to speak and act for his Glory -- Turn away mine Eyes from beholding Vanity,
Psalm. 119. 37.
and Quicken thou me in thy Way. Holy David, found the Dead^ing Influences of
the World, on his Heart; that he could not live to God, as he would; and he
thus Confesses, and thus Pleads, and obtains Help -- And God will surely hear
our self bemoanings, Jer. 31. ^8, 20
our unutterable Sighs and Groans. Rom 7. 14. to the end.
-- He will hear his own Spirit and Grace in us; Romans 8. 26, 27.
the New-man, Psalm. 50. 15.
that is Begotten and Born of God -- and we shall Glorify him: Which brings on
another Plea.

2. Plead the Gracious Breathings of Desire, and humble Wishes, we sometimes
find, acting and moving in our Heart's -- O that we could seek the Lord more,
and our selves less, in what we do -- That we could more abundantly lay out our
selves, in his Service, Phil. 2^ 13.
and for his Glory. -- Lord, thou have wro't the Will; strengthen and enlarge
it: but work the Deed also.

3. Pleading for Grace to Glorify the Lord, we may, with safety, promise him;
that according to the Measure of enlightening, renewing, strengthenning,
enlarging and confirming Grace, that he shall please to give, we will
proportionably Honor him, in our several Places: For though without him we can
do nothing; yet, through Christ's strengthening us, we can do all things, John 15.
5. Mat. 24. to the end.
Phil. 4. 13. But after all, there is nothing, in the order of means that will
so help us to Glorify the Lord, 2 Pet. 3. 4, 10 -- 14
our Lawgiver, Judge and Savior, Rev. 23. 12.
as the realizing expectation of his speedy Coming, by Death or Judgment: 1
John 2. 16
This would work mightily both on our Hope and on our Fear: 2 Timothy 4. 8.
It would deaden our Affections to all that is in the World; even the Lust of
the Flesh, Col. 3. 4*
the Lust of the Eyes, Heb. 10, 23, -- 25.
and the Pride of Life. Such as love Christ's Appearing will be Constrained; the
Love of Christ, their Life, with whom, they have his Promise that they shall
then appear in Glory, must ^eeds Constrain them to do much for him, as they see
the Day Approaching For it will be worth something unto Magistrates, Ministers,
and People, in that Day, when the Rich and Honorable of the Earth; Yea high
and low, one and all, that have sought themselves, and Robbed Christ of his
Glory; shall seek to hide themselves in Holes, and cry to the Rocks and
Mountains to fall on them, Rev. 6. ^5, 16.
and to hide them from the more dreaded Presence of their Judge; then, I say,
it will be no little thing to be openly Acquitted, before Angels and Men, from
all the hard Censures they have Patiently and Profitably born: and to be
Acknowledged by the Governor of the World, and Judge of our Eternal State, as
his Faithful Servants and Peculiar Favorites; where and when, Every kind of
thing, great or little, that they have though it or said, done or suffered; whether
more Openly or in Secret; shall be Proclaimed, to their Unspeakable Honor and
Joy, before Kings, Prophets and Apostles; all Nations and Generations of Men:
Before Angels and Archangels! Without all doubt, then, the uncertain Riches,
deceitful Pleasures, and empty, vanishing Glory of this Worm-eaton, Sin-worn,
drossy World is not worth a Thought, in Comparison with the Recompense of
Rewards. Nay, Heb. 11. 26.
even the Reproach of Christ is to be esteemed above the Treasures of a
Kingdom: Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
Nor may the highest and richest Favors of the greatest Monarch on Earth,
Compare with the least Chearing Smile of our Master in Heaven; while we are
Sweating at his Work; or, were i^ bleeding under the Cross here on Earth.
Verily we shall be all of one Mind as to this, When the Gates of Death shall be
opened to us, and when we shall see the Doors of the shadow of Death; Job 38.
17.
through which we must Pass to an amazing Eternity! Or when we shall see the Son
of Man Coming with his mighty Angels, in Power and great Glory: then, shall we
all be of one Mind in this, That Christ is All; 1 Cor. 8* 4.
and this Idol World, with all its unsanctified Pleasures, Profits and Honors,
nothing at all; but a Perfect Cheat.

BUT I am on the Directory Part of my Discourse: Take therefore one Cautionary
Direction, before we Pass to ^e other Branch of the Exhortation. And I the
rather add this Direction, because it seems to be no aliene Trans^^ion to that
Exhortation which will more immediately concern the General Court, and the
Difficult Work before them. The Direction or Caution is this.

DON't think it an easy thing to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ None are bro't
^o it but by such a Power as Raises the Dead. Ephesians. 1, 19.
And it is, in some respects, a greater wonder to see an Earthly Heart mounting
Heavenward, then it would be to see the Rocks and Mountains, leaving their
established Basis, in the Earth, and flying as the Clouds in the Aerie Region.
Phil. 2. 20, 21.
All seek their own, not the Things which are Jesus Christ's. The Apostle had
one with him, Mat. 6. 24.
that was all for Christ, but he could not find his Second. No man can serve
two Masters; God and the World, Self and Christ: But how inexpressibly hard is
it to Crucify the Flesh, and overcome the World? Nothing but the Almighty
Power of God is so strong as the Chains of Sin and Self-love; whereby we are
held back from Honoring the Eternal Father, and the Dear Son of his Love.

AND now having spoken these things to the whole Congregation, in General, I
should make Application.

2. TO the Great and General Assembly in Special: But being neither Versed nor
Skilled in the Art of Address; I must desire to be Excused, if what I presume
to suggest, be without Distinguishing the Three Estates of the General Court,
which carries in it the Resemblance of a Parliament. All therefore that, in a
more Indefinite Way, I shall be Bold to lay before so Wise, August and
Venerable an Assembly, will be in a Threefold Hint.

(1.) IT is a Thing greatly to be Wished by and for the Two Honorable Houses;
Psalm. 34. (...).
that they may be United in the Highest, Isai. 42. 8.
most Noble, Princely, Angelical Design, that ever was or could be on Foot,
Acts 3. 13.
in this or the Heavenly World: John 13. 31, 32.
Namely, That of Glorifying the Son of Man, and God in him.

AND what Advantage, worth the Naming, have the Wise and the Great above Meaner
Men, John 19. 38 -- 42.
but in this; that they may do much more then others for the Honor of Christ,
1 Cor. 15. 10.
and the Peace of Jerusalem. Esth. 10. 3.
On this Account, indeed, it is Desirable to be Esteemed, Exalted, Psalm. 122. 9
Betrusted; that these Advantages may be Improved to the Glory of him, Is^^ 6.
8.
who is the Fountain of Honor: 1 Timothy 3. (...).
And we have the Word of this King of Glory; which is more than the Oaths of
twice Ten Thousand Angels; Psalm. 140. 13. compared with John 12. 26.
That if any man Serve him, he shall Dwell in his Presence; and the Father will
Love and Honor him; and Greater Glory the Blessed God himself has not to
bestow on any, John 16. 27.
then to Love them as, and Honor them with his Son; John 17. 22, 23, 24. And
the Glory which thou have given me, I have given them (...) that they may be
One as we are One. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made Perfect in
One, and that the World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as
thou have loved me. Father I will, that they also whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory, which thou have given me: --
Behold, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be
called the Sons of God. -- Beloved now are we the Sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be: But we know that when he shall Appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 1, 2. Higher then this,
neither Saints nor Angels can possibly Aspire. Yet this Honor have all the
Saints: and such as Glorify Christ, as we have heard, shall doubtless be
Honored in diverse respects above Angels.

(2.) BEING Fixed as to their Design and End; even to Honor Christ, and serve
their Generation, according to the will of God; the next thing to be wished by
and for the Great and General Assembly is, that as Wise and Faithful Stewards
of the manifold and mighty Advantages, which their God, their King and Country
have put into their Hands; Judge. 19. 30.
they may with all possible Deliberation and Impartiality, Consult with
themselves and one another; but above all with the Wonderful Counselor, and
Prince of Peace, in a Thousand devout Ejaculations, besides their Set
Devotions, Neh. 2. 4, 5.
the surest and safest methods, for the Attainment of the Blessed and Glorious
Ends Proposed. 1 Cor. 10. 10, 11.
And how vehemently is it to be Desired, That both Houses may Unite in the
means as well as the End? Watching and Praying, that they Enter not into
Temptation; for the Greatest, Wisest and Best of them all, are but men at the
Best.

(3.) HAVING Agreed on the Right and Good Measures to be taken, according to
their Unbyassed Judgments and a Good Conscience; there will be, in the Faithful
Servants of the Lord, and Patriots of their Country, a Steady Resolution, in
the strength of Christ, Zealously, and with unwearied Application; but not
without Prudence and Moderation, (That they may approve themselves PEACEABLE as
well as Faithful in Israel; according to that excellent Character of an
Israelite indeed, Exemplified in 2 Samuel 20. 19.) to prosecute the means, for
the Attainment of the End; and that over the steepest, Rocky Mountains of
Opposition; and through the deepest and dirtiest Sloughs of Reproach and
Discouragement, Mat. 5. 9, 12.
that may lie in their Way: and great shall be their Reward in Heaven: Nor
shall it be small on Earth; for, thus ^aith the Lord God of Israel, I Sam. 2.
30. Them that Honor me, I will Honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly Esteeemd. 1 Cor. 1. 12
Were it but the Testimony of a Good Conscience, -- It is strong Consolation!
For Believing the Promises, that are, one and all Confirmed by two Immutable
things, in which it is impossible for God to lie; Heb. 6. 15. 18.
we Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. 1 Pet. 1. 8.


THERE might have been Added, a Third Branch of the Exhortation: But I am
Happily Excused by the Expectation of a Sermon, To morrow, to the Sacred Order;
from One who without Apology, may Instruct, Charge, Warn and Comfort, 1 These.
2. 11.
even the Eldest Ministers, as a Father his Children. One Happy Token for Good
to the Province; that the Lord Jesus Christ has spared the Life of his Servant,
thus long, and to this Work.

THERE should also have been a Use of Warning to the openly Profane and
Secretly Wicked; to the Self-Righteous, Vainglorious Pharisee, and the Self
Seeking, Flesh-Pleasing Worldling and Sensualist; as being all of them Traitors
to the Lord Jesus Christ, his Crown and Dignity: and if speedy Repentance
prevent not, Luke 19. 17.
they may expect (For the Lord will Recover his Glory by Destraint) Acts 17. 31.
to be treated as Rebels on the Day which God has Appointed wherein to Judge
the World in Righteousness, Romans 2. 16.
by the man whom he has ordained: -- Even Judge the Secrets of Men, by Jesus
Christ, according to the Gospel.

BUT I must Conclude: And it may be in a Word, or two of Comfort, to such as
are Heartily Concerned for the Honor of Christ, and Jerusalems Peace: Grieved
that the Lords Name is so much dishonored, by the most; and that themselves
can so little Glorify him, at best -- Such as, instead of adding to the floods
of Excess, and mountains of Pride, that threaten to overwhelm us; instead of
raising up Contention, and heightning the Crimes of Oppression and Extortion,
Ezekiel 9. 4
that have Reached to Heaven; they Sigh and Cry for all the Abominations that
are Committed in the Land. 2 Timothy 3 1 -- 5.
Now therefore Know for your Relief and Comfort, in these Evil Days; these last
and Perilous Times.

1. THAT the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is unalterably fixed to
Glorify his Dear and only Son, to the very uttermost: and every thing that is
Transacted in Heaven above, or here below; in which Angels or Saints, Satan or
the most subtle and malicious of his Instruments are concerned; shall be
infallibly over ruled and turned, even that which has a most contrary tendency,
to the greater Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Best Good of his Church
and People.

2. THAT being Espoused, or Betrothed unto the Lord forever, Hos. 2 19. 80.
in Righteousness, Judgment, Loving Kindness, Mercies and Faithfulness; you
must needs have the sweetest Pleasure; the fullest satisfaction, and an Honor
above Angels, in the Glory that is and shall be given to your Royal Husband;
who is Dearer to you than your Life; and will be ten thousand times dearer than
he is.

3. YOU may Pray, in Faith, for the Peace of our Jerusalem; not doubting but
God will give a Gracious Answer: At least, for the Present, your Prayers shall
return into your own Bosom; Psalm ^5. 13. 122. 6.
for all shall Prosper that love S^uns Welfare. But the Time will come for a
full Answer to all the Millions of Faithful, Fervent Prayers, and
Supplications, that have been poured out in former Ages, as well as in our
Days. They are none of them lost, they shall all be Answered.

I now shut up all with Two or Three Texts, of Holy Scripture; Refe^ring to the
Glory of God, in Christ; given Him by the Church Militant and Triumphant.

EPHESIANS. 3. 20, 21. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think, according to the Power that works in us; Unto him be
Glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all A^^^. World without End.
Amen. Jud^^ 24, 25. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy. To
the only Wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both
now and ever. Amen. Rev. 5. 8. -- 14. And when he had taken the Book, the four
Beasts (...) twenty four Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of
them harps and golden vials, full of odours, which are the Prayers of the
Saints: And they sang a new Song, saying, Thou art, ^^^^thy to take the Book,
and to open the Seals thereof; for thou wast-s^ai^, and have redeemed, us to
God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. And
have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth.
And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels, round about the Throne, and
the Beasts, and the Elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing: And every creature which is in Heaven, and on
the Earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in
them, he^^^ I, ^aying, blessing and honor, and glory and power, be unto him
that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever. And the four
Beasts said Amen, and the four and twenty Elders fell down, and worshipped him
that lives for ever and ever.

FINIS.

