News from the Moon.
A Review of the State of the British Nation, Vol. 7. Numb. 14. Page 53.
TUESDAY, May 2. 1710.
I Suppose Every body that know any thing of the Author of this Paper, knows,
That when he having some Years ago Traveled a Long Journey, and was carried up
into the Lunar World in a well known Engine, contrived for Elevations for our
famous High Church Men, and which was Called a Consolidator; at his return he
gave the World some account of his Curious Observations. -- But one Story he
never yet told, and which seems reserved to the present occasion. -- Be it
Known to you all then, that the (...)to the World in the Moon, as I was passing
through a great City about my Lawful Occasions -- What my business was there, is
Nothing to any Body: But I found the People in a great hurry, dragging a poor
Tailor away to their Courts of Justice. -- Lord have mercy upon the poor man
thought I, what will become of him? For he Looked to me Just as an English
Presbyterian would do if he were got into the hands of the high Church rabble;
(viz.) Like a Man that Expected to be Murdered by them. Being mightily
Concerned you may be sure, to see the poor Man used thus, I Inquired who he
was, and what was the Crime for which he was thus treated -- I met with many
relations Differing from one another about him, For the People there tell the
same Story a great many ways Just as they do here, as the humor takes them;
but not to trouble you with several Relations of the Thing, the Substance of
the Man's Case, it seems, was thus. The Man as I told you was a Tailor by his
Trade; Now you are to understand, that though I did not find there was any of
that foolish useless sort of People called Poets there, yet they have their way
of Satyrizing and Ridiculing the Follies and Vices of the Place, as well as in
other Countries; and it seems the Tailors are the Satyrs -- for when any Man,
or Body of Men have played the Fool, or the Knave, or the Coward, or the
Drunkard, or any Vicious prank, he that has a mind to Lampoon him, goes to a
Tailor, and gets such a Coat made as such People are generally condemned to
wear upon Public Days, who upon Trial are found Guilty of such or such
respective Crimes: this Coat is carried about the Streets and hang d up, or
showed particularly at or near the House of the Person, and is easily known by
the Dimensions and Figures made upon it, who it belongs to: and it is called in
their Language a Thocacterraca, in English, a Representer or a Character Coat.
But you must remember too, that there are Strict Laws, any Tailor making these
Coats for Persons innocent of the Follies Described; and when any Transgress
that way, they are severely Punished especially when they make a Coat for a
Man, and upon trying it on, it does not fit him. On the other hand, oftentimes
it happens, that when a Man makes a Character Coat for one Man, it fits
another, and sometimes a great many. This is owing partly to the Ignorance of
the Tailor, who does not take his measure right, and partly by Fools and
Knaves, being in that Country very often much like one another, but more
especially by the ridiculous Folly of some Men, who when they see a Coat made,
though it be the most ridiculing, and most exposing thing in the World, they
cannot forbear, but they will be always trying it on, and endeavoring to make
it fit themselves whether it will or no. -- Nay they will stretch the Coat out
of all manner or shape to see if they can make it fit them, quite contrary to
the Tailors Design; as if knowing themselves to be Fools they were desirous all
the World should know it too. This is a great piece of Injustice to the Tailor,
though perhaps it may be none to themselves; for I cannot believe; but Every Man
IS just AS much a Knave as he would have the World believe him to be. -- Just
thus it fared some Years ago, with the Author of the Paper, Called, The Review,
in the World on this side the Moon, when he happened in a Paper to be panting
out the Character of a State Mountebank, a City Hero, a Coward to his Cause, a
Fool, a Knave, and a Deserter of his Friends. One said, that is at me; another,
that is at me; and the like: Nay, that would not serve them, but they must bring
in their Friends too; Who does he mean by that? and, Who does he mean by this?
That Is such a Lord, that blue List Man, is my L -- and his Garter; That
Deserter of his Friend, or that empty headed Magistrate, is the L -- M -- r;
that Litigious Impertinent is Mr. Hill -- d; that High-Church Buffoon, is Par
-- n Hig -- s, and the like; when it was far from the thoughts of the poor
Author, to do any of these Gentlemen so much honor. -- In like manner exactly
it happened in the Moon; the Story is this:

There had been some very Scandalous Fellow had done some ridiculous Thing, for
which he deserved to be Exposed, and some People had be spoke this Tailor to
make a Coat for him; the Coat was wonderfully made indeed, every side of it was
singular, as you turned it this way, it looked one thing: that way another; to
ones eyesight it represented one thing; to another, quite contrary; and all
agreed, that never such a Coat was made before: If you turned it this way, it
was a Fools Coat; that way, 'twas a Knaves Coat; on one side it represented a
Lord Bishop; on the other side, a Lord Duke; on another, a Lord M -- r; on
another a Clergy Man, on another, a Thief: Worn this way it made a Man a States
Man; that way, a Mountebank, that way a General that way a Coward; a strange
Coat it was indeed, as ever I saw in my Life. The Man that bespoke it no sooner
carried it along the Streets, as was usual in such Cases, but it raised a
terrible Combustion in the Town; the People began to stare at one another, as
if they were frighted --. The first that broke silence was a huge Tall Man, by
his appearance a Man of Grandeur, for he had a blue List upon his Coat, which
in that Country none but a few of the Prince Nobility are permitted to wear --
What D -- 's that? says he -- a Villian -- a Rogue -- why that Coat's made for
me; and up he runs to the poor Man and begins to bluster. -- Pray my Lord, Good
my Lord, says the Man, it is not made for your Highness, it was made for your
Neighbor such a one: you lie you Villian says my Lord, it was made for me, and
I Will have you Hanged, if there were no more Tailors in all the Moon. Indeed my
Lord says the Man again, it could not be made for you, for it will not fit your
Lordship: I ll try that, says his Lordship, and if it does I Will have you Hanged
immediately.

Upon which my Lord put the Coat on; but the poor Man was Confounded, when he
saw, that with but the least stretching, it fitted his Lordship to a Hair. --
And he expected nothing but Death. My Lord went away raging, in order to sent
the Criminal Officers to take up the Man: but he might have saved himself the
Labor, for the Coat was not carried much farther, but one cried, That -- has
made this Coat for me; another said, no, it is for me, and almost every body
that saw it challenged the Coat: at last the chief Magistrate of the Town
happened to come along, and he fell in a rage, and cried out with an Oath, the
Coat was made for him whereupon he Immediately seized it, and carried it into a
great Assembly of that City, which was then Sitting, to complain of the
Affront. This Assembly is called in their Language the Momonciculoc: I will not
pretend to Knowledge enough in the Lunar Language to Translate it; Some think
it may resemble a Common Council. -- Here he began to complain of the Affront,
when of a sudden a great Combustion rose among them in the Hall of the
Assembly; one said the Coat is made for me, another said it is for me; and to
be short, with my Story, no less than 114 of them Challenged the poor Man for
bringing this Coat out to Expose them in particular. The Man was in great
Distress,and had no way at last to bring himself out of this Broil, but by
telling them the Name of the Tailor, who made the Coat: which having done, he
made his Escape,and the poor Tailor was sent for. The Tailor was a bold Fellow,
and feared no Colors: And Immediately went to them upon the first Summons; and
being brought before them, they Examined him very strictly.

And as near as I can remember, the Examination was as follows; he is brought
into a large Closet, where they usually Examine Witnesses, and the Coat being
showed him, the Clerk appointed to Examine him, began the following Dialogue.

Clerk. Did you make this Coat Sir?


Tailor, Yes I did.


C. Who was it to represent?


T. It was made to represent him that it represents Sir.


C. But who is that Sir?


T. Why I tell you Sir, says the Tailor briskly, him that it represents.


C. Well, but here are a great many Gentlemen who say it represents them.


T. What all of them?


C. Yes, all of them.


T. It Is strange Men should be all K -- s of like Dimensions?


C. But how say you, Was it made to represent them!


T. If it represents them, it must be made to represent them.


C. But did you Design to represent them?


T. What do you tell me of Designs, my design was to make the Coat.


C. But here is my Lord A --, he says the Coat represents him.


T. His he tried it on, and does it fit him?


C. Exactly.


T. It Is impossible -- pray look on the Coat, the Coat is a Fools Coat, and his
Lordship is too much something else to be a F -- l.


C. But then it fits my L -- B --


T. That cannot be neither; for turn it and you will see it is a Knaves Coat, and
every body knows my L -- cannot be a Knave, it is not in his Head.


C. But it may fit my Lord C --.


T. No it cannot neither for turn it again, and then it is a Statesman Coat and
it is well known my Lord is no more a Statesman than he is a Conjurer.


C. Well, but they may think it fits them.


T. Their Guilt may do much, but it is not good manners in me to think so.


C. Well, but what say you to the rest of the Gentlemen that Challenge it? pray
give them Satisfaction.


T. Why truly, as to the 114 Gentlemen belonging to the Great Hall, if it fits
them all I cannot help it, they may take it among them, and then every one will
have his share -- (...) strange thing a Man cannot Dress up a Monkey but every
one calls him Cousin.


-- And with this T. threw the Coat down in the middle of the Hall.


