None but CHRIST. A Discourse On JOHN VI. 67, 68. Preached Privately, TO A
RELIGIOUS SOCIETY in SAY-BROOK.

By Azariah Mather, A.M. Pastor of the Church there.

Joh. xiv. 6. I am the Way, and the Truth and the Life.

Acts iv. 10, 12. Be it known unto you all, and to all the People of Israel,
that by the Name of JESUS CHRIST of Nazareth -- Neither is there Salvation in
any Other: for there is none other Name under Heaven given among men whereby we
must be Saved.

New London, Printed and Sold by T. Green, 1722.

None but CHRIST.
JOHN VI. 67, 68. Then said JESUS unto the Twelve, Will Ye also go away?

Then Simon Peter answered Him, LORD, TO WHOM SHALL WE GO? Thou have the Words
of Eternal Life.


WE find in the 66 th. Verse of this Chapter, That many of CHRIST's followers
forsook him, and went away; they turned their backs upon him and became
Apostates; The occasion thereof we find in the foregoing Verses; they stumbled
at his Doctrine: they were prejudiced at his Sermon: He had told them in the
foregoing Verses, that He was the Bread of life; and that unless they ate His
Flesh and drank His Blood, they had no life: That is, they neither had any
Spiritual Life then, nor should they have Eternal Life hereafter. They taking
these words to be meant Carnally and Literally, not Spiritually, stumbled
thereat. And when Jesus saw that some of His own Disciples misunderstood him,
He proceeds to Enlighten them, v. 61. telling 'em He meant eating of His Flesh
and drinking of His Blood, to be after a Spiritual manner, Ver. 63. That it is
the Spirit that quickneth and not the Flesh; and His words were Spiritual, i.
e. to be understood after a Spiritual manner. After which He told them he knew
well that there were some that did not receive the Truth, and would not
Believe, Ver. 64. And in Ver. 65. He gives one reason of it, viz. It was not
given them of the Father; telling them if the mighty Power of God did not
Enlighten their Understanding, quicken their dead Souls, draw them with a
sweet, yet holy Violence (as it were) they would not, could not come unto the
Son; which was farther offensive still, as the like Doctrine is to Arminians to
this Day. Upon this they Revolted, and this was the occasion of their
Backsliding; therefore it is said, From that time many of His Disciples went
back and walked no more with Him; forsook Him, and never returned to follow Him
any more.

Upon this the Lord JESUS took occasion to speak to His Disciples, that is the
Twelve (being full of Pity and Compassion,) He seeing many turn their backs,
turned about to those who remained; and in a very pathetical Heart-affecting
manner, says, Will ye go away also? Ye that are my Disciples! It is no great
wonder to see such and such go away, but will YE also go away that have been so
near and so dear to me? Will ye go away from Me that am your Savior and
Redeemer? Simon Peter, partly being a forward man to speak, partly because the
Lord's words reached and deeply affected him, makes Reply, Lord, whither shall
we go? The words note a Vehemence, and imply, (1) That they would not go. (2)
That they had no where else to go.


As if they should say; Lord, We have no where else to go; we cannot better and
mend our selves, therefore we will not go: Whither shall we poor needy Sinners
go for help, if we should leave and forsake Thee?

DOCT. That there is no help to be had for poor needy Sinners, but in JESUS
CHRIST. Act 4.12. Salvation is to be had in no other.

There are Two PROPOSITIONS.

PROP I. Sinners are Poor Needy Creatures. I intend Unconverted Sinners: All
men are such by Nature; the condition of all and every man by Nature is, POOR,
MISERABLE, BLIND, AND NAKED.

1. Men stand in need of Pardoning Mercy. They have need to have their Sins
Pardoned. Sins are called Debts, Mat. 6.12. What Luke calls Trespasses or Sins,
in Luke 11.4. Matthew calls Debts; to note that Sin is a Debt. How many Sins a
man is guilty of, so many are his Debts: and poor Man is miserably Bankrupt,
and not able to pay so much as one of the least of them! So likewise man is a
poor guilty Criminal and Malefactor, Condemned to die; Joh. 3.18. He that
believes not is condemned already. And there is no way to escape but by
Pardoning Mercy: They stand in need of Justifying Grace to Absolve, Acquit and
Discharge them.

2. Men stand in need of Renewing and Sanctifying Grace. Natural men are
Carnal, Corrupt, Unholy ones, such as God can have no pleasure in, Jer. 44.4.
Sin is abominable in the sight of the Lord; God hates it, and man because of
Sin is such in the sight of God too, Job 15.6. -- Much more abominable is man.
Hence they stand in need of Cleansing and Purifying, which is done by
Converting and Sanctifying Grace; which is wrought by the Operation of the
Spirit and Application of the Blood of Christ Therefore you read of being
washed in His Blood, Rev. 1.5 Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our
Sins in His own Blood. And 1 John 1.7, 9. He not only Forgives, but Cleanses
from Sin. This is done by the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God. Men stand
in need of being Purified and made Holy, without which they cannot enter into
the Beatifick Presence of God; Heb. 12.14. For without Holiness no man shall
see the Lord. As it was of old, a man Ceremonially Unclean might not enter into
the Camp and Congregation of God's People, Deuteronomy 23.10. So men Spiritually
Unclean cannot enter Heaven, Ephesians. 5.5. No unclean thing enters there.

3 Sinners stand in need of Peace, true Peace and Comfort. A Peace and Security
many of them have; Amos 6.1. Sinners in Zion are at ease: they cry, Peace,
peace to themselves: but this is a Peace that they were better without than
with: It Is a false Peace, a carnal Peace;

Peace that must be broken and taken away from them, else Woe to them; It Is a
Peace that is from a spirit of Self-flattery and from Satan, (he blinds men's
Eyes and keeps them under Delusion) and not a Peace that comes from God. GOD is
angry with them, ( Psalm. 7.11.) and says, that there is no Peace for them,
Isa. 57 ult. There is no true Peace and Comfort but what is from God, and is a
fruit of the Spirit; Joh. 14.27 My Peace (says our Savior) I give you; who
sends the Comforter to speak Peace. Christless Souls can have no good
well-grounded Peace, Joh. 16. ult. Isa. 57.19 God causes Peace, but God never
speaks Peace to such who are Unconverted, Impenitent Unbelieving Sinners.
Sinners, many of them don't need Ease and Security, but they need Peace: Peace
they have, but then not a sound, solid, durable and lasting, Peace.

4. Men stand in need of the Precious Indwelling Presence of the Spirit of God.

(1) This is needful to Enlighten and Teach them the way they should go. Men
are naturally Blind, Rev. 3.17. Full of Spiritual Darkness and Ignorance, Ephesians 4
18 Having their understandings darkened through the ignorance that is in them.
Ephesians. 5.8. They are Darkness it self, having no Spiritual light and knowledge* 1
Cor. 2.14. They neither do no can discern Spiritual things, because they are
Carnal; nor do they understand the way to Jesus Christ. When men fall under
Convictions and Awakenings, they are wont to calculate and lay out to
themselves the way to Conversion, the way to Peace with God; but they are at
length made to see that their wisdom is but foolishness. God is wont to let
them try, and they try one method and find that fails them, and another and
that fails; till at last the Soul comes to see it self Lost and Bewildred:
Oftentimes the Sinner is brought to a stand, he is non-plush'd, knows not
whether to look or what to do! He finds the way quite contrary to what he
expected, he finds it is not with him to direct his own steps. Much so is it
with men after Conversion: they are many times sensible that they must sink and
perish if God undertakes not for them; if they have no higher wisdom than their
own they shall surely fail of Salvation, miss the Harbor and Haven of Rest,
and so Perish for ever. Man's own wisdom will not guide him aright one step:
Therefore you read, Isa. 42.16. GOD leads the blind in ways that they little
thought of, makes darkness to become light, etc. quite contrary to what they
once expected. The Psalmist was sensible of his own darkness and want of
wisdom, which made him Pray, as in Psalm. 25.4, 5 Show me thy ways, O Lord;
teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me.

(2.) They need the Spirit of God to quicken and strengthen them unto Duty.
Naturally men are without strength, as well as light, Romans 5.6. Not one Duty
but the poor Soul (...) in need of aid and the help of the Spirit, in order to
the right discharge of it; he an't able to move one step aright toward Mercy,
nor take one step in the way to Heaven; nay, not so much as to receive Mercy,
when and though offered and held out in the Offers and Tenders of the Gospel.
Men are by nature not only void of strength, but deal in trespasses and Sins, (
Ephesians. 2.1.) and need therefore to be Enlightened and Quickened And after
Conversion they need daily Influences from the Spirit, Psalm. 80.18. (...)
119.25. Cant. 1.4. Draw not, we will ran after this, --

PROP. II. There is no help to be bad for poor needy Sinners, but in and
through JESUS CHRIST. He and He only can deliver the Needy, the Poor, and him
that has no Helper. Psalm. 72.12.

For,

1. (...) cannot help them. Some men have (...) dependence upon Means; but
(...), they do depend upon broken Reeds. Ministers cannot help; they are but
Instruments in God's Hands: And all the Efficacy of the Instrument is from the
Principal Cause, 1 Cor. 4.7 They are but (...), and have nothing but what God
the (...) himself may Plant, and Apollos Water, and yet be unsuccessful, if God
deny His Blessing Many lay the fault of their being not Converted upon the
Means, and think if they had better Means, they should be and do better. Alas!
had they the Means and Advantages that such and such have. Oh! If they did but
sit under such and such a Ministers, they think they should do well -- When
alas, Ministers cannot Convert men and and Save them: They may Pray for them,
and Weep over them; They may tell them their Misery and their Duty, but they
cannot Convert men. Multitudes live and die in their Sins, and are not so much
as thoroughly Convinced under a Painful and Faithful Ministry: Isa. 53.1. Who
has believed our report? and to whom in the arm of the Lord revealed? If
Ministers could Save their Hearers, they would not suffer so much as One to
Perish and go to Hell; not one should go out of the Assembly before they are
Converted.

2. Godly Friends and Relations cannot Save. All that they can do is to
Instruct, Teach, Counsel, Direct, Warn, and Pray for them.

3. Hence the Word of God alone cannot Save. Psalm 19.11. The Commandments of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. It has a Convincing Power and Efficacy,
but not in it self, only as it is in the hand of God, Heb. 4.12. It Is the Sword
of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. But if it be not wielded by the Spirit of God, it is
like a Sword in the Scabbard, that neither wounds nor pierces; it is as the
Spirit and mighty Power of God makes it. Hence multitudes who fit all their
Days, live and die under the most likely Means and Advantages, such as
Preaching of the Word, go to Hell when they Die and so Perish for ever
notwithstanding all: They did so of old in the Days of the Prophets, in the
Days of John the Baptist, under the Ministry of our SAVIOR Himself, and in the
Days of the Apostles likewise, and ever since even to this Day. We must indeed
attend to the Word, but after all look to GOD, who alone gives Success.

4. Dependence on a man's own Righteousness, that cannot Save a man. All that a
man can do, cannot recommend him to God's Favor, or lay God under any
Obligation to take Pity on and Save him. Such as build their Hopes upon their
Doings, build but upon the Sand. Man cannot Merit at the Hands of God, any
thing but Misery. Man's Righteousness is but as filthy Rags, Isa. 64.6.
Therefore does pollute and defile him: They do but Condemn him being imperfect
and sinful. The Pharisee had his dependence upon his own Righteousness, but
what got he by it* he lost his Life, Luke 18 from Ver. 9 to the 15 th. Men are
wont to have a great deal of dependence upon their Repentance and Reformation,
their Prayers and their Tears, and really think God is bound to have regard for
them. Hence they are often times wont to have hard thoughts of God, when they
don't find expected Success in performing Duty, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we
Fasted, say they, and thou see not? -- It Is in vain to serve God, Mal. 3.14
Job 21.15. To what purpose and to what profit is it to Pray to God? All this is
the Language of a Self jusstifying Sinner and Merit-monger. But, alas! he that
has no better Foundation to build upon, is sure to sink: Such a dependence
will not keep men out of Hell, Psalm. 49.7, 8 None can by any means redeem a Soul,
nor give to God a Ransom for him: For the Redemption of the Soul is precious,
and it cease for ever. The Price necessary for the Redemption of the Soul out
of the Hands of God's Justice, is so great, that for all a man can do, there is
no hope of Redeeming it; Isa. 40.16 Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the
beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. Thousands of Rams, or ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil, nay the Fruit of the Body, though it should be the
Firstborn, cannot appease the Anger of God and Redeem the Soul, Mic. 6.7.
Could we water our Couch, and weep tears of Blood, it would not commend us to
God or give satisfaction to injured Justice.

5 There is us depending upon Absolute Mercy* neither. To look to that and
think that Mercy shall save us without Gospel-conditions, and complying with
the Terms, Offers, and senders of Grace, is but the ready way to Perdition. Yet
men must depend on Absolute Mercy to work Gospel-conditions in them. This is
the case of abundance of men. Ask them, Do they hope to be Saved? (...) Hell?
They Will say, Oh! Yes. Ask them, Why do you hope so? Why, say they, GOD is a
Merciful God! That Is true, and that is no more than the Damned in Hell may save
It Is a precious truth, GOD is rich in Grace, abundant in Mercy, plenteous in
Redemption: Read Psalm 86.15. Thus, O Lord, are a God full of Compassion,
Gracious, and Long suffering. And Psalm 130.7. With the Lord is Mercy and
plenteous Redemption. But notwithstanding this, multitudes Perish for ever. God
never bestows Mercy upon any, but in and through Jesus Christ. And such as look
not for the Grace of Faith, Repentance, and Holiness, here, are sure to Perish
notwithstanding all the Provision that Mercy has made for Poor Sinners. It Is in
vain to plead Mercy, if Mercy don't win us over to a Compliance with Gospel
Terms, it will not save us at last from Hell.

In a word, There is no Help to be had, no Salvation but in and through Jesus
Christ, That He alone is the Savior of mankind, Appears;

(1) Because (...) is Appointed of God to save Sinners. He it is that God the
Father has appointed for the Work of Saving Sinners; it is He that God the
Father has Exalted with His own Right Hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to
give Repentance unto Israel and Forgiveness of Sins Act. 5 31. His Name is
called JESUS, which signifies Savior; Mat. 1.21. Thou shall call His name
Jesus, for He shall save His People from their Sins. It is He that God speaks
of, in Psalm. 89.19. Where God says. I have laid help upon One that is mighty,
-- Isa 61.1.2, 3. Jesus Christ (...) said (...) it Anointed (as the High Priest
was of old) to note His solemn Appointment of the Father and Designation to the
Office of Mediator and Redeemer, and this Exclusive of all others. It appears,

2 For (...) but Jesus is able to help and (...). He only is Qualified to (...)
and go through the great Work of Redemption. Such a one must be GOD as well as
Man (...) none other is a fit Person to Mediate between an Offended GOD and the
Offending Sinner. He must be GOD, that a Value may be put upon the Price that
He Paid down for the Debtor. The Sufferings of one that is GOD renders the
Price Valuable in the fight of God. He must be GOD that He may be able to bear
the Weight of all the Sins of the Elect which were laid upon Him, Isa. 53.6
That He might endure the shocking Stroke of Divine Justice, and bear the
insupportable Weight of God's Wrath, when He pours out the Vials thereof upon
Him; a few Drops whereof is more than enough to consume the poor Sinner. His
Blood alone is able to quench the Flames of God's burning Ire, which otherwise
burns down to the lowest Hell. Again, He must be Man, that so He might be able
to Suffer; for God only suffers in the Humane and not Divine Nature. He must be
Man as well as God, that He might be fit to become the Redeemer of man. Man
Sinned, and Man must Die. You read, under the Law in case a man Sold himself,
and was not able to work his own Redemption, then he must be Redeemed by a
Brother, or of one near of Kin. See Lev. 25 47.48. Which was to signify, that
the Redeemer was to be near or Kin, our Brother, true Man as well as very God.
Such a Person as JESUS CHRIST only can Save.

3 Thither and thither alone, bare the Saints in all Ages fled for help, and
there alone found it. They built their Hopes of finding Mercy with God upon
Jesus Christ; unto Him did they look, and in Him was their Confidence And such
as look not for Salvation in and by Him, and upon Gospel Terms, miss of it and
miscarry for ever. Of old the Brazen Serpent was a Type of Jesus Christ And we
read expressly that Jesus Christ is the Saints Hope, Col. 1.27. -- Christ in you
the Hope of glory. 1 Timothy 1.1. The Lord Jesus Christ, which is our Hope.

APPLICATION.
USE, I. By way of INFORMATION and INSTRUCTION.

Learn hence the dangerous Error of such as hope to be Saved, yet rest short of
Jesus Christ, and live without God and Christ in the world; such as never go to
Him, never look to Him. Some hope to be Saved, and escape Hell when they die,
yet have a deep silence about JESUS CHRIST and Salvation by Him, and the Terms
of the Gospel. Oh! how deceived are such as these? There is Safety of appearing
before God only in Jesus Christ. Some build their expectation upon one thing,
some upon another; but they are deceitful Foundations they build upon; called
Refuges of Lies, because they do but deceive men and bring fearful
Disappointment in the end, Isa. 28.15, 17, 18 Which shall be swept away as a
Spiders Web. Oh! that deluded Self-flattering Sinners would seriously Consider
of it before it be too late, else they will find it a dreadful thing to be
deceived at last.

USE, II. Of EXHORTATION.

Oh! Be Persuaded to flee to Jesus Christ for Help, in all your straits and
difficulties. Though one would think there is no need of Motives to Quicken men
other than the Doctrine, yet I shall here endeavor to open and set before you
sundry things for Awakening, Quickening, and Encouraging.

Motive 1. JESUS CHRIST is a Mighty Savior. Let your Wants be what they will,
never so many, great, and mighty, He can help. Is your Heart hard as a Neither
Millstone, and wants to be broken? Why Jesus Christ is able to melt it, mould
it, and break it, for you. Though none else can, yet He can. He that at His Death
made Rocks to rend, Earth to quake, the Graves to open, the Dead to rise, can
break that hard Heart of thine. All Hearts are in His Hand, Prove. 21.1. Are
your Sins many and aggravated* Are your Transgressions of a deep Dye and
crimson Color? Yet there is Virtue enough in Christ's Blood to wash them all
away. Read Isa. 1.18. and 1 John 1.7. He is a God of infinite Wisdom, He sees
all your Difficulties, knows all your Wants; nothing is hid from Him, and his
Wisdom is more than a match for all. When a Person is sick, many times
Physicians are called, but they are non-plush'd, know not what the Malady is;
and when they do, it may be, cannot help. A Parent can stand and weep over a
Sick and Dying Child, and cannot relieve it. Oh! But JESUS CHRIST is an
alsufficient Physician, Savior, and Redeemer; Heb. 7.25 He can Save to the
uttermost. Oh! What Encouragement is there then to go to Him, since He can, and
none other can, help you.

Motive. 2. He is a Ready and a Willing Savior. He is as willing as He is
able: He is more ready to help poor Sinners, than they are to be helped by Him.
Mercifulness is one of the Glory's of God's Nature. We reckon it a very Amiable
thing in man to be Pitiful: And this does more abound in the Lord, than in any
Creature whatsoever. There is no man in the world (as Dr Preston Expresses it)
so ready to forgive as GOD is. If our Sins be exceeding many and exceeding
great, yet the Lord is Merciful and exceeding ready to forgive. He graciously
invites men to come, Mat. 11.28, 29. Come to Me, poor, burdened, tired Soul.
Rev. 22.17. Come: The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come. And whosoever
will let him (come and) take of the Water of Life freely. Joh 6.37. He that
comes I will in no wise cast out, says the Lord. Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and
be ye saved all the ends of the Earth. Why do you Object your own Unworthiness?
Isa. 55.1. Come and buy without money, -- Though you have no Worthiness, yet
come. If Naked go to Him for Clothing, Read Rev. 3.18. You think your wants
are too great to be supplied! why go freely, and ask liberally: You cannot ask
too great Blessings. Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and it shall be filled.
Be not strait-handed in asking, if you would have God liberal in bestowing. You
see the readiness of God to accept Penitent, Returning Prodigals. In the
Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15.20. The Father saw him afar off and ran to
meet him. You don't read that the Son ran to meet the Father; but that the
Father he ran to meet his Son. All which is to show the Readiness of God to
receive and help poor needy Souls; His Arms are stretched out, He stands with
open Arms ready to receive the Sinner, Job. 6 36, 37. Oh! Be persuaded to fly
to Jesus Christ for help for thy poor needy Soul.

Motive 3. Consider the great Necessity you lie under. If you don't go, you
Perish, if you fit still you are sure to Die: As they said, 2 King. 7.4. If we
fit still we die. So I say, JESUS CHRIST is the City of Refuge, thither you may
flee and be safe; but if you fit still you must die; and it will be a great
aggravation of your Misery, to fit still and die, when there is help to be had,
especially having so great Encouragement to seek it.

Motive 4. Your Time is short and uncertain too. Therefore don't delay; nor
don't dally and trifle; up and be doing; be in good earnest and maste haste;
Fly, fly, Oh! Flee to the City of Refuge; Heb 6.18. Flee for refuge to lay hold
on the hope that is set before you. It has reference to the City of Refuge, of
old appointed for Manslaughter; but not to save wilful Murderers: And if the
Manslayer was slow, slack, negligent, the Avenger of blood might overtake him,
and so he Perish; therefore he was to fly and make have. So says the Apostle
here. Man must fly as from an Enemy, fly as a Bird from the Fowler or Hawk;
fly as for Life; make haste, left the Justice of God (the Avenger of blood)
overtake you. Give your selves no rest till you have got into the City of
Refuge; if you fall short and sit down, though at the gate, though at the door of
Heaven, yet you will Perish. You may go far, yet you will Perish for ever, if you
rest short of Jesus Christ.

To Conclude with some Directions.

1. Get pinched with the sense of your Wants. The Prodigal never comes to any
serious Thoughts of returning to his Fathers house, till pinched with Hunger,
Luke XV. So here, Whatever men thinks of it, they will never be truly willing
to go to Christ for help in a right way, till they are starved out of house and
home. So long as they can live without Christ, they will. Oh! Study your own
Hearts, Reflect upon your Lives, dwell much in Meditation upon your Natural
miserable State and Condition, till you feel that sense That there is no Hope,
you will never go to Christ for help upon Gospel Terms, Mat. 9.12 The Israelites
looked not to the Brazen Serpent, till they found themselves stung by the Fiery
Serpents. Now, Oh! Now it is that a Savior is Precious! Men that before slight
Jesus Christ and the Offers of Mercy, when they come to feel themselves
sinking, Oh! What would they give for a Savior? A drop of that Blood which
once they could trample under foot, is more worth than the whole World to them
now. Sense of Sin, Misery, Danger, and Fear of Hell, will make a savior
Precious.

2. Go Humbly if you would go Acceptably. Go Poor, and Wretched, and Empty. Oh!
Don't think to carry any thing with you that will Recommend you to God: Isa.
55.1. Go without Money and Price. Go Empty, that so you may Receive freely. Go
Empty, sensible that you are so, and then you will be Welcome. Be willing to set
the Crown upon the Head of Jesus Christ, that He should have all the Praise and
Glory of your Salvation.

3. Look earnestly to God to Prepare and Lead you. If He don't undertake and
lead you, you will never find the way to Jesus Christ, Isa. 42.16 Tell the Lord,
He can do it, He has done it for others, and He can do it for you. Plead hard
Night and Day: It Is a matter of greatest Moment, highest Consequence. Your poor
Souls and all lies at stake. Don't think that God will bestow Grace upon the
Negligent and Careless Sinner, or upon the Cold* and Indifferent Seeker. The
little Pains that some men take, is an Argument that they are like to miss of
God's Grace and Mercy.

4. Wait on GOD in the diligent Use of all Means. Neglect no Duty, beware of
all Sin, Ephesians. 4.30 Don't do any thing wilfully that may grieve the Spirit of
God, lest you provoke Him and He forsake you Have you waited long? Yet be not
discouraged, but hold out and wait still. A Ship that beats long upon the
Coast, may at last arrive safe in the Harbor: So a Soul that has many Years
been Seeking and Waiting, may at last obtain Mercy.

5. Lastly, Realize the Advantage that you will gain by a Gospel Compliance
with Duty If you once get safe into Jesus Christ, you are made for ever: It
will make you rich amends for all your Pains. You will never Repent, and say
that you have been too Speedy, or too Early, or too Painful, nor for the whole
World be out of Jesus Christ again, so much as for one Hear. Oh! Believe it, It
would be worth a while to swim through whole Seas of Blood to get to JESUS
CHRIST: (As one said.) When you come to Heaven, one Hour in the Presence of
GOD, where is fullness of Joy unspeakable, ( Psalm. 16 ult.) will swallow up and
make you forget your Sorrows and your Tears, here. Oh! It is well worth your
while to be at utmost, yea at all Pains, to (...) an Interest in JESUS CHRIST.
Amen.

FINIS.

