A Memorial Relating to the Kennebeck Indians.
THAT my often speaking the same things, may not be gravaminous; I humbly offer
my Sentiments about sending a Military Force against the Kennebeck Indians, in
Writing.

IT is Resolved that the Government has (...)cient Reason to prosecute the
Eastern Indians for their Rebellion. But I am humbly of Opinion, that
sufficient Enquiry has not be(...) (...) made, Whether the Government has done
all that is necessary on (...)r part, to prevent a Rupture.

AT the Conference of his Excellency with the Sachems, and Chief Men of the
Eastern Indians, at George-Town on Arrowsick Island, August, 9. 1717. The
Indians showed a great Reluctance against Erecting Forts higher up the River;
and against the arrival of a Multitude of New Inhabitants; lest they should
prove unable heartily to embrace them. They also desired the Running of a Line
between the English, and them; and made some Proposals on their part, which
were rejected: but no Proposals for fixing Boundaries, were offered to them.

WITHOUT doubt, Boundaries are necessary for the preservation of Honesty and
Peace among those that border one upon another. This is evident from the Law
made for the Renewing of them between Townships once in three Years time,
successively; and the penalty of Five Pounds inflicted on those, who shall
neglect their Duty herein.

THE Royal Charter gives a good Account of the Errand of English Christians
into this New World, in the Words following; -- And to dispose of matters and
things, whereby Our Subjects, Inhabitants of Our said Province, may be
religiously, peaceably, and civilly, governed, protected, and defended; so as
their good Life, and Orderly Conversation, may Win the Indians, Natives of the
Country, to the Knowledge and Obedience of the only True GOD, and Savior of
Mankind, and the Christian Faith: Which His Royal Majesty, Our Royal
Grandfather, King Charles the First, in His said Letters Patents, Declared was
His Royal Intention, and the adventurers free Profession, to be the principal
End of the said (...).

BY this Momentous clause in our Charter, the Government is Obliged, and
excited, to do what in them lies, to Recover the Aboriginal Natives from their
Heathenisme, and Antichristianisme.

OUR Blessed Savior's Method of Conversion was, To Heal the Bodies of Men and
Women, in order to His entire, and Eternal Salvation of them. This constrains
me to think, that it is Necessary to state and settle plain and lasting Bounds
between the English, and the Indians; that so the Natives may have a certain
and established Enjoyment of their O^^ Country: and that the English may have
DEUS NOBISCUM Legibly embroidered in their Banners.

THE History of the War between the Israelites, and their Brethren the
Benjamites, is very awful. The Israelites had a vast Army: Four Hundred
Thousand Fighting Men; the Benjamites had only Twenty Six Thousand, and Seven
Hundred: And yet the Benjamites (the Flameable causes of the War) Slew Forty
Thousand Men of the Israelites.

Omne prius tentandum est --

AND if, at last, we should be provoked to go against our Neighbors, the
Kennebeck Indians; 'twould be convenient for this Government first to sit down,
and count the Cost. Many Thousands of Pounds have been already expended on this
Controversy. If the War proceed, and be prospered; the English may, probably,
drive the Indians from their ancient Habitation: Yet it is improbable the
English should slay them, or take them Captives. In all likelihood, the
Survivours will fly away to Cannada. And if a War should happen between Great
Britain, and France; these Fugitives would solicit the Assistance of the
French, in returning to their Country (which they are very fond of) though it
should be never so much to the Loss and Damage of the English.

SO that I am humbly of Opinion, 'Twould be most Honorable, and most
Profitable, for this Province, to persuade the Kennebeck Indians to be our
Dependents and Friends, by Really convincing them, it is their True Interest so
to be; as indeed it is.

WHICH is humbly submitted to his Excellency the Governor, the Honorable
Council and Representatives, in General Court assembled.

Per Samuel Sewall.
BOSTON; September, 8th. 1721.
Extract of a LETTER from the Reverend Mr. Solomon Stoddard.
North-Hampton; March. 10. 1720/21 SIR,
-- IN our Charter, and also in the Charter of Connecticut, the King says, That
the Undertakers do profess it to be their principal Design, to bring the
Indians to the Christian Faith.

I am afraid Whether we do not provoke GOD, by our Neglect of Prosecuting that
Design. Something has been done at the Cost of Benefactors in England: but, very
little at the Charge of the Country. -- I am never like to see my Friends in
Boston any more; but I often Remember them, and am a Well-willer to them, and
particularly, to your self.

Solomon Stoddard.


