A Friendly Check, from a Kind Relation, To the Chief Cannoneer, Founded on a
Late Information, Dated N. E. Castle-William, 1720, 21.
KINSMAN, and FELLOW-SOLDIER!
THE Measures which I hear you Take are no ways proper for your high Station.
What, Sir! Only to flush, or Fire your Touchhole with the Dust, or sweepings of
the Powder-Room, in receiving that Capital Enemy, Amicus Patriae, who Boldly
with all his Canvas abroad, with his Jack, Ensign, and Pendant proudly Flying,
has, [within the Reach of your Guns] Entered our Chief Harbor; with a plain
Design of Mischief to many Principal Gentlemen, hoarders of our Bills in our
Good Country; And plainly intends to break the Measures of such Eminent
Benefactors to the Public? And comes with a farther Aim of doing hurt, Scil.
To Teach our Unfortunate and Oppressed Neighbors, how they shall grow Rich
too: That in a little Time the Gentilities which is supported by the Wise
Monopolys aforesaid, will daily Impair and grow out of Date, if he prevails,
and other mean Fellows will grow so Rich, that they will turn Gentlemen too;
which must needs alloy, and much suppress the Coat Armor, and Ancestry of our
Country. And is not all this next to a Felony!

Therefore Fellow Soldier! For you that stand in so high a Post, and only to
Fire off a few (...) of Old-spent-Powder, at such a Brazer and Daring Attempt
as he has made in passing our Castle, and entering our Country; you deserve by
the Law of Arms, if not to be Pistoled and Tumbled cross the Britch of your
Cannon, yet to ride the Wooden-Horse, for your Cowardice. Therefore at your
Utmost Peril; when he shall weigh Anchor, and come to Sail for the High Seas,
bring him too; And if he is so hardy and choleric, as to stand a Brush; Then
Charge with French Powder and Ball, as your Usage has been; And give him Broad
side, for Broad side, and don't stand flushing at him at this Cowardly Rate;
for if you do he is so haughty a Nature, as only to Laugh at you for your Pains.

Don't you see how Proudly he Rides in our Chief Harbor, with all his Colors
abroad, and in the heart of the Country; and has Cast our Gentlemen hoarders
into miserable Paroxisms in the Lower Bowels, that they are in hazard of
falling into Old King James's Pickle; which will be a great Misfortune to their
Ladies, etc. And also he has so awakened, and universally Alarmed our Country
that they are fully Resolved not to be Hectored or wheedled into unsolvable
Penury and Vassalage, for want of a Plentiful Medium, whence it is in their own
Power to Remove those who stand in their way, and supply themselves. Therefore
Cuz! at your Peril, Mind what I say; or if not, [as well as I love you] I will
assuredly Article [somewhat against you to the Commander in Chief, as a
Traitor, for that your Measures are apparently full of Cowardice; and know by
Camp Law, a Traitor and a Coward, signifies one and the same thing in War.
Therefore to make short my Caution, Kinsman, and Fellow Soldier! Don't act the
Fool or the Knave any more in so great a Concern; but be more Manly.

Then to play-hop-in-hoy
half Woman, and half Boy.
From a Near Kinsman, in a Country Village, to be left at Castle-William,
February 1720, 21.

GENTLEMEN!
THe Moral of the Premises is to make Known a Desire that if any Gentlemen
think it agreeable with the Interest of this Province, to Write in Opposition
to Amicus Patriae, that they will do it Solidly and not Pevishly; and he
engages his Thanks to any Man that will fairly subvert him. And for the
present, it was thought Reasonable to Answer the late Advertisement from
Castle-William in the foregoing manner. It being very proper to Answer a fool
according to his Folly, least he be Wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26.

A Letter from Amicus Patriae, to his Son.
February 23. 1720, 21.
THE Report from Castle-William, is so mean a thing, so Little in Argument, and
Pevish in Temper, its Beneath a Wise Man to Resent it; at least no otherways
than you see in the Enclosed. But however to satisfy your self as to my
Domestic Affairs, which you though so nearly Related are a stranger to.

Therefore some time within less then Three Years, we took out 1000l. and put
into the Public Bank, an Estate of 2000l. which we would not take Five and
Twenty Hundred for now. (Indeed such fat things Draw these Hungry Crows by a
strange Instinct) We thought it might be very pr^per both for the Public good
and our own pr^fit so to do. And through Mercy we have Reaped great Ease and
Benefit by it. For that we have solved our former Money Obligations, and
furnished the business of the Family (under your Brother's Sole management) to
very great purpose, for since that our Business has gone on with such Success,
that we have pa^ed into the Bank about 200 l. with the Interest, and have
another 100 l. ready to answer in that Affair. And not only so, but the
Temporal Business of the Family is so well Qualified and Adjusted, that through
Divine goodness, and by the Assistance of the Auspicious and Prosperous Bills,
we do not fall short of Three Hundred Pounds Annual Income. And not only so,
but though the Pevish Gentleman (If he be a Man) does allow if we put in 2000l.
which is already grown in Value, but also their Remains in our hands no ways
entangled by the Bank, in Rich housen, homest^ad, Remote Lands, and other
Estates to the Value of One Thousand Pounds, or not much under. That
considering what we have Done in less than Three Years toward the solving the
Bank, etc. I am full of Assurance that in the Remaining Six Years, by Divine
Aid, and by a Frugal and Prudent Management we are quite out of Danger, as to
Crows and Vultures,

Therefore what I have Wrote on the Bank of Credit, was purely in Love to my
Country, that all Men in their Affairs, may be as Prosperous as I have been. At
Least that our Country may Universally Flourish in their Outward Affairs.

Your Loving Father Amicus Patriae.

That the Reader might not be at a loss where to meet with the N. E.
Castle-William Advertisement, to which the preceding Pages refer, it was
thought reasonable to insert the same.
N. E. Castle-William, February, 1720, 21.
N. B. THat Amicus Patriae a late Author is Worldly Wise Man, and has spoke two
Words for himself, and not one for his Country, as Actions will better show a
Man's designs then his Words; it would have been but the ingenious part in him,
to have told us that from Twenty Years long experience he has not been able to
pay Interest for Money borrowed of Private People, and of Twelve Hundred and
Fifty Pounds (of his Miracle working Paper Money) borrowed of the Government by
himself and two Sons he has yet paid but 250 l. of it in again; it is therefore
that he declares, and will insist on it, as the best way to enrich his Country,
to make Paper Bills enough for every body to take what they please, and further
(in his whole bustle of words) says not.

FINIS.

