GOD's Providence IN PLACING MEN

In their Respective Stations and Conditions ASSERTED and SHOWED.

A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Colony of Connecticut, at
Hartford, May, 10. 1722.

The Day for Electing the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY Governor, and
the Worshipful ASSISTANTS there.

By William Burnham M. A. Pastor of the Church in Kensington.

Published by Order of Authority.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, Printer to his Honor the GOVERNOR
and COMPANY. 1722.

An Election SERMON.
PSALM LXXV. 7. But GOD is the Judge: He puts down one, and sets up
another.
ONE Objection made against the goodness of divine Providence which a late
Learned Writer Dr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Divine Providence. Page 324.
Edit. 4.
takes notice of, is, God's Partial and unequal Care of his creatures; the
foundation of which Objection is; that there are various Ranks and Conditions
of men in the world; Rich and Poor, High and Low, Princes and Subjects, and c.
But however atheistical wits may argue from the variety of men's Conditions,
certain it is that the various Ranks and degrees of men are for the advantage
and benefit of mankind in General, in as much as without this variety, and ^f
all men's Conditions were alike, men would want some Motives and Encouragements
to Virtue and Restraint from Vice, that now they have; and there could be no
such thing as Government in the world, which is a thing so necessary to the
well-being of it, that any thing conducive hereunto Rather argues a good
Providence over the world, than the Contrary.

Government is a great Blessing to this Sinful and Miserable world, and if it
should be destitute thereof, it would soon become a heap of Confusion, a stage
of mournful Tragedies, a Theater of woeful Spectacles; the whole world might
fitly be called, Aceldama, a field of Blood; or Golgotha, a place of a Scull.
One man would be as a wolf to another, the wicked would devour the man that is
more Righteous than he, men would be as the fishes of the Sea, and as the
creeping things, that have no Ruler over them, as the Prophet speaks* Hab. 1*
13. What God says of the old world. Genesis 6* 13* The Earth is filled with
violence* would soon become true of the world now if destitute of Government.

Government being so great a Blessing, and consequently the variety of men's
conditions in the world, and their subordination one to another, which is
necessary to the very being of it; The most High God, who will not give his
glory to another, nor his praise to graven Images, Isa. 42. 8. has
sufficiently taught us in his word, to whom we are beholding for it; and that
it has an higher and more Excellent Original, than only the pride, ambition,
and Crafty designs of some aspiring mortals, that affect a Superiority over
others and can bear to be second to none in honor and power; Even his own wise
and gracious providence over the world.

To this End we are Taught, that there (...) no power but of God, that the
powers that be are ordained of God. Romans 13. 1. That by him Kings Reign, and
princes decree justice. That by him princes Rule and nobles, Even all the
Judges of the Earth* Prove. 8. 15, 16. That he removes Kings and sets up
Kings. Dan. 2. 21. And besides many other places that might be mentioned, we
are Taught this Lesson in our Text and Context* viz. that promotion comes not
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; but God is the Judge he
puts down one, and sets up another.

Concerning the Penman and occasion of this psalm wherein our Text is, there is
variety of opinions amongst Expositors, (as may be seen by Mr Pool' s
Collections in his Critica Sacra, and his English Annotations*) Some being of
opinion that it was composed in the Babylonish Captivity and written in form of
a Dialogue, though there be no mention made of the persons speaking therein.
Others that i^ was composed by Asaph in David's time, and in his name and
person, as it is not unusual for poets to bring in princes speaking in their
poems. Others that it was composed by David himself, and with this opinion the
Learned Ames Ames. Lectiones in Psalms in Loc.
concurs.

The Psalm seems to Relate to the time when Saul and other of David's Enemies
were overthrown, and he had Entered upon the Kingdom of Israel, although he had
not Gotten full possession of it. And herein David in the name of other pious
persons professes his Thankfulness unto God for his wonderful providence over
all things, and in special toward himself v. 1. Unto thee, O God do we give
thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy name is near, thy wondrous
works do declare. And then he makes a promise agreeable to such a frame of
spirit, Even that he would do the duty of a Just and pious Ruler. v. 2. When I
shall receive the Congregation, I will Judge uprightly. This general Promise he
seems more particularly to Explain, in the following verses, in that he
Promises to Endeavor to Restore the Decayed state of Things in his Kingdom v.
3. The Earth and all the Inhabitants of it are Dissolved: I bear up the Pillars
of it, Selah. or -- I will bear up and c. as Tremellius and Junius Render it.
And as a means to this Restitution of things in his Kingdom, that he would
suppress the Madness and Haughtiness of the wicked. v. 4, 5. I said unto the
fools deal not so foolishly; and to the wicked, lift not up the horn Lift ^ot
up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck. And the more Effectually to
Suppress their haughtiness, he refutes and condemns one great Error of theirs,
about the Exaltation or depression of this or that man. Showing that it is not
to be ascribed to chance, or humane policy and power, but to that wise and
powerful providence which God Exercises over the world. v. 6, 7 For promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South. But God is
the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.

In the verse now Read, we may Observe

1. The person spoken of, the Most High God.

2. The Relation he stands in to his creatures* he is the Judge. The Judge by
way of Eminency. It is the work of a Judge to Determine matters of Right. To
Distribute Rewards and Punishments. To Determine Controversies Relating to
Commutative Justice. In these Respects God may be Called the Judge. He
determines the Eternal state of men. Romans 2. 16. And also he determines what
their Condition in this world shall be, whether high or low, whether they shall
be Rich or poor, the men of the world are as so many Rivals, Competitors or
Candidates for Riches and honors, and God as Judge, does by his all governing
providence, pass Sentence, who shall have them and who shall go without them.
Again a Judge Sometimes in Scripture Signifies the chief Ruler in a state. So
in Israel before Saul' s Reign the Chief Rulers were called Judges. Ruth. 1. 1.
Now it came to pass in the days when the Judges Ruled. God may be Called the
Judge in this sense. Because the whole world is governed by him.

3. We may herein observe those works that are ascribed to God, that are
agreeable to such a Relation. He puts down one and sets up another. He
disposes of men to their Several Ranks and posts, as the chief Ruler of a
state conferreth offices and places of trust on some, and degrades others, So
the most High depresseth and Exalts whom he pleases. Dan* 4. 17.

DOCT. That God is the Supreme Ruler of the world, and he places all persons
in their Several Stations and Conditions.

The Doctrine may be branched into two Particulars.

I. That God is the Supreme Ruler of the world. II. That he places all persons
in their Several Stations and Conditions.
I. God is the Supreme Ruler of the world. He governs the world, and not in
Subordination to any Superior power. All other beings that are in power in the
universe are subject to him, but he is subject to none. That God is the Supreme
Ruler of the world appears.

1. From that wisdom and power that is discovered in the Government of the
world. Infinite wisdom and Infinite power are peculiar to and Inseparable from
Gods works. Prove. 8. 30 Psalm. 111. 7. This wisdom and power appears in the
government of the world. And consequently God is the Ruler of it. This wisdom
and power appears in Gods common Government: what Less than Infinite wisdom and
power could make the Luminaries of heaven, by an uniform and steady motion to
Describe to men the times and seasons, like some public Clock or Dial. as
Psalm. 104. 19 He appoints the moon for seasons; the Sun Knows his going
down. It is beyond finite power and wisdom to make the Thunder and Lightning, a
thing so powerful and ungovernable by man, to help Gods People and punish their
Enemies, and yet it does this. Psalm. 18. 13, 14. Or to make the fire, hail,
snow and vapor, and stormy wind to fulfill his word* as Psalm. 148. 8. To make
the Frogs, Lice, Flies, and Locusts to punish the Egyptians. The Quails to come
in such vast numbers and at set times to the Camp of the Israelites to feed
them; the Ravens to feed Elijah, or the worms to Destroy Herod when he gave not
God the Glory. It Is from this Infinite Wisdom and Power that the Stork in the
heavens Knows he^ appointed times, and the Turtle Crane and Swallow the Time of
her Coming. Jer. 8. 7. That the ants prepare their meat in Summer, the Conies
make their houses in the Rocks, and the Locusts go forth by bands. Prove. 30.
25, 26, 27. Yea from this wisdom and power it is that wicked men are made to
serve the Great Ends of Providence, to Punish one another, and to Chastise Gods
People. Isai. 10. 5, 6, 7. O Assyrian the Rod of mine anger, and the Staff in
their hand is mine Indignation. I will send him against an Hypocritical Nation;
and against the people of my wrath will I give him a Charge to take the Spoil,
and to take the Prey, and to tread them Down like the mire of the streets.
Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his
heart to Cut off and Destroy Nations not a few. Further such a wisdom and such
a power appear in Special Government. The Redemption of mankind and Gods great
works relating to his Church belong to This, and herein a wisdom above that
which is finite is conspicuous not only to men but Even to Angels. Ephesians 3. 10.
To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places
might be Known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. And such a Power is
manifested by the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, by the Preservation of
Gods church in the world, and by the Conversion of Sinners. Ephesians. 1* 19. And
what is the Exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who believe according
to the working of his mighty power.

2. That God is the Supreme Ruler of the world appears, from his foretelling
future Events, and his Exact and Infallible accomplishment of them. God
foretells things that are contingent as to Second Causes, a great while
beforehand, and Exactly accomplisheth them. Thus he foretold to Abraham the
affliction of his posterity in Egypt and their Deliverance. Genesis 15. 13, 14.
The Babylonish Captivity of Seventy years, and their Deliverance by Cyrus who
is mentioned by name a long while before he was born. Isa. 44. 28 and 45. 1.
Likewise the great power of the Grecian and Roman Monarchs before they appeared
in the world. By the Prophet Daniel. And also many circumstances of the
Incarnation and Sufferings of Christ, as they were afterward accomplished. Now
seeing God foretells such things as they come to pass, it is Evident that he is
the chief ruler of the world, and that there is not any other being, that is
Equal with, or superior to him, to frustrate his Designs. God himself uses
this argument with his people to convince them that he alone is God. Isa. 46.
9, 10. Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is none Else,
I am God and there is none like me* Declaring the End from the Beginning, and
from Ancient times the things that are not yet done, Saying, My Counsel shall
stand. and I will do all my Pleasure. Now he that is God alone without any
Superior or Equal, must be Supreme Ruler of the world.

3. This is Evident, because all things are subject to Gods Government. Psalm.
103. 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the heavens: and his Kingdom
Rules over all Great and Potent Creatures are Governed by him. He Rules the
Raging of the Sea. Psalm. 89* 9. The Winds and the Sea Obey him. Mat. 8. 27.
Earthly Rulers are subject to his government. Prove. 21. 1. The Kings heart is
in the hand of the Lord as the Rivers of water: he turns it whithersoever he
will. Yea Even the angels that Excel in strength are governed by God. They do
his commandments, hearken to his word, and are ministers of his that do his
pleasure. Psalm. 103. 20, 21. And God is said to Rule in the armies of heaven as
well as among the Inhabitants of the Earth. Dan. 4. 35 Yea Weak small and
minute beings are not Exempted from his Government; for Even a sparrow does not
fall to the Ground without our heavenly Father. Now he that has all things
under his Government must needs be the Supreme Ruler of the world.

II. God places all persons in their respective Stations and Conditions; As
the place of men's abode is ordered by God* Act. 17. 26. So is their Rank,
condition and Quality, as in the verse of our Text.

1. Persons of Low degree have their condition assigned them by God. Whether
men are brought Low as a punishment for Sin or for any other wise and holy End,
Gods providence is to be acknowleged therein Job 1. 21 -- The Lord Gave, and
the Lord has Taken away. -- Men may sometimes be said to bring themselves Low.
Hos. 14. 1. O Israel return thou unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by
thine Iniquities. Sin in General is a lowering, sinking thing Prove. 14. 24 But
some Sins are peculiarly so. Some Sins are dishonouring and disgraceful. As
whoredom and adultery. Prove. 6 33. A wound and dishonor shall he Get. Theft.
Jer. 2. 26. A Thief is ashamed when he is found -- Lying. Prove. 19. 22. A poor
man is better than a Liar. Some Sins are Impoverishing. As Uncleanness. Prove.
6. 26. By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread.
Intemperance. Prove. 23. 21. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty
-- Injustice is also Impoverishing. Prove. 11. 24. -- There is that witholdeth
more than is meet, but it tends to poverty. So is Idleness. Prove. 23. 21 --
Drowsiness shall clothe a man with Rags. The like may be said of Keeping bad
Company. Prove* 28. 19 -- He that follows after vain persons shall have
poverty Enough. But although men may by Sin Bring themselves low, yet Gods
Providence is not to be Excluded, upon this account; although he is Righteous
in all his ways and holy in all his works; yet some things are said to be done
by him which are brought about by Sinful means. Thus God is said to send Joseph
into Egypt. Genesis 45. 5 And to Exalt Baasha 1 Kings. 16 2 When as both were
brought about by Sinful means Hence God is said to make poor. 1 Samuel 2. 7. And
to pour contempt upon princes. Psalm* 107. 40.

2. Persons of high Degree are Exalted by God.

(1.) He Exalts those that are above others in wealth and Riches. Though God
has Given the Earth to the Sons of men. Psalm. 115 16 Yet all have not an Equal
share in it. And this difference is not to be Imputed only to men's prudence and
diligence. But a higher hand is to be acknowledged in the matter Deuteronomy. 8. 17,
18. And thou say in thine heart, my power and the might of mine hand has
Gotten me all this wealth. But thou shall Remember the Lord thy God, for it is
he that gives thee power to Get wealth -- Men's prudence and diligence may be
Instrumental to advance their Estates, and Increase their Substance. But
without Gods Blessing this will not Avail. Psalm. 127. 2. It is vain for you to
Rise up Early, to Sit up Late to Eat the Bread of Sorrows. Therefore Gods
Blessing is said to make Rich as well as the Diligent Hand. Prove. 10. 22. And
God is said to be the maker of the Rich and Poor* Prove. 22. 2. The Rich and
Poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them all.

(2.) God Exalts those that are above others in Gifts and parts. As it is God
that makes men in General Wiser than the fowls of heaven Job. 35. 11. So it is
he that distinguishes persons of Great Gifts and Parts from others. Men's Gifts
and abilities are the manifestation of the Spirit, and are wrought by that one
and the self same Spirit that divides to Every one severally as he will. 1 Cor
12. 7, 11. God is the father of Lights and from him Every good Gift and Every
perfect Gift comes. Jam. 1. 17. It was God that Gave to Solomon wisdom and
Largeness of heart as the sand upon the Sea shore. 1 King. 4. 29.

(3.) God Exalts those that are above others in places of trust. Civil Rulers
are advanced by him. Judge. 2. 16. The Lord raised them up Judges which
delivered them. Godly Rulers are promoted by God. David Styles himself the man
that was raised up on high. 2 Samuel 23. 1. And acknowledges that it was God that
so advanced him. Psalm. 78. 70. 71. He chose David also his Servant and took him
from the Sheepfolds: from following the Ews great with young, he brought him to
feed Jacob his people and Israel his Inheritance. Yea wicked Rulers are
beholding to the most high for their Exaltation. 1 Samuel 15. 1. 1 King. 16. 2.
Likewise church officers are promoted by God. So the Priests and Levites were
under the Law* Deuteronomy. 10. 8. At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi,
to bear the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord to
minister unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day. And thus also the
ministers under the Gospel are advanced. They Receive their ministry of the
Lord, Col. 4. 17. And are made overseers over their flocks by the holy Ghost.
Act. 20. 28.

But I shall be thought to forget my self and to abuse this honorable Audience
if I Insist upon a truth so plain and so generally professed amongst us* I
proceed to make some Improvement of it.

APPLICATION.
USE, I. What we have heard may be of use to teach us, that a people that have
good Rulers, have great cause of thankfulness to God upon that account. Though
all Rulers are set up by God, yet they are not all alike, God sometimes gives
such to a people in anger, and to be punishments to them. Hos. 13. 11. I gave
them a King in mine anger and took him away in my wrath. Some Rulers want
ability for their work, others are unfaithful therein. Some that stand in the
place of shepherds feed themselves but not the flock Ezekiel 24. 8. A people
sometimes have princes that are as Roaring lions, and Judges that are as Evening
wolves. Zeph. 3. 3. Temporal Dominion is not founded in Grace And the most high
is pleased sometimes to set up the basest of men over a People Dan. 4 17 Some
that are Enemies to religion are in places of power. Psalm. 2. 2. The Kings of
the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers took counsel together* against the
Lord and against his anointed Sometimes they are in Places of power that
pervert Justice* Isai. 5. 23. Which Justify the wicked for a Reward and take
away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him. And such as set a sad Example
before their People, as Manasseh, and Ah^b who sold himself to work Wickedness*
1 King. 21. 25.

But there are some Rulers of another Spirit* that are as Nursing fathers to
their people. Isai* 49. 23 That are seeking the wealth of their people Esth.
10. 3. That are a terror to Evil works. Romans 13. 3. As an hiding place from
the wind a covert from the tempest: as Rivers of water in a dry place, and as
the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Isai* 32. 2 And that are Really
ministers for the good of a people. Romans 13. 3. And when this is the Case of a
people, that they are favored with such Rulers, they are highly privileged
and such a mercy should not be forgotten by them. This mercy to Israel Nehemiah
takes notice of. chap. 9. 27. Thou Gave them Saviors, who Saved them out of
the hands of their Enemies.

USE, II. Hence Persons of a Lower Rank should not Envy those of a more Exalted
Station. Places of honor and Eminence have their Burdens and Inconveniences
attending them, so that they that are set in them, are not (...) much more
happy than others, as many Imagine them to be. Its a great mistake (as a
learned Dr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Divine Providence. Page 325. Edit. 4.
writer observes) to think, that the Happiness of men differs as much as their
fortunes (...); that a prince is as much happier as he is greater than his
subjects; for all the World knows, that Happiness is not Entailed on Riches,
and Power, and secular honors; as they have their Advantages so they have very
troublesome and sour allays. Their happiness is not so great as it appears to
be, and if it were they would not Enjoy it long for though some by office are
Gods, yet they must Dye like men Psalm. 82 6. Again if their happiness were as
great as it appears to be, and much more lasting than it is, yet this is Enough
to Quiet us and make our minds Easy, that this difference that is made in men's
Condition is ordered by the alwise God, who is Righteous in all his ways and
holy in all his works, and accountable to none, and that he orders such a
variety in men's conditions for his own glory and the General good of mankind;
and therefore Although we see some of our fellow mortals have more Riches, more
Honor, greater Gifts and parts than our selves, we should not have our Eye
Evil toward them, because God is good to them Mat. 20. 15. It becomes us to
submit to, and acquiesce in Gods Providence in this matter, because he has
done it. Psalm. 39. 9. He Knows how to Rule the world better than we do, and if
he confers more favors upon others than he does upon us, he does us no wrong,
we have still as much as we deserve and unspeakably more,

USE III. We may Hence Infer that Sins in Rulers are more Heinous in the sight
of God, than the same for kind and degree would be, if committed by men of
lower Rank. The sins of Rulers Dishonor God more than the sins of others; and
are more Hurtful to men: and Rulers discover more Ingratitude and baseness of
Spirit by their Sins, than persons of a lower Rank. And therefore we find that
Eli's, David's Jeroboam's and Baasha's Sins are represented as the more odious
because God had Exalted them 1 Samuel 2 28, 29. 2 Samuel 12 7, 8, 9. 1 King. 14 7 1
King 16. 2. And God showed himself highly provoked by them, by that train of
afflictions brought upon David himself. And the awful punishments brought upon
the posterity of Jeroboam and Baasha. Whose Families are mentioned, as Examples
of Divine vengeance 1 King 21 22. And in that God had sworn that the house of
Eli should not be purged with Sacrifice and offering for Ever. 1 Samuel 3. 14.

USE. IV Hence persons of an Elevated Station should be Humble and
Condescending to Inferiors, and ready to be serviceable and useful to them.
This is the Direction that God gives to such as you. Romans 12. 16. Mind not high
things but Condescend to men of low Esta^e. It is the pleasure of God that
persons in an high Station should remember that their Inferiors are their
brethren and should treat them as such. Deuteronomy. 17. 20 That his heart be not
Exalted above his Brethren.

In many things the Great and mean in this world are alike. The Rich and poor
meet together in many Respects. They are the workmanship and offspring of the
same God. Act. 17. 28. And made of one blood. Ibid. v. 26. Men of highest
advancement are formed out of the clay as well as the Lowest. Job. 33. 6. And
men of Lowest Degree are created in Gods Image, and after his likeness as well
as the Highest. Genesis 1. 26. The Highest and Lowest dwell in the same world,
breath in the same air, tread upon the same Earth, and need the same Kind of
supports for their outward man. Eccl. 5. 9. Moreover the profit of the Earth is
for all and the King himself is served by the field. They are all under the
same Law to God, are all alike mortal. Psalm. 49. 10. and 82. 7. And must Rest
in the grave together. Job. 3. 19. Psalm. 49. 14. They are all Capable of the
blessedness of the other life and obnoxious to Its punishments, for Riches will
not profit in the day of wrath Prove* 11. 4 And they must all stand before the
same Judgment seat. Rev. 20. 12. I saw the Dead small and great stand before
God. A proud, lofty, scornful and disdainful carriage toward Inferiors is
Exceeding unbecoming you, hereby You greatly abuse the savor of God to you,
and act very contrary to what this Doctrine suggests If it be God that has
made you to differ from Inferiors, and you have nothing above them but what you
have received, You should not pride your selves as if you had not Received it.
1 Cor. 4. 7.

Persons of Distinction and Quality should be willing to be serviceable and
useful to those that are below them Your Enjoyments that you have above others,
you have from God, and have not received them for your selves only. Are you
accomplished above others in respect of Gifts, these are given for the good of
others as well as your selves. 1 Cor 12. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to Every man to profit withal. Are you Rich in this world God has given
you all these things Richly to enjoy and you must do good with them and be
Ready to distribute them 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. Charge them that are Rich in this
world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy: that they do good, that
they be rich in good work ready to distribute, willing to Communicate. Are you
in place of Rule you are concerned to seek the good of your people. Romans 13 4.
For he is the minister of God to thee for good. Serviceableness is no degrading
thing to great persons, the more Serviceable they are to others, the more
honorable. Jehojada was buried in the city of David with the Kings because he
had done good in Israel, both toward God and toward his house. 2 Chronicles. 24
16. The more good they do, the more they are like to the holy Angels, who are
ministering Spirits sent forth to minister to the Heirs of Salvation. Heb. 1.
ult. Yea hereby they are more like to the Holy God who is good and does good*
Psalm. 119. 68.

USE. V. The truth that we have now heard Suggests that persons that are
Concerned in the Choice of Rulers, should faithfully attend the directions of
Gods word in that affair. The Reason is, because that in the Choice of Rulers
they work with God, and for God.

They work with God. He is the principal agent or Efficient in Exalting and
depressing men, and he honors you that have the Privilege of choosing your own
Rulers, by Implo^ing you in this work of his, and this should oblige you to
faithfulness. Gospel ministers should be faithful in their work for this Reason
among many others, because they are workers together with God. 2 Cor 6. 1. And
Laborers together with him in his Husbandry. 1 Cor 3* 9 A like motive to this
our freemen have, they are Employed in the same work that he is, they work with
God.

Again they work for God, and therefore this work should not be done
deceitfully. God being the chief Ruler of the world, you that are concerned in
this choice, are to pi^ch upon some, to be servants and officers under him; if
but a Neighbor of yours wanted a servant and Employed you to procure one for
him, would you not endeavor for one according to his mind, and one that might
be suitable for his work: what concernment then ought you to have upon your
spirits, to be faithful in this matter, seeing you are to choose Servants for
God, and such as are to be Employed in a great and weighty work. As David faith
of the house that Solomon was to build. 1 Chronicles. 29 1. The work is great, and
the palace is not for man but for God So it may be here said to you; the work
that you are concerned in is great, the officers that you are to choose are not
for man only but for God.

Hence you may not Choose heedlesly and at Random; or pitch upon men for Public
places only because they have been kind and obliging to you; or because they
are of such a faction or party; or because they are most likely to serve your
own Private Interest: the men of Shechem had an Eye to this in the Choice of
Abimelech. Judge 9 2, 3. And paid dear for it. Your privileges, Sirs, are too
sacred to be prostituted to serve such base designs as these: be governed in
your choice, by a sincere aim at Gods glory, and the good of your people, which
are the great Ends of Government.

To this End let the persons that from time to time you give in your Suffrage
for be men of well-known ability and faithfulness Deuteronomy. 1 13. Take ye wise men
and understanding and known among your tribes and I will make them Rulers over
you. Let them be men of wisdom and good conduct, like the men of Issachar that
had understanding in the times to Know what Israel ought to do. 1 Chronicles. 12 32.
Men zealously bent for Justice. 2 Samuel 23. 3. The God of Israel said, the Rock
of Israel spoke to me, he that Rules over men must be Just, ruling in the fear
of God. Let them be men of activity and Industry, that will apply themselves to
their work and Rule with Diligence as Romans 12 8 Men of Courage and fortitude,
that will not fear the faces of men or bear the Sword of Civil Justice in vain
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and Rom 13 4 Let them be pious Godly men. Exodus 18. 21. Moreover
thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God. Let them
be men of a Generous Public spirit, such as know how to Deny themselves for
the public good, and to look beyond their own private Interest. We need such
amongst us now, as will be faithful to the Public weal of the people, though the
main requital that they can Expect from some, is Ill Will and reproach, a sort
of pay for public officers that passes too current amongst us.

The promoting such persons amongst us, is the way to preserve the honor, and
attain the Ends of Government, to manifest our faithfulness in Gods work and
love to our people; when a people have such to Rule them, it is to be accounted
no small happiness. 1 King. 10. 8. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy
servants which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom* And it
is for a Lamentation when they have not such strong Rods to Rule them. Eccl.
10. 16. 17. Woe to thee, O Land when thy king is a child, and thy princes Eat in
the morning. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy king is the son of Nobles, and
thy princes Eat in due season, for strength and not for Drunkenness.

USE. VI The Doctrine we have now heard may be Improved to Exhort and persuade
all persons in places of Civil power, so to conduct themselves in the whole of
their Conversation, as if they had a powerful Impression of this truth upon
their hearts. So live and act as if you had a lively sense of this upon your
spirits, and were verily persuaded, that the most High governs the world, and
sets up and puts down whom he pleases.

And I would Humbly direct it to such as now are or this day may be Elected
thereto, whether in higher or Lower stations. And in particular I would (with
all submission and a deep sense of my unfitness for the work I am Engaged in)
Address the Honorable, The GOVERNOR, The DEPUTY GOVERNOR, The Worshipful
ASSISTANTS and Worthy REPRESENTATIVES of this Colony. Honorable, Worshipful
and highly Respected, You are men that are raised up on high, the Exalted of
the God of Jacob: You are the men whom the Sovereign Lord of the Universe is
pleased to set at the upper End of this our little world; be Entreated so to
deport your selves, as to Express a spirit of obedience to your great Lord and
sovereign, and of Gratitude to him, who is your glory, and the Lifter up of
your Heads. Particularly

Be Entreated to honor God who thus puts honor upon you. You have the honor
to be officers Subordinate to the Supreme Ruler of the world; to be the
Servants of God in a peculiar Respect, as David styles himself. Psalm. 18. tit.
Yea such as you are Termed the Children of the most high. Psalm. 86. 6. And by
these your Relations to God you are obliged to honor him. Mal. 1. 6. A son
honors his father and a servant his master, Gods glory is the great End of
your being and office Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all thing for himself.
Rulers then sadly forget themselves, if they have not an Eye to this, The
Renowned Calvin Calvin: Epistola ad Regem Galliae Institutionibus auteposita.
tells the king of France. Nec jam regnum Ille, sed Latrocinium Exercet, qui
non in hoc Regnat ut Dei Gloriae Serviat* He Rather acts the part of a Robber
than of a Ruler, that does not Rule to Gods Glory.

Again, be Entreated to take heart in your weighty work. There are no small
difficulties in the Rulers Province and we are not, Honorable, Worshipful, and
much Respected; altogether Insensible of the discouragement you meet with, by
the Ingratitude, Jealousies, Murmurings, and coffeehouse of some of your
people. It is our grief that the Archers of our time have shot at you, hated
you, and are often doing much to Grieve you. It becomes us to Sympathize with
you, and to pray, that your Bow may abide in strength, and that the Arms of
your Hands may be made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, that so
you may be the shepherds and the stones of our Israel -- But although your
difficulties and discouragements are great, yet let not your hands hang down or
your knees wax feeble; It is no new thing for faithful Rulers to be faulted by
murmuring persons, yea even sometimes for those Evils which a people bring upon
themselves by their own Sins: thus when Korah and his company perished in their
Rebellion, the people say to Moses and Aaron where (...) have ye killed the
people of the Lord. Luther Observed in his time See Mr. Hubbard of Ipswich's
Election Sermon Page 48.
Qui regit Signum Est in quod Satan Omnia Jacula dirigit. Rulers are the mark*
against which Satan shoots all his arrows. Let it not be forgotten that it is
God which has set you in this difficult post, and he is worthy of your service
whether your people be or no. He is able to support you in it and reward you
for it, and turn all your Sufferings to your own advantage; and seeing he has
made you Nursing fathers to your people, It will not become you to give over
your care of these your children though they prove very froward and ungrateful.

Again, let the good and Welfare of this People be much at heart with you. God
blesses you in your advancement, and therefore you must be blessings;
according as God speaks to Abraham* Genesis 12* 2. I will bless thee and make thy
name Great, and thou shall be a blessing. Let the Characters given of Nehemiah
and Mordecai hold true of you; make it manifest that you seek the wealth of
your people, and that you are men come to seek the good of our Israel. Let us
see in you the life of those metaphors by which good Rulers are set forth in
Scripture. They are heads of the people. 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. Be such to us, by
seeing our way for us, and Leading us in paths of peace and safety. Rulers are
pillars. 1 Samuel 2. 8. Appear to be such, by standing upright by being united to
Each other, and in bearing with a Christian fortitude the burdens and
difficulties of your office, and by your Endeavors to support our sinking
state. Good Rulers are Lights. 2 Samuel 21. 17. Yea they are compared to the
Light of a Clear morning. 2 Samuel 23. 4. Manifest your selves to be lights, by
being public blessings as the Light is, and in being a Terror to Evil
persons, and a Comfort to the good: the morning light as it is pleasant to
honest livers, so it is to the murderer* thief and adulterer as the shadow of
Death* Job. 24. 14, 15, 16. Rulers are Gods. Exodus 22. 28. Psalm. 82. 6. May we
see that very worthy deeds are done from time to time to this people, by your
providence. To use the words of Tertullus. Act. 24. 3. Show your selves the
children of the Most High in your care to be like him in his communicable
perfections: let us behold in you not only power, but wisdom also, and a
Godlike goodness. And in order to our good.

1. Let it be your care to promote and Encourage Religion amongst us. The
Necessity of this in order to the well being of Societies has been set before
you in a clear light upon a like occasion to this some years since. It seems
now to be much in Its wane among us, Endeavor to revive it. Encourage it by
being patterns of holiness, heavenly mindedness, zeal for Gods glory, etc. And
by promoting men of such a spirit to places of trust amongst us. Let it appear,
that you have set your affection to the house of your God, by your care to
support his worship; ordinances and ministry. May schools of Learning be
Encouraged and supported amongst us. Is it not highly Reasonable that our
children, that are given to God in Baptism, should be Educated for him? without
which there is danger that our religion will soon sink into Paganism. It was
signified on the Last Election Day to this Honorable assembly: That there
needs something more to be done in scattered places to make the benefit of our
schools more Extensive, without which they cannot be Kept up with good
agreement. etc. Our scattered place having felt by woeful Experience the truth
of this, and not Knowing of any thing done by the Legislative power for relief
herein, I would now take the boldness again to Recommend this matter to this
honorable Assembly, hoping that if something may be done in that affair for
our relief, so much benefit will accrue to our children, and so much strife and
other concomitant Sins will be prevented, that your pains herein will not be
Lost.

2. Do what in you lies for the Reformation of this people. Reformation is very
necessary for the good of a people: Their Iniquities separate between them and
their God; and their sins hide away his face from them. Isai. 59. 2 And we are
Encouraged from Gods word to look to you for something to be done in order to
it. Inasmuch as we are told that Rulers are a terror to Evil works. Romans 13.
3* And are sent for the punishment of Evil doers and for the praise of them
that do well. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Let this then be vigourously Endeavored after by
you: and be Entreated to be from time to time, swift witnesses against the
Crying abominations of our Land. Is not the Neglect of Gods worship, profane
cursing and Swearing, Sabbath breaking, whoredom, Drunkenness, Rioting,
Idleness, fraud and Injustice, very growing and prevailing Sins amongst us? Let
the sword of civil Justice be pointed against these. Say to these fools in our
Israel (by the promulgation and Execution of suitable Laws against them) that
they do no more so foolishly. Be such a terror to these Evil workers, as that
their Iniquity may stop Its mouth and hide its head. It will be sad if things
come to that pass amongst us, that such sinners should lift up the horn on
high, and speak with a stiff-neck. as Psalm 75. 5

3. Let Justice have Its free course. You Judge not for man only but for God.
Let Judgment Run down as waters and Righteousness as a mighty stream. Amos. 5.
24. Let the spoiler cease and oppressors be consumed out of the Land. Isa. 16.
4. To this End let Superior and Inferior courts of Judicature be filled up
with such, as will Judge the people with Righteousness, and the poor with
Judgment; according to Psalm. 72. 2. Let Justices of the peace be such as are
fit to bear that Title. And seeing many complain that they fail of Justice by
raw and unskilful jurors which know little of the nature of an Issue, or of the
business they are called to, may something be done to remedy their Grievance
Jurors giving Just verdicts, will have a tendency, to discourage the
mischievous, who are now apt to look upon the Event of a Lawsuit a matter of
mere contingency; a tendency to raise in the hearts of people a veneration for
our Courts; and to make the sentence pronounced by our Judges appear more as a
divine sentence.

4. Let nothing be wanting that tends to the Continuance of our Privileges.
Although there may be some unthinking or dissaffected persons among us, who
like Esau despise their birthright, that make very light of them, and may be
likely to give you very little thanks for your pains herein; yet it is to be
hoped that there are many of another spirit, and we trust your concern for the
welfare of this people will prompt you to Endeavors to Secure that which is so
valuable and precious to us.

5. Endeavor to promote peace amongst us. That our Jerusalem may be as a city
that is compacted together. Psalm. 122. 2 This is a blessing we are Encouraged
to look for from good Rulers under God. Psalm. 72. 7. In his days shall the
Righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the moon Endures. We are
to pray for Rulers to this End, that we may lead a Quiet and peaceable life in
all Godliness and honesty* 1 Timothy 2* 2. Let the mountains bring forth peace to
us and the little hills by Righteousness. To this purpose let no Endeavors be
wanting to preserve a good understanding between the members of this Honorable
Assembly. It is a good and a pleasant thing for a people to see such Brethren
in honor and power dwell together in unity. Psalm. 133. 1. The want of this
tends to Gods dishonor and opens a door to those Confusions and Evil works
that accompany strife. The most High God is represented as peculiarly present
in the assemblies of such as you are. Psalm. 82. v* 1. God stands in the
Congregation of the mighty he Judges amongst the Gods And strifes and
divisions amongst you must needs be provoking to him, who is the God of peace
and hates those that sow discord among brethren. Prove. 6. 19. Moreover the want
of such unity will greatly weaken your hands in Gods work: and may prove very
Hurtful to your people; if our Fathers in the assembly Eat these sour grapes,
it is well if their Childrens teeth be not set on Edge, and contention like oil
run down from the head to the skirt of the Garment. A great breach in the head
hazards the whole body. Our own nation Experienced not a little of the sad
tendency of this many years ago.

For motive Consider. 1. What a People. and 2. What a God you are Called to
serve.

1. What a People you are Called to serve They are a people visibly near to
God. His own people, not only by creation, but by covenant Engagements. They
are the posterity of a choice set of men, collectively taken who ventured over
into these American deserts for the sake of Religion. The Honorable Stoughton
in his Election Sermon says of them. God sifted a whole nation that he might
send choice grain into this Wilderness. God then Honors you as he did David in
that he takes you to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his Inheritance. As he
speaks. Psalm. 78. 71. Surely then in doing good to them your work will not want
its reward* Seeing God promises to bless them that bless his people. Genesis 12. v.
3 And I will bless them that bless thee and curse him that curses thee.

They are your own people. People of your own Country, Nation and Profession.
Your own Interest, and the Interest of your children and friends is Bound up
with theirs. Seek then the Peace of our Jerusalem, for your Brethren and
companions sake. Psalm. 122. 8.

They are a very growing and increasing people. This vine that God has brought
over into this Wilderness, he has Caused to take Deep Root, and it fills the
Land. as Psalm. 80. 9 By promoting their Welfare you will then bec^me very
diffusive Blessings; and many will share in the good that you do to them.

They are a people highly privileged in civil and sacred respects. Our Charter
privileges are great. And Gods worship and ordinances in their purity are set
up amongst us. A Ship so Richly Laden should not be neglected by those at Helm.
Resolve then with David. Psalm. 122. 9. that because of the house of your God
that is in us, you will seek our good.

Moreover they are a people that lie open to Gods wrath. They have been highly
favored and privileged, but they have abused the favors of God and Ill
requited him for his distinguishing Kindness. Be Entreated then to be like
Phineas zealous for your God that you may turn away his wrath from this his
people. Numb. 25. 11.

2. Consider what a God you are called to serve And he is a God that searches
all hearts 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. That takes notice how men carry themselves. He
beholds the Evil and the good. He has done much for you already to oblige you
to faithfulness; and he is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of
love to us. Heb. 6. 10. He will honor those that honor him 1 Samuel 2. ^0. And
do good to those men that are good, and will think upon you for good, according
to all that you shall do for this people.

USE, VII. I would now Address my self to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in
the MINISTRY. Let the Doctrine we have now heard be Improved to Excite us all
to greater diligence, Earnestness and faithfulness in our great work. Reverend
and Beloved Suffer this Exhortation from one in all respects unworthy, to be
Reckoned of your order, and let Gods General providence over the world, and in
particular his placing men in their several stations, be an argument to Excite
us all hereto.

It should not seem a small thing to us, that the God of Israel has separated
us from the congregation, to bring us near to himself to do the Service of his
tabernacle. As Moses speaks to Korah, Numb. 16. 9. And that he has separated
us, to minister unto himself, and to bless in his name* as Deuteronomy 10. 8. We
having received this our ministry from the Lord, should take heed that we
fulfill it. Let us then hold forth the word of life, by our doctrine and
conversation. And Endeavor to be burning, as well as shining lights let us
give our selves as much as may be to our work, the ministry of the word and
prayer And not suffer our selves unnecessarily to be taken off from it. It will
be very Inexcusable in us. Propter vitam vivendi perdere fin^m*

A small measure of proficiency will not Excuse us. We live in a time and place
where the church of Christ enjoys great peace and Rest, and we are not
molested by persecutors and sectists, as many of Christ's Servants are, who are
obliged to work like Nehemiah's Builders, who with one hand held a weapon and
with the other wrought in the work. Besides we are Entered into the Labors of
some who have been Eminent in Gifts and Piety, and Zeal for the Interest of
Christ. Not to mention the famous Worthies that the Neighboring Province has
been blessed with Even in this Western Part of New England, there have shined
Stars of the first magnitude, such as the Renowned Hooker, Stone, Davenport
Fitch, with Others of the Like stamp, who are now shining in a better world;
and what manner of persons should we be, if we would not give men occasion to
take up that sad Lamentation concerning us, Lam. 4. 1. how is the Gold become
dim, how is the fine Gold changed.

There is a spirit of Jealousy and hatred too manifest in many of this Land
against those of this order, and many reproaches are cast upon them, which will
be best removed and Confuted by a vigorous prosecution of the great business of
our Office. Moreover the declining state of religion amongst us, requires not a
little piety and painfulness in those of this order. And finally our time in
the world will soon be run out. Our bodies are Earthen vessels, and we shall
not be suffered long to Continue by reason of Death; let us then in all things
show our selves blameless and faithful as the Stewards of God, And do the work
of him that sent us while it is day, because the night of Death is hastening
upon us wherein we cannot work. John 9. 4.

Let us think seriously, how Invaluably precious the Souls of men are that we
watch for, and what a doleful account we shall have to give, if they perish
through our neglect, and how glorious their reward will be, who are faithful to
Christ in this work to the death. Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the death and
I will give thee a crown of life.

USE, VIII. Lastly. I would hence Exhort the whole body of this people so to
Carry themselves toward Rulers as this doctrine Suggests. Particularly.

1. Put honor upon them. This is their due by the fifth Commandment, and we
must not Deny it to them. Rom 13. 7. Render therefore to all their dues: --
honor to whom honor. Honor Rulers by speaking well of them, and taking in
good part their administrations. It was a good time in Israel when all that the
king did pleased the people 2 Samuel 3. 36 Don't declaim against Rulers, like
those Bruit Beasts (as such are called.) That are not afraid to speak Evil of
dignities. Jude. 10. It would better become some of you, to pray more for them,
and bless God for them, than to talk so much against them. Exodus 22. 28. Thou
shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people. Be not ready to
Credit Evil reports concerning them* Some speak against them out of malice,
because they have born testimony against their Evil works. Others out of Envy,
because they cannot bear to see them so great. Others that they may appear
wiser and more understanding in state affairs than their neighbors, who cannot
see them so faulty as they represent them* But Let your Countenances be ^s the
northwind to these back biting tongues. It is a fault to take up a reproach
against any* Psalm. 15. 3. Much more against these. It is not for nothing that
it is said. 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against an Elder receive not an accusation but before
two or three witnesses.

2. Pray for Rulers. They come in the name of the Lord. Are invested with his
power and authority. And It becomes us to ask for them a blessing. A blessing
upon their persons and administrations. Psalm. 118. 26. We are Expressly
commanded to pray for them. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I Exhort therefore that first of
all Supplications, prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all
men: for kings and for all that are in authority.

3. Be Ready to Recompense them for their Service. By your choice of them you
set them to a difficult, troublesome Employment, and they spend their time for
your benefit. And no small advantage accrues to you thereby. We may say without
flattery, concerning them, as Tertullus to Felix. Act. 24. 2 That by them we
Enjoy great quietness. Moreover the Supreme Lord of the world, whose you are,
and all that you have, Expressly requires that you should recompense these his
officers Rom 13. 6. 7. For, for this cause pay you tribute for they are Gods
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to all
their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom.

4. Lastly* Be Subject to and obey Rulers. Civil Rulers are to be obeyed in
that which is Lawful, otherwise we must obey God rather than man. Act 5. 29* We
are bound in conscience thus to obey them. Romans 13 1. 2. Let Every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: the powers that
be are ordained of God. Whosoever* therefore Resists the power, Resists the
ordinance of God and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. v.
5. Wherefore ye must needs be Subject, not only for wrath but for conscience
sake. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to Every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake: whether it be to the king as Supreme: or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. I likewise Ecclesiastical Rulers are thus to be submitted
to. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selve^:
for they much for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do
it with Joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you This duty of
submission to Rulers though very distastful and unpleas^^t to Corrupt nature,
should be sweetened to you in this Government, not only from the doctrine you
have now heard, that it is God that places men in their Respective stations;
but also because your Rulers in church and state are chosen by the people.
Hushai's Resolution. 2 Samuel 16. 18. is very reasonable Whom the Lord and this
people and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be, and with him will I
abide.

This is the way for a people to be happy. That commandment which requires
obedience to rulers is the first commandment with promise. Ephesians. 6. 2. If a
people would prosper they should hearken to their prophets* 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. If
they would live long in their own Land, and Eat the fruit of it they should be
an obedient people Isai 1 19. If ye be willing and obedient ye shall Eat the
good of the Land.

FINIS.

