The Angel of Bethesda, Visiting THE INVALIDS OF A MISERABLE WORLD

Spi^i^^s hil^^is Aetat^^ ^^^rid^m facit: Spi^^^^s (...) Ex^^^^^^ O^^*

E^dem a^^^^^^ Regi^^^ S^^itatis Sa^er^i (...):

Fol. III. Si ^ibi def^i^^^ M^i^ci, M^d^ci ^ibi (...)*
H^^ (...), (...)
Qu^^ V^^^^s (...) i^sum, (...);
Psalm. C^ii 10. BY a FELLOW of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by Timothy Green.

1722.

Nishmath-Chajim. The Probable SEAT of all Diseases, and a General CURE for
them, further Discovered.
More particularly, for Splenetic and Hysteric Maladies, which make so great a
part of our Distempers.
I. THERE is a Spirit in Man; A Wonderful Spirit, which from very good
Authority may be called, NISHMATH-CHAJIM, [Or, The Breath of Life:] And which
may be of a Middle Nature, between the Rational Soul, and the Corporeal Mass;
But may be the Medium of Communication, by which they work, upon one another.
It Wonderfully receives also Impressions from Both of them; And Perhaps it is
the Vital Ty between them. The Scriptural Anatomy of Man, into Spirit, and
Soul, and Body, seems to favor and invite the Apprehensions, which we are now
proceeding to.

II. THE Great GOD who formed all things, and who after a Singular manner forms
the Spirit of Man within him, has Endued this Nishmath-Chajim, with Mavelous
Faculties; which yet are all of them short of those Powers, which Enable the
Rational Soul, to Penetrate into the Causes of Things; To Do Curious and
Exquisite Things in the Mathematical Sciences; And above all, To act upon a
Principle of Love to GOD, and with the Views of Another World.

III. SOME Rays of Light Concerning this Nishmath-Chajim, have been darted into
the Minds of many Learned Men, who have yet after all remained very much in the
Dark about it.

FAMOUS have been the Sentiments of Helmont (and some other Masters of
Obscurities) about it; who would Exhibit it under the Name of the Archaeus; and
with much of Reason Press, that in the Care of Diseases, there may be more of
Regard Paid unto it.

ACCORDING to Gr^mbs (Writing, De Ort^ Rerum) it is, Medium quid inter Vitam at
Corpus, et Vel^^i Aura nit^^^ Splend^^^sque* A Sort of Luminous Air, which is
of a Middle Nature, Spirituous and Corpor^^us.

IT has the Denomination of, The Astral Spirit, with some Philosophers, who
Trouble the (...), more than there is any Need for.

EVEN the Galenists themselves, have not been without some Suspicions, yea,
some Acknowledgments, of our Nishmath-Chajim, and have given very Broad Hints
Concerning it. And no doubt, they may thank the Old Platonists for Instructing
of them. The Great Fernelius, one of the most Illustrious Men that ever shone
among them, (Writing, De Abditis rerum Causis) gives a very Lively Description
of it. Yea, He finds it in the, To ENORMON, or, Inciter, of Hippocrates; and
having a great Power of Incursion, like the Wind, he allows it some Affinity
with the Nature of Body; But inasmuch as it is Invisible, it must also have
some Affinity with what is Incorporeal* So, he will have it of a Middle Nature
between Both. But he supposes it, the Vehicle, and proper Seat of the Soul, and
all its Faculties; and if we call it, their Body, we shall have his Permission
for it.

AND indeed, the Old Platonists had a Notion, of a certain Excellent Body,
Pelluced, and Ethereal, Subservient unto the Faculties of the Soul, and Uniting
it unto the more Terrestrial Body.

HEURNIUS, whom some Reckon and Value next unto Fernelius, (in his
Institutions) describes it as, A kind of Etherial Spirit, Ela^er (...) out of
the purest part of the Blood, and changed into the Substance of a very subtle
Air; and the prime Instrument of the Soul, for the performance of its Functions.

IV. OUR Nishmath-Chajim seems to be Commensurate unto our Bodies; and our
Bodies are Conformable to the Shape which GOD our Maker gives to that Plastic
Spirit, (if we may call it so:) But by what Principle the Particles of it,
which may be finer than those of the Light it self, are kept in their Coh^esion
to one another; it is a thing yet Unknown unto us.

V. AND how it fares in the Case of Amputations on our Bodies; Whether like a
Flame Violently Struck off, what is so, may not nimbly, as by a sort of
Magnatism, Reunite with what it belongs unto: But then, how far it becomes for
the Present folded up into it: Or, Whether it be not Entirely Lost, but what
remains, may have the Power to Produce a Recruit, when there shall be a Lodging
again Provided for it; This also is yet Unknown unto us.

VI. THE Nishmath-Chajim is the Spirit of the Several Parts, where it has a
Residence; and it is the Life by which the Several Parts have their Faculties
Maintained in Exercise. This it is, that Sees, that Hears, that Feels; and
Performs the Several Digestions in the Body. And the Animal World, having
Anima^^^ Pr^ Sale, if it were not for This, would quickly Putrify.

VII. WE have sometimes been led by our Microscopes, into some Apprehensions,
That our Bodies are Originally folded up, in Inconceivably Minute
Corpusculicunicules; and that Generation is nothing but the Evolution of the
Stamina so Involved: Which Operation is carried on, by filling them up with a
matter agreeable to them, till they have an Augmentation to the utmost Extent
of the Dimensions, that they can reach unto: And that the Resurrection of the
Dead, which is in the Sacred Scriptures called, A Filling of the Dead Bodies,
will find out the Old Stamina of the Forsaken Body, again Shrunk up into its
first Parvity, and Replenish it with a more Etherial Matter, fit for the
Celestial Employments and Enjoyments intended for it. But this Hypothesis is
Encumbred with Difficulties, which drive us unto a Nishmath-Chajim, either to
Support and Perfect the Hypothesis, or to yield us a Better upon the fai^^^^ of
it.

VIII. THE Nishmath-Chajim is indeed, Generatienis Faber ac Rector; and as it
Leads to the Acts Requisite in Generation, without any further instructor, So
it is the Spirit, whose Way we know not, for Shaping the Bones, and other
Parts, in the Womb of her that (...) with Child*

IX THERE are indeed many Things in the Humane Body, that cannot be solved by
the Rules of Mechanism. Our Nishmath-Chajim will go very far to help us in the
Solution of them. Indeed we can scarce well Subsist without it.

X THERE is an astonishing Operation, and indeed some Illustration and
Explanation, of the Nishmath Chajim, in Pregnant Women; Whose Imaginations
frequently makes Impressions on the Unborn Infants, that would Exceed all
Belief, if we had them not continually in View before our Eyes. The ^^^^^nces
are so Numerous and so Various th^^ One might Compile a Large Volumn of them;
and almost ask a Paleph^^^^^ to a^^^rd a ^i^ie for it. But in what other way to
be accounted for?

XI. FOR the Nishmath-Chajim we may safely be Traducians. It is a (...) in, and
so Derived from the (...). And this Traductian (which is (...) L^min^) may help
us considerably, in our Enquiries, How the Dispositions of our (...) Conveyed
and Infused into us?

XII. IT was of Old, yea, it is at this day, a prevailing Opinion, among the
Strangers to the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God; That the Manes, which
remain after Death, have still an Humane Shape, and all the Parts both External
and Internal, which there were in the Body that is now deserted: yea, That
there is a Food which this Departed Spirit craves for and Lives on. Homer
inflicts Punishments on the Wicked after Death, which there must be a Sort of
Bodies to be the Subjects of. And Plato Speaks of those that are Punished in
Hell, as having such Members and Faces as they had once upon the Earth. Indeed
Justin Martyr argues from it, that these old Gentlemen must needs have some
Knowledge and Belief of our Doctrine of, The Resurrection of the Dead. But what
shall we say, when our Glorious LORD-REDEMER, in His Parable of the Rich man,
supposes his Body in the Grave, and yet being in Hell, he cries out of a Body,
and particularly, of a Tongue, that is tormented there? Many of the Ancients
thought, there was much of a Real History in the Parable; and their Opinion
was, That there is, DIAPHORA KATATAS MORPHAS, A Distinction (and so a
Resemblance) of men as to their Shapes after Death. We find This was the
Opinion of Iraen^^s; who proves, from what our SAVIOR Speaks of the Dead Man,
that the Souls which have put off their Bodies, do yet Characterem Corporum
Custodire, Preserve the Shapes of the Bodies, to which they were United. And
from the same Speech of our SAVIOR, Tertullian does infer, E^^igiem Animae et
Corporales Lineas, the Shape and Corpoperal Lineaments of the Soul, I will say
nothing of what Thespesius returning to Life reported about the, ^A TONE
PSEUCONE CROMATA, The Colors of Souls, and the Ulcers by their Passions left
upon them.

XIII. THE Nishmath-Chajim is much like the Soul which animates the Brutal
World; Even that spirit of the Beast, which goes downward unto the Earth; but
is by the Hand of the Glorious Creator impregnated with a Capacity, and
Inclination, for those Actions, which are necessary for the Preservation of
themselves, and the Propagation of their Species. The Nidification of Birds,
the Mollification of Bees, and a Thousand such Things, how surprising Works
done in the Brutal World, without any Rational Projection for them! And hence,
there are also many Actions done by us, that have a Tendency to our Safety and
Welfare, which are not the Effects of any Rational Projection; but such as we
do by what we call, A mere Instinct of Nature, fall into. The Sucking Infant,
yea, and the Nursing Mother too, do very Needful and Proper Things, without
Consulting of Reason for the doing of them.

XIV. HAVING at some time or other felt a Considerable Smart, or been
Considerably Sick, from something that we have met withal, we have an Abiding
Horror for that thing perhaps all our Days. Though we Certainly Know that the
Thing will now do us No Heart, but rather do us Much Good, yet no Conviction of
Reason will Overcome our Abiding Horror, We cannot Swallow the Pill, or take
the Meat or the Drink, and do an hundred Things, which we have heretofore been
horribly frighted at. Our Nishmath-Chajim has an lncurable Aversion for them.

XV. IT IS the Nishmath-Chajim, that is the Strength of every part in our Body,
and that gives Motion to it. Here perhaps the Origin of Muscular Motion may be
a little accounted for. And this is the Spirit, and the Balsome, and one might
almost say, the Keeper, of each part, which is Occupied and Befriended with it.
Yea, what Construction shall we make of it, when People have Lived without any
Brains in their Heads, and after the Destruction of almost all the Bowels in
their Bodies? We are supplied and surprised with many most Credible Relations
of such Things. And I Question, whither any thing will do so well, or go so
far, as our Nishmath-Chajim, to account for them?

XVI. THE Principal Wheel in the Animal Economy, is the Stomach. And we shall
now find that which above all things the Digestion there, is to be ascribed
unto. Dispute, O Philosophers, and Physicians, How Digestion is Performed in
the Stomach. It Is the Nishmath-Chajim after all, that is above all, the Main
Digester. Else, how could a Stomach that is actually Cold, and has in it no
very Tastable or Notable Humor for this purpose, Digest the very Stones that
are taken down into it?

THE taking of some Repast, is in our Sacred Scripture sometimes called, The
Establishing of the Heart. The Heart, is not seldom, a term for our
Nishmath-Chajim.

XVII. IT is the Nishmath-Chajim, that is more Eminently the Seat of our
Diseases, or the Source of them. To pass by what they quote of Herophilus, we
find Plato Elegantly Demonstrating* That all Diseases have their Origin in the
Soul. Yea, as long ago, as the Days of Hippocrates, the Essentials of Diseases
began to be Discovered; and the Pacifying and Rectifying, of the Enforcing
Spirit was proposed as the most ready way to Cure them.

QUAERE; How far the Decays of Old Age are to be found in the Circumstances of
the Nishmath-Chajim falling under Impairments? And Whence it came to pass that
when Moses was very Old, yet his Eye was not dim, nor his Natural Force abated?

IS not this the true, Humidum Radicale, they use to talk of?

AND is not this the Microcosmic Air, whereto Tachenius ascribes the Cure of
the Gout by a strong pertu^^^^^ of the Mind; upon which he concludes it
animated?

XVIII. IT is Probable, that when we Die, the Nishmath-Chajim, goes away, as a
Vehicle to the Rational Soul; and continues unto it an Instrument of many
Operations. Here we have some Solution for the Difficulties, about Place, and
the Change of it, for such an Immaterial Spirit as the Rational Soul; And some
Account for Apparitions of the Dead: The Specter, which are called both,
Spirits, and Phantasms, in our Gospel. Yea, We are certain of it, That Persons
before they have Died, upon strong Desires to Visit and Behold some Objects at
a Distance from the Place to which they were now Confined, have been thrown
into a Trance, wherein they have lain some Considerable. While without Sense or
Breath; and then Returning, have reported what they have seen. But
incontestible Witnesses have deposed, that in This Time, they were actually
Seen at the Place, which they affirmed they had gone unto.

AND here also we do a little understand, how our Apostle in the Raptures
(which the Scoffing Lucian derides him for) wherein he supposes he might be Out
of the Body, yet he heard Words; he was yet Sensible of Occurrences.

XIX. IN the Indisputable and Indubitable Occurrences of Witchcrafts (and
Possessions) there are many things, which, because they are Hard to be
Understood* the Epicurian-Sadducees content themselves, in their Swinish
Manner, only to Laugh at. But the Nishmath-Chajim well understood, would give
us a mavelous Key to let us into the Philosophy of them.

XX. AND now, for some Important Consequences.

MOST Certainly, the Physicians that can find out Remedies (particularly in the
Mineral or Vegitable Kingdom) that shall have a more Immediate Efficacy to
Brighten, and Strengthen, and Comfort, the Nishmath-Chajim, will be the most
Successful Physician in the World. Especially, if he can Irradiate the Spirit
in the Stomach, he will do Wonderfully.

THOSE things also, which Fortify the Blood, and restore a Volatile Ferment, in
the Vapid and Languid Blood, will do Wonders for us. It is impossible to Kill a
Man (the Nishmath-Chajim will never leave him) till the Circulation of his
Blood be ruined.

XXI. WE read, Heaviness in the Heart of man makes it stoop; but a Good Word
makes it Glad. We read, A Cheerful Heart does good like a Medicine; but a
broken spirit dries the Bones. The Invigoration, or the Debilitation of the
Nishmath-Chajim, is that wherein these ancient Observations are accomplished.

IT is a Remark of Baglivi, but it may have been made by Ten Thousand more;
That a great part of our Diseases, Either do Rise from, or are Fed by, a Weight
of Cares, lying on the Minds of men. Diseases that seem Incurable, are easily
Cured by agreeable Conversation. Disorders of the Mind, first bring Diseases on
the Stomach; and so the whole Mass of Blood gradually becomes infected. And as
long as the Passions of the Mind continue, the Diseases may indeed change their
Forms; but they rarely quit the Patients.

A BONIFACIUS heretofore Addressed the Physicians on this Occasion, in such
Terms as these. Tranquillity of Mind, will do Strange Things toward the Relief
of Bodily Maladice. It Is not without Reason, that Hofman in this Dissertation,
Des Moyens de vivre longtems, does insist on Tranquillity of Mind as the chief
among the Ways to Live Long; and that this is the cause why we read, The Fear
of the Lord tends to Life. They that have Practiced, The Art of Curing by
Expectation, have made an Experiment of what the Mind will do toward the Cure
of the Body. By Practicing, The Art of Curing by Consolation, you may carry on
the Experiment. I Propound then, Let the Physician with all possible Ingenuity
of Conversation, find out, what matter of Anxiety, there may have been upon the
Mind of his Patient; what there is, that has made his Life Uneasy to him.
Having Discovered the Bu^^^n, let him use all the ways he can devise to take it
off. Offer him such Thoughts, as may be the best Anodynes for his Distressed
Mind; especially, the Right Thoughts of the Righteous, and the Ways to a
Composure upon Religious Principles. Give him a Prospect, if you can, of some
Deliverance from his Distresses, or some Abatement of them. Raise in him as
Bright Thoughts as may be, and Scatter the Clouds, remove the Loads, which his
Mind is Perplexed withal: Especially, by Representing and Magnifying the Mercy
of GOD in CHRIST unto him.

XXII. IT is well known that if one Third of our Diseases, be those which we
call, Chronical, more than one Half of this Third, will be those, which in Men
go under the Name of Splenitic, and in Women go under the Name of Hysteric;
though the Spleen and the Womb are often enough unjustly accused in these
Denominations. It is mavelous to see, in how many Forms we undergo Splenetic
and Hysteric Maladies; The very Toothache it self often belongs unto them: And
Mavelous will be the Success, Mavelous the Esteem, of the Physician that
can Discover'em and Encounter'em.

THE Sagacious Dr. Sydenham, seems to have the Scent of our Nishmath-Chajim,
when he tells us, That as the Outward Man is framed with Parts, obvious to
Sense, thus the Inward Man does consist of a due Series, and as it were a
Fabric, or Spirits, to be viewed only by the Eye of Reason: And as this is
united with the Constitution of the Body, so the Frame of it is more or less
easily Disordered, by how much the Constitution of the Spirits is more or less
Firm within us. And that the Origin of the Splenetic and Hysteric Ataxy in the
Body is a Feeble Constitution of the Spirits, and the breaking of their System,
so that they are easily Dissipated, or have an Unequal Distribution.

THESE Maladies have many Symptoms, which may serve as Diagnosticks for them;
Especially these Two: That the Urine is Clear, Limpid, and Copious. And, That
the Patient is Chiefly affected with his Indispositions, when he has just had
his Mind under some Disturbance and Affliction.

IT is Plain, that these Diseases are not mainly in the Humors; inasmuch as
Evacuations do not Relieve, but fearfully Produce and Increase the Diseases.
Only indeed, when the Ataxy of the Spirits, has by its Continuance at last
Considerably Vitiated the Humors, -- Then a little Purging and Bleeding may be
allowed of.

THE Cure is; First, Quiet the Spirits with Proper Anodynes. Then bring them to
Rights, and Revive them and Refresh them, and bring a New Strength into them.
In short, Confirm the System. Chalybeates do Wonders this way; And usually the
Steel in Substance, more than many of the Common Preparations. Corroborating
Plants, infused in Generous Wine, or a Tea of them, have also done Wondrously.
Yea, Venice-Treacle alone (our Sydenham says) as Contemptible as it may seem,
yet if often used, and a long while, it is a Great Remedy in This, as well as
very many other Diseases, and perhaps the most Effectual that has hitherto been
known in the World.

THE Force of the Peruvian Bark Regularly administered, for giving a Vigor to
the Blood, and so to the Spirits, has also been very Surprising And for the
Recovering of People to an Healthy Constitution out of Splenetic and Hysteric
Diseases.

BUT there is nothing like the Exercise of Riding on Horseback, Every Day,
when the Weather will allow it; and increasing the Journey by Degrees till one
comes to a Score of Miles in a Day.

XXIII. UPON the Whole;

OF all the Remedies under Heaven, for the Conquering of Distempers, and for
the Preservation of Health and Prolongation of Life, There will now be found
none, like Serious PIETY. Many Remedies have done Virtuously (and had their
Virtues) but thou Excellest thou all. The Rational Soul in its Reflections h^^
Powerful and Wonderful Influences on the Nishmath-Chajim. Now in the Methods of
PIETY, get a Soul into the Peace of GOD, with Assurance of a Reconciliation to
Him; and walk in the Fear of GOD, and the Comfort of the Holy Spirit; Keeping
always in, and Filled always with, His Love; and Indulge none of those Lusts,
which render the Wicked like the Troubled Sea. Keep a Conscience, which in a
Continual Aim at what is Right shall make a Continual Feast. Be not Anxious
about Futurities, nor Disturbed upon Provocations: But let the Strong Faith of
a Faithful SAVIOR Performing the Thing that is Appointed for us in all that
happens, Produce a perpetual Tranquillity and Serenity in the Soul. Go on
Singing in the Ways of the Lord, and Casting all Burdens on Him, and Rejoice in
the Hope of the Glory of GOD. Thus, I show you a most Excellent Way.

XXIV. LET this be Remembered; Moderate Abstinence, and Convenient Exercise; and
some Guard against Injurious Changes of the Weather, with an HOLY and EASY
MIND, will go as far, in Carrying us with Undecay'd Garments through the
Wilderness, to the Promised and Pleasant Land, which we are Bound unto, as all
the Prescriptions with which all the Physicians under Heaven, have ever yet
Obliged us.

De Flatibus Humanum Corpus Molestantibus.
By another Hand.
RES levis est flatus: Sed enim firmissima quaeque;
Concutit, et terris et dominatur aquis:
Horrenda ignivomo reboare tonit^^a caelo
Audisti, et trepidis fulmina missa pelis?
Iratum vastis agitari fluctibus aequor
Vidisti, et mersas per freta faeva rares?
Annosasque ima quercus tellure revulsas,
Et validas rurres, et cecidisse domos?
Tum sonitu ingenti torqueri immania saxi
Pondera per longos ignibus acta tabos?
Sensisti et quondam tremere intima Viscera terrae,
Credulus extremum jam fore jamque diem?
Scilicet efficient violenti haec omnia ^^at^s:
Qui simili afflictant Corpora nostra modo:
Si quando inclusi per summa* per ima vagantur,
Et miseris Vexant Viscera torminibus.
Magis nocet nimius Animi affectus,
Quam nimius Corporis motus.

