THE ORIGINAL RIGHTS OF Mankind Freely to Subdue and Improve the EARTH.
Asserted and Maintained

By I. M.

And has made of one Blood all Nations of Men to Dwell on all the face of the
Earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the Bounds of their
Habitation, Act, 17. 26. chap. 4. 24. Jer. 51. 15. Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Genesis 13. 9. to
the end of the Chapter. Revealed Truths when manifested, ought not to be
rejected, but complied with, lest we fall into the Sin of the Israelites, Ezekiel.
12. 2. Boston, Printed for the (...). 1722.

Quarles Pentelogia.
WHat is the World? a great Exchange of Ware,
Wherein all Sorts and Sexes Cheapning are.
The Flesh, the Devil sit and cry, What lack ye?
When most they fawn, they most intend to wrack ye
Who live to Sin, are all but Thieves to Heaven
And Earth: they steal from God, and take ungiv'n.
Good Men they rob, and such as live upright,
And being Bastards, share the Freemans Right.
They Are all as Owners in the Owners stead,
And like (to Dogs) devour the Childrens bread.
Lord, What I have, let me enjoy in thee,
And thee in it, or else take it from me!
In Loving God, if I neglect my Neighbor,
My Love has lost its proof, and I my Labor.
My zeal, my faith, my hope, that never fails me,
(If Charity be wanting) naught avails me.
(Lord) In my Soul a Spirit of Love create me,
And I will love my Brother, if he hate me.
In naught but Love let me Envy my Betters,
And then forgive my Debts, as I my Debtors.
So Rich is Man (that all his Debts being paid)
His Wealth's the Winding Sheet wherein he is laid,
TO THE Courteous Candid RREADER.
THE Good of the Governed is the sole end of all Government, which the English
Constitution, Wholesome Laws, and bright Magistrates will Effect. Good
Magistrates are God-like Men, (the greatest Blessings on Earth to Mankind) and
Merit the greatest Service, Praise and Honor from them: They are their
greatest Benefactors, Imitating their Maker, always doing Good; Uneasy when
they want Ability, or Opportunity thereto; they look upon themselves Appointed,
Set up and Advanced by God, and also Dignified by their Brethren for that very
End; knowing, that all the Governed are ready to Contribute their Lives, and
all (...) their Glory; therefore Gratefully they Exert all their Power for the
Good of all the Governed, and promote every one who contributes thereto.

They are Men of Souls above their Brethren, possessed with soaring elevated
Thoughts and Designs for the Good of Mankind, and o make their Brethren happy,
watching over them, to keep off all Evil, to take off all heavy Burdens, and
to break all Yokes, and to possess them of all GOOD Happy, Happy are the People
that are in such a Case! In such a Government there is no difference in the
Views and Interests of the Governors and Governed, but each striving to Excel,
in promoting one the others Happiness. It has been so in N-England, and why may
it not now, if in our Elections, we make Choice of Good Delegates, and they of
Good MAGISTRATES? we have an Excellent Governor, who is must willing to do
every thing by Counsel, for the best Good and Welfare of this People; therefore
if we be not happy, we must condemn our selves for it. Pray God increase our
Wisdom, and Love one to another, and remove all Jealousies, and Direct all our
Elections to his Glory, and the best Good for this Province.

The Design aimed at in this Scroul, is to do all Men good, without wrong to
any, by removing from all, all causes of just Complaint, and by giving to the
Industrious all due Encouragement, and wherein this falls short thereof, may
the Ingenious give further Light.

Ambition, Custom and Interest will move some to Object against the Positions
argued from, but if no Wrong be done, then no Person has just Cause of
Complaint.

For which is most to be Avoided, a positive or a privitive Evil, is it not
according as the degrees thereof be! Certainly that which is the greatest
Paenal Evil is most to be Feared; for if a Privitive Evil be a greater damage,
it is by so much the more to be avoided; for is it not better to suffer a less
Positive Evil (though to be Robbed) than a greater Privative Evil, (for Men and
their Posterity to be deprived of their Birthright) and a far greater Sum it
amounts to then many Robberies; it is a progressive Robbery, from Generation to
Generation, etc. And only suffers Mankind to Live, that they may be Slaves to
Monopolizers; for so much as they can Raise (if not more) they must give them
for Deeds, (...) to Improve Dormant Lands; especially considering that this
Earth is the free Gift of God to the Improver, and that all Government is to
Dispense Justice in Equity and Mercy to the Governed; otherwise Iniquity may be
committed by a Law, and Men and their Posterity be made to Work and Fight for
others, and to feed and pay themselves for the support of Pride, Ambition and
Coveteousness. For is it not just cause of Complaint, that men shall be possessed
of a Visible Increasing Estate in Dormant Lands? (that is no benefit to, but
Impoverish the Province, also is defended by the Blood and Purse thereof) worth
10, 20 or 30 Thousand Pounds, more or less, and Pay no Rates for it; when
others are constantly Taxed for their Improved Lanes, which is the Enriching
and Support of the Country; for whether is to be justified a necessity for the
Farmers to purchase Dormant Lands? and thereby make the Farmers that subdues
and improves the Earth Slaves, or the Taxing of Dormant Lands to prevent
Slavery; and (...) thereby necessitate the Monopolizes to Improve them, or to
give them up to Authority to see thereto; especially considering if
Monopolizers will but Improve Lands, they and their Posterity will have the
Land free before them, without price, bounds or Emitation, and all set off
regularly better appointed, etc. lying far more Commodious, both for Defense
and Improvement. Always next to improved Lands ( page (...)) here is nothing
touched or struck at, but only a Moral and Paenal Evil, which if once removed,
we may hope for God's Blessings, and the Countries Happiness; and who have any
just came to Complain for being prevented from Tyranizing over, and Oppressing
one another? also the Consequences will be very great, the comfortable
Necessaries of Life will be much cheaper; for when the Farmer and his
Posterity, shall have their Land free, then they may Sell what they Raise
therefrom, at much lower Rates; (only to be honorably paid for their Labor)
whereas now they must advance so much more as will pay for their Purchasing
Dormant Lands for themselves and their Posterity, or leave them naked.

The first beginning of this Mystery of Iniquity, (to set up Idol self) was a
shadow of Justice and Righteousness, under specious pretenses of our just and
natural Rights, giving large Towns to a few Men, who finding that dividing all
the Towns Lands among themselves, the more Land they could keep for their
Posterity, and Sell to Strangers that wanted Land to improve; and at first
selling shares at low prices, it was not much minded, but now it is risen to so
great a price as to make us all Oppressors or Slaves, (that is Monopolizers or
Purchasers of Dormant Land,) therefore it is high time to be looked upon as a
great Iniquity; and Laws made to free us therefrom, to prevent such attempts
for the future. It Is true, the first Townsmen dividing the Towns Land among
themselves, thereby have kept Land for their Children, else the Country would
have been less improved, and their Posterity necessitated to have Removed, as a
multitude have done, and Settled many Towns in Connecticut. To Conclude, if
nothing be struck at, but what is a Provoking Sin, both against God and Man,
Let us beware of persevering therein; for whether is Wisdoms Choice, the
removing of Sin, and thereby saving the Land, or to uphold Sin, and thereby
destroy the Country; for God is a Jealous God, and will not suffer Coveteous
Hucksters to interpose betwixt his Gift (and the Subject Man, to whom it is
given) and thereby destroy his free Bounty, to Serve their Lusts, and Ruin
their Brethren.

I. M.

The Original RIGHTS of Mankind, freely to Subdue and Improve the Earth:
Asserted and Maintained.
IF GOD by the Word of His Almighty Creating Power, has spoke this Earth, with
the Creatures thereof into Being, Upholds and Provides for them; then this
Earth, with the Creatures thereof, are at his Disposal!

But God by the Word of his Almighty Creating Power has spoke this Earth, with
the Creatures thereof into being, Upholds and Provides for them Gen Chap 1 v 8
to the end Jer. chapter 27 v. 5.
.

Therefore this Earth, with the Creatures thereof, are at his Disposal.

If God has given this Earth to that Species Man Adam, as he Represented, and
was Potentially and Seminally all Mankind, without Price or Purchase, to subdue
and replenish the same; then that Species Man Adam (that is all Mankind)
without Price or Purchase, has a Divine Right to subdue and replenish this
Earth.

But God has given this Earth to that Species Man Adam, as he Represented, and
was Potentially and Seminally all Mankind, without Price or Purchase to Subdue
and Replenish the same Genesis chap. 1. v. 28, 29. also chap. 9. v. 1, 2, 3.
.

Therefore that Species Man Adam, (that is all Mankind) without Price or
Purchase has a Divine Right to Subdue and Replenish this Earth.

If the Scriptures, and our Reasonable Nature give Testimony thereto, then it
is unquestionably true.

But the Scriptures and our Reasonable Nature do give Testimony thereto Psalm.
115. ver. 16. Job 15. verse 19.
.

Therefore it is unquestionably true. For,

If Men now stand in the same Relation to this part of the Creation that Adam
our Origin, and after him Noah and his Family stood in, then Men have without
Price or Purchase, a Divine Right from the Donation of God, freely to subdue,
replenish and improve this part of the Creation.

But Men do now stand in the same relation to this part of the Creation that
Adam our Origin, and after him Noah and his Family stood in: For Noah and his
Seed are the Subjects of all general Gifts, Promises and Blessings contained in
the Scriptures.

Therefore Men have without Price or Purchase a Divine Right from the Donation
of God, freely to subdue, replenish and improve this part of the Creation.

If Adam our Origin, and after him Noah and his Family represented and were
Potentially and Seminally all Mankind, and this Earth was given to them without
Price or Purchase, freely as they Represented, and were Seminally and
Potentially all Mankind; then the Donation of God was, and is to all Mankind.
Into your hands are they delivered, etc.

But Adam our Origin, and after him Noah and his Family Represented and were
Potentially, etc. all Mankind; and this Earth was given to them without Price
or Purchase, freely as they represented, and were Seminally and Potentially all
Mankind Genesis chap. 9. verse 1, 2, 3.
. God blessed Noah and his Sons, and said to them, be (...) and replenish the
Earth, and all that (...) on the Earth, and the Fishes in the Sea; into your
hands are they delivered, even as the green Herb have I given you all things;
that is, as they represented, and were potentially and seminally all Mankind.

Therefore the Donation of God was, and is to Mankind. Into your hands are they
delivered. etc.

If the Gift of God to our Origin, or first and Common Stock, or Parents, must
be understood as they represented and were potentially and (...) all Mankind,
(and no other construction can be put upon the Text) then all Mankind has a
Divine Right from God, freely without price or purchase to subdue and replenish
the Earth.

But the Gift of God to our Origin, or first and Common Stock, or Parents,
must be understood as they represented, and were potentially and seminally all
Mankind; Genesis 13. 9. The land was free (...) (...) Lev 20. 24. Yea. to the
Wicked and their Seed God freely (...) this Earth, Deuteronomy. 2 5 9. and 19 chap. 19
26. Josh. 2. 9. though improved, yet freely given.
(and no other Construction can be put upon the Text.)

Therefore all Mankind has a Divine Right from God, freely without Price or
Purchase, to subdue and replenish the Earth.

Our Reasonable Nature is that of Man which in his Creation was nearest, and
the most perfect Shadow and Image of the Divine Being, that he was capable of
being made the Subject (...), and is the Matrix, or the Universal Created
Reason, Equity and Justice, from whence flows good and excellent Conduct and
Government, following the Intentions of its Author and Maker; all Humane
Goodness is from our Reasonable Nature, and it is satisfied with small Matters;
all it requires is comfortable Necessaries, what more is of our Lusts.

If our Reasonable Nature in Adam's perfect State, and afterward in his and
Noah's Apostate State, was God's Law to them as they represented and were the
Root and Stock, and all Mankind, their Seed and Branches from them; then is
they were without price or purchase freely possessed of this Earth, etc. So are
all their Seed, that are Branches from them, (that is, all Mankind.)

The Indians of this Continent, their Natures were not so much Vitiated, as for
their Sachems to Sell the Common Earth to their Subjects, nor their Subjects
one to another, but by Tradition from Generation to Generation; they all
improved according to Divine Donation freely, without Price or Purchase, and so
continue to this Day; and where the English Possessed, they set them off parcels
of Land free from Price or Purchase more than they can improve.

If the Proposition be sufficiently proved by Scripture and our reasonable
Nature, that the Earth and the Creatures thereof, ought to be free without
Price or Purchase to the Subduer, Replenisher and Improver thereof; then it is
Unscriptural, and contrary to our Reasonable Nature, that the Earth and the
Creatures thereof should be Sold, or by Laws, Deeds, Grants, or any other
color or manner of device whatsoever, be made the Property of particular
Persons; who exact all the Fruits of the Sweat of the poor Husbandman and his
Families Labors; and thereby make their Families, nay, the Province to be
their Slaves.

But the Proposition is sufficiently proved by Scripture, and our Reasonable
Nature; that the Earth and the Creatures thereof ought to be free: without
price or purchase to the Subduer, Replenisher and Improver thereof.

Therefore it is Unscriptural, and contrary to our Reasonable Nature, that the
Earth, etc. should be Sold, or by Laws, Deeds, Grants, or any other color or
manner of device whatsoever, be made the property of particular Persons; who
exact all the fruits of the poor Husbandman and his Families Labors, and
thereby make their Families; nay, the Province to be their Slaves. For,

If all Men have a Divine Right, as they are Men, (except they have forfeited
their Birthright) freely without price or purchase, to Subdue and Replenish
the Earth, as has been proved; then every Person that puts in his Claim, ought
to be possessed with a portion thereof, to Subdue and Replenish the same; and
that portion to be his Fee Simple for ever, it being his Birth right, as he is
a Man.

But all Men have a Divine Right as they are Men, freely without Price or
Purchase to Subdue and Replenish the Earth, as has been proved.

Therefore every Person that puts in his Claim, ought to be Possessed with a
portion thereof, and that portion to be his Fee Simple for ever, it being his
Birthright, as he is a Man.

If it be granted, that this Earth, etc. is the free Donation of God to the
Species Man; and its manifested so to be by Revelation, and our Reasonable
Nature; but yet some assert, that God has given this part of the Earth to the
Natives, or Indians born in the Country, exclusive of all others. Their
Argument is.

If God has freely given all this American Part of the Earth, etc. to the
Natives or Indians born in the Country, exclusive of all others, and they be
rightfully Possessed with the Property thereof, and have subdued, replenished,
divided and improved the whole amongst themselves; and we have legally
purchased, and the Natives have legally Conveved their Property to us, then we
are rightfully and legally possessed thereof.

But God has freely given all this American part of the Earth, etc. to the
Natives or Indians, born in the Country, exclusive of all others, and they are
rightfully possessed with the Property thereof, and have subdued, replenished,
divided and improved the whole amongst themselves, and we have legally
purchased, and the Natives have legally conveyed their Property to us.
Therefore we are rightfully and legally Possessed thereof. The Assumption wants
proof.

1. That God has given this American part of the Earth to the Indians,
exclusive of all others; for if being born in the Country gives them the
Property thereof, then they of English Extraction are possessed equally thereof
with them, they being also born in the Country; and have equal reason to
Exclude the Indians, as the Indians have to Exclude them.

2. As for their rightful Possession, it is granted, that where they have
subdued, replenished, and are actually improving that is their Property; and to
take that from them, is to Rob them; also to improve too near their
Settlements, is annoyance that ought not to be tolerated. But

3. Is it not unaccountable, that the (...) or Indians should be invested with
the Property of all this vast (...), unreplenished, unimproved, unknown, and
greatest part of this Creation, exclusive of all others; for they came here
only Providentially as the English came.

4. As for their dividing and improving the whole Continent amongst themselves,
there is neither ground nor col^^^ of pretense for such Assertion, or did they
ever Bay or Sell Land, the English first (...) into their needs; before the
Land was all free to the Improver, they never so much as inquired whose the
Property was, nor knew they of any such thing; only where they Improved, if
(...) but agreeable to the Primitive Practice of Abraham and Lot, the Land was
before them, to turn to the Right hand or to the Left, and to Improve where
ever they came, freely without price or purchase; so the Land of Judea was
given to the Israelites, every Tribe, Family and Person had their there, and
all freely, without price or purchase. Also in England, the Lord will not Out
his Tenant that holds by Lives, except the Purchaser first Bay his Tenants
Right; also in this Province by the Law of Possession, Improving 12 years, make
their Title good against all Claimers (...); which if the Earth were not free
to the Species Man, would be Unjust.

5 As for the Indians legal Sale, and the Monopolizers legal Purchase, and they
being thereby legally and rightfully possessed thereof.

If the Indians had no property, but where they have subdued, replenished, and
improved, (as has been proved) then neither the English, nor any other Nation
could purchase Land of them, save (...) they have subdued, replenished and
Improved.

But if this vast Continent be the Natives Property, it ought to be manifested
by Revelation or Reason, and if it can bring it to light, that it may be known,
who are the Lord Proprietors of this vast Continent.

If it cannot be proved, that God has given the Property of all this vast
unsubdued and unknown American Part of the Creation to the Indians, exclusive
of all others, nor that they have subdued or improved one hundred thousand part
thereof; (they only were born and brought up in the Country, as also the wild
and savage Creatures were, and preyed on every thing they could catch, a Rattle
Snake could not escape their teeth) then the Natives have no more Property,
save the Land they have subdued and improved; for no People have a Right to
Exclude the Species Man from subduing, replenishing and improving the Earth.

If God in his Providence brought the English to this almost Vacant and
Uninhabited part of the World, which was neither subdued, replenished nor
improved; and the great Sachems submitted and surrendered to the Crown and
Nation of England, and became our Kings Subjects; and all Opposing Powers and
Rebels by the King of England's Subjects, both of English and Indian
Extraction, were subdued and brought into subjection; and this part of the
Earth subdued, improved and replenished by the Subjects of England, they
bringing into this Continent all sorts of Cattle, Grain, Seeds, Herbs, Roots,
Fruits and Fowls, and all sorts of Tools, Utensils, Arts and Sciences, with the
true Knowledge and Worship of God, and also (...) and protected the same; then
it is manifest, that the Property is not invested in the Indians, but in the
Crown and Nation of Great Britain.

But God in his Providence did bring the English to, etc. as Mr. Nathaniel
Morton, Secretary of Plymouth gives account thereof, in his History of
New England, at large especially in the second Edition, Page 39.

Therefore it is manifest, that the Property is not invested in the Indians,
but in the Crown and Nation of Great Britain.

If we consider the Indians or Natives as Communities, then this vast Continent
either is their Property, exclusive of all others, or it is not; if it be the
Communities Property, what right have their Sachems to Sell it; for if Sachems,
or any in Authority do destroy, or alienate their innocent Subjects, their
Liberties and Properties to Strangers (without their (...)) by any device or
color whatsoever. Thereby they forfeit all Right of Authority to Govern, and
are manifested to be Tyrants; and then they ought to be deposed; for illegal
Destraction and Alienation are contrary to, and inconsistent with both Moral
Virtue, Reason and Government; and also destroys the end thereof, which is the
Preservation of Life, Liberty and Property.

Before the English Arrived to this Continent, there was nothing in this
Country, save Indian Corn and Squashes, not one tame Creature, save our Dogs,
nor any thing made of Metal, nor the least step of Literature; nor did the
Indians pretend to be invested with the property of the Soil, save where they
had improved if that till the English possessed them therewith; designing Men
thereby to take Umbrage for a color and pretense to Monopolize Lands, which
they have effected one or two hundred miles deep into the back Wilderness, more
or less; also in Towns, to the Inslaving of their Brethren. For the Earth by
God is as freely given to the Species Man, as the light and influence of the
Sun, or as the Air we brethe in, and is as necessary for his subsisting, and
ought to be as free to the Improver. For,

What necessity for any Men to have such great quantities of Dormant Lands more
than they can improve, (is it not the effect and fruit of a Covetous Spirit,
and what is worse) that they may reap the Effects of the Farmers, and Laboring
Men's Industry; knowing, that Farmers cannot live, nor the World be supported
but by Farmers and Laborers subduing and improving the Earth; and therefore by
their Monopolizing Dormant Lands, they bring the Farmer under a necessity to
Buy of them, and give them their Price.

And so great a Price do Farmers give for Dormant Lands, that when they are
improved, if you compute what the Building, Subduing, Fence and Fencing,
breaking up the Land, and all other Charges amounts to; suppose that Laborers
were Hired to do all the Work (except some few instances) their Farms would not
Sell for more, and many Farms not for so much as to pay the Laborers; (only
near Navigable Rivers, where Timber and Wood is worth Money to carry to Boston,
or some Fireworks that for Cole enables the Farmer to clear his Land)
therefore generally what Money the Farmer gives for Dormant Lands, is so much
to the Monopolizer for nothing; for if he Sells his Farm for no more than will
pay for his Labor done upon it, then he loses all he paid for the Purchase.

Government is the Appointment of God for Good to the Species Apostate Man, and
while it moves in its proper channels of Love, Truth Justice, Equity and Mercy,
its sovereign Authority is the greatest resemblance of God we have on Earth;
but if reversed, the greatest resemblance of Satan, and of the Tyranny and
Oppression of his Kingdom.

Government is the Foundation of all Humane Societies, and the Vital Spirit and
Conduct thereof, appointed of God for Peoples Safety and Utility.

Princes in Possession of Government ought not to Sacrifice Divine Donations to
that great and almost Universal Idol Self, nor to their Families, Relatives,
Friends, Parasites, Companions, Servants, nor to their Personal Circumstances,
to make themselves or their Great and Honorable, by any Distributions,
Exactings or Delaves contrary to Divine Appointment, thereby wronging and
grieving their Subjects, and frustrating the Ends of Government; thereby
misapplying the Power given to them. For they are Gods Stewards, and must give
a strict Account to him for both Persons and Things committed to their Charge
and Care; therefore their safest course is to have special Regard to the Divine
Mind in all their Actions, that they may give up their Account with Joy, and be
the Subjects of that Blessed Sentence, Well done, etc. and receive that great
Reward; Enter into the Joy of your Lord.

It Is granted, that Government has a Divine Rightful Power to Distribute,
Proportion, Order and Dispense with Wisdom and good Conduct to their Subjects,
without Price or Purchase; that which God has freely given to them, dividing
this Wilderness into Townships, and the Towns into Farms, (quantity and quality
considered) appointing the places for Habitation, best for Defense and
Improvement, setting off proper Commonages, Roads and High ways; also all
Public Buildings and Revenues thereto; and then whoever will freely, without
price or purchase, according to Divine Donation, Settle upon, and Improve a
Farm so appointed, and that Farm to be his Fee Simple for ever; and when one
Town is full, to set off more; which disposal had it been put in practice by
the First Comers, the Province by this time, would have been (...) of the most
desirable Places in this World; and much more multiplied with Inhabitants,
which is the Glory, Strength and Riches of any Country.

I Appeal to you who are the (Chosen and Beloved) Fathers of our Country; whose
Honors, Persons and Estates, we are most willing and ready to Uphold and
Defend with our Lives and Fortunes. You are Gods Stewards, it is required of
you to be Faithful: You are our Delegates and Guardians, and you have taken our
Families, Persons and Estates to be your Charge; we are now become the Subjects
of your great Wisdom and Conduct, to Guide and Direct us in all our Affairs; by
the Legislative Power, we have Conferred on you, that we may be under the
Direction and Conduct of Good and Wholesome Laws, and have Good Men advanced to
Execute the same, Wise Men fearing God, and hating Coveteousness; I say, hating
Coveteousness, for it is the root of all Evil; that the bonds of wickedness may
be loosed, and heavy burdens taken off, and the Oppressed go free; yea, break
every Yoke.

I Appeal to you Fathers, Honorable and Beloved! If a Parent, or any Man Give
and Bequeaths Legacies, whether the Legatees may not demand of the Executors?
and if they refuse to Pay, Sue them for, and Recover their Legacies.

And is not God as much the Donor of this Earth, as any Parent or Man is of
their Estates? Or is not that Species Man the Donees of this Earth, so much as
any Legatees are the Donees of Legacies? Or is not this Earth the Donation of
Heaven, to that Species Man? (as has been proved) Or is it only given to a few
of them, and the rest to be their Slaves and Vassals, to Subdue, Replenish and
Improve this Earth for them? And the Monopolizers to have all the fruits of
their Labors.

Pray consider the State and Condition of this Province! Suppose but One
hundred Towns (though there is more) and that every year ten good Farmers Sons,
one Town with another, wants each of them to purchase One hundred Acres of
Land, for a Farm to Settle upon, and give only Twenty Shillings an Acre, which
is less by half then will purchase good Land, that lies commodiously; How great
a Sum does it amount to? no less than One Hundred Thousand Pound. How shall
this be paid, either by their Parents, or their Sons, or both? Two times the
number of Blooming Youth, or their paying double the Sum comes to more Money,
or Bills of Credit then there is in this Province; and if yearly so many Young
men wants Farms, how can they be purchased? is it not Repugn, and next to a
Prohibition, and contrary to the Divine Injunction? Genesis 9. 1. viz. Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth; but suppose they Mortgage
their new Farms, and pay but six per Cent. Interest Money amounts to Six
Thousand Pounds a Year; if I may not call it Oppression, is it not a very heavy
burden laid upon our blooming Youth, who are both the Strength and Glory of the
Province? also it aggavates the burden, considering that this Earth is the free
Donation of God to them, with his Injunction to be Fruitful as aforesaid; and
also they must Support and Defend it.

If any such Monopolizers, Oppressors and Usurers be in our Legislative
Assemblies, is it not high time in our Elections, to leave them out?

In the Jerfies, the Proprietors Demands was but one halfpenny an Acre; at
which lay, one hundred Acres is but Four Shillings and two pence Yearly; which
no doubt might be bought off for twenty years value, which is but Four Pound
Three Shillings and four pence for one hundred Acres; but suppose One Penny an
Acre, then it will but amount to Eight Pound Six Shillings and Eight pence,
clear of all Quit-Rents; but with us if good, and lies commodious, it will
fetch Three or Four Hundred Pounds, though no Work done upon it.

If it be Gods Just and Sovereign Prerogative only to punish Man's Apostasy and
Sin, and he has justly so done, by cursing the Earth, Genesis 5. 29. and the
Creatures thereof having changed the Quality of the first, causing its
Unfruitfulness, except in Briars, Thorns, etc. and the second rejecting Man's
sovereignty and dominion over them, except by force they be subdued; which is
our sore travail, and an heavy wearisome burden, making us sweat and groan in
undergoing the some; then is it not presumption for any Man to add to their
burden; also by making their Brethren Buy this Earth of them which God has
freely given to all Men, with this injunction, to subdue and replenish the
same. Genesis 1. 28.

If the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain to be delivered from the
Curse, Romans 8. 22. God has justly Executed on account of our Sin upon the
Earth, and the Creatures thereof, Genesis 3. 27, 18, 19. then is it not great
Oppression and Sin for Men, our Brethren (though in Authority) to make addition
thereto.

Monopolizing the Common Earth, subjects this Colony to the greatest Slavery,
especially Farmers, Husbandmen, Laborers, late Comets and their Progeny; for
without Earth for them to Work upon, they cannot follow their Callings; for
they having no Land, either must Bay of the Dormant Lands, or must become
Barriers to the Monopolized Lands lately set off for that end, and there be
exposed to the insults of the Indians, and be excluded the convenience of Life,
for the good of both their Souls and Bodies.

If they Bay Monopolized Lands that lies next to Improved Lands, then all the
Personal (...) the Husbandman or Farmers and their Families can raise from
their Farms, is not sufficient to purchase Land for their Children to Settle
upon, and Improve; and so from Generation to Generation, (...); for
Monopolizers have raised the price of Common Earth from Five Shillings one
hundred Acres, to Three or Four Hundred Pounds One hundred Acres, and (...)
Marsh to ten or twelve Pound an Acre, and all by reason of the Improvement the
English have made; its Value is owing to the Farmers, Husbandmen and Laborers,
for before it was not worth any things and now chiefly because it lies
commodious, being near at hand to improved Farms, (which is the Industry of the
Farmers Labors.)

Though Monopolized Dormant Lands be the most visible thriving Estates in the
Province, yet neither the Government nor the Subjects are at all bettered by
them, (only the Monopolizer) for they do not pay any thing for the support of
either, though both a Moral Evil, (as has been proved) and also a great Paenal
Evil, driving our blooming Youth to the Seas, and Neighboring Colonies; also
(...) us raising our own Bread, so that we live upon the surplus of all our
Neighboring Provinces viz. Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, the Jersies,
Pensyilvania, Virginia, Maryland, and both the Carolina's; besides the
West Indies and Europe, for our Support; which is a great shame for this
Province.

Monopolized Dormant Lands are defended (...), Blood and Purse of the Province,
for all Taxes are laid on Merchants, Farmers, (...), Traders, Laborers, Heads,
Improved Lands, (...) etc. Not One Penny upon Monopolized Dormant Lands, which
ought to bear the greatest Taxes, because of the Lives, Blood and Treasure
spent for their Defense, also the Oppression of the Husbandman; and its being
(...) free from being Taxed, Viz. 100 Years. If we consider this Monopolizing
of Dormant Lands, is it (...) they will improve what they Monopolize? nothing
less, but knowing that there is a necessity that the Earth must be improved,
and that the Husbandman Cannot go to improve one or two hundred; no, nor ten
miles back into the Wilderness beyond Inhabitants, where there is no Church,
Market, Roads, Neighbors, Doctors, Midwives, nor Safety, etc. therefore they
must Buy of the Monopolized Lands, and take up with what Land the Monopolizers
will sell, and give them their price; or leave the Province: Monopolizers of
the Common Earth are like the Dog in the Manger, that will neither eat Oats
himself, nor suffer the Laboring Horse to eat them.

Nor does giving the Farmer one half of their Monopolized Lands mend the
matter; it is but a bait to draw them to go and improve there; for when they
have improved, the Monopolizer raises on the remaining Moiety more than six
times the first Value; which the Farmer, his Children or others, must of
necessity Buy to Improve, or lie under the same Disadvantages as before; nor
does it mend the matter to give a Township to a few men, for in a little time
they divide the Land among themselves, and then all after Comers must Buy of
them: this Monopolizing of Lands runs some Parallel with Stock Jobbing, which
never helps, but always hurts a Country.

Here is a vastly great and desirable Continent, extending from 25 to 52
degrees in North Latitude; the difference of Latitude is 27 degrees, which
according to the English Computation makes 1620 Miles.

And we are in Possession of all the Sea Coasts, save Cape Brettoon, which are
full of good Harbors, and a multitude of Islands, replenished all along the
Coast with great plenty of all sorts of Fish and Fowl, and a back Wilderness of
very good Arable Land, of vast and unknown extent; all Uninhabited, except a
few scattering Indians, which are mostly, if not all Civilized, and Subdued.

This part of the Continent lies in a good Climate, a very healthful Air;
there is no seasoning, as in the Southern Parts; and if here were ten Millions
more of People, here is Land and Room enough for many times more; and then
every thing would be much more plentiful, and for the better Living: for the
Honor, Riches, Plenty and Strength of a Country consists in the Multitude of
People, etc.

If this Earth were not Monopolized, we should have a multitude more Farmers
and Laborers; every one that could would Farm it, and every one that had
Money, would Hire, Buy or send for Farmers and Laborers, that they might have
a Farm; and thereby the Necessaries and Comforts of Life would be plentiful and
cheap; and all Artificers would live cheaper, and their Work would be better
and cheaper: and then we should Import less, and Export more, which would be
the making of this Country.

Taxing Monopolized Dormant Lands a just and speedy Remedy, and no Person hurt,
nor unjustly treated, but gainers thereby. For,

If all Visible Estates ought to be Taxed for the Support of Government, then
all Dormant Monopolized Lands ought to be Taxed.

If Moral and Paenal Evils ought to be Taxed till they be removed, then so far
as Monopolizing Lands is a Moral and Paenal Evil, it ought to be Taxed till it
be removed; that is improved, or given up to the Government, that they may see
thereto.

Nor will any Person be unmercifully or unjustly treated, nor be a loser, but a
gainer thereby; for now the Monopolizers are circumscribed, bounded and
limited; but if the Common Earth were made Free for the Improver, and laid
forth in Townships, etc. (as has been proposed) Page 11, then whosoever would
without being limited, might fill up the whole Province with improved Farms; it
would be all before them; whereas now they are limited, so that the
Monopolizers if they mean the Good of the Country, that is to improve it, would
be gainers thereby, but if they mean to live upon, and reap the fruits of the
Husbandman and Laborers Industry, then thereby prevented they are, and should
be from so greatly oppressing and burdening their poor industrious Laboring
Neighbors.

Monopolizers of Dormant Lands would be the Lords of this Continent, and
necessitate the Farmers, their Families, and Posterity, to give them the
benefits of all their Labors, from Generation to Generation, for Liberty or
Deeds from them, to improve the Common Earth, (which God has freely given to
the Improver) and so the Continent would be the Monopolizers Property, and all
Farmers and their Posterity the Monopolizers Slaves for ever; for they will
keep Monopolizing this Continent faster than the Husbandman or Farmer can
Improve it.

It would be a much easier Lay for the Farmer to hold his Land from the Crown
and Nation of Great Britain, paying One Penny an Acre Quit-Reat, for that would
be laid out for the Support of the Government, (and in a short time how great
(...) would it amount to?) and then Taxes would be so much the less, and
thereby the Subject as much eased in Taxes, as the paying of Quit-Reats amounts
to; but now the Monopolizers goes away with all, and Contributes nothing for
the Support of Government, nor has done for this 100 years past.

May there be a Cry throughout all your Elections, no Monopolizers, no biting
Usurers; for there is more Electors that are neither Monopolizers and biting
Usurers then that are such, therefore it being in your Power, show your selves
once more Freemen, and be not overawed by any Persons, either by their Great
Power or Riches, unless you will choose Issachars portion, become strong Asses,
couching down between two Burdens, and then bow your Shoulders to bear the
Burden.

I Appeal to you our most Learned, Reverend and Pious Seers, to read, and weigh
in the Balance of the Sanctuary, judge and determine with your Spiritual
Understanding; and what is contrary to right judgment, condemn and cast
overboard, and what agreeable thereto, and for the best good of this Province,
justify and maintain convincing all Gainsayers; Is it not your Duty, and your
great abilities, both natural and acquired; also your faithfulness not only
enables, but also obliges you thereto, for you are to be found faithful. What I
have Chattered, is as nothing; May you bring so great a current of Truth so
well digested and pressed from Scripture and Reason, as to bear down all
Opposition before it, that the Oppressed may be freed, and every Yoke broken: I
pray God to spirit, and increase you with all the Gifts and Graces of His most
Holy Spirit, in the greatest degrees you are capable of being made the Subjects
of.

Let no one say, this is a levelling Doctrine! for no Person is more against
Levelling, than I (...) For suppose a Township set off, containing One hundred
Farms, quantity and quality considered, with proper Commonage, etc. as
aforesaid, Page 11. One Man may be able to improve Forty Farms, and if whole
Townships, it is all his own; another can improve but one Farm, he has no more:
But let all be supplied with Farms, according to the Donation of, God freely,
without price or purchase, (for it is their Birthright as they are (...), as
has been proved, and also the best Good for the Province) and thereby neither
the Richest, nor the Poorest will be discouraged, or have any cause to
complain; and when one Town is improved and full, set off more, till you fill
this vast and unknown Continent with Inhabitants, that this Continent may sing
forth the Praises of God, and Love abound to one another; and then we may
expect, that God, even our own God will bless us, and that the Earth will yield
her increase. Consider well the 58th Chapter of Isaiah, and also the 34th
Chapter of Ezekiel. For while the Rich live upon the Sweat of Laborers, and
grind the faces of the Poor, what can we look for, but Judgments from God, as
he has threatened? from which by Faith, Repentance and Holiness, doing as we
would be done unto. May our God prevent us.

Upon the whole, if it be sufficiently proved, and self evident,

1. THat God has given this Earth, etc. to Mankind.

2. That the Indian Sachems have submitted to the Nation of Great Britain.

3. That the English have subdued all Opposing Powers, and brought them into
subjection; also Protected and Defended this part of the Continent.

4. That they have Subdued, Improved and Replenished it.

5. That the Indians are not possessed with the Property of this Continent, save
only where they Improve.

6. That Government is the Appointment of God, for Good to Mankind.

7. That Princes possessed of Government, ought to make it subservient, to the
Good of the Governed.

8. That it is Oppression to necessitate the Subject to Buy the Common Earth.

9. That God has Cursed this Earth, and that it is a Sin for any Man (though
in Authority) to add thereto.

10. That Monopolizing Dormant Lands, subjects the Colony to Slavery.

11. That it prevents raising our Bread.

12. That Dormant Lands ought to be Taxed, for Support of Government.

13. That there is a necessity for the Earth to be Improved.

14. That Monopolizers of Dormant Lands lives on the Farmers and their Families
Labors.

15. That so high Prices for Dormant Lands, drives our Youth out of the
Province, though both the Strength, Glory and Defense thereof.

16. That giving a Township to a few men, does not mend the Matter.

17. That Monopolizers, etc. giving one half to be Subdued, does not remove the
Grievance.

18. That the Glory, Strength and Riches of a Country, Consists in the
Multitude of Inhabitants.

19. That here is Land and room enough for many Millions more of People.

20. That Moral and Paenal Evils ought to be Taxed till they be removed.

21. That Monopolizers, etc. are no Loosers, but Gainers thereby.

22. That Taxing Dormant Lands will be a means to free Farmers from Oppression
and Slavery

23. That Taxing Dormant Lands is no Levelling Doctrine.

24. If the Common Earth, etc. were free to the Improver, as page 11. then
Parents would be able to give their Children a sufficient Competency of
Comfortable Necessaries to Subdue and Improve New Farms, Mich. 6. 8.

If what is Premised be worthy the Consideration of our Great and General
Assembly, may they have them close at Heart, and by Laws undo heavy Burdens,
break every Yoke, make us a free People, to Enjoy without Price or Purchase
what God has freely given us, and thereby they will become our great
Deliverers and Benefactors, Eternalizing their Memories, not only to the
Present, but also to Succeeding Posterity; that they may be Honorable and
Illustrious Instruments, (in the Hands of our Bountiful Creator) for the Good
of this Province.

Is the Prayer of the meanest of Your most Humble and Obedient Servants, I. M.

I love the World (as Clients love the laws)
To manage the Uprightness of my Cause,
The World loves me, as Shepherds do their Flocks,
To Rob, and Spoil them of their fleecy locks;
I love the World, and use it as mine Inn,
To bait and rest my tired Carcass in:
No man is born unto himself alone;
Who lives unto himself, he lives to none: Q. Pent.
FINIS.

