THE DOCTRINE OF Absolute REPROBATION, According to the WESTMINSTER Confession
of Faith, Refuted: And the UNIVERSALITY of the Saving Grace of God asserted.

By BENJAMIN EASTBURN.

To which is added, A POSTSCRIPT by another Hand, wherein those several Texts
of Scripture generally perverted, to vindicate the aforesaid Doctrine of
Reprobation, are set in a true Light.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed and sold by Samuel Keimer, in High Street. 1723.

THE DOCTRINE OF Absolute REPROBATION REFUTED.
SEEING there is a Sect of Men, which (I charitably hope) for Want of duly
reflecting upon, judiciously weighing, and reverently considering the injurious
Consequences and absurd Inferences of the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation,
according to the Westminster Confession of Faith, has entertained the same for
Truth, which implies thus much, viz. That God by an eternal and immutable
Decree, has predestined to eternal Damnation the far greater Part of
Mankind, not considered as made, much less as fallen, without any Respect had
to their Disobedience or Sin, but only for the demonstrating the Glory of his
Justice; and for the bringing this about, he has appointed these miserable
Souls necessarily to walk in their wicked Ways, that so his Justice may lay
hold on them; and that God does therefore not only suffer them to be liable to
this Misery in many Parts of the World, by withholding from them the,
preaching of the Gospel, and Knowledge of Christ, but even in those Places
where the Gospel is preached, and Salvation by Christ, is offered; whom, though
he publicly invite them, yet he justly condemns for Disobedience, albeit he
has withheld from them all Grace, by which they could have laid hold on the
Gospel, viz. Because he has by a secret Will unknown to all Men, ordained and
decr^ed, (without any Respect had to their Disobedience or Sin) that they shall
not obey, and that the Offer of the Gospel shall never prove affectual for
their Salvation, but only serve to aggravate and occasion their greater
Condemnation. The which Doctrine, when I had seriously pondered, and in the
Fear of the Lord solidly weighed and considered it: understanding it to be
received for Truth, and boldly promulgated by the Preslyterious, in this
Province of Pennsylvania, as also by the Baptists in a Catechism printed in
Philadelphia; which briefly comprehends the whole, viz. That God for a Purpose
of his own Glory, has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass; I found it
incumbent open me to reply to it, both as it is inconsistent with the Truth,
and derogatory to the Justice and Mercy of God: As also, if any simple Hearts
have received Hurt by it, they may be undeceived.

Something of this Kind has indeed of late been pa^singly touched upon, but (in
my Opinion) considering the Tendency and Import of that Doctrine, it is therein
too easily passed over; and the Absurdity and Injuriousness thereof not rendered
obvious enough, or at least not so ^ully ^llustrated as it might be, (and I
hope profitably) to its poor deluded Believers. ^t is an amazing Thing to
think, how any Men that render to God the Epithets ^f Just, Righteous,
Merciful, Gracious, Long-suffering, Loving, Pitiful, Tender and True, could
ever conceive an Opi^ion so blasphemous, so injurious, and ^o opposite to them
all; the natural Consequences of which are such as these that f^llow, viz.

First, It makes God the Author of Sin, which is of all Things the most
disagreeable to his Nature; it being antipathe^^^^ to his Holiness and
Righteousness. And that this is a natural Consequence of ^his Doctrine, is
easily proved. For if God (as the Westminster Confession of Faith, Chap. 3.
says) "has ordained such as are not elected, for Dishonor and Wrath, to the
Praise of his glorious Justice": And again, in the same Chapter, Nothing
future, or what was to come, (...) as foreseen by God, was the Cause of God's
Decree: And if it be only of his own Pleasure that he has so decreed; and if
to the End that his Justice may lay hold on them, he has decreed long before
they were in Being, or in a Capacity to do Good or Evil, that they should walk
in those wicked Ways, by which Means they should justly be led to that End:
Then, they in committing Sin and Wickedness, are fulfilling and accomplishing
the Will and Decree of God, which then he must be the Author of, seeing it is
undeniable, that he is the Author of all his own Decrees.

Secondly, It is injurious to God, in that it makes him a mere Hypocrite and
Dissembler, ( abfit Blasphemia) when he utters his Mind in so many seeming
serious and strong Asseverations, Complaints, Commands, and compassionate
Compellations; and makes him only to deceive People, and belie himself, when he
says,

I have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies. Wherefore turn your selves
and live.

As I live, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the wicked; but that the wicked
turn from his Way and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways, for why will
ye die?

Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye Ends of the Earth.

Behold my Servant; I have given him a Light to the Nations, to be my Salvation
to the Ends of the Earth.

Hearken unto me, and let your Souls delight in Fatness; hear and your Souls
shall live.

The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that is a thirst come; and
whosoever will, let him come, and take of the Water of Life freely.

Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no
Money, come; yea come, and buy Wine and Milk, without Money and without Price.

The Son of Man is come to seek out and to save that which is lost.

I am come, that they might have Life abundantly.

Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life.

He has laid Help upon one that is mighty, who is able to save to the utmost,
all that come to God by him.

Him that comes unto me, will I in no wise cast out.

In the Lord is Compassion, and with him is plenteous Redemption.

Let the wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous his Thoughts; and turn to
the Lord, for he is gracious; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

He is long suffering; not willing any should perish; but that all should come
to Repentance.

Wills that all should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth.

His tender Mercies are over all his Works.

God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, may not perish, but have everlasting Life.

For he sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World; but that the
World through him might be saved.

He that believes not, makes God a ^iar, because he believes not the
Testimony God gives of his Son.

In him is Life, and his Life is the Light of Men: And the Light shines in
Darkness, but the Darkness comprehends it not.

He came a Light into the World, but the World knew him not.

This is the true Light which enlightens every Man that comes into the World.

He would have all Men to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved.

Glory be to God on high, on Earth Peace, and Good Will toward Men,

Glad Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to ALL People.

He shall save his People from their Sins.

To you is born a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, the one Mediator between
God and Man,

JESUS who gave himself a Ransom for ALL.

Who died for ALL and by the Grace of God tasted Death for every Man.

God commends his Love to us, in that when we were Sinners, Christ died for
us.

"Died for the ungodly.

"The Savior of the World.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee, as a Hen gathers
her Chickens under her Wings, but thou would not.

And the Wisdom of God cries out, How long ye Scorners, will ye delight in
Scorning, and simple ones love Simplicity, and Fools hate Knowledge?

Turn at my Reproof, I will pour out my Spirit upon you, make known my Words to
you. Because I call, and ye refuse; and stretch out my Hands to a rebellious
and gainsaying People; and no Man regards; but ye set at naught all my
Counsel, and will none of my Reproofs; I also will laugh at your Calamity, and
mock when your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction as a Whirlwind, when Distress and Anguish comes upon you; because
ye hated Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of the Lord. For the turning
away of the Simple slays him; but whosoever hearkneth to me shall dwell safely, and
shall be quiet from Fear of Evil.

And a Number more like to these, of solemn Compellations, Complaints,
Counsels, Consolations, Compassions, Wishings and Wouldings, Adjurations,
Corrections, Condemnation, Entreaties, Threatenings, Persuasions, openly poured
out to all Men; which yet according to the aforesaid Doctrine (though tendered by
a true and merciful God) is only Deceit and Hypocrisy to Millions of miserable
Sinners, to whom its never intended, that they ever must be shall come within
the Bounds of so much as a Possibility of it; nor have to much as a Liberty
allowed them to take or refuse, but be kept down under a certain Necessity of
perishing, contracted to them (as is supposed) from one single Sin of one whom
they never chose to be their Proxy or Representative of their Persons to God;
so as that they should live or die, as he should stand or fall; from whose
Loins is derived inevitable Damnation upon all Individuals, that for Want of a
sufficient Light and Grace vouchsafed them to lead out of it, to escape it, the
most must necessarily, unavoidably, unalterably (as by God's particular private
Decree, without Reference to their final Rejection of God first) Sin from the
Womb to the Tomb; that they may, by filling up their Measure, become Vessels of
Wrath sit so Destruction; and upon Account of the personal Decree still
concerning them not so much as possibly escape the Condemnation of Hell.

Thirdly, This makes God a most unjust and merciless Tyrant, like to, or worse
than Pharaoh himself, whom he plagued for the self-same Cruelty and Tyranny;
even a rigorous Requirer of Men, with many and sore Stripes, yea, on pain of
his eternal Wrath and Vengeance, to make Bricks without any Allowance at all of
Straw, fit for such a purpose; an austere Man, a hard Master, a tyrannical
^ack-Master, (as the ^ille unprofitable Servant falsely represented him) that
expects to reap where he never sowed, and to gather where he has not strawed;
that calls on Pe^^l of for ever perishing, for a Crop of good Works, from those
in whose ^^^^^ts he never sowed the good Send o^ (...) Word; Fruits of the
Spirit, from (...) Souls into whom he never sent his Spirit; from whence only
they can (...) up; and commands all Men every where to repeat; and yet he
knows, without him and his Grace, they can do nothing; all their Sufficiency to
will and to do, must come from him; This is utterly contrary to the Wisdom of
God in Scripture, which justifies him still, as accepting every Man according
to what he has, or has had; not expecting (much less with Rigor exacting) of
any Man according to what from him he neither has, nor ever had; as requiring
from Men no otherwise than according to what is committed to them, and requires
no more of any Man than Improvement of his own Money he commits to him to trade
with; which Money, if every one put into the Bank, that the Lord at his coming
may receive but his own with the Use thereof, and Increase in the same Kind of
Grace that he freely gives, he will never enter into Judgment with them to
Condemnation.

Fourthly, It renders the Coming, Death and Suffering of Christ ineffectual*
For if the far greater Part of Mankind be by an irrevocable Decree preordinated
to eternal Damnation, without any Respect had to any foreseen Sin to be
committed in Time by them how can the Death and Suffering of Christ be to them
beneficial, seeing they are not thereby put into a Capacity of Salvation*
Little Reason then had the Angel to sing ( Gloria in excelsis) (...) to God on
high, on the Earth Peace, and good Will to Men, or to say, I bring you good
Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People, if so great a Number were
excluded from any Share or Interest therein; this would make the Message of God
by the Angel to all People to be a salacious Lie; seeing he neither intended
ALL nor half of them to be in the least Measure benefitted by it; but rather to
leave them in the more fore Condemnation. For, though he by his Son call and
invite ALL, yet ALL cannot come, nay not one, except God who calls give them his
special, saving and electing Grace; and most, according to this Doctrine can
never come, because God never did (...) to vouchsafe it to the (...) has a
Reserve in hi^ Min^, (...) ^^^tain secret Will within himself, not known to Man
which runs otherwise (...) his revealed Will in the Holy Scripture does; even a
secret Purpose (which yet, as secret as it is, it seems the Propogators of this
Doctrine, as if they had been upon the secret Council of the Almighty, pretend
to know it, and must be babbling about it, to the shaming and contradicting
themselves in the other) to give this Salvation but to a certain small Number,
in Comparison of the rest, whom from Eternity he has reprobated, and purposed
personally upon Adam's Score shall go without it; which Sin of that single
Person shall so remain on the Score with him for ever, that upon the Account
thereof the greatest Part of Mankind, his Posterity, though yet he would (in
Words) show himself more rich in Mercy to them all, than severe, to take
Advantage against any, so as to have it told thus in universal Terms, THAT HIS
SON DIED FOR THEM ALL, for EVERY Man, the WHOLE World, etc.) should be left
without any Interest or Share in it, or any Potential Title thereunto. And
howbeit he will have them all called to come, and lay hold on it, and Promises
of Life made to them on Condition they come, and believe in his Son, and his
Love to them in him; yet, he so hates them (personally) before ever born, or
doing Good, or Evil, that they shall never from him be sufficiently empowered
to come, or believe; nor by him be put into any Capacity to choose the Life,
though set before them, as well as the Death; with a CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE;
but be left, for Want of a Will set at Liberty, under a Necessity of having the
Evil, but cannot choose the Good; and must therefore either choose the Evil, or
none: And yet if they do not choose the Good too, that Advantage shall be taken
the more against them, to double Vengeance on their Heads, for that helpless,
unavoidable Fault of refusing the Good; and a Quarrel picked against them (upon
the Account of the old intended Praeterition) and so double Execution be done
upon them, now, as rebellious against the Gospel of God's Grace; whereby he
would (in Words, alias seemingly, though secretly he never would, nor intended
it) have saved them: And for not believing in his Son as theirs, when yet he
left them locked up (when he called to them to believe,) so fast, that he knew
they could not answer, and would not so much as unloose them neither, to see if
they would accept his Love, believe, repent, and make Use of the Remedy, Yea or
Nay; in whom also, if they had all believed, most of them had (as the Case
stood) been deceived, and believed but a Lie; a Matter that was no such Matter,
viz. That Christ died for every Individual of them, if they would believe it;
and so his Wrath shall abide on them the more heavily for ever; even because
they believed not the Testimony God gave by his Ministers, openly of his Son,
that he died for them; whom yet he died not for, but only for a few Elect ones,
according to this Doctrine; and so, whereas God says, He that believes not the
Testimony that God gives of his Son, ( viz. that he gives eternal Life by him
to every Man that believes in him) makes God a Liar, if every Man should
believe in him, (as they are all bid) and take the Testimony of the Life by him
to themselves to be true: Either some must believe a Lie. (since he died not
for every Man, but for some only, as they say) else their Testimony is a Lie,
and they ALL lie, (which is indeed the Truth) who testify that God gave his Son
intentionally but for a few, when God's own Testimony of him, is, That he gave
him a Ransom for ALL.

Fifthly, It is injurious to Christ, in that it renders his Mediation
ineffectual, and his Intercession vain: For, if by an eternal and immutable
Decree a certain Number be p^^de ^^^ated to eternal Damnation, what can the
Mediation and Intercession of Christ avast them, seeing the Decree is
unalterable, and that they must necessarily Sin, and therefore perish? How
consistent this is with the Testimony of the Apostle (...), let the Reader
judge, viz. If my Man, ^i^ we have an A^^v^^^te with the Father; Jesus Christ
the righteous; and he is the Pr^pitiation for our Sons, and not for ours only,
but also for the Sins of the whole World.

Sixthly, It renders the Preaching of the Gospel a mere Mock and Illusion: For
if many of these to whom it is preached be by an irrevocable Decree excluded
from being at all privileged by it, it wholly makes useless the Preaching of
Faith and Repentance; and the whole Tenor of the Gospel-Promises and
Threatenings, Wrestlings against Sin and Corruption, Fasting, Prayer and
Humiliation, and all other pious and religious Exercises whatsoever. For they
that are under the Decree of Election, can never miss of Salvation; let their
Omissions o^ Commissions be what they will; All Works to them are useless; they
need do nothing but wait for that irresistible Juncture which will come, though
at the last Moment of their Lives: But if they are under the Decree of
Reprobation, let their Labors be what they will, they must inevitably undergo
eternal Damnation.

Seventhly, It is injurious to Mankind. For it puts them in a worse Condition
than the Devils in Hell. For these were sometimes in a Capacity to have stood;
and do only suffer for their own Guilt. But according to this damning and
damnable Doctrine, Millions of Men suffer and are for ever tormented for Adam's
Sin, which they were never accessory to, nor in a Capacity to prevent, nor ever
knew of. This puts them into the Condition of a Man fa^t chained, and setter'd
in a Dungeon; to whom when he is almost starved, one comes near to him with a
Dish of Meat in his Left Hand, and a Club in his Right Hand; and standing aloof
off from him, says,;Why will thou starve, thou self-murdering Man? come to me,
and here is Meat for thee; I am freely willing thou should have it, and not
perish, (never coming near to loose him all this while, nor bringing the Meat
within his Reach) but if thou will not come, I will b^^t out thy Brains; and so
because he comes not, when yet he knows he cannot, he runs on him pretending to
do just Vengeance on him, for his wilful refusing his own Help, when he might (
alias never might) have had it; and like a mocking merciless Tyrant, beats out
his Brains indeed: which is just the Measure God metes to Men, according to
this blasphemous Doctrine. For he that on Pain of Puni^hment, Death and
Condemnation if the Terms be not performed, tenders Life and Salvation, on
Terms and Conditions utterly impossible to be, or ever to have been performed,
by the Person to whom the Tender is, unless a Grace be given him, which never
shall be, is an arrant Hypocrite, and a merciless Tyrant. And such an one this
Doctrine makes God; who yet is no such, (but that it belies him) but just,
righteous, merciful, gracious, compassionate, long-suffering, pitiful, tender
and true; and no Mocker of poor Mankind, but truly means and intends as he
says, and does not unjustly and unmercifully tyrannize over them.

Eighthly, It makes the Publishers of the Gospel to be meet mock Ministers, not
worthy of hearing, (seeing they cannot profit the Hearers) much less of
feeding, and so richly rewarding; yea, such as thereby make themselves the most
hateful Extortioners; and might be ashamed to force Maintenance from Men, for
running on such a sleeveless Errand as this is to all Men; for if this Doctrine
be true, the Elect shall be saved without either their Preaching, or any
Endeavors of their own* But the Reprobated shall never be benefited by either,
and the Ministry is then fruit less; and the Priests Trade utterly vain: But
yet, such is the Force and Strength of Truth, that it compels them, to call
ALL to come to Christ for Salvation; and to believe it every Man for himself,
that Christ died for him, is tendered truly and sincerely from God to him: And
in particular, each is to believe him as his Lord and Savior, or perish: And
that he is now freely proffered, and as truly and unfeignedly offered from God
to him, as he did once offer himself to God for him, as his Ransom as well as
for any: And that there is this good Ground for each particular Man to believe
it for himself, because without Exception of any Sinner in the World, that does
not exclude himself, by his not coming, are freely without Respect of Persons
invited to come, and this Ground also, that as he is truly without Mockage,
held out to ALL, and all bid to come, so God is willing they should come, and
have the Salvation; and to that End has sent his Son not to condemn, but to
save them; and his Son, his Ministers to entreat them to be willing as he is,
and reconciled to him, as he is to them; and they declare for him according to
God's Words in the Scripture, that he died for all and every Man; is a
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World; and died for the ungodly, and
came to save them, and heal the Sick, and seek the Lost, and such like; and
therefore every Man may conclude it is for him as well as any other, that can
say he is a Man lost, sick, sinful, ungodly, and of the World; and that God
has also wrought in them, of his own good Pleasure to will, and to do; and
therefore now they must up and be doing; and work out their own Salvation,
which if it be not wrought out, God has done his Part; and the Fault is only
in their own particular Persons; and God is no hard Master, but has given to
every one, one Talent at least, which if he hides, he will be cast into utter
Darkness, and weep and gnash his Teeth at the Remembrance of it, that once he
might have been happy, had he not been wanting to himself, and been an
unprofitable Servant with what he had; and had not (in his own Person) still
put the Salvation from him; and hated the Light and Instruction; And that God
requires of Men but the Improvement of his own, and much more to this Purpose;
which is all sound, true, plain, wholesome, saving Doctrine: And then to the
ridiculizing, confounding and contradicting themselves, belying the holy
Scriptures, and blaspheming God, they come round again with a new Tale, whereby
all the good Grounds, before laid for every Man that is called thereto, to come
and believe upon, are utterly razed and removed; and to tell them, though they
are ALL called, and invited outwardly, yet the greatest Part, a Hundred to one,
are by a Decree in God's secret Council, so secluded by Adam's Sin, that they
cannot come, nor have any Right to Christ; he did not so much as die for them,
but only for a few Elect ones; nor offer himself a Ransom for the most, but a
s^w, Though God indeed says, ALL, EVERY Man, Sinners, ungodly, the Lost, the
whole World, etc. yet, by ALL, and such universal Terms, we must understand God
and Christ meaning another Matter, far otherwise than they say. -- O H^sphemous
and damnable Doctrine! any Hand almost trembles to write it. Is not this
Doctrine of Devils? And was the Devil himself to turn Preacher, could he ever
publish any Doctrine, which if Men practiced according to, would more surely
secure them to his Kingdom; for if Men receive for Truth the aforesaid
Doctrine, viz. That God has so unalterably decreed a certain small Number for
Election, and all the rest for Reprobation, without any Respect had to Good or
Evil, to be by them committed, in vain is all their working, waiting, striving,
and Diligence: For, if they be elected, they cannot escape Damnation. Under
which Delusion, all Men esteeming at vain and fruitless, might (in the Day of
their Visitation) neglect to work out their own Salvation, till the Night
overtake them, and they be indeed reprobated, and eternally excluded from any
Part or Portion in the Kingdom of God.

Many are the Absurdities and Confusions that are concatenated to this dark,
and Grace-darkning Doctrine: Which, what an incredible Kind of Creed; what a
braky Mess of Belief, what a Labyrinth of Lightness and Nonsense, what a
Wilderness of wondrous Wisdom; what a blasphemous Heap of Confusion, these
already adduced do render it, is evident to every one, whose Eyes the God of
this World has not blinded, and who are not of the Mind of the unprofitable
Servant; but that God is, in Deed and in Truth, just and merciful, and that he
truly says, He wills not the Death of him that dies; but that his Destruction
is of himself; and that he has put all Mankind into a Capacity of Salvation;
and has pre-ordained none to Damnation; which is indeed the Truth: And what I
will abundantly prove by the following Arguments.

ARGUMENT I.
Those to whom God calls to come to him, and be saved, he has not
pre-ordained to Damnation, but has made Salvation possible to them. But,

He calls all, (even all the Ends of the Earth) to come to him and be saved.
Therefore,

He has not pre-ordained any to Damnation, bat has made Salvation possible to
ALL. Again,

ARGUMENT II.
Those for whom Christ died and offered himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice, are
not pre-ordained to Damnation, but to them Salvation is possible. But,

Christ tasted Death for every Man; is in Propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World. Therefore,

None are pre-ordained to Damnation, but Salvation is possible to every Man.
Again,

ARGUMENT III.
Those wham Christ does savingly enlighten, to them Salvation is possible, etc.

But Christ does savingly enlighten every Man that comes into the World.
Therefore,

Saving Grace is not withheld from any; but Salvation is made possible, and
offered to all. Again,

ARGUMENT IV.
Those to whom the saving Grace of God appears. Salvation is possible,
(seeing it is for that very Purpose that it appears to them.) But,

The saving Grace of God, or the Grace of God that brings Salvation,
appears to all, and every of Men. Therefore,

Salvation is possible to all Men; and none are by a Predestination to
Damnation under an Impossibility thereof. Again,

ARGUMENT V.
If the Commandments of God be not grievous, not impossible to be obeyed, God
requires not that of Man, which he never will empower him to do, nor what is by
him altogether impossible to be done. But,

God commands every Man, every where, to repent and believe in his Son, to the
End that he may be saved. Therefore,

He has not for Adam's Sin predestined any to Damnation, but is willing to
save, and offers Salvation to ALL. Again,

ARGUMENT VI.
For whomsoever it is lawful to pray, to them Salvation is possible. But,

It is ^awful to pray for every individual Man in the whole World. Therefore.

Salvation is possible to every Man. Again,

ARGUMENT VII.
That which every Man is bound to believe, is true. But,

Every Man is bound to believe that God is merciful to him, (seeing his tender
Mercies are over all his Works.) Therefore,

He cannot (if he be merciful and just to every Man, which is true for ever)
have pre-ordained any Man to Damnation, for not doing of that which he never
was, nor will be, capacitated by him to do. Again,

ARGUMENT VIII.
If God did not give to ALL Men, at one Time or other, such Grace, Liberty,
Light and Power, as is sufficient to bring them to Life, if they will choose the
Life, and well improve the Light and Power, to the working one their own
Salvation, when he bids them, by it; Then God could not to ALL Men tender Life
by his Ministers; nor say, Work out your own Salvation; Choose Life that ye may
live; else ye shall perish; My Soul shall choose your Destruction, etc. without
mocking Men in their Misery, before that Time, wherein he says, He will only,
and may justly mock at their Calamity; (which is only when they have filled up
their Measure of Scorning at him, set at naught all his Counsel, and utterly
rejected his Reproof, Prove. 1.) nay, nor yet without horrible Cruelty,
Absurdity, and Nonsense, say, Behold I have set Life and Death before you;
choose which of these two you will; and yet leave them under a Necessity of
taking the worst, and put them into no Possibility of taking the other, but
rather lay it utterly out of their Reach, so that they must either have the
worst, or none such Choice, (as the Proverb is) is no other than Hebson's
Choice, which is, Choose whether thou will, Have this, or none. But,

It is certain, God speaks after no such horribly cruel, absurd, nonsensical
Manner, but truly and sincerely means as he says. Therefore,

God has undoubtedly vouchsafed a measure of his saving Grace and Power to
every Man, sufficient to lead him to Life, if he will use, improve, follow and
obey it. Again,

ARGUMENT IX.
If Christ the Savior, and Salvation of God it self be a common Salvation
given in common to all and every Man without Exception, so that all who will,
may have it; Then that sufficient saving Light that lea^s to it and the Gift of
that Grace of God, that puts them into a^l ^^er and ^ossibility to work it out,
to themselves, brings it to them; and being not neglected, but improved, brings
them to it, is given also in common to all, and every Man, else it cannot be
said properly, that they are in posse to it; or so much as that they may have
it. But,

The Sa^vation of God is given in common to ALL, and every Man: so that all
were will, may have it. Therefore.

None are excluded from the Offer of Life and Sa^^ation; but ALL may lay hold
of the Means that God freely and sincerely renders to them; and thereby (if the
Fault be not their own) obtain Salvation.

ARGUMENT X.
If God had predestined a certain Number to eternal Damnation; and to the End
that his Justice may lay hold on them, appointed them necessarily to walk in
their wicked Ways; Then he could not truly and honestly say, without a Lie,
(which Blasphemy, far be it from us to believe) that his Ways are equal, and
that he had rather the Wicked turn from his Wickedness, and live; than die in
it and for it. But,

God's Ways are equal; and he had rather the Wicked return from his Wickedness
and live, than die in it, and for it. Therefore,

He has not (to the End that Justice may lay hold on them) foreordained any
necessarily to walk in their wicked Ways, but wills (and to that End has
empowered) ALL to return therefrom, that they may obtain Salvation. Again,

ARGUMENT XI.
If the Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity; then the Son's Offspring of
Adam are not predestined to eternal Misery for Adam's Transgression. But,

The Son shall not beat the Father's Iniquity; but the Soul (only) that sins
shall die.

Thus Reader, thou seed this horrid, blasphemous Doctrine, according to the
Pr^sbyterian and Westminster Confession of ^aith, and the Baptists Catechism
solidly refu^ed by Scripture-Testimony, and the Universality of the saving
Grace of God substantially and plentifully proved, by the reverenced Authority
of sacred Writ; which were this Doctrine of the Presbyterians and particular
Baptists true, would be rendered but a mere Complex of Lies; and God be made the
Author of all the Devil's Works; and Mankind be put into an inexpressibly worse
Condition than the Beasts of the Field, which, far be it from us to believe;
but that God is holy, just merciful and righteous, etc. and that the holy
Scriptures contain no such Deceit or Hypocrisies, but precious and unfeigned
Truths; and that Men have truly and sincerely Life and Death set before them,
and that if they perish, their Destruction is of themselves. God has done his
Part, and their Blood is upon their own Heads; and that God is clear thereof,
and just for ever; to whom with the Son and holy Spirit, be all Glory for ever.
Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT. By ANOTHER HAND,
HAVING perused the foreg^^ing Confutation of that dangerous, destructive, and
Soul destroying Principle, and Doctrine of Personal and particular Election and
Reprobation, fairly deduced from holy Scripture and right Reason,

A Concern came upon me, in Christian Love to the honest-hearted of the
Presbyterian Way, to show unto them, how their Teachers have misled them, and
misrepresented the Words of God, in their pretending to prove that miserable
Doctrine; and wresting the Scriptures to their own (and others) Destruction.

The Texts of Scripture, whereby they vainly endeavor to defend, and whereupon
they chiefly sound their evil Tenet, are such as these, viz.

First, Concerning Jacob and Esau, Romans 9.13. Mal. 1.2, 3.

Secondly, Concerning the Lord's hardening Pharaoh's H^^^t, Exodus 9.10, Romans
9.17.

Thirdly, He that made them, will not have Mercy on them, and he that formed
them, will show them no Favor, Isa. 27, 11.

Fourthly, Has not the Potter Power over the Clay, of the same Lump to make
one Vess^l (...) Honor, and another unto Dishonor; ser 18 ^. Romans 9.^1.

Fifthl^, Therefore he has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will
be hardeveth, Romans 9.18.

As to the first of these, relating to Jacob and Esa^, the Case is thus, the
Almighty showed Rebbecc^, the Mother of them both, while the Children were yet
unborn, that the Elder should serve the Younger, (Genesis 25.23. Romans 9.12.) not
that the Elder should be damned to Eternity, and the Younger only saved; as
it is hoped will appear plain and clear from the Sequel; and the contrary
plainly proved, both from Scripture and right Reason.

1. then, These Two were the Sons of godly Isaac, to whom with Abraham, was the
Promise of God, and to their Seed, ( Genesis 22.17, 18.) and both Jacob and Esau
were blessed in Faith too: For says the Author to the Hebrews (a very good
Author, whom some think to have been the Apostle Paul) Isaac blessed Jacob and
Esau, by Faith, ( Heb. 11.20.) when he was illustrating the invincible Power of
Faith, by the many mighty Works that were done thereby. And doubtless, the
Faith there spoken of, was true Faith. And whatever is done In, By or Through
true Faith, will most certainly come to pass; as, (and which will be evident by
what follows,) this great and significant Blessing of good old Isaac to his
Sons, did. The good old Man calls his eldest Son to him, being disposed to
bless him, and bids him seek Venison, and make him savoury Meat, Genesis 27.3, 4.
(such as he knew his Father loved) that my Soul may bless thee before I die
(says he;) and Re^^cca their Mother knowing, from what God had showed her, that
the Elder should serve the younger, (Chap. 25.28.) for whom she had tho the
greatest Love, s^e calls Jacob, and opens the Matter to him, and bids him get
savoury Meat for his Father, (Chap. 27, 1^. 1^, 18.) which through her
Importunity he did, and got it prepared, and brought it to his Father, before
his Brother came. And his Father blessed him in Faith, ver. 28. but he did it
against his natural Inclination; for he would have had his Son Esau to have had
the Blessing of Preference, ( ver. 24, 25.) because he was eldest Son: and by
Nature it was his Birthright; but by Grace it was ordered otherwise. He in his
profane State and Condition despised and sold it for a thing of little Value,
to his Brother Jacob; so that Jacob had it on a double Account, both by
Purchase and Promise: By Promise of God, before he was born; and by Purchase of
his Brother, after. But, pray observe, That was the ^le^sing of PREFERENCE, the
Blessing which Esau sought with Tears, but could not find it, (which was not
the Divine Blessing, for he had that pronounced to him by his Father, through
Faith, Chap. 27.39.) for he was now in a profane Spirit, ( Heb. 12.16.) and in
Enmity and Malice against his plain, honest Brother Jacob, as appears by that
murdering, persecuting Mind that then was in him; for says he, The Days of
Me^rring will come for my Father Isaac, and then I will kill my Brother Jacob.
Genesis 2^.41. Well might God hate such a profane Wretch, that instead of mourning
for the Loss of a pious Father, was for killing his Brother, who, (though a plain
Man) a much better than himself. But then, as his Wickedness was great, so his
Conversion must needs be glorious. It would be well if all murdering
Persecutors would (in this) take him for an Example; for instead of killing his
Brother Jacob, when he met him in his Return to his Father's House, (from
whence he had fled from Esau,) he fell on his Neck, and kissed him, and wept,
Genesis 33.4.

It Is hoped, no Christian Ear will be offended to hear of the Conversion and
great Change of this profane Person, who, though he was nor favored with the
Blessing of Preference, or the natural Blessing of Birthright, which he sought
with Tears, but could not find, Genesis 2^.38. yet the Blessing of Grace he had,
being the free Gift of God to him, Heb. 12.17. and pronounced by Faith to him,
as says the Apostle, in the forecited Epistle to the Hebrews; which Blessing
was, by their Father Isaac, thus expressed to each of them; First to Jacob,
(that the Purpose of God according to Choice or Election might stand, Romans
9.11, 12. which Choice or Election, before they were born, or had done Good or
Evil, was, that the Elder should serve the Younger, or the Younger be preferred
before the Elder, not one damned, and the other saved. Here Is no Damnation to
Eternity that we read of concerning Esau, but a Blessing of a quite different
Nature. To Jacob, he pronounces thus; God give thee of the Dew of Heaven, and
the Fatness of the Earth. Be Lord over thy Brother, and let thy Mother's Son
bow down to thee, etc. Genesis 27.28, 29. And to Esau he says, (exceedingly
trembling, through the Power of Faith, ( ver. 33.) (...) Hand of God being upon
him) (...) ^ling shall be of the Fatness of the Earth, and the Dew of Heaven
from above; and by thy Sword shall thou live, and shall serve thy Brother. And
it shall come to pass, when thou shall have the Dominion, [which Dominion is in
Christ,] that thou shall break his Yoke from off thy Neck, ver. 39.40.

These Blessings have not only Respect to their own proper Persons, but also to
their Posterity; far from pre-ordaining them, or any of them to Damnation. And
we have good Ground to believe, (from what is abovesaid, together with the
Reformation afterward wrought in Esau himself) much better Things of him, as
it is written, At what Time soever a wicked Man turns from his Wickedness,
the Wickedness which he has committed, shall be remembered no more, Ezekiel 18.27.
so, When a righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, and commits
Iniquity, and dies in them, for his Iniquity which he has done, shall he die,
ver. 26.

Having thus far taken Notice of the Purport of the Blessings of Jacob and
Esau, relating to their Persons, who were both blessed with the Dew of Heaven
and the Fatness of the Earth, I make this Remark, None can curse him or them
whom God has blessed. And whereas the Apostle says, Jacob have I loved, and
Esau have I hated, (Romans 9.13) this was not said of them before they were born,
or had done either Good or Evil, (but pointed to the Elder's serving the
Younger, therefore it is wresting the Scripture to infer he loved one and hated
the other before they were born) but many Years after, Mal. 1.2, 3. relating to
the Ways they had walked in, and to their Posterity, as they followed the Steps
of their Predecessors; the Posterity of the one professing the true God; and
the other walking in the Way of the Gentiles. God loves Righteousness, and
hates Iniquity; and for so doing, CHRIST our Lord was anointed with the Oil of
Joy and Gladness above his Fellows, or Followers, Heb. 1.8.9.

And so, next we n^ (...) note, how it came to pass, that Isaac's Prophecy was
full lied on the Children of Jacob and Esau. Jacob has allotted to him, and his
Seed, the Dew of Heaven first, and the ^^t^ess of the Earth afterward, Genesis
2^.28, 29. but Esau the Fatness of the Earth first, and the Dew of Heaven last,
ve^. 39, 40. This is worth our while to take some special Notice of, because it
seems to predict the Conversion of the Gentiles, and breaking of the Yoke of
the Ceremonial, or Shadowy Part of the Law. Now the Lord and his Divine
Goodness was with Jacob, and his Seed; and powerfully wrought for them, in
bringing them out of Egypt, and through the Red Sea, and feeding of them with
Angel's Food, or with Manna from Heaven, Exodus 14.21. during all which Time,
they had but little of the Fatness of the Earth, but the mighty God of Jacob
was wonderfully with them. While on the other Hand, Esau was rich and
flourishing, and had (as his Father predicted) the Fatness of the Earth, in
great Plenty; having diverse Kingdoms, and many Dukedoms, Genesis 36. about
thirteen Kings, and thirty odd Dukes; but we read nothing of their
Righteousness, or true worshipping of the God of good Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
so that they had the Fatness of the Earth, and seem to have prized it above the
Dew of Heaven, which Jacob had first: But that Expression is of great
Signification to the Heathen Gentiles, that were of the Stock of Esau, and
points to the Gospel-Day, and Coming of Christ, viz. When thou shall have the
Dominion, thou (...) break his Yoke from off thy Neck, Genesis 27.40. which shows
forth the Power of the Gospel, and Dominion of Christ, and ^onversion of the
Gentiles; for Esau's S^ock according to the Flesh, is some Part of the
Gentiles, as the Jews are of Jacob's. And now is Salvation offered freely through
Christ to those Gentiles, that are of the Stock of Esau, and to all others,
both Jews and Gentiles, that truly believe in him, Acts 10.34, 35. throughout
all Nations; which caused the Angel to sing, Glory to God on high, Peace on
Earth* and good Will toward Men, Luke 2.14. Happy would it be if Men had good
Will one toward another, then would they join in the High Praises of God, in
and through the blessed Visitation of his dear Son. And now is the latter Part of
that Blessing to Jacob fulfilling, viz. the Enjoyment of the Fatness of the
Earth; for the Jews are generally a rich People, and have great Abundance of
the Fatness of the Earth; as is evident in all Parts where they are allowed to
live and traffic. But the Dew of Heaven, the immediate Power and Manifestation
of the Presence of God, is much lost as to them, which we have Cause to
believe, is for the Hardness of their Hearts, and Unbelief in Christ the Lord,
Heb. 11.20. So that the Blessing of Faith by Isaac to his two Sons, and their
Posterity, is come to pass, as may plainly be seen with an Eye of Faith; the
which, may our good and gracious Lord open more and more in the Hearts of all
People. And may every one that sees this, truly lay, Amen, even so come holy
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Furthermore, these dark Divines, the Propagators of the aforesaid Doctrine
would also grant, if they would once come to the Light of Christ that they
might see, that it is one Thing to be denominated aforehand by God (who
foreseeing future Events, often calls those Things which are not, as if they
were) loved or hated respectively; before either Good or Evil be actually done,
or the Doers born, with Reference to the Good and Evil he foresaw would be done
in Time; and another to be absolutely and actually loved and hated, not only
without any Reference or Respect to Good and Evil foreseen that it would be
done: But also before the Subjects and Doers thereof are as yet in so much as
any actual Being: And that these two Persons were Types of the two See^s; that
(and not Persons, but so) as they are Children of the one or the other, are the
only, absolute, everlasting, unchangeable Subjects of God's peremptory,
unalterable and eternal Decrees of Election and Reprobation, viz. the Seed of
the Woman and that of the Serpent; which, the Seed of the Righteous who are
ever blessed, and the S^ed of evil Doers who are never to be renowned, are
respectively born of, and adhering to. And though they will needs misunderstand
it as spoken of those Persons only, yet it is not so, but of the two Nations
that strove in the Womb of Rebecca, Genesis 25.23. and the two Manner of People
that were to go forth of her Bowels; viz. Israel and Edom, which two Nations,
(but that what is most right, is mostly a Riddle to them) they might read (as
born after the Flesh) were Types yet of a more mystical and Spiritual Israel
and Edom than they are yet well acquainted with; and that God's loving the one,
and hating the other of these, was (as is most evident in Mal. 1.2, 3, 4.) not
without, bu^ with Respect to Evil; and not any foreseen Evil already done
neither, but on Account of the wicke^ Works and Rebellion of Esau and his
Po^terity that walked in his ^ays, (as Jacob's were not) they became the
Objects of God's Hatred, and (whilst they ^emain in their Rebellion) a People
against whom God has Indignation for ever.

But there was no such Thing as Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, said of
these two single Persons before they were born; for the Text says, that Before
they had done Good or Evil, (or were born either) it was said to her, the elder
shall serve the younger, Romans 9.11, 12. And it is certainly true, that he did
so, both in the single Type and the foresaid double Anti Type. And this is
witnessed in the Saints, whom the World knows not, to be Truth at this Day,
that the Elder does serve the younger, which has been kept under a great
while; but of the other, it is said thus, (not as it was said to her, but) as it
is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, ver. 13. And when was
this written? Was it before the two Persons of Jacob and Esau were born, or had
done either Good or Evil? I trow not, but by Malachi the last Prophet, Mal.
1.2, 3. whose Time was long after they had done all the Good and Evil they ever
did in the Body; yea, Hundreds of Years after both their Dissolutions.

Secondly, The next under Consideration, is, that the Lord hardened the Heart
of Pharaoh, Exodus 7.13. (who first hardened his own Heart against God and his
People, and then God hardened him yet harder to show his great Power to
Mortals,) which is true, that he did (...) after Day of his Visitation was
over, and that Pharaoh had first hardened his own Heart; so that God was clear
of that evil Heart of Unbelief in him; and it is but just, and also reasonable,
that when Man having been often visited, refuses the O^fers of God's Love,
that God visits him in his just and righteous Judgment, when he has slighted
his Mercy, and Grace; and then according to Holy Scripture, his Destruction is
of himself, but his Help is in the Lord, Hos. 13.9. So that God is true, and
every Man (contradicting him) a Liar, Romans 3.4. Wherefore, let all and every
Body have a Care of hardening their Heart as Pharaoh did, for that is provoking
to the Almighty; and then he justly gives them over to an evil Hear^ ^f
Unbelief, or to a Reprobate Mind, and they depart from the Living God. The Lord
said to Pharaoh, Let my People go, (over and over) and it was the Mind of God,
he should have done it, and he might also have done it if he would, bur he
refused, saying, Who is the Lord that I should obey his Voice, to let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, (Exodus 5.2.) and so
continued to harden himself against God and his People, cruelly persecuting and
forcing them to make Brick without Straw, until God hardened him yet more. Also,
may all hard-hearted and unbelieving People take Warning by him, in Time,
before it be too late.

Thus, it is clear, he might have let the People go, because God by Moses
commanded him so to do. It is absurd to think, that God spoke one Thing and
intended another, therefore it was possible for him to have done what God
required of him, and he was not predestined to that Obduration, until he
hardened his own Heart, and then he was given up to a Reprobate Mind, Romans 1.28.

Thirdly, The following Scripture is falsely made Use of, viz. Isa 27.11. He
that made them, will not have Mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show
them no Favor. This Text has been met with in the Writings of some of those
that espouse the aforesaid Doctrine, adduced to vindicate that Principle of
Pre-ordination to Destruction: But it is therein grossly perverted; for in the
same Verse, the Cause thereof is fairly stated, and the Reason clearly shown,
Isa. 2^.11. viz. because they were withered Branches, and a People of no
Understanding, therefore he that made them, would not have Mercy on them; and
he that formed them, would show them no Favor. So that it is clear they might
have been fruitful, but would not, and had been green, but were withered from
their Greenness, much like those whom Christ expostulates with, when he says,
How often would I have gathered you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings, but you would not, (Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.42.) O that thou had^t known in
this thy Day, the Things that belong to thy Peace, but now they are hid from
thine Eyes: Which shows the great and fervent Desire of Christ, and his tender
Love to poor Mortals, far from ordaining them to Destruction; so that God and
Christ is fully clear of the Blood of all Men, and their Destruction is of
themselves.

Fourthly, They argue from the Words of the Apostle, Has not the Potter Power
over the Clay, to make of the same Lump one Vessel to Honor, and another to
Dishonor? (Romans 9.21.) Yes, doubtless, he has; but the Potter does not make
Vessels designedly to break them to Pieces, or to destroy them, but for the Use
and Service of his House; and it is an Honor to be the meanest Vessel in the
House of God, though some Vessels are more honorable than others; and if the
Vessel mar in the Hand of the Potter, it is not the Fault of the Potter, but of
the Clay, as we have it in the Instance of the Prophet, concerning Israel, Jer.
18.4. And the Lord in his Wisdom, and to show his Power, does make Souls more
or less honorable, as he pleases; but it is plain, he makes none with Design
to destroy them, both from Scripture and right Reason.

Fifthly, They urge the Apostle's Words, Romans 9.18. but to as little Purpose as
the former, He will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will be
hardens. It Is true; God has abandantly shown us in the Holy Scriptures on
whom he will have Mercy, viz.

He has Mercy on the Poor.
The humble he teaches of his Ways.
Guides the Meek in Judgment.
Clothes the Meek with Salvation.
Has the Righteous in everlasting Remembrance.
Loves them which loves him.
Saves them who loves his Son, and believes in him; and gives to them
everlasting Life.
And Christ loves them, and manifests himself unto them; and wills not to
harden any but the Wicked and ungodly, and such who slight their own Mercy, and
neglect their own Salvation; and are malicious and uncharitable, persecuring
and unmerciful; but the merciful shall obtain Mercy, as says Christ, in his
most excellent Sermon which he preached upon the Mount, Mat. 5.7. well worth
the often reading and perusing of all professing the Name of Jesus Christ.
There was never any Sermon in all the World, preached by any Man since the
Creation, like that of Christ's. And now, all who make a Profession of the holy
Name of Jesus, are desired and entreated to take a View of the Lives and
Conversations of People, for with those who walk most consonant to the Doctrine
of our blessed Savior, they may most safely join in Communion and Fellowship,
and in the Worship of the Father and the Son with them. But it is of dangerous
Consequence to join with those that walk, and talk, and believe contrary
thereto.

Thus it was in my Mind, and has been for some Years, to show to the
Presbyterian People, the Weakness of some of their own Proofs, (as they imagine
them) and strongest Arguments for this corrupt Doctrine of theirs; and their
Misapplication of those Texts of Scripture, which they advance, to maintain
their absurd Notion of particular and personal Election and Reprobation of
Souls to eternal Destruction and Damnation, before they were born, or having
done either Good or Evil, that they might come to true Repentance, add lay hold
on eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and dwell in the Sense of the
universal Love of God and Christ to all Mankind; in the tender Bowels thereof,
to all those of the Presbyterian, Independent or Baptist Persuasion, or any
other who hold the aforesaid gross Error, are those Lines written; and in great
Love and Tenderness, they are invited to search the Scriptures, and see whether
the whole Scope of them do not show the contrary, and wonderfully and
excellently set forth the Love and Goodness, Grace and Mercy of God and Christ
to poor Mortals.

Oh that People might lay hold of it, and come to Christ, that they might have
Life; for though it is Good to search the Scriptures, it is better to come to
Christ. A Man may search the Scriptures, and not come to Christ as the Jews
did, John 5.39.40. But ^f a Man come rightly to Christ, he will not be
negligent in searching the Scriptures, for they contain rich Treasure to the
seeking Soul. And they are able through Faith in Christ Jesus, to make the Man of
God wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. And what is therein clear to the
Understanding, That lay hold of, embrace, and put in Practice: But be careful
not to meddle with what is obscure to thy Understanding; for there is enough
therein which is plain and apt to most States and Conditions. And if thou
want any Thing for thy Soul, which thou can not readily find Satisfaction
about in the Scriptures; then I advise thee, in the Love of Christ, to seek to
him, who is near every true seeking Soul. He is not far away from every one of
you, says the Apostle, Acts, 17.27. He is in the true Believers the Hope of
Glory, as says the Scriptures.

Wherefore, O tender Soul, come to Christ, pour out thy Soul to him, make thy
Complaint to him; He being the Good Samaritan, the great Physician of Value,
will in his own Time (if thou continue in well doing) help and heal thee. Do
not let in that dangerous Principle, that thou art predestined to
De^truction; for that is a dangerous Snare of the Enemy; and many Souls have
been lost through that deceitful, dark Doctrine, being thereby doubting and
fearful of Damnation, and ready thus to express themselves; It is in vain for
me to ^^rive, to seek or to pray; for I fear I am a Vessel of Wrath and
predestined to Damnation; for I have no Heart to any good Thing, and am
so^ely buffeted by Satan.

Oh Soul! In Order that thou may be disentangled from this Snare and
Stratagem of Satan, is the foregoing written, in Christian and tender Love to
thy Soul.

Lately Published, A LETTER to a Friend in Ireland, containing a Relation of
some sorrowful Instances of the sad Effects of Intemperance, as a Warning to
Young People. The Third Edition. By Thomas Chalkley. Price Twopence.

Sold by S. Keimer in High Street.


