Gloria Britannorum: OR, The British WORTHIES. A POEM. BEING An Essay on the
Characters OF THE Most Illustrious PERSONS in Camp or Cabinet, Since the
Glorious Revolution to this present Time. More Particularly, Of the present
MINISTRY, under our most renowned Sovereign Lord King GEORGE.

To which is added, An ODE on his Majesty's Coronation, and an ELEGY on the
Death of the late Glorious Duke of MARLBOROUGH.

By a Lover of the present happy Constitution.

Quem (...) acri (...)

Hor. BOSTON: Printed by J. Franklin for N. Buttolph, and Sold at his Shop in
Cornhill, 1723.

Gloria Britannorum.
SICILIAN Muse! the rural Strain forbear
Nor urge the verdant Spring, nor blooming Year,
Though Flora's Charms have sweetly tuned thy Lyre,
Yet now a nobler Theme my Verse does fire,
To Sing of Heroes Deeds.
Ye Heavenly Nymphs assist me with your Lays
To Sing such Heroes worthy of your Praise,
And you bright Sons of Harvard where the Nine,
And Great Apollo consecrate their Shrine,
For Wisdom famed, the rude Attempt excuse,
Accept an Offering from an Infant Muse,
That in Adventurous Numbers first would Sing
The Famed NASSAU, the Great, the Warlike King.
Next to my View a Cloud of Hero's rise,
Whose Fame is wasted to the boundless Skies,
Innumerable Years shall never deface
Such worthy Patriots, such a Wondrous Race.
Then dare my Muse! the Immortal Man declare,
How mild in Empire, yet how brave in War,
Sing all his Toils, the Glorious Toils he took,
To rescue Britain from the impending Stroke
Of grievous Servitude, and foreign Yoke.
For this, the intrepid Hero scorned his Ease,
Plunging his Way through Winters faithless Seas,
Saw the rude Winds impetuous swell the Main
In Storms that round the Warrior raged in vain.
Embarked in Liberty's Immortal Cause,
WILLIAM the sacred Sword of Justice draws,
Directs his Course for injured Albion's Shore
To save Religion, and the Laws restore.
Stunned at his near approach the Romish Crew
With guilty looks their dire Destruction view,
Their Altars fall, their Priests no refuge find,
But scour like Locusts before the Western Wind.
Now the old English Freedom dares return,
WILLIAM arrived, no more does Albion mourn;
Wherever his presence as the Sun appears
It banishes all Clouds, dispels all Fears.
See the glad Nation rise with one accord,
With ravished Joy to meet their welcome Lord,
Who comes the English Glory to restore
That in Luxutious Sloth lay sunk before.
The British Lion rouses at his call,
Enlarged from Tyranny's Oppressive Thrall,
Rampant he tears and foams with vengeful Roar,
Snuffing the approaching scent of Hostile Gore
And shows how Bourbon might have fallen before,
At his stern Voice drooping the Lilly lies,
No more the dread of Europe now to rise,
Pendant she lours, her true Complexion shows,
And at the Victor's Thunder paler grows;
Blasted with Fear, declines the brandisht Sword
Of Nossau's mighty Prince and puissant Lord.
Hark! the melodious Trumpet's Sound I hear,
Loud ecchoing Shouts surprise each listening Ear,
Bells ringing, Bonfires blazing every where.
Scarce do the British Youths their Joys contain,
(Old English Liberty restored again)
With Oaken Boughs and Laurel spread the Way,
Immortal Garlands at his Feet they lay,
Whilst the freed Nobles their Allegiance pay;
Mirth, Wine, and Music crown the auspicious Day.
Long had the haughty French by Charles been spared,
And James in open League with Rome appeared;
Lewis without control his Conquests gained,
No Seas had yet with Gallick Blood been stained;
But now as rons'd from dead lethargick Sleep,
Britain again prepares to rule the Deep;
Again Britannia's lovely Sons are Armed
Against France, by NASSAU'S great Example warmed.
Fired with Revenge, their glittering Swords prepare,
And all the dreadful solemn pomp of War.
ORANGE like Lightning at their head appears
With firmest Soul, nor Death nor Danger fears.
Immortal Deeds the Hero's Bosom warm,
Then Ireland felt the Thunder of his Arm.
To Flandria thence his awful Course he bends,
Thither the Great Victorious Leader tends;
Thither Britannia's freeborn Sons advance,
And great NASSAU strikes Terror into France.
But OF the uncertain State of human Things!
WILLIAM the dread, the Scourge of Tyrant Kings;
Must to inexorable Fate resign,
Whilst the sad Nations mourn his Funeral Shrine.
The time now came that Heaven expedient saw,
The Hero should from earthly Cares withdraw:
But before his greatest Soul to Heaven was fled,
He raised himself upon his Couch, and said,
Can any more for Albion's Isle be done,
Before this mortal Life's frail Glass is run?
I Am now no more! but ANNA does succeed,
By Her the Perjured Gaul shall surely Bleed.
Let Shovel's Arm with Rook's the Fleet command
And CHURCHILL head Britannia's Troops by Land:
He shall the direful Stroke to France impart,
None has a cooler Head, or warmer Heart.
To Britain's Arms, by ANNA'S firm Decree,
The World shall strike by Land as well as Sea.
When she (...) to Heavens Harmonious train,
It is decreed that BRUNSWICK'S Line shall Reign.
To their long Rule no Bound's assigned by Heaven,
That House the Powers have endless Empire given,
In them the English Glory shall survive,
In them you will have Plantagenets alive;
They to remotest Climates shall give Law,
And Plans of Peace for future Ages draw.
Then Janus Temple shut, the din of Arms
To Silence hushed, no more shall dire Alarms
From the rude God of War with flaming hand
Threatening destructive Ruin over a Land,
Or Britain's Wealth, or Briton's Blood demand.
But all the Nations soothed to gentle Peace,
Britain shall glory share with Freedom's Ease;
Plenty shall flow profuse with a full horn,
And peaceful Olives shall those Halcyon times adorn.
Thus said, with faltring Speech the Hero cried,
Britain adieu, then bowed his Head and died.
Great Soul! even in the latest hours of breath,
Triumphs in England's Glory, smiles in Death.
Of SCHOMBERG next who at the Boyne did fall,
Or RUSSEL who destroyed at Sea the Gaul,
I know not how to touch, or SUMMERS too
Who Tully did for Eloquence out do.
Immortal WHARTON'S Praise must still be sung,
His ready Wit, his sweet mellifluous Tongue;
Who durst for Albion's safety out have poured,
His greatest Soul to have seen her laws secured.
SARUM to sing requires Angelick Lays,
For he exceeds the bounds of humane Praise;
Winged with his starry plumes, he soars on high,
By Saints and Angels welcomed to the Sky:
Clio beware, the sovereign Task resign,
Urania can alone make BURNET shine,
The Theme's all heavenly, sacred, all Divine,
STANHOPE, for Arms or Arts so lately famed,
Should with Eternal Numbers be proclaimed;
He may in either Shape be glorious shown,
Or in the warlike Camp, or in the peaceful Gown.
In vain my Muse attempts the Hero's might,
Bold in the Field, and in the Senate bright;
His Name in England's Story shall be told
So long as BRUNSWICK'S Line does Albion hold;
His Merit shall from Shore to Shore be famed,
Wherever Britain's Liberty is named;
How through Iberian Coasts the Victor flew
With uncontrolled Success, his Thousands flew;
At Sarragoss how Philip before him fled,
On Madrid's Walls the British Flag displayed,
His Name to haughty Spamards yet a dread.
CADOGAN too, for Martial Prowess known,
Shall in the sacred Chronicle be shown,
And shine with endless Glory and Renown.
WHARTON the Young, the Wise, of Freeborn Race,
Whom all the Virtues, all Perfections grace;
With steady Zeal pursues his Country's Cause,
And in the Spring of Age asserts the Laws:
Nor Hopes nor Fears the Generous Youth can bind,
The Patriot's deep engraven in his Mind.
Thus the Illustrious Roman Youths of old,
Did Rome's Immortal Liberty uphold,
And were among the Eternal Powers enrolled.
What shall I say of TOWNSHEND's honest Zeal:
His Pains unwearied for the public Weal?
WALPOLE's immov'd Integrity relate:
His Powerful Eloquence in warm Debate,
Or deepest Judgment in Affairs of State?
PARKER's inimitable Harangues show:
Which with resistless Force unbounded Flow?
Shall I sweet COWPER's heavenly Style rehearse,
And Sing Encomium's with Eternal Verse?
Show JEKYL's florid Parts which 'dorn the Hall,
Or LECHMERE's ready Tongue that speaks them all?
But OF my Muse! on what Immortal String
Will thou all conquering MARLBRO's Triumphs Sing?
Relate perfidious base Bavaria's Fall,
Or in the Bloody Danube plunge the Gaul;
Show how from Blenheim's Towers they basely yield,
Or broke in wild Confusion fly the Field?
Ramillia's never fading Garland show,
What Laurels there adorned the Victor's Brow;
On Judoign's Plain the purple Scene disclose,
And Field bestrew'd with heaps of slaughtered Foes.
'T was on a Summers Morn, the bloom of May,
(As if just Heaven willed a decisive Day)
With vaunting Pride the Gaul came forth to try
Their Strength in Arms once more, conquer or dye;
Boasting Success, furious Efforts they make,
In bellowing Flames the Thundering Cannon spoke,
At whose dread Roar the Neigh bring Mountains quake.
In Motion see their Horse from Wing to Wing,
Dreadful in Arms, that sound a clangorous Ring,
The prancing Steeds fired with the din of War,
With rage disdainful snuff the nitrous Air;
Waving their sinewy Necks with fiery glare,
Swallow the Ground with Fierceness, bound and tear,
No more the Thunder of the Battle fear.
Of threatened Dart, or Sword, or pointed Spear.
Proud in their Ranks the firm Battalions stand,
Eager for Fight, and Victory demand;
Amongst whom the Household Troops in Splendour shine,
Waiting the Charge with numerous Hosts to join.
But now Confed'rate Drums twang through the Air
In solemn sound; the Echo rings afar
From Hill to Hill, tossed over the tragic Verge,
Whilst the shrill Trumpet sounds the bloody Charge;
At which Command, the Troops with dauntless Mind
Embattled Ranks in mighty Quadrate joined,
With Blenheim's Everlasting Trophys crowned,
Move on intrepid to the rapturous Sound
Of Instrumental Harmony that breathed
Heroic Ardor to adventurous Deeds:
Under their Godlike Leader in the Cause
Of Europe's Safety, Liberty, and Laws,
Onward they move, profuse of generous Life,
Eager for Glory, and demand the Strife.
The Impending Storm hangs instant over the Hills,
And great Expectance every Soldier fills.
But the loud Shout of Battle now began,
And rushing Sounds of Arms, horrible clang?
The Battle joined, loud Thunders rend the Sky.
Deaths and a thousand flaming Dangers fly
Across the Field; Lightning and Storms arise,
Filling the Neighboring Boors with wild Surprise.
'Twas then Britannia's Chief, renowned in Wars,
In awful Form assumed the Port of Mars;
Whilst on his Victor Front with Graceful Air
Deliberation sat, and public Care;
Through all the Storm dreadless and firm appeared,
With steady Hand the Helm of Action steered,
Regardless of the mighty Thunder's fall,
Though once so near approached the mur'dring Ball.
OF BRINGFIELD! hard, but glorious was thy Fate,
Around thy Tomb a thousand Glories wait;
That Tomb which now to latest Times must tell
Where MARLBRO' Triumphed, there how BRINGFIELD fell.
The Gaul repulsed, still burn with fresh Desires,
And love of Conquest every Bosom Fires;
But they for glorious Conquest strive (...),
Nor do the furious Battle long maintain;
Broke and overthrown their Horse with dreadful Foil,
Back in tumultuous Rout the Foot (...),
Nor dare again Brittanick Powers engage
Now kindled into more than tenfold Rage,
Whose Center-shaking Guns when once they spoke
In Blaze of Sulphur, and thick Clouds of Smoke,
Charon grew faint with sorrying Souls to Hell,
Such Hecatombs of haughty Frenchmen fell.
Now drooped their Silver Ensigns lost in Flight,
To Gallic Empire boding Eternal Night,
Broken Battallions squandring baste away
To pass unseen, and sculk behind the Day,
And leave the vanquished Field the Victors Prey.
Thus have I seen a Fleet with well spread Sail
Quit Harbor pompous with a flattering Gale;
With gilded Pride and Luster brave the Day,
Their Streamers fluttering in the Zephyrs play;
When on a sudden Storms and Tempests rise,
And Jove descends in Lightning from the Skies;
Broke and confounded on the boisterous Main,
Strive the next Port with shattered Sides to gain,
Untaught the raging Billows to sustain.
Proceed, my Muse, the lofty Theme pursue
To Oud'nard's bloody Field of Crimson hue;
There let Vandome's opprobrious rout appear,
Or Lisle's vast Conquest crown the wondrous Year.
But OF what Numbers can suffice to tell
The vast Exploits of War that Year befell?
Blazon the pompous Field of Battle won,
Or let the vanquished Gaul before him run;
Traverse the Conquered Realms, the wide Campaign,
Through Seas of Blood, over vasty Hills of Slain,
And see whole Armies drag the Victor's Chain.
Sing Villars too with triple Trench immured,
With Blaugie's stubborn Oaks and Pines secured,
Tell how the deep mouthed Tubes with hideous Roar,
Flaming Destruction, guard their Camp before;
Legions of Troops in Swarms behind them lie,
And Briton's Power, and MARLBRO's Arm defy.
Delusive Thought! the Trumpet sounds to Arms,
Whilst loud Huzza's the Gallick Camp Alarms,
Britannia's Bands move toward the Gloomy Wood
Like a thick Tempest hovering in a Cloud.
Amazing Scene! What thundering Storms ensue,
What fiery Hail, what flaky Lightnings flew,
When the fierce Bands in furious Battle joined
With force superior, but with braver mind,
Undaunted Bosoms tempt the Edge of Death,
In Freedom's Cause proud to resign their Breath.
Long was the Fight and dubious, and the Plain
Drank deep of Crimson; Here their last Campaign
Choice hardy Veterans made; Stern Generals here,
Lie gasping, Valiant; Still in their Looks appears
Great Magnanimity, now bleeding lie
And stretched of the purple Bed of Honor dye.
Till now the Battle hung in even Scale,
Which Side Victoria flattered hard to tell;
But now the enraged Britons bear down all
With Force impetuous before 'em; now the Gaul
Beneath the Victors Thunder fainting fall:
Nor Tube nor Trench their rapid Force restrain;
Britannia's Bands the dreadful Entrance gain,
And Blood and Slaughter rages over the Plain.
Here might you have seen the Trenches overspread
With mangled Trunks, and Bodies of the Dead,
Till the discolored Earth thus died in Grain,
Blushed to behold such Shambles of the Slain;
Nay the pale Furies stood like trembling Elves,
Wondering to see Men do more than themselves.
The Gaul now broke, in panick dread they run,
Amazed to find their lofty Ramparts won.
And own themselves by MARLBRO's Power outdone.
Such were the Effects of his Deliberate Care,
Victoria still attended CHURCHILL's Spear:
Wherever the mighty Chief in Battle joined
Glad Victory always to his Arms inclined,
And FOUR the Laurel to his Temples bind.
No more of Pompey now, or Julius tell,
Nor on Great Ammon's Son's vast Story dwell,
MARLBRO' on Hochstet's glorious Plain did more,
Than they in all their boasted Wars before,
In HIM concentred all that ever they knew,
Experience, Wisdom, Judgment, Valor too,
In heat of Action brave, in Conduct clear,
Strange and averse to naught but Pride and Fear.
AUGUSTUS Prince of Wales.
next, in Day of Battle bold,
Amongst the noblest Hero's stands Enrolled;
Sublimely Great, for mighty Actions born,
Britennia's sacred Annals to adorn;
My Pen is not sufficient for his Praise,
Bellona on his Head has fixed the Bays.
Nor must I leave unsung the Youth Prince Frederick.
divine,
Britannia's Hopes, betwixt the Elbe and Rhine,
Like to the Morning Dew his Goodness flows,
And as a Root for after Ages grows,
Ingenuous, candid, free, of generous Race,
Mirror of Wit, adorned with every Grace,
So much his sweet engaging Charms invite,
That justly he is esteemed the Worlds delight.
When young the Tree, yet choicest Fruit appears,
What may we not expect from riper Years.
But above all, see mighty BRUNSWICK'S Star,
Shines forth refulgent in the glorious Sphere,
With dazzling Light does as the Sun appear!
Not only here his kindly Rays descend,
His Goodness does to all the World extend;
From Pole to Pole, Britannia's Fame he bears,
And gives new Luster to the Crown he wears;
His powerful Treaties over the World prevail,
No Widows now their Husbands Blood bewail;
Captives from Chains his generous Schemes release,
Does the proud Spaniards sultry Rage appease,
And sooths the rugged Northern world to peace.
But OF what Joys perpetual must they share,
Who feel the effects of his immediate Care!
Happy the Land that his just rule obeys!
Happy the Realms! wherever his Empire sways,
By CAESAR'S rule, Justice and Truth abound,
And all the Year's with Peace and Plenty crowned;
By HIM our Flocks in safety range the Plain;
Secure, the Seaman ploughs the boisterous Main;
The laboring Fields with Plenty crown the Year,
And Liberty its golden Head does rear:
Not Saturn's Age could boast an happier Reign,
Should that be true which witty Poets feign,
That perfect Virtue then on Earth remained.
Sure Heaven itself propitious deigned to Smile
When Britain's States declared in awful Style
BRUNSWICK the Great Defender of our Isle.
Our Pipes shall therefore Sing HANOVER'S Praise,
Through all our Grotto's with immortal Lays;
His Temples shall be decked with Ivy round,
And every Village shall his Name resound.
What boundless Prospect now before me lies!
Ten thousand Scenes of Bliss for Albion rise,
HANOVER'S Reign Octavian Times curvies.
Our Fleets shall now the furthest Coasts attain,
Laden with Wealth shall safe return again,
The Product of the World without control,
Shall with the beauteous Thames Triumphant roll.
No more shall Civil Discord's Fury rage,
Nor Broils domestic Britain's Arms engage,
War's dreadful sound no more shall Albion hear
Nor Goth, nor Gaul's insulting thundrings fear,
But the whole Globe shall BRUNSWICK'S Name revere.
Religious Truths in purity shall shine,
Though Rome in bloody League with High-Church join
To root them out, they firm as Heaven remain,
Whilst giddy Zealots spend their rage in vain,
Unable to answer Ho^dly's nervous Strain
CAESAR shall Live, Britannia's Scepter sway,
And all with cheerful Hearts his Rule obey;
Peace now Triumphant over the World shall ride,
And HE the Affairs of Europe always guide;
Then Mars shall up his murdering Engines fold,
And GEORGE the Balance of the World shall hold.
But where, presumptuous Muse! do thou aspire,
Thy Genius touched not with the sacred Fire;
Forbear on such a mighty Theme t'engage,
Not Sing of Patriots with unequal rage;
Rather some humble Country Subject choose,
That better suits thy (...) and feeble Muse,
Then on so great, so vast a Subject dwell,
Which only thou in mean ignoble Verse can tell.
On the happy Anniversary of His MAJESTY'S Coronation.
HAIL! happy Day for Albion's Realm,
That set great BRUNSWICK at the Helm
To save the Church and Laws;
When TENNISON of high Renown
Did on his Temples fix the Crown
With thundering vast Applause.
Legions of Angels did attend
The anointed Hero to defend,
Armed with JEHOVAH's Might,
Seraph's commissioned to be there,
Encamped around the Favourite's Chair,
Triumphing at the Sight.
How did the Palace ring with Joy!
Sad Omen to the Rival Boy,
And all the Tory Crew,
Though forced some of 'em to proclaim
Great BRUNSWICK'S Title and his Name,
And swear Allegiance too.
The self same Faction that before
Had sought the Impostor to Restore,
And overturn the State;
Now perjured, and the public Scorn,
Yet served his Triumph to adorn,
Such was the Will of Fate.
Thus Heaven that orders humane things,
That governs States, and sets up Kings,
The Sovereigns Title owned;
Baffled the ill Designs of those
That did his Settlement oppose,
And all their Schemes confound.
Thrice happy Day! Long may thou stand.
And still new Songs of Praise demand
From all the tuneful Quire:
Still may thou flourish, even when old,
And the first Rank of Honor hold,
And lofty Strains inspire.
To thee our Albion's Peace we owe;
By thee our cheerful Cups overflow,
And Plenty Crowns the Board:
Thou do new Joys, and Glory bring;
Of thee shall after Ages sing,
And BRUNSWICK'S Name record.
On the Immortal Memory of that ever Renowned and Victorious Prince and
General, JOHN Duke of Marlborough, Prince of Mindelheim, etc.
WOULD but the Powers afford their Lays
To sing the Warrior, and his Praise,
How would the fainting Muse arise,
And bear the Victor to the Skies.
There famed NASSAU, and Thousands more
Of the great Souls that went before,
All radiant, all divine appear,
And spangle in the Hemisphere.
There CHURCHILL in full Splendour shines,
And the Victorious Consort joins,
Heroes of famed immortal Race,
And only to NASSAU gives Place.
Great Pompey there, and Ammon's Son,
With Caesar, who the World had won,
And HE that Ilium's Towers o'erthrew,
Before the unconquered Hero bow.
But Albion mourns her MARLBRO' gone,
And sadly does her Loss bemoan;
Drowned in her Tears does pensive mourn,
And wish in vain her Chief's Return.
Immortal Prince! of mighty Fame,
(Whose matchless Trophies own the same;)
Thy Deeds around the Globe shall ring,
And flourish with Eternal Spring:
So long as Hochster's fatal Plain
Shall boast the Gaul with Vengeance Slain,
Or the proud Marble A Marble Pillar erected there in Memory of that glorious
Victory.
Pile shall stand
The Praise and Honor of our Land,
Or BRUNSWICK'S Line the Throne possess,
(Whose worthy Deeds deserve no less)
Thy Arms and Triumphs shall be Sung
By every Nation, every Tongue.
Ye Powers that over the Wars preside,
And in rough Camps, and Fields abide,
Send down a Man of Equal Size
To cheer our Hearts and bless our Eyes,
Do you the public Loss restore,
For CHURCHILL is to us no more,
The Man that led our Youths in Arms,
And kept our Albion safe from Harms.
But Great Cadogan does succeed,
Britannia's Armies now to lead,
Who under MARLBRO' first begun
In Martial paths his Race to run.
He shall restrain the insulting Gaul,
And Britain's Foes before him fall,
In Him the old Conqueror shall live,
And GEORGE shall Laws to Europe give.
FINIS.

