An ANSWER TO SOME Cases of Conscience Respecting the COUNTRY.
By SOLOMON STODDARD, A. M. Pastor in Northampton.
Quest. I. WHEREIN does the oppression of the Country principally consist?

Answ. THERE is an oppression of R^ers often spoken of in Scripture. But
besides that, there is an oppression contrary to commutative Justice: this is
committed principally in these three ways.

1. WHEN they make the advantage of the ignorance of others. Men that are
otherwise, knowing Men, are ignorant of the worth of some Commodities; and Men
take that opportunity to extort from them. Men that are ignorant of the worth
of things, have a dependence on the Integrity of the Seller, who thereby has
an Advantage to gain more than is meet. Sometimes they get twice the value of
it. Men's ignorance does expose them to become a prey to greedy Men. The Seller
knows that could sell it cheaper; but the Buyer is ignorant, and (...).
Sometimes Men sell that which is t^^^h at the (...) of that which is
commendable. The Apothecary sells his Drugs that have lost their virtue through
age, to ignorant Men. It is an easy thing for crafty Men to abuse those that
are ignorant. And in Country Towns. Men sometimes give a shilling for that,
which at the Market Town, might be had for six pence.

2. WHEN they make their advantage of the Necessities of particular Men: When
there is a general Scarcity, the Market-price will inavoidably rise; but where
there is no Market, particular persons may be in great necessity; there be few
in that Town that can supply them. If they go to another Town to buy, the
charge will be considerable; the Man is also in a strait because strangers will
not trust him, and the Seller takes that advantage to oppress him; the
Scripture takes notice of the oppressing the poor, Prove. 22.16. Prove. 14.31. It
may be Lawyers may be guilty of taking excessive Fees.

3. WHEN they take the advantage on the good nature and ingenuity of other Men,
by lying in Debt beyond the proper time of payment, Multitudes of people in the
Country are not beforehand, they spend their Money before they have it; the
extravagancy of their expenses forces them to lie in Debt; the inevitable
Providence of GOD casts some Men behind hand; in that case they should compound
with their Creditors: but some through a profuse way of living, cannot
conveniently pay their Debts: Hereby the Creditor is reduced to straits, looses
the improvement of his own Estate; and sometimes the Debt is lost; the Debtor
dies, and there is no Estate; the Creditor dies, and the Children can never
recover their Father's dues. GOD was very strict in requiring to pay the
hireling his wages. Lev. 19.13.

Q. II. IS it lawful for Men to set their Dwelling Houses at such a distance
from the place of Public Worship, that they and their Families cannot well
attend it?

Answ. IT is lawful to do it when a few make a beginning of a new Plantation
under a prospect of obtaining the Ordinances in a little time. But it is quite
Unwarrantable, where there is no such prospect.

WE read in Scripture of a Sabbath days journey: Acts 1.12. but that was a
tradition, not an injunction. Some take it to be a Mile; some, two Miles,
according to the different sort of Cubits. It is though it that the Armies of
Israel encamped in the Wilderness at that Distance from the Tabernacle, Number.
2.2. They are ordered to pitch over against the Tabernacle; we read it, far off
about the Tabernacle. This is thought to be 2000 Cubits; because there was to
be that distance between the Tabernacle and the People, when they passed over
Jordan, Josh. 3.4. But supposing this to be, it will not prove that two Mile
was a Sabbath days journey. For there is reason to think that when the Children
of Israel encamped in the Wilderness, they took up the space of Twelve Miles
square; so that some of them would be six Miles off from the Tabernacle.

Object. 1. THE Prophet, 2 Kings 8.1, 2. directed the woman of Shun^ to remove
out of the Country, because of an approaching Famin^, and she sojourned in the
land of the Philistines seven Years. And it is very probable, that tho the
Israelites were cut off from worshipping at the Temple, being commanded to
sacrifice at Dan and Bethe^ yet they had places near, where the law was
publicly read, and public Prayers made: yet she is directed to live else
where.

Answ. THE Land of the Philistines joined to the Land of Israel, and she might
have opportunity by going two or three Miles, to join with some of Israel in
Worship; yea the north-east parts of the Land of the Philistines, was not very
far from the Temple at Jerusalem, and she might have better opportunity for
Worship, than in her own Land.

Obj. 2. IT seems the Woman of Shunem was wont to travel on the Sabbath to
Mount Carmel, which was twelve Miles, 2 Kings 4.25.

Answ. IT does not appear that it was ordinary for her to go thither on the
Sabbath; tho possibly she might on some extraordinary occasions.

Q. III. IS not the depreciating the Bills of Public Credit matter of
Provocation?

Answ. IT must needs be; for great wrong is done to many Persons who have
received them according to their denomination; and have been forced to put them
off as if they were of less Value. Some Men are able to help themselves, by
getting greater wages for their Work, and advancing the price of what they
bring to the Market; but others have been great Sufferers by this practice; and
if ever the Bills are called in; such as are in debt, either to the Public, or
to particular Persons, will be great loosers. It may be, some of them will be
undone thereby. The temptation to the Merchants was to get the Money into their
own hands, that thereby they might make Returns to England. They would give
thirty shillings in Eills, for twenty (...) Silver. And they may afford it,
that have Sold, and do sell, their Goods at execessive Rates. They are under no
necessity to do thus: for they have the command of the Market, and might buy
the produce of the Country at such prices, that they might make as profitable
Returns, as now they do.

Q. IV. Is it Lawful to wear long Hair?

Answ. IT was the Custom in England to cut their Hair all off, in ^tion of King
Henry the Eighth (...) humor, as Dr. F^r (...) off his Hair. This custom
continued for about threescore years: (...) by degrees. Men took a greater
liberty; tho some Men placed Religion in it: yet in length of time, they were
not so scrupulous as formerly. And some wore their Hair very long. And many of
those that wear Periwigs, use such as are of a very great length. And the
custom does now prevail among Pious People. But it seems utterly Unlawful to
wear their Hair long; It is a geat Burden and Cumber; it is Effiminacy, and a
vast Expense.

ONE Scripture that condemns it, 1 Cor. 11.14. Does not even nature it self
(...) you, that if a man (...) long hair, it is a shame to him? That which the
light of Nature condemns, is a Moral Evil. The light of Nature is to be our
Rule in ordinary cases. The reason why it is a shame (...) wear long Hair is,
because it is a Sin: the light of Nature does condemn it; therefore it is
sinful.

THE principal Objection that is brought to evade the Authority of this Place,
is. That by Nature, Custom is meant. So Dr. Hammond (...) it: I judge he does
it, that he may strengthen himself in his (...), that he may have the better
pretense to expound it so, (...) 2.3. where it is said, We are by nature
children of wrath, even as others. His Exposition there is contrary to the Rule
of Faith; and in this Place, contrary to the Rule of Life. We sometimes say
that Custom is a second nature: yet it is never so used in the Scripture: the
Interpretation is without Precedent: and the Apostle being presently after t^
speak of Custom, uses another word: 1 Cor. 11.16. He says, We have no such
Custom. The Apostles Expression is very remarkable, He says even Nature it
self, as if he had foreseen that Men would put a false interpretation on his
words. He does not ^tent himself to say, Nature, but that they may not suppose
he meant Custom. He says, Even Nature it self U^dly he was guided therein by
the Spirit of GOD. Besides, it was not true, that Custom taught them that it
was a shame for a Man to wear long H^ for it was the Custom of the Greeks to
wear their Hair long: The Remans wore their Hair short; but the Greeks wore
their Hair long. ^mer calls the Grecians Comati Acbivi. And when Alexander was
in a rage with Cassander one of his Nobles; he took him by the Hair, and
knocked his head against the wall. Moreover in the next verse, 1 Cor. 11.13.
The Apostle to show, that Nature teaches Women to wear their Hair long; He
says, if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her; for her hair is given
her for a covering. GOD gave it to Women for a covering, but not to Men.

ANOTHER Scripture does also condemn it, viz. Ezekiel. 44.20. Neither shall they
shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long, they shall only poll
their heads. Here are two Extremes forbid; Shaving the head, and suffering
their locks to grow long. This must either signify some spiritual thing; but no
Man can devise what; or some Gospel Institution; and if so, why is it not
enjoined unto Ministers in the New Testament, or else it is a Moral Law: and so
it must be. One part of it, is surely Moral; They shall not shave their heads;
therefore the other part is Moral also; They shall not suffer their locks to
grow long.

THE Command of GOD requiring the Nazarites to nourish their Hair, is no
vindication of long Hair; but a forcible reason against it; which will appear,
if we consider two things.

1. SUCH Actions, as under their ordinary circumstances are Moral Evils; under
extraordinary circumstances, be very good: So for Brothers and Sisters to join
in Wedlock, as Adam's Children did: For the Brother, among the Jews, to Marry
his Brother's Wife: So, for a Physician, to give an intoxicating Potion: to do
that which ordinarily, is contrary to a Rule of Modesty. One Command, in many
cases, must give way to another.

2. THE Nazarites were to deny themselves many comforts, to show us that we
should be mortified to the things of this World. Upon a Religious account, they
were to abstain from Wine and Raisins, etc. and upon that account, they were to
deny themselves of that neatness and comeliness in wearing their Hair, that was
a duty in other Men.

IT was a part of the Calamity that came upon Nebuchadne^^ar, that his Hairs
were grown like Eagles Feathers, and his Nails like birds ^laws, Dan. 4.23.

[The following Letter, written by the same learned Author many years ago, may
be here inserted.]

SIR,
IN compliance with your desire, I now send you my Thoughts concerning
Periwigs. I cannot see sufficient Reason to condemn them Universally. GOD does
allow Man, by Art to supply the defects of Nature. Hair artificially prepared
may supply as fully and innocently, the want of Hair, as any other matter
artificially prepared.

But yet I judge that there is abundance of Sin, in this Country, in wearing
Perwigs. Particularly, in these two things;

First, When Men do wear them needlessly, in compliance with the Fashion. Their
own Hair (...) sufficient for all those Ends that GOD has given Hair for. One
Man's Hair is comlier than another's. And so it is with their Faces, and
Bodies. Some cut off their Own because of the Color; it is Red or Gray; Some,
because it is Straight; Some, because it is Frizel'd; and some, only, because
it is their Own.

Secondly, When those that may have just occasion to wear them, do wear them
in such a Ruffianly way, as it would be utterly unlawful to wear their own
Hair in. Some of them are of an un^^asonable Length; and generally, they are
extravagant as to their Bus^yness.

We have no certain way to pass a Judgment upon this Practice, but by comparing
it with such general Moral Rules, as we are bound to Observe. It renders it
somewhat Suspicious, that the Practice did at first take it is rise from very
Corrupt Men; and that it was long, before it did obtain among those that were
godly. But if it disagree with Moral Rules; it is altogether to be Condemned.

The Practice seems, to me, to have these four Evils in it:

1. It is an Uncontentedness with that Provision that GOD has made for Men. GOD
has generally given Men such Hair as is co^ly; and a sufficiency of it. And
when it is so, Men have cause to be well satisfied. When GOD has given to Men
such Hair as is suitable to answer the Ends of Hair; It seems to be a Despising
of the Goodness of GOD, to cut it off, in compliance with a Vain Fashion. If
GOD lay Affliction upon them; they may use lawful Methods, to moderate the
Affliction: But these Men, the GOD be Bountiful to them, are not Contented to
be at His Finding.

2. It is Wastifullness. Abundance of Money is needlessly spent in maintaining
this Practice. Some of the Men that use it, have need enough of the Money other
ways; and lay themselves under Temptation by this Extravagancy, either to
oppress Men in their Dealings^ or to be more Pinching in other Cases, than they
ought to be. And those Men that have more plentiful Estates, have no Liberty to
use them according to their own Pleasure. That Money that may be laid out to
Advantage, should not be spent Unprofitably.

3. It is Pride: they do it to make a great S^^^; It is from an Affectation of
Swaggering; it is an Affecting of Finery that there is no just occasion for.
They count it Brave to be in the Fashion; crave the honor of being counted as
Gallant as others. It is too much Flanting.

4. It is contrary to Gravity. There is a Masculine Gravity that should appear
in the Countenances of Men, discovering a Solemnity of Spirit. But this
Fractice is Light, and Effeminat. Tho it make a Show; yet it takes much away
from the Presence of Men. Such Curipsity discovers much Vanity in the Mind; and
makes others to esteem the more lightly of them; and not to show that Respect
to them. This Practice makes them look, as if they were more disposed to Court
a Maid; than to bear upon their Hearts the weighty Concernments of GOD's
Kingdom.

But I am fearful that the Stream runs so strong this way, that no Endeavors
will work a Public ^^^ormation; until GOD does give Men another Spirit; or lay
them under other Dispensations. Yet it may not be without good Effect on some
particular Persons, if a Testimony be born against the Practice; if not to
Reduce any; yet to Prevent some that were in danger.

Thus Sir, I have endeavored to give some Satisfaction to your Desires; which
I hope you will take in good part, from your Servant.

N -- H.
July, 29. 1701.

Q. V. WHAT Night does belong to the Sabbath?

Answ. THE Night before the Sabbath Day. These two Considerations clear it.

1. THAT from the Beginning, the Sabbath began in the Evening. That Text, Lev.
23.32. -- From evening to evening, ye shall celebrate your Sabbath, does
immediately respect the day of Expiation; but that is to be kept as a Sabbath;
from evening, to evening. But this does further evidence it, because the First
Sabbath began in the evening. When the Evening and the Morning had made the
Sixth Day: as soon as the Sixth day was past, the Sabbath began: and so it
continued, during the Time of the Old Testament. And if the Christian Sabbath
began in the Morning, the seventh part of time is not kept.

2. THOUGH the Resurrection of CHRIST made a change of the day; yet there is no
reason that the Time of the day when He rose, should make a change of the Time
of the day wherein the Sabbath should begin.

(1.) BECAUSE the Scripture does not assure us in what exact Time CHRIST rose:
if GOD had appointed that we should begin the Sabbath then, He would have given
us light to know when that Time was: for the Scripture is a perfect Rule. But
none of the Penmen do design to tell us the Exact Time when CHRIST Rose.

(2.) IT is not the manner of Men, when Solemnities are kept in Memory of some
great thing that happened on such a day, to have a regard to the Time of the day;
as in keeping Princes Birth-days. So among the Jews, they had no regard as to
the Circumcising of their Children, to the Time of day when they were born. If
a Child were born on the Sabb^th, an hour before Sunset, it might be
Circumcised the next Sahbath an hour after Sunrise, when it was not completely
seven days old.

(3.) WE have no reason to think that in the first Institution of the Sabbath,
GOD had a respect to the very Moment of Time when He ceased from the Work of
Creation. The Woman was the last Creature that was made on the Sixth day; but
we have no ground to think that She was made the last hour of that day. The
sixth day was a working day: but we have no reason to think, that GOD was
creating all that day.

Q. AT what Time of the Evening does the Sabbath begin?

Answ. JUST at Sunset. There be some in this Country that begin the Sabbath in
the dusk of the Evening, when the Darkness prevails over the Light. They ground
their Opinion on that Scripture, Neh. 13.19. And it came to pass when the gates
of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates
should be shut, etc. But this place does not prove their Opinion; For the word
in the Original is, When the gates of Jerusalem begar to be shaded; which might
be some considerable time before the Sabbath; Jerusalem being compassed with
Mountains.

(...) -- i. (...) (...) occafum, disp^cret a portis (...) boc cft, tempestwe
admodum; quis sol Propter adversos (...), celerius ill^ (...) occultalat^. Hoc
(...) precepit, rati(...) bakens legis, Lev. 23.32. Tremel. and Jun.

-- Come prime le form di Jerusalem (...) (...). -- Italian Bible.

-- (...) l' (...) de (...) vici^ -- Margin.

-- als ie poer^ (...) Jerusalem sch^ gaven, (...) -- Dutch Bible.

Nebe^ (...) regloit sur l' c^ des ports de i^ rille. I'ar David Martin.

Quin Moses primo, versper^ hic, et in c^teris d^, (...); Videtus same vesp^
sen (...), primafuiffe; (...) et Hebrai (...), et deintep^ supp^ jubcutur sues
ferias and dies pa^, a ^espers in vesper^. -- Eug^, (...) pleris^ nostror^, put
at in boc prims die finsse (...) resper^, (...) in alijs; quis (...) sit f^is
noctis, (...) antem non pracesserit, (...) init^ distinctionis (...) a (...).
-- sed boc aperte est coutra expressa terb^ Mesis, qui it^ non secus in (...)
-- Chrys^stomus iniqui^ ost Jud^ contendentibus a vesper^ diens anspicandum,
quafi (...) a luce primus bic dies inceperit: sed rat^bus (...) ag^t. Save cum
Ju^ (...) a patribu^ (...) ba^t diem (...) and supp^ a vespera; et Meses ^
Domin^ ita illos jubeat; sic Mosen put^rim a patribus (...) diem pri^ (...)
capisse, et hanc deinceys mercm servatum. --

MERCERUS in Genesis 1.5. p. 14, 15.
BUT it is very manifest that the Sabbath begins at Sunset. The World being
made in the time of the Equinoctial; the first time of Darkness, and the first
time of Light, made the first Day -- Est ergo Synecdoche in vesp^ and mane: et
utramque intelligitur, non ut (...) siplex, sed ut terminus contim^tus. Vespera
igit^ et (...) protota duratione ac vicissitudine prims tenebro^ et (...), hic
accipitur: ut fitidem, ex vespera and mane, quod ex te^bris et lucc, ex nocte
et die factu^ esse diem (...). -- Qu^ritur, Cur vesper^ po^tur ante (...) die
fit indignior. Respondeo; Non est causa, quam multi afferunt, quod tespera sit
finis d^: mane fenis noctis: quasidicat Moses, Ex v^spera, i^ est, ex die (...)
per resperam; et ex mane, id est. ex nocte term^, per mane, suit does p^, Neque
(...) prima art ^fici^lis pracessit noctem: sed con^, nox prccessit diem: quia
tenc^ praccesserunt lucem: ut docet contextus. Causa vero aperta est, qum
(...), boc est, initium teneb^um and noctis prac^ (...), boc est, ^tium lucis
and diei prim^ (...). Teneb^ erim p^acesser^nt lucem; (...) die^, non Contra.
Non igitur min^, quo^ pr^, fuit tempore, id etiam prius no^. At que bac, (...)
dubio: prin^ at anticuissius est (...) na(...) disp^sitio a vespers ad
vesperam, seu cb occasu ad occasu^ lucir. Levit. 23.32. A vespera usque ad
vesperam quiescetis Sabbatho ve^ro. Quam Jud^, et p^imi p^puli (...), Itali,
(...), Silesij, body retinent. -- I^sdem plane terminis, vesper^ et mane, tam
primus, quam sequentes dies definiuntur. At dub^ non potest, dies^ habu^sse
n^ctem, et di^m artificalem: fu^sse boris 24. definitos Easdem ^gitur p^rtes,
^demquo sp^ pri^ dies babuit. Nox vero al^a ejus dari non potest, (...)
tencbras (...) Has (...) Deus vocavit noctem. E^go fine dubio dies primus
caepit ab init^ teneb^a^ (...) est, a (...) puncto Creationis (...) et abyssi:
et in lucis prima terminatione de^jt; quod spatiu^ (...) f^it 24. horarum:
Consequens est, tenebras sen nocie^ prim^ d^dec^ (...) du^sse; et luce^ seu
diem primam artific^alem, nocti ^ualem fuisse. Est enim ^dus, omnium consens^
(...) actumnal: conditus. DAVID PAREUS in Genesis 4 p. 41, 42. See Mr. William
Pry^'s Differtation concerning the true Time of the Inchoation and
Determination of the LORD'S-DAY-SABBATH, which was compiled in the Year,
1633-and Printed at London, 1655.


AND when the Sun set on the sixth Day, there were six days complete, and the
Sabbath began. And it is determined by GOD, that then it is Even, when the Sun
is set. Lev. 22.6. 7. The Seal which has touched any such, shall be unclean
until even, and shall not eat of the holy things, unless be wash his flesh with
water; and when the Sun is down he shall be clean. The like is Deuteronomy. 23.11.
When evening ^eth ex, he shill wash himself with water; and when the Sun is
down, he shall come into the camp again. And it was counted both by the Jews
and Heathens, that when the Sun was down, the Day was at an end. Judge. 14.18.
The men of the city said thas to him on the seventh day before the Sun went
down, What is sweeter than honey? Had the Sun been down, they had lost their
wager. 2 Sa^ 3.3^. David s^are, saying, so do God to me, end more also, if I
taste ^ead or ought else, till the Sa^ be down. Exodus 22.3.

Q. VI. IS not Unfaithfulness in Officers, and private Persons, a Provocation?

A. Undoubtedly it is. We may suppose that Magistrates and Ministers, were they
informed, would bear a due Testimony against Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, and
other fins. But such things are seldom punished, for want of information. Many
persons are bound by Church Covenant to watch over others, and Officers are
bound by ^ath, to inquire into Disorders, and give information. But many times
there is a fame of such things, but seldom Complaint is made to Authority.
Possibly, some Persons are obnoxious themselves, and are afraid that if they
bring out others, that they shall be brought out.

BUT the great Reason of this is the want of a Spirit of Religion: Men are not
concerned for the Honor of GOD, the preventing of Judgments, and the Recovery
of their Brethren. They are asraid that others will be disgus^ed, that it will
be a ^dation of ill will and Contention. Officers don't consider the solemn
Bonds that they are under, and the Account they must give to GOD of their
Oaths. It may be, they Pray that Sin may be parged out of the Land; and that
Religion may flourish; but they are notoriously negligent of doing what GOD and
^

Q. VH. IS not the neglect of bringing others to the Profession of Religion, a
Provocation?

A. IT must needs be. It was foretold of CHRIST, that all nations shall call
him blessed, Psalm. 72.7. GOD promised to Him that He (...) give Him the Heathen
for his luberitance, Psalm. 2.8. And it is a part of that Love and Duty which we
owe to JESUS CHRIST, and to the Souls of Men, as we have opportunity, to be
prevailing with other People to give entertainment to the Gospel. Great pains
were taken that way in the first Ages of Christianity, and with great Success:
But there is great reason to fear, that we have not answered GOD's expeclation,
(...) ^ay.

1. THERE has been a neglect of bringing some of our own Nation to the
Profession of the Gospel. Many in, and about Rhode Island, and in the
Naraganset-Country, have fallen into Heresy; and some almost into Heathenism.
And we have been too much unconcerned about reducing them unto the Right way:
We have reason to reflect on those Words to the Shepherds of Israel, Ezekiel.
34.4. The diseased have ye (...) strengthened, neuber have ye bealed that which
was sick; neither have ye bound up that which was broken; neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away; neither have ye sought that which was
left. There has been something done of late Years, at ^ho^e-Island and the
places adjucent; and it has not been without Effect. But it was too long before
it was taken in hand, and has not been followed with sufficient Application: If
we had done much more, it would have been more Acceptable to GOD. When the
Kingdom of CHRIST does not flourish, Satan's Kingdom will prevail. Our
Diligence might have prevented the growth of Atheism and Profaneness, and have
preserved many from falling in with the Apostasy.

2. THERE has been a neglect to bring the Indians to the Profession of the
Gospel. Something has been done through the Piety of particular Men; and at the
Cost of some in Old England; But we are reproached abroad for our Negligence.
Many Men have been more careful to make a Prey of them, then to gain them to
the Knowledge of CHRIST. The King in the CHARTER says, that the Undertakens did
profess it to be their principal design to bring the Natives to the Knowledge
of GOD. But we have very much failed of prosecuting that Design to Effect. We
must bring them to Civility and to learn our Language. Paul says to the
Corinthians, I seek not yours but you, 2 Cor. 12.14. The Reverse is too true of
New England. It may be, on that account GOD has made them to be a scourge to
us. GOD says to Ecekiel, Thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech, and
of an hard language -- Surely had I sent thee to them, they would have bearkned
unto thee, Ezekiel. 3.5, 6. We have reason to fear, that we are much to blame for
their continuance in their Heathenism.

3. WE have Neglected to bring Servants to the Profession of Religion. Some Men
are careful to make their Servants learn their Catechism, to make them attend
Family, and Public Worship. But Servants should be brought to the Profession
of Religion; they need to practice Religion, as well as their Masters; and
their Masters are bound to take care of their Souls as well as their Bodies.
GOD required Abraham to circumcise his Servants, as well as his Children, Genesis
17.12, 13. Here you may observe two things. 1. GOD says, They must needs be
circumcised. 2. GOD makes this to be a Token of his Covenant with Abraham and
his Posterity. If they had proper Helps, they might be as forward in Religion,
as the English. It has been the misery of New England, that under a fear of
polluting the Ordinances; they have neglected proper means to make Men godly.

Q VIII. DID we any wrong to the Indians in buying their Land at a small price?

A. 1. THERE was some part of the Land that was not purchased, neither was
there need that it should; it was vacuum domicilium; and so might be possessed
by virtue of GOD's grant to Mankind, Genesis 1.28. And God blessed them, and God
said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue
it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over every living thing that moves upon the earth. The Indians made no use
of it, but for Hunting. By GOD's first Grant Men were to subdue the Earth. When
Abraham came into the Land of Canaan, he made use of vacant Land as he pleased:
so did Isaac and Jacob. (a) Genesis 1.28. Subdue] By keeping it in a Bats of
subj^, and (...) to M^n: Annot. The three first Verses of the Ninth Chapter of
Genesis, are the best Commenter, on this place. And GOD Messed North and his
fous, and sold unto them. Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth.
And the Fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the
earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moves upon the earth, and
upon all the fi^es of the sea; into your (...) are they delivered. Every moving
thing that lives shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given
you all things.

The Indians did out the Beasts of the ^rest, and clothed themselves with
their Skins. Then they used the (...) Wild. Cats, and Welves, and Bears; as
well as the Deer, and Bever, and other Animals. With their Bours and Anows and
diverse Strstagems, they subdued them, and kept them under. By Fowling, and
Fishing they got a great part of their Livelihood. The Shall Fish were their
standing Dish. They also ^de (...) of Ches^s, (...), Wa^ts, A^s, (...),
Whordeberties, and Ground^ts.

They made themselves confortable Houses or Tents, covering, them with Mats, or
Barks of Trees. These houble Houses were adorned with the Pictures of Animals
ingeniously drawn. But the chief Ornament of them was Hos^lity, which was truly
excellent. They were Orbicular; and the Fa^ being in the Middl^ conveyed With
to the subabit arts round about, and (...) the defects of then ^oathing. That
they night pass the Ri^, and Bays; they made themselves conomient (...) or
Cannon with the Rind of Birch-Trees, vib'd with Cedar.

Morcover they had pleasant Fields of Indian Corn and Beans, and Squashes;
which being peachased by the English at their first Coming, was a Relief to
them. They bad no Oxen, nor Horses, nor Iron: so that it may be rather wondered
at, that they went so far in their Tillege; than that they proceeded no
further. Their forrowful Circumstances demanded Pity. Prove. 17.5.
Whosoever mocketh the Poor, reproacheth his Maker. The Obligation Men are under to
subdue the Earth, must be consistent with the Rule Recorded, Mat. 20.15. Is it
not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Is thine eye evil because I am
good? It would be very Bad busbandry indeed, for an industrious Man to oust
(...) sothful Neighbor, and seize upon his Field for himself, under a pietence
of M^ing it better. The Owners of Fore^s, and Parks in Great Britain would be
Offended, if poor People should offer to enter upon them, and Plough them up;
and then (...) that they were well Entitled so to do by reason of their Better
Improvement of them.




2. THE Indians were well contented that we should fit down by them. And it
would have been for great Advantage, both for this World, and the Other, if
they had been wise enough to make use of their Opportunities. It has been
common with many People, in planting this World since the Flood, to admit
Neighbors, to sit down by them.

3. THOUGH we gave but a small Price for what we bought; we gave them their
demands, we came to their Market, and gave them their price; and indeed, it was
worth but little: And had it continued in their hands, it would have been of
little value. It is our dwelling on it, and our Improvements, that have made it
to be of Worth. (b) The (...) of the Indian Lands, may (...) the (...) to the
(...) for a (...); which (...) be what the (...) of (...) of England. But where
shall we find such a Noble ^air for Buying and S^ing, (...) ^

The Land (...) the (...) of the (...). They indeed by their (...) made it to
be of much (...). The Land was a good Land, a Land of Rivers of Water, of (...)
that spring (...) of Va^ and Hills; a Land that (...) and (...) at many or true
(...) of the (...), of Coundy (...) and (...) as (...) me English (...) follow
(...).

(...).




Q. IX. IS not the Multiplying of S^its at Law a Provocation?

A. IT must needs be so: It is a Sign of Contention, and a Cause of Contention.
Moses complains of it, Deuteronomy. 1.12. How can I ^y self alone bear your cumbrance,
and your burden, and your strife? And it occasions a great deal of Expense: and
great Loss of Time. It is in this case generally as it is in War, that one
party, if not both, are to blame, 1 Cor. 6.6.

1. SOMETIMES it rises from the Injustice or Unmercifulness of the Plaintiff.
The King of the Ammonites challenged what was not his due, Judge. 12.12. And the
Servant did very ill, that ^ook his fellow servant by the throat for a small
debt, Mat. 18.28.

2. SOMETIMES from Dishonesty, or Disingenuity of the Defendant. Many Men lie
shamefully in Debt, and break their (...), which is a just Provocation to
others to Sue them; They bring others under such necessity, that they will be
great sufferers, if they do not seek their Remedy at the Law. The Rule is, That
we owe no man any thing but Love, Romans 13.8.

4. SOMETIMES through the greediness of Lawyers: the more Men contend at Law,
the more they gain and they stir up strise among Neighbors: and when Persons
are Cast, persuade them to Appeal; say to them, as Absalom in another cafe, 2 Samuel 15.3. See, thy matters are good and right.

Quest. X. IS not a spirit hankering after Ceremonies that are not Instituted
by GOD, a Provocation?

A. YES, because it is contrary to the Second Commandment: Exodus 20.4. Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.

1. THIS is an Arrogating a Power that GOD has not given to Men. It may be
said to them that do it, Who gave you this Authority? Deoency, and Order may be
without any new Ceremonies: Jerebeam was taxed for assuming a Power that did
not belong to him: 1 King. 12.33. So be affered upon the alter which be had
made in Bethel, the fifteenth day of the Eighth Month, even in the Month which
he had devised of his own heart --.

2. IT is a Reflecti on on the Wisdom of GOD; as if they could Mend His
Institutions: As if they could find out a Better way of Worship, than He has
Appointed, Col. 2.23.

3. IT is a Presuming on a Blessing without a Divine Warrant: Math. 15.9.
Teaching doctrines [ which are] commandments of men.

THERE be many other Practices that are plainly Contrary to the Light of Nature.

HOOPED Petticoats have something of Nakedness; Mixed Dancings are incentives to
Lust; Compotations in Private Houses, is a Drunken Practice.

FINIS.
BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green: Sold by Samuel Gerrish at his Shop
near the Brick Meeting House in Corn Hill. June 25th. 1722.

WEDNESDAY, January 1. 1701. A little before Break-a-Day, at Boston of the
Massachusetts.
ONCE more! Our GOD, vouchsafe to Shine:
Tame Thou the Rigor of our Clime.
Make haste with thy Impartial Light,
And terminate this long dark Night.
Let the transplanted ENGLISH Vine
Spread further still: still Call it Thine^
Prune it with Skill: for yield it can
More Fruit to Thee the Husbandman.
Give the poor INDIANS Eyes (...)
The Light of Life: and set them free;
That they Religion may profess,
Denying all Ungodliness.
From hardened JEWS the Vail remove,
Let them their Martyred JESUS love;
And Homage unto Him afford,
Because He is their Rightful LORD.
So false Religions shall decay,
And Darkness fly before bright Day:
So Men shall GOD in CHRIST adore;
And worship Idols vain, no more.
So ASIA, and AFRICA,
EUROPA, with AMERICA;
All Four, in Consort joined, shall Sing
New Songs of Praise to CHRIST our KING.

