True Piety THE BEST POLICY For Times of WAR. A SERMON Preached at
Boston-Lecture on August 16. 1722. soon after a DECLARATION of WAR, against the
Eastern Indians and Rebels.

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston, N. E

Lev. 26. v. 3, 5, 6, 7, 15, 17. If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my
commandments and do them, -- ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in
your land safely. And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid, -- neither shall the sword go through your land And
ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. And
if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, and so
that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant -- I
will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they
that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none persueth.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Excellency the Gov. and COUNCIL.
1722.

PRinted by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. Joliah Willard,
Secr.

True Piety the best Policy, for Times of WAR.
DEUTERONOMY. XXIII. 9. When the Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep
thee from every wicked thing.


THESE words are a divine direction, given to a covenant professing People of
GOD. In the Words, we have one thing supposed, viz. That a professing people
are sometimes obligd to go forth to War against their enemies. We have another
thing commanded, viz. When they do so, they should keep themselves from every
wicked thing.

1. WE have one thing supposed, viz. That a professing people are sometimes
obliged to go forth to War against their enemies. GOD's People sometimes have
enemies molesting, disturbing, assaulting of them; striving to rob and spoil
'em of their substance, and to captivate or destroy their Persons. As Men's
carnal minds are enmity against God, (Romans 8.7.) so they naturally are against
one another also. Man's fallen, corrupt nature, is deceitful above all things
and desperately wicked; it contains the Seed and root of all manner of
wickedness against Men, as well as of Irreligion toward GOD. Out of Men's
wicked hearts, proceed evil Thoughts and Murders, Mat. 15.19. Unregenerate
wicked Men, are the Children of the Devil, his lusts they will do; and he is a
Murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. Men's hearts are naturally full of all
unrighteousness, wickedness, maliciousness, envy, murder, debate, malignity;
they are implacable, unmerciful, Romans 1.29 -- 31. In their flesh there dwells no
good thing; and what are the works of the flesh? Why these are some of 'em.
Gal. 5.20, 21. Hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
envyings, murders. Men under the reigning power of Sin, how do they live? Hear
what the Apostle says: Tit. 3.3. We our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful and hating one another. Such carriage among Men, is the genuine
product of corrupt nature where it prevail, and reigns. Jam. 4.1. From whence
come wars and fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts that
war in your members. The prevalency of Men's cursed lusts, often produces
quarrellings, fightings between particular Persons, in Families, and between
Countries, Kingdoms, Nations. Wicked Nations are often enemies to and they
often War against one another. And some or other of such Nations, are often
open enemies to GOD's professing People, seeking to spoil, subdue and overthrow
them. This truth is so plain from Scripture and experience, that I need not say
any thing for the demonstrating of it.

AND when GOD's People are assaulted, molested, threatened with ruin by their
enemies; they are obliged to stand on their own defense, and to endeavor the
conquering of those, who unjustly strive to conquer and destroy them. GOD has
sometimes expressly commanded His People, to fight against and destroy their
wicked enemies. GOD said to Moses concerning Sihon King of the Amorites; Deuteronomy.
2.24. Contend with him in Battle. GOD gave an express command to King Saul, 1 Samuel 15.3. Now go and smite Amatek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and
spare them not. There are Wars of the Lord, (Numb. 21.14. 1 Chronicles. 5.22.) and
Battles of the Lord, (1 Samuel ^5.28.) and a Curse has been denounced against
some, for not coming to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the mighty, Judge. 5.23. It Is as reasonable, and often as necessary in these
days, as it was in former ones; for GOD's People to fight against, and
endeavor to subdue and destroy, their wicked enemies. They Are indeed
sometimes, yea often, obliged to send forth their Host, their Armies to fight
against their wicked unrighteous enemies.

BUT thus much may suffice for the thing supposed in our Text, viz. That a
professing People are sometimes obliged to go forth to War against their
enemies.

2. WE have another thing commanded, viz. When they do so, they should keep
themselves from every wicked thing. When GOD's People are engaged in War, then
they should keep themselves from every wicked thing. Then, it is not to be
taken exclusively of other times, as tho at other times they might Indulge
themselves in wicked practices: no Indeed, for they should continually,
perpetually keep themselves from every wicked thing. But then especially they
should be careful to shun all wickedness, when their Host goes forth to War;
lest by Indulging any wickedness, they should provoke GOD to frown on, and
fight against them. We have general Precepts, Pray always, Pray without
ceasing. Continuing Instant in Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.1 These 5.17. Romans 12.12. Yet
GOD more particularly says, Call on me in the day of trouble, If any be
afflicted let him pray, Psalm. 50.15. Jam. 5.13. In our affliction we should
seek God early. So that we should Pray always, and yet especially and
peculiarly apply our selves to this duty in time of Trouble and Affliction. So,
we should be always careful to avoid every wicked thing; and should yet be
peculiarly and especially careful to avoid it, when Engaged in War against our
enemies.

WHEN the Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every
wicked thing. It may Imply,

1. THAT in time of War, Persons are in peculiar danger of Indulging themselves
in vicious practices. Soldiers are apt to give themselves such a loose, to
take such a liberty in unbecoming Words and Actions; which possibly they would
be ashamed or afraid to do, if at home and among their usual Neighbors. Almost
every condition and business of Life, has it is special or peculiar Snares and
Temptations attending of it; a Soldier's calling is attended with very great
and dangerous ones. Tho Soldiers have strong Obligations to be Singularly
Pious, yet they have strong Temptations also to be very wicked; and they are
frequently and shamefully overcome by their Temptations. John Baptist seems to
have cautioned Soldiers, against the evils they were most peculiarly in danger
of committing; for when they asked him, saying, What shall we do? He replied,
Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. Luke 3.14. So that the peculiar danger of Indulging wickedness, in time
of War, might be one occasion of this special command, then keep thee from
every wicked thing. It may Imply,

2. THE very great Importance and Necessity, of keeping our selves from every
wicked thing in time of War. A wicked thing, What is that? Why it is any thing,
every thing that is contrary to God's Law. 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits Sin
transgresses also the Law, for Sinis a transgression of the Law. Every thing
that is contrary to GOD's Law, is Wicked, Sinful, and therefore hateful and
loathsome to GOD. For Sin is the abominable thing whith He hates, Jer. 44.4. He
is of purer eyes than to behold evil, he cannot look upon Iniquity, Hab. 1.13.
And this Infinitely great and glorious GOD to whom Sin is so hateful. He
orders, overrules, governs all things as He will; even all things in the
Armies of Heaven and among the Inhabitants of the earth, none can stay his
hand, or say unto him, what do thou? Dan. 4.35. Victories and Defeats in
Battle, even all events of Peace and War, are Entirely at GODS dispose, He
orders them as He will. Therefore it highly becomes a professing People Engaged
in War, to keep in good terms with GOD, to keep themselves from every wicked
thing; lest otherwise they should provoke Him to appear and fight against them.
If they fight against Him by their Sins, they may justly fear that He Will fight
against them in His Providence. Therefore, when the Host goes forth against
thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. Keep thee, this may
refer both to the Soldiers that go forth to War, and to the rest of the People
that stay at home.

1. TO the Soldiers that go forth to War. Those who go out to War, go in
danger of their lives. It Is true, if we stay at home, live in peace, seem to be
most safe and secure and free from danger, yet we are liable to Death. Some
grievous Sickness, sudden fit, or unexpected accident may in a little while
turn us out of the World. Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of tomorrow, thou
know not what a day may bring forth. Jam. 4.14. Ye know not what shall be on
the morrow: for what is your life? It is even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away. Tho all Persons are thus liable to Death,
and they know not how soon of suddenly it may overtake them; yet those who go
out to War, are in more apparent eminent danger of their lives. They Jeopard
their lives to the Death in the high places of the Field, Judge. 5.18. They put
their lives in their bands, as it is said of Jeptha and of David when they went
forth to Battle, Judge. 12.3. I Sam. 19.5. When Persons are Engaged in Battle,
tho they are never so Healthy, Stout, Strong, yet they know not but that the
Sword, Spear, Hatchet or Bullet of the enemy may dispatch 'em in a Moment, and
send their Souls to an endless Eternity. Surely, Persons in such danger, if
they will but think, consider, and show themselves Men, must needs reckon
they are strongly obliged to keep themselves from every wicked thing. They
should keep themselves not only from Robbing, Stealing, Profane Cursing and
Swearing Drunkenness, and such gross Scandalous Transgressions, but even from
all known Sins as much as possible, whether Open or Secret, of Omission or
Commission, whether more Immediately against GOD, or more Immediately against
Men. Their Military condition, Circumstances and Services, cannot weaken their
obligations to Obey that GOD who is a Man of War, the God of Armies, the Lord
of Hosts, the Captain of their Salvation, Exodus 13.3. 1 Samuel 17.45. Heb. 2.10.
They should not dare to Indulge themselves in any known wickedness, in any
thing displeasing and provoking to GOD; therefore they should not dare to
Indulge themselves in Impenitence or Unbelief, than which nothing can be more
provoking to GOD, or hurtful to themselves. Luke 13.5. Except ye repent ye
shall perish. Mark 16.16. He that believes not, shall be damned. They should
therefore be most speedy, hearty, sincere in Repenting of all their Sins, in
Believing and Trusting in JESUS CHRIST our LORD for Pardon and Salvation. This,
even this is the great, indispensable, most necessary and profitable Duty
Incumbent on all that are acquainted with the Gospel; and it cannot be neglected
by professed Christians going out to War, without the highest madness and folly
that can be. It Is extremely unsafe, to go out to War with the guilt of all our
manifold, aggravated Transgressions lying on our Souls. If we fight against Men
with our Bodies, and against GOD by our Sins, our danger is unutterable,
inconceable. Who ever hardened himself against God, and prosperd? Job 9.3. Do
we provoke the Lord to Jealousy, are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. What,
shall we set briars and thorns in Battle array against GOD? Shall we dare to
run on the thick (...) of His Buckler? We are but (...) our own destruction,
while by our Sins we are provoking an Infinitely Holy and Powerful GOD. It Is
true, If GOD be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.3^. But on the other
hand, if GOD be against us, if He Is our (...) for our continuing in Sin (for He
(...) Psalm. 5.5.) then who can be for us? Who can protect and defend us, and
render us safe? Surely none can. Those therefore who go to fight against Men,
should take utmost care to be at Peace with GOD, Those who Jeopard their lives
in the high places of the Field (or on the Seas) should be most careful to keep
themselves from every wicked thing, most careful that they don't fight against
GOD by their Sins. They should to be sure be sincere and vigorous in the
exercise of every Grace, in the practice of every Duty; that so they may please
and glorify that GOD, whose favor is most needful for them; even that GOD, in
whose favor is life, and whose loving kindness is better than life, Psalm.
30.5. and 63.3. I might further say, those who go forth to War, should take
utmost care to be at Peace with GOD, to avoid whatever provokes Him, and to do
all they can to Please Him, for

1. It Is GOD alone can (...) 'em Skill, Wisdom, Prudence rightly to manage the
Military business they are Engaged in. Some Skill and Prudence is needful for
the right managing of any business whatsoever; and none but GOD, the Father of
Lights and Fountain of wisdom, can give it. It Is said of the Husbandman: Isai.
28.26. His GOD does Instruct him to discretion, and does teach him. Dan. 2.21.
-- He gives Wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know Understanding.
There Is much Skill and Prudence needful, for a due managing of Military
Matters, and GOD alone can give it, for He Is the Giver of every good gift, ^am.
1.17. David was wonderfully furnished with Military Skill (as well as courage)
and he thankfully adored GOD as the Author of it. Psalm. 144.1. Blessed be the
Lord my Strength, who teaches my hands to War, and my fingers to Fight.

2. It Is GOD alone can preserve their Health. Warlike exercises require healthy
Bodies; it cannot be expected that Sickly Soldiers should do much. Well,
Soldiers are sometimes crowded in Heaps, as it were, in Ships, or Garrisons,
sometimes exposed to great Heats, Colds, Rains, to Hard fare, Hard lodging,
Hard marches, (they are often obliged to endure hardness) by which their Health
is endangered. And, it is GOD alone that can preserve their endangered Health.
He Is the Healer of His People, the Health of their Countenance, (Exodus 15.26.
Psalm. 42.^^.) it is His Prerogative to make sore and to bind up, to wound and
heal, to kill and make alive, and none can deliver out of his hand, Deuteronomy. 32.39.

3. It Is GOD alone can give Courage to act properly in Military Affairs. A
Cowardly Soldier is but a poor tool indeed, likely to do more hurt than good;
more likely to discourage his Partners and Fellow Soldiers, than to destroy
enemies, Deuteronomy. 20.8. Good courage and resolution is necessary to constitute a
good Soldier; and none but GOD can give such courage. All hearts are in GOD's
hand, He Is the GOD of the Spirits of all flesh; He can so dispirit and
discourage Men, that they shall fear where no fear is, and the sound of a
shaken leaf shall chase them, Lev. 26.36. Small dangers, or appearances or
suspicions of danger, shall fill 'em with Frights, Fears, Terrors. On the other
hand, GOD can Encourage and Spirit Persons to undertake great things, tho
they are very hazardous. Prove. 28.1. The righteous is bold as a Lion. Psalm.
60.12. Through God we shall do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down
our enemies. GOD can fill Persons with such boldness and courage, as that Five
shall chase an hundred, (Lev. 26.8.) Yea, One shall chase a thousand, Josh.
23.10. When King Saul heard how the Ammonites Insulted those of Jabish Gilead,
it is said, The Spirit of the Lord came upon him; and then he took speedy
courageous methods to relieve his Insulted, threatened Subjects, 1 Samuel 11.6.
etc. Through Faith some have subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in fight, turned to
flight the Armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11.33, 34. The lively exercise of Faith
in GOD, fills the Soul with holy courage. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? -- Though an host should encamp against me, mine heart shall
not fear, etc. Psalm. 27.1, 3. Lively Faith works great courage; and whence
comes this Faith? Why it is the gift of GOD, Ephesians. 2.8.

4. It Is GOD alone can Protect Persons, and Preserve their Lives in Battle.
Every Arrow and Bullet that is Shot, is governed by the same Providence, that
directed the Syrian Arrow between the Joints of Ahab's harness to kill him, 1
King. 22.34. Whoever the Soldier levels at when he Shoots, yet the Bullet hits
the Mark that Providence aims at, and none other. Every Bullet that flies, tho
seemingly at random, is as much under the Government of Providence, as the Sea
to which GOD says; Job 38.11. Hitherto shall thou come but no further, and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed. GOD alone can protect in times of danger, Men
cannot defend themselves. GOD is a shield, Psalm. 84.11. A shield was a defensive
piece of Armor, to secure Persons against destructive blows, from Swords,
Spears, etc. Well, with reference to the Warlike dangers, the I salmist called
GOD, his Buckler, Deliverer, Shield, Fortress, High Tower, etc. Psalm. 18.2. and
144.2. Yea, he said, Psalm. 140.7. O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation,
thou have covered my head in the day of Battle. He might have had his head
broke, nay, cut off in Battle, if GOD had not covered and defended it. Tho some
trust in Chariots and some in Horses, yet we should remember the name of the
Lord our God, (Psalm. 20.7.) for none else but He can preserve us in danger. Tho
the Horse be prepared against the day of Battle; yet safety is of the Lord,
Prove. 21.31. Men may fight, none but GOD can defend and protect.

5. It Is GOD alone can give Success in War. As, whoever Plants or Waters, yet
GOD alone gives the Increase, (1 Cor. 3.6, 7.) So, whoever Wars, and Fights,
yet GOD alone can give Success. The likeliest means often fail. The race is not
always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, Eccl. 9.11. Weapons are held
in the hands of Men, Victory is held in GOD's hand, He gives it to whom He
will. 1 Samuel 17.47. The Battle is the Lord's. 2 Chronicles. 20.15. The Battle is not
yours but GOD's. The Lord is mighty in Battle, (Psalm 24.8.) Therefore it is
nothing with him to help, whether with many or with them that have no power, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. The Army of the Syrians came with a small company of Men, and the
Lord delivered a very great Host into their hand, 2 Chronicles. 24.24. GOD can cause
even wounded Men, to arise and burn a City, Jer. 37.10. Gideon's three hundred
Men, with their Pitchers, Lamps, Trumpets; did fright, rout, and vanquish a
vast Army of the Midianites, Judge. chapter 7. Jonathan and his Armor-bearer,
routed and vanquished the Army of the Philistines; at least they two began the
matter, 1 Samuel 14. chapter If an Army is never so numerous, skillful, courageous,
never so well provided with all warlike-stores; yet they cannot command Success.
All events of Battles and Wars are Entirely at GOD's dispose; and He often
orders them quite contrary to the expectation of Men, possibly of most Men.

6. IF Men die in Battle, none but GOD can save their Souls. The Soul is more
worth than a World. Men can kill the body, are not able to kill the Soul; but
GOD can destroy both soul and body in hell, Mat. 10.28. So, GOD can Save the
Soul too, can pardon it is Sins (and will do so, if it penitently believes in
CHRIST) and take it safe to Heaven when it parts from the body. Good Men may
die in War, by the hands of enemies; godly King Josiah did so. But if the godly
should die in Battle, in the High Places of the Field, yet their Souls go as
safe to Heaven, as if, they would di'd quietly in their Beds surrounded with
attending, mourning Friends. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they
rest from their labors, their works follow them, Rev. 14.12. Their Death is
their gain, they go to be with Christ which is far better, Phil, 1.21, 23.

NOW since all these things are so, surely it becomes those who go forth to
War, to keep themselves from every wicked thing. If they have any thoughtful
serious regard to their own Personal safety, honor, usefulness, they should be
most careful to avoid every thing which might displease or provoke GOD, in
whose hand is their breath, and whose are all their ways; and who alone can
save or destroy. Nay, if they have any regard to the Welfare of those they
fight for, they should be careful to keep themselves from every wicked thing.
If those who go forth to War, should die in Battle, or be greatly blasted or
defeated; this might be greatly and variously hurtful to the People they are a
part of. They should not Indulge themselves in any wickedness, lest GOD blast
them, and therein blast those they represent, or act for. For tho GOD sometimes
prospers and succeeds wicked Men in Fighting against Enemies; yet such wicked
Men have no ground to expect Success. When Amaziah King of Judah was going to
War against the Edomites, he hired an hundred thousand Auxiliaries, even that
number of the Men of Israel; but a Prophet of GOD said to him, 2 Chronicles. 25.7. O
King, let not the Army of Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not with Israel,
to wit, with all the Children of Ephraim. As if the Prophet had said, Don't
employ 'em, don't let 'em go with you, because GOD is not with them. Having
greatly dishonored and provoked GOD, in worshipping the Idols Jeroboam had set
up (as well as by other wicked practices) GOD would not so honor 'em in His
Providence, as to use them as Instruments to obtain Victories for Judah. GOD
sometimes prospers business the letter, for the sake of Pious Instruments
employed; consider Jacob in managing Laban's Affairs; and Joseph, in managing
the Affairs of his Master in Egypt.

WELL, as these words, keep thee from every wicked thing, may refer to the
Soldiers that go forth to War; so they may refer,

2. TO the rest of the People, even those who stay at Home. Does our Host go
forth, our armed Men to Fight against our Enemies? (...) we who stay at Home,
should keep our selves from every wicked thing. We should be very studious and
careful to do so, not only for the Glory of God (which we should supreamly a^m
at, in all things, 1 Cor. 10.31.) but subordinately also,

1. FOR the sake of those who go forth to War. We Have heard already, that the
whole of their safety, welfare, usefulness depends entirely on GOD's Blessing,
His favorable Presence, Protection, Assistance. Well, Let us not by our Sins
provoke GOD to blast or frown upon, our Soldiers that go forth to Fight for
us. They are part of our selves, are of the same body politic with us, are our
Brethren,; our Bone and our Flesh; and they expose themselves to safeguard us,
hazard their own Lives to preserve ours. Justice and Gratitude requires, that
we should desire and seek their Welfare; therefore we should not by our Sins
provoke GOD to bring evil upon them. For the Sins of a professing People, GOD
often brings a blast on those they send forth to War. Why did GOD deliver a
very great Host of the Jews, into the hands of a small Company of Syrian
enemies? Why, 'twas because the Jews had forsaken the Lord God of their
Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 24.24. For the Sins of GOD's Professing People, he
threatened, That the Bows of their Enemies should dash their young men to
pieces, Isa. 13.18. So, Jer. 11.22. Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts,
behold I will punish you; the young men shall die by the sword. Let us take
heed therefore, that we don't by our Sins provoke GOD to defeat our Soldiers,
or give them up to the rage and will of our enemies. If we indulge our selves
in a Careless, Prayerless, Irreligious Life, in profane Cursing and Swearing,
in the abominable, Sin if Drunkenness (which is grown shamefully common) in
Lying, Stealing, fraudulent unrighteous Dealing, Malice, Envy, etc. I say, if
we indulge our selves in these, or any other known wicked Practices; what is
this but a Fighting against GOD by our Sins, and so a provoking Him to blast
and disappoint (if not to destroy) our Soldiers gone forth to Fight for us?
We Are unjust, perfideous, barbarous to those gone forth to Fight for us; if we
thus expose and hazard their welfare by our own wickedness. They are hazarding
their Lives for our welfare, let us not requite 'em evil for good; let us not
add to their danger, by adding to the number and weight of our own Iniquities.
We should not by our Sins provoke GOD to blast our Soldiers; but by earnest
Prayers, and an humble close walking with GOD, we should do what we can that He
may be a Shield and Buckler, Safety and Protection to them. As we should keep
our selves from every wicked thing, for the sake of those who go forth to War;
So we should,

2. FOR our own Sakes, or for the sake of this People in general. Are not our
Soldiers gone forth for us, for our good, to defend the Lives and Estates of
this People; and to Endeavor the destroying those who would destroy us? Are
not our Soldiers thus gone forth? And would we have them prosper and be
succeeded for our welfare? Then let us not by our Sins provoke that GOD, who
alone can blast or prosper all our undertakings. Let us so live, so act as to
please (and obtain the smiles of) that GOD, who does according to his pleasure
in Heaven, Earth, Sea and in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. Let us abhor that
which is evil, and cleave to that which is good, denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, let us live soberly, righteously, godlily in this present world,
Tit. 2.12. This in general is the best method we can take, to have our Arms
successful and prosperous. GOD said to Joshua, Josh. 1.7. Only be thou strong
and very courageous, that thou may observe to do according to all the law
which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to
the left, that thou may prosper whithersoever thou go. Let us obey GOD's
Laws, if we would prosper in our ways, Deuteronomy. 29.9. Keep therefore the words of
this Covenant and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. 2 Chronicles.
24.20. Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper?
Because ye have forsaken the Lord, He also has forsaken you. When we Sin
against GOD, we wrong our own Souls, lay our selves open to His revenges, and
walk in the way leading to shame and confusion. For, whatever we think of it,
yet it is true, That Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to
any People, Prove. 14.34. The usual method of GOD's dealing with His People, is
set forth. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while ye be with him, if ye seek
him he will be sound of you; but if you forsake him he will forsake you. Isai.
1.19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land, but
if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. What, wont you believe what the LORD says? His Mouth
declares (and He cannot lie, it is impossible for him to lie, Tit. 1.2. Heb.
6.18.) that if we rebel against Him, we shall be devoured with the Sword, or
some Judgments or other (if we walk contrary to Him, He Will walk contrary to us,
Lev. 26.27, 28.) For these things written aforetime, were written for our
learning, Romans 15.4. If our ways pleased the Lord, we might expect that He would
make our enemies to be at peace with us, (Prove. 16.7.) Or else subdue them
before us, Psalm. 81.13, -- 15. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways; I should soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned mine hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have
submitted themselves unto him, but their time should have endured for ever.

IF we hearken to GOD's Voice, and walk in His ways, we may humbly expect that
He Will Fight against and subdue our Enemies; but if we Fight against GOD by our
Sins, we may expect that He Will raise up, multiply and strengthen and assist
Enemies against us. It Is extremely foolish and dangerous (as well as unjust and
ungrateful) for a People to make War against Heaven by their wickedness;
therein they provoke One that is stronger than they, that can blast or destroy
them when He will, and use and succeed what Instruments He pleases against
them. Isai. 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did
not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient to his law. Jacob, Israel, even a professing
People of GOD were given up to the oppressing power of Enemies, Spoilers,
Robbers, because they were disobedient to GOD, and would not walk in his ways.
The Assyrian enemies, what were they, but only Instruments wherewith GOD
punished His rebellious People? Isai. 10.5, 6. O Assyrian, the rod of mine
anger, and the staff in their hand is mine Indignation. I will send him against
an hypocritical Nation, and against the People of my wrath will I give him a
charge, (they were commissioned by Heaven, as it were to this work) to take the
spoil and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
streets. Our enemies, the Indians at the Eastward how false, perfideous,
treacherous, rebellious, barbarous, wicked soever they are in themselves; yet
we are to look on them as the Rod of GOD's anger, the staff of his Indignation.
He may use what Rod He will, to chastise and correct us. If they are but a weak
rod, yet they are in a strong Hand that can strike hard, can whip us and make us
bleed terribly before He has done with us. It is GOD (and not only the Indian
enemies) that is contending with us, managing a controversy with us, bringing a
sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, (Lev. 26.25.) Wicked Instruments
are but His Rod, His Sword. Psalm. 17.13. The wicked which is thy Sword. Would
we therefore that GOD should put up his Sword, or throw his rod into the fire?
Then the way we should take is, humbly and penitently to turn from all our
Sins, trust in His Mercy through our LORD JESUS CHRIST for Reconciliation, and
walk in His ways. It Is not only our Indispensable Duty, but also our highest
Wisdom, Prudence, Interest thus to do. All Politic Schemes, deep Projections
warlike Stratagems, are but sorry trifles and baubles compared to this most
Wise Method. By a penitent turning to the Lord of Hosts, the God of Armies. Let
us engage Him to be on our side; then He Will be our refuge, strength, a very
present help in trouble; we need not fear though the earth were removed, and the
mountains carried into the midst of the Seas; He can make Wars to cease, break
the Bow, cut the Spear in sunder, and burn the Chariots in fire, Psalm. 46. Let
us Engage GOD on our side, and then He Will command deliverances for us, and help
us to push and tread down those that rise up against us, Psalm. 44.4, 5. If GOD
be for us, on our side, then we may boldly say, the Lord is mine helper, and I
will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13.6.

SURE I am, now the Host is gone forth against the enemy, we should keep our
selves from every wicked thing. In stead of growing more loose and dissolute,
more rude and vicious, (as People are very prone to do in Time of War) we
should seriously study and strive after a thorough REFORMATION.

THOSE in Civil Authority should do so, in being Personally Exemplary and
Conspicuous in the exercise of every Grace, and practice of every Duty; in
being a Terror to evil doers and a praise to them that do well.

MINISTERS of the Gospel also should do their utmost to promote a REFORMATION,
in being harmless, blameless, unrebukable in their Conversation, studious and
faithful in rightly dividing the word of truth, and dispensing the mysteries of
God. Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and
show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their Sins. They
should plainly and faithfully tell People of their Sin and (...); and warn them
to turn and live. They should also be much in Prayer, for the welfare of GOD's
People. Joel 2.19. Let the Priests, the Minicters of the Lord weep between the
Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them: therefore
should they say among the people, where is their God?

YEA, All Persons in their various Capacities, should do what they can to
promote a REFORMATION. Jer. 25.5. Turn ye again now every one from his evil
way, and from the evil of your doings. REFORMATION is what GOD loudly calls for
at our hands.

WE are lately entered into a New War, we know the beginning but don't know the
end of it. We are a professing but a very degenerate People, GOD is angry with
us. The last Year He sorely Scourged us by Sickness, the Small Pox; it greatly
hindered Trade and Business, lessened our Estates, thind our Numbers, by an
awful Mortality, tho He punished us less than our Iniquities deservd. This
Contagious Sickness was the Rod of GOD, He whipped us with it, and whipped many
(probably above a Thousand) of this People to Death by it. This was a very sore
Judgment of GOD, yet we are not at all Reformed by it; and He is now contending
with us in other ways. (...) sore and awful Drought Considerably preva^^^ in
many Places of the Land; Men and Beasts meet with difficulties under ^his frown
of Providence. This Year also we have been considerably molested and spoiled,
by ^irates on the Sea; and by Indians on the Land, and a War is now opened. And
what the LORD will do with us, we don't know; what He calls for at our hands, we
do know, viz. that in Ezekiel. 18.30. -- Repent and Turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your ruin. The LORD is shaking His
Rod* brandishing His Sword over us, and what is our business now? Why see, Mic.
6.9. The Lord's voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy
name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. Our duty is that in Lam.
3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. If we do
thus, then He that has torn, will heal us; He that has smitten, will bind us
up, Hos. 6.1.

As to the War we are engaged in, I would say,

1. LET us not trust in Means. We should use the best means and methods we can;
but not trust in any of them. Jer. 9.23. Thus says the LORD, Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might. Very
weighty was that saying of King Ahab, 1 King 20.11. Let not him that girdeth on
his Harness, boast himself, as he that puts it off. Let us not depend too
much on Probabilities. Possibly some will think, our enemies are few in Number,
small in Power, have no Magazines, no defenced Cities to betake themselves to
if routed, etc. But, let us not flatter our selves with such thoughts, how mean
and contemptible soever the enemy may be thought to be; yet they may possibly
make all our hearts ache, before we have done with them. We know not how far GOD
may Employ them, to spill the Blood of this People. If the enemies are looked
on as few and weak, yet our Sins are so many and mighty; as should keep us from
being vainglorious, from promising our selves speedy and great success. Tho we
should be thankful for the success that we have had already, yet we should not be
self-confident. Psalm 44.6. I will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my Sword
save me. It Is very provoking to GOD and dangerous for us, to trust in means.
Jer. 17.5. Thus says the LORD, cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the LORD. We should be
courageous to use means, but not so foolish as to trust in them. We should
follow the counsel given by that great General, Joab, Just as he was going to
engage in Battle; even counsel becoming a Soldier and a Saint, (tho he was not
much of the latter) 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men
for our People and for the cities of our God; and the LORD do that which
seems him good.

2. WE should be much in Prayer to GOD, for help and success in War. Psalm.
108.12. Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man. In King
Solomon's Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple, it is plainly Intimated, That
when the People are engaged in War, they should be very Prayerful to GOD for
help, 1 King. 8.44. The Israelites East of Jordan, were helped in Battle
against their enemies, yea, their enemies were delivered into their hands; for
they cried unto GOD in the Battle, and he was Entreated of them because they
trusted him, 1 Chronicles. 5.18, -- 20. GOD never fails those, who sincerely Pray to
Him and Trust in Him. Let us therefore be humble, earnest, constant in Prayer
to GOD, for Protection and Success to our Soldiers, as well as for all
Blessings needful for this People. Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. GOD says, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me.
Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and
Supplication with Thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to GOD.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
LAtely Printed and Published Mr. COLMAN's SERMON Preached at Mr. Monis's
Baptism.

Together with Three Discourses by Mr. Monis, viz. The Truth, the Whole Truth,
and Nothing but the Truth, the One delivered at his Baptism.

To be Sold by Daniel Henchman, at his Shop in Cornhill, Boston.


