UTILE DULCI. OR, A Joco-Serious Dialogue, Concerning Regular Singing:
Calculated for a Particular Town, (where it was publicly had, On Friday Oct.
12. 1722.) but may serve some other places in the same Climate.

By THOMAS SYMMES, Philomusicus.

Auditum admi^^, Risum tene^tis Amici? Hor. Omnium Temporum Heroes et Pii Vin,
atque ^tis Amantes, Musicam Magnifecerunt. Alded. De Musica. Of all Beasts,
there is none (says Aelian) that is not delighted with Harmony, but only the
Ass. Plays Introd. Pref. No Science but Music may enter the Doors of the
Church. Ven. Beda BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, near the
Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1723.

The Preface.
THE Occasion of the Ensuing Dialogue it accounted for in the Introduction.

It Is the Fruit of a few Hours pains; being begun after Noon on Thursday, and
finished before Noon next Day, without One though it of it is ever being thus
Exposed to the public view.

BUT several of my Friends, upon Hearing of it, were desirous of having it
Printed: which I the rather consented to, because diverse for whose sake it was
drawn up, were not present, when it was publicly delivered, who may possibly
take the pains to read it.

I designed to have polished it as well as I could before I let it appear
abroad; and (having other Business in hand) I deserved the Transcribing it, one
Week after another, hoping for a more Convenient season still, to see about it.
But at length despairing of any such leisure, and being unwilling to d^soblige
my Friends, by any longer Delay, I resolved to Transcribe it, a^fast as I
could, and have done so, without making any Material Alteration, save the
Adding a few Quotations more than were in it at first. I therefore ask the
Candor of my Critical Readers, (if any such will vouchsafe to look upon it:)
And as for the Captiens, if they don't like it, I hope they will be so very
kind, as to let it alone.

IF it may, by GOD's Blessing, be Effectual, to satisfy any piously Disposed
Persons, (or stop the Mouths of hold gainsayers) in the dark, about Singing by
Note; so that, This Excellent, Good Old Way of Singing, may be more promoted
and practiced in the Country, I Have gained my Point. Now that it may be so and
our Singing Dev^^ as well as Musical, is the Humble, Fervent Pray^. of the
Unworthy Author,

T. Symmes.

The Recommendation.
WE the Subscribers, willing to Countenance and Promote Regular Singing, or
Singing by Note, Do signify our Approbation of the Substance and Design of the
Ensuing Dialogue. We pray GOD to bless it, for the Noble End unto which it is
Adapted.

Thomas Blower of Beverly Samuel Moodey of York John Rogers of Boxford John
Tusts of Newbury Thomas Foxcroft of Boston.


A DIALOGUE Concerning Regular Singing.
The Prologue, or Introduction.
THERE has seldom any Reformation, how Reasonable and Needful soever, been
bro't forward in the Church of Christ, or proposed to consideration; but through
the Subtilty and Malice of Sat^n and his Vassals, the weakness of the Gifts and
Graces of some of GOD's own Servants, and prevalency of Corruption remaining in
them such Proposals and Essays, and the Promoters of them, have met with more
or less Opposition.

THE Ecclesiastical History of our Nations, yea of our own Land, does furnish
us with too many sorrowful Instances of this sort, both Ancient and Modern.
For, although the Professed Design of our Fathers of Blessed Memory, in leaving
the Pleasant L^nd of their Nativity, and coming to this Country, then an
Howling Wilderness; was not a Reformation in Religion according to GOD's word,
but a Progress in Reformation, or agoing forward unto any of the things of
CHRIST, we are defective in; (as the late Venerable Higgi^sen, The cause of God
-- Stated. An Elect. Sermon. 1663. p. 13.
has reported to the World) yet how many amongst us, through a misunderstanding
and miserable misrepresentation of the Errand of our Fathers into the
Wilderness, have still Retarded, and very much Obstructed the execution of
their Noble and Glorious Intention, in coming Hither? I Will mention two or three
Particulars here. First, We are fully satisfied from our Platform of
Discipline, as explained by the Famous Mr. R. Mather of Dorchester (the most
Unexceptionable Expositer, of said Platform. It being chiefly drawn up by him,
Mr. R. Mather's Life, in Dr. C. Mather's Magnal. Book 3. p. 128.
and also from many other Writings of our most Eminent Divines, That the first
Pastors of the N. English Churches were not Morellians or Brownists; and yet
were very sensible that above 70 Years since, there were in too many in
New England, a strong Disposition to promote and practice upon, Brownistical
and Morellian Principles. ^id not this give occasion to Mr. R. Mather to write
a Treatise to prove, That whatever Privilege and Liberty may belong to the
Fraternity, the Rule of the Church belongs only to it is Presbytery? Dr. C.
Matler's Magnal (...)
Did not this occasion Mr. Norton's Expostulation, in his Epistle Dedicatory,
before his Discourse of the Sufferings of Christ? where having said, I Appeal
to any competently judicious and sober-minded man, if the denial of Rule in the
Presbytery, of a Decisive voice in the Synod, and of the Power of the
Magistrate in matters of Religion, does not in this point translate the Papal
Power unto the Brotherhood of every Congregation; -- He thus expresses himself;
'Thou that abborrest Epis^, do thou commit Popery? Alas, Alas! Is there no
medium between Boni^ce and Morellius, between Papacy and Anarchy --? If there
be a Mystery of Iniquity in the one, is there not an University of Iniquity in
the other? Briefly Did not this early Disposition to Corahism, give occasion to
Mr. Shepard of Charlestown, to say, Let not the way of the Rigi^ Seperatists --
be acted over again here, till the Churches be buried in Confusion. In case of
Divisions in Churches, has not the Congregational-Way Balm for this wound
appointed by Christ, but Morellius must be raked out of his Grave to be the
only Physician? Mr. Shepard's Elect. Ser. 1672. p 38.


AGAIN, Was there not long ago great struggles to prevent the Rising Generation
in this Country being bro't under the Government of Christ in his Church, so
that when grown up and qualified they might have Baptism for their Children? Is
not thus much intimated in Mr. R. Mather's D^^^g Advice to his Son, the now
very Reverend Dr. Increase Mather? Magnal. B. 3. p. 129.
And is not this very evident from that Passage in Mr. Norton's Life, This
excellent Man, would fain have had inserted in the Platform, agreed by a Synod,
in the Year 1647, certain Propositions concerning the Watch, which our Churches
are to have over the Children born in them; which Propositions were certainly
the first Principles of New England: Only the fierce Oppsitions of One eminent
Person, caused him -- to forbear urging them any further; by which means, when
those very Propesitions came to be advanced and embraced in another Synod, more
than twice Seven Years after, many People did ignorantly count them Novelties.
Idem. B 3 p. 34.
Whence I observe, En Paessant, That it is no New thing for some Weak People,
to declaim against such things as Novelties, that were not generally practiced
within their Memory; though it is certain, they were highly esteemed, by the
Wisest and Best of the First Generation of New England. But what Notion soever
it proceeds from, we know, That Opposition to the work of Reformation, was
judged by the Last Synod of these Churches to be one of the Provoking Evils of
this Land.

NOW, though I could easily produce several other Instances to illustrate this
point before us, I Will take notice only of one more: And that is, The opposition
made in too many T^wns to the Reformation of our Fsaimody, notwithstanding all
that has been done to show the Reasonableness, Advantage and Necessity of it.
And this brings me to say, That I have used my best endeavors, according to
the measure God has given me, to prevent the rise and afterward the progress
of such an unhappy Controversy in this place; yet then has been a great deal of
Contention and Uneasiness amongst us, about Singing by Rule, and I perceive
there are some yet dissatisfyed. Parva Scint^la maximum e^citat Incendium.

NOW, it being my purpose to encourage Singing Meetings in the Town, in the
long winter-Evenings, I though it it prudence to make another Essay, introductory
to my setting forward such a Laudable Pra^tice, that if it be possible I might
ease the Minds of all amongst us, that remain dissatisfied on this score. And
agreeably, I projected to draw up in form an Answer to all the Objections, I
could remember to have heard about this matter, and at a Meeting called for
that purpose to communicate it, to such as would give their Attendance. For
though in all my Conversation with Mankind, I never (in my opinion) observed a
more Ridicu'ous and Groundless Controversy; and although I have always esteemed
the Objections against Singing by Rule, too weak and ludicrous to be mentioned
in a Sermen; and knowing that, Rectumest Ind^x sui ct Obliqui and consequently,
that having proved abundantly (in more Sermons than one, occasionally; and in
one Sermon especially, Preached in sundry Congregations) That Singing by Rule,
or according to the Pattern in our Psalm-Book, is agreeable to the Will of God:
and having also seen sundry Treatises on this head, that have been dispersed
about the Town; in one of which, the chief Objections of our
Anti-Regular-Singers, [let me use (...) Phrase for shortness] are designedly
and particularly and very solidly answered, I held my self Excused from
endeavoring an Answer to them. And that I might justly say in this case with
the Apostle 1 Cor. 14.38. If any be ignorant, let hi^e be ignorant. i. e. says
Mr. Clark, If any will not be bro't to a rig^t Understanding in these things,
by all that I Have said, but is still Contentious and U^ruly, be it as his own
Peril; I Will trouble my self no further about him, and don't you regard him.
Clark's Annotations is Lo^.


FOR though I know it is the business and duty of the Ministers of the Gospel
(acc^ing to the Example of Christ and his Apostles) to answer weighty
objections against their Doctrine ^r Practice, for the removing the
Conscientious scruples of the Weak and Ignorant; and stopping the Mouths of
Gainsayers; yet I know also, that many objections are Refuted, by being
Recited. The bare proposing of them, to Unprejudiced Persons, is a sufficient
Representation of their absurdity. And as to others, of more Solidity, they are
fully answered, though there be a Legion of them, if there be One Conclusive
Argument on the other side. For Unquestionably, One good Argument for a thing,
is of more value, than Ten Sophisms, or inconclusive arguments against it. And
as I Have often had occasion to say publicly, If men will never Embrace any
Articles in Religion, but such as there are no Objections against, they must
renounce all the ^rticles of the Christian Faith, and turn Scepticks in
Religion. Having therefore as I said, sufficiently proved Singing by Rule, to
be agreeable to the Will of GOD; I have sufficiently proved all Objections
against it, and Pleas to the contrary, to be utterly vain and insignificant;
and that such strive against God and oppose Religion, who oppose that: And
hereupon (for sometime) I supposed, as I said, I had no obligations upon me, to
take the method I Am now come into.

BUT being willing to become all things to all men (as far as I may with a good
Conscience and to Edification) I though it, if on a Weekday, and in a Discourse,
(not a Sermon) I could help any of my Nei'bours to light in this matter; and
convince any of them, that they are out of the way, in speaking against this good
Practice; It might be Time and Pains well spent.

AND, accordingly having first sought to Heaven for Direction, and considered
in what method to proceed, I at length concluded to draw up my Th^'ts in the
way of a Dialogue, between a Minister for Singing by Rule, and one of his
Hearers vehemently set against it: Resolved to give the Hearer all the
advantage I possibly could in the Dialogue, and to set his Arguments and
Objections in the best light, my little skill in arguing would allow me: And
then to give an answer, according to my power, agreeable to the nature of the
Objection, and the Objector, and Answerer. Such Objections as are Grave, I Would
answer Gravely; such as appear Conscientious, I Would give a soft answer to them;
such as are Untoward, I Would answer with more Smartness; and if any will make
Merry objections, they I be so kind as to take a Merry answer: For thus
variously have the most Celebrated Writers, [ Marvel. Alsop. Dr. wild. Presi
Willard, Ne Suitor, etc. etc. Sic parvis Componere --! A mean Hand may write
after an exact Copy.] Yea, the Amanuenses of the Holy Ghost have taught us thus
to answer those, we have occasion to controvert with. 1 Cor. 15.12. v 35, 36.
Jam. 2.18 -- 20.1 King. 18.27. Jud. 9.7, 21. Job 6.25.12. c. 2.13. c. 4.16. c.
3.21. c. 3.27. c. 5. Prove. 26.5. etc etc.

Here then I shall introduce, The Proposed DIALOGUE.
Min. How do you Nei'bour? I Am glad to see you. What occasions your looking so
sad, and uneasy?


Nei'b. Alas! Sir, I have met with a great deal of Affliction in my time; I Have
had (...) great deal of Sickness, been exercised with many Crosses and
Disappointments, but indeed never met with any thing in all my life, that made
me so uneasy, as this New Way of Singing, that is forced in upon us.


M. Truly N. I Am heartily sorry for your Uneasiness about that matter, and the
more so, because I Am satisfied Satan has got a great Advantage against you, or
you would never remain so out of tune, after all that has been said and done for
your satisfaction. But I pray you N. to produce your Cause and bring forth your
strong Reasons, and make out your Charge, that Singing by Note is a New-way, or
obtruded upon you; and I Will be your easy Proselite, and make you a Confession
in Folio, if you desire it, that I Have been deceived and done very much amiss in
this matter.


N. Well Sir, but you will be angry ( they say) if I should be plain with you, and
it will do no good, to have any Discourse with you about it.


M. And are none of your Party transported sometimes with anger, when they talk
about Singing? But -- If what you call Plainness, be downright Rudeness, and
the last Dogmaticalness, and if those that should come to learn of me and be
instructed by me, come rather to dictate to me: and instead of (as the Apostle
directs) Entreating me as a Father (supposing they think me out of the way)
arraign my Administrations, and treat me with the last Scurrility, or at best,
as if I were the Pupil, and they the Tutor; (I say, if so) I Have just reason to
be angry and I do well to let them know I am so. I should sin against God, and
betray the Authority I Am vested with, and vilify my office, if I should tamely
suffer my self to be insulted, and not manifest my Resentments, with due
discretion, Rebuking with sharpness where there may be occasion for it, as the
Apostle directs. Though I hope I do not forget, that the Servant of the Lord must
not strive, but be gentle unto all men: not a brawler, but apt to teach,
patient, and in meekness instructing those that opppose themselves. And let me
assure you, N. if you will modestly produce your Allegations and Objections, I Will
(by the help of God) use you, with all the Patience and Calmness, with all the
Goodness and Gentleness, you can desire. And this, I think, is fair.


N. Truly Sir, I think so too. And if any say otherwise, I must own they are very
unjust. If then you are at leisure, Sir, and will give me leave to speak freely,
and hear me patiently, I Will tell you what sticks with me.


M. Well N. I dare promise nothing in my own strength; and I must confess,
there is scarce any thing apt to put me out of patience so soon, as to hear the
Unsufferable Impertinces of some of you Anti-Regular-Singers; However (as I
told you) I Will endeavor to hear you patiently, at least while you keep within
the bounds (I don't say of good sense! but) of Modesty and good Manners. Let me
then, hear your Objections: Only, let them be reduced to a proper order, that I
may not be obliged to answer ten times to the same thing, but may know when I Have
done, and that our coming together and this our Confabulation may be for the
better and not for the worse.


N. Why truly Sir, I don't know whether I Have shall end to range my Objections
to your mind. I believe you have heard all the Objections I have to produce, and
if you will please to dispose them in an agreeable Method, I Will endcavour, as my
Memory serves me, to keep to that Method.


M. You speak well N. and give me good hope, (though you looked so Unpleasantly
at first) that you come hither with a Teachable Disposition; and if so, I doubt
not, but I shall give you full satisfaction in every Article, ever we have done.
However, I Will promise you N. in this Conference, to act not only the part of a
Respondent, but of a Moderator also, and will agreeably assist you, in stating
and prosecuting your Objections, that you may have no cause to complain, You
cannot be heard.


N. Sir, I thank you for your Civility. I Am sorry I ran away with the Popular
Clamor against you. I must needs own you treat me very Heartily.


M. Well, N. I Am thankful, and rejoice greathy, if I can give you content; for
that is my Ambition and hearty Desire; and since you ask it of me, I Will tell you
how you may Range your Objections, to make them look most Formidable and fit
for business. Those that I Have heard of, (though no doubt some of you A. R. S.
that have such an incomparable talent at raising Objections against
Mathematical Demonstrations, may have many more in store, against the Day of
Battle) but those they have been pleased to favor us with the Knowledge of, are
reducible to Three Heads. First, Some against the Thing it self, which you are
pleased to call a New Way of Singing, and the Consequents of it. And they are
these Seven. (1) That it is a New Way, an Unknown Tongue. (2) That it is not so
Melodicus as the Usual Way. (3) That there are so many Tunes, we shall never
have done learning. (4) That the Practice of it gives Disturbance; Roils and
Exasperates men's Spirits; grieves sundry good People, and causes them to
behave themselves indecently and disorderly. (5) That is Quakerish and Popish,
and introductive of Instrumental Music. (6) That the Names given to the Notes
are Baudy, yea Blasphemous. (7) That it is a Needless way, since their good
Fathers that were strangers to it, are got to Heaven without it. Secondly, Some
are against the Persons, that are the Promoters, Admirers and Practitioners of
this way. And they are Three. (1) It Is said to be a Comrivance to get Money.
(2) They spend too much time about learning; they tarry out a Nights
Disorderly, and Family-Religion is neglected by the means. (3) They Are a Company
of Young Upstarts that fall in with this way and set it forward: and some of
them are Lewd and Loose Persons. Thirdly, The other Objections are against the
Manner of bringing Regular Singing into the Church: And these are peculiarly
levelled against my self. These are your Principal Objections; a'nt they,
Nei'bor?


N. Yes Sir, They are so. But for my part, I don't father all of them; yet
since we are upon the Head; I should be glad to hear what you can say, (as the
time will allow) to these several Objections, or any other that in Discourse
may come tomind.


M. Well N. I am willing to speak particularly to them; but there is so many of
them, you cannot expect I should say much to them, but I Will endeavor to speak
to the purpose and eno', if you will lay aside your Prejudices, and hear and
judge impartially.


N. Sir, I know that is my daty; and I dare dono otherwise, I should have no
Charity for my self, if I were unwilling to see my Mistakes and Errors, and to
come to the Light for that end.


M. You speak Christianly, N. O that there were such an heart in all of you,
that make these Objections! Please then to begin with your first set of
Objections. There Is a perfect number of 'em; and if they would hold weight,
when tried in the Balance of the Sanctuary, they would carry the Case against all
the Skilful Singers under heaven. Come, N let us hear them!


N. Nay, Sir, Proy be Serious, and don't run upon me neither! I don't come
hither to be laughed at.


M. Prithee N. keep your Temper, and allow me to handle the matter according to
the Nature of it (or I shall not do it wisely) and I Will be as good as my word;
If I find one solid objection in the whole Crowd, I Will endeavor a solid answer.

Come, let me hear your first Objection; and adone with Preambles.


N. Why Sir, my first Objection is this, That it is a New Way, an unknown
Tongue.


M. As for this Objection, N. you may see it solidly answered in a little
Treatise, Entitled, The Reasonableness of Singing by Note; which Book was well
approved of by very good judges of Books. I advise you, if you can, to get that
Treatise, and read it, with humble Supplication to the Father of Lights, that
He would open your Eyes to see the Truth there held forth unto you: And if you
cannot otherwise procure it, I Will furnish you with it. -- Now besides that you
find it there truly asserted, That this you call a New Way, was studied, known
and approved of in our College, from the very Foundation of it; (and though for
some Years of later time it was unhappily neglected, yet (blessed be God) it is
again reviven, and hope will be ever continued in that School of the Prophets.)
And besides, that it is there observed that the Notes of the Tunes were placed
in our New England Psalm Books from the Beginning, with general Directions for
Singing by Note; and that there are many of the Children, and Grandchildren of
the first Setlers of New England, who are now living, that well remember their
encesters Singing by Note; I say, besides all this, It Is evident, that Singing
by Note is no Novelty, since Music is one of the Liberal Sciences, (or, (as
Alsted terms it) a Mathematical Science subalternate to Arithmetic, and may be
called a special Arithmetic,) has been so accounted in all Ages, and amongst
all learned Nations; and was doubtless Coaeval to, if not more ancient than
Instrumental Music; of which Jubal was the Inventer, as Moses tell us, Genesis
4.21.

Moreover, the very Tunes pricked in our Psalm Books, are with little or no
variation in Mr. Ravenserests Psalm-Book, printed above a Hundred Years ago; in
One of which, there is an account of the Gentlemen's Names, that made our Tunes.

Furthermore, (as is evident from a Psalm-Book of Elder Chipman's, now in my
hands) The Church of Plymouth (which was the First Church in New England) made
use of Ainsworth's version of the Psalms till the Year 1692. For although our
New England Version of the Psalms was composed by sundry Hands, and completed
by President Dunsier, Magnal. B. 3 p. 100.
about the Year 1640; yet that Church did not use it, it seems, till about Two
and Fifty Years after, but stuck to Ainsworth; and till about 1682. their
excellent Custom was to Sing without Reading the Line. Now, in Ainsworths
Psalm-book, there are about 44 Tunes, and but 4 of them that I ever saw (to my
knowledge) any where, save in that Psalm-book: And there the Tune is pricked as
in Ravenscrosis and Playford's at the beginning of the Psalm, or you there find
a Reference to the Tune the Psalm is to be sung in, so that all the Chief
Masician or Chorister had to do, was to give the Pitch and lead the Tune, and
all were to sing according to the Notes in the Psalm Book.

Briefly, all that know any thing to purpose about Singing by Note, know as
certainly, as they can any thing, that what is now called the Usual Way, in
opposition to Singing by Note, is but a Defective Imitation of the Regular Way.
And in some Places, they have kept nearer to the Rule, and in others, they have
varied more from it. And wherever they differ any thing considerable, their
Singing, as to the external part of it, is so far Defective and Irregular. And,

Finally, Singing Skilfully or by Note is expressly and by just consequence
required in the Word of GOD; as in Psalm. 33, 3. and 47.7. 1 Chronicles. 15.22. 1
Cor. 12.31. Mal^. 1.14. with the Third Command, and many other Scriptures;
several of which you have heard me Expound. So that your Usual Way of Singing is
but of Yesterday, an upstart Novelty, a Deviation from the Regular, which is
the only Scriptural good Old Way of Singing; much elder than our Fathers, or
Fathers Grandfathers; as we could easily further evince were it needful; But
they that will not be satisfied with what I Have now offered to consideration, or
with what is in the Book referred to, neither would they be persuaded, though one
arose from the dead l What say you N?


N. Say! Why truly Sir, I Am amazed I should be so long deluded and
Hood-winck'd. I must own, You have Antiquity on your side, or I shall forseit
the Character of a Reasonable Creature, if things are as you tell me.


M. I aver what I Have said to be so; and I Am ready to produce the Books to prove
what I Have asserted.


N. Sir; I Am obliged to take your Word in some things of greater Consequence
than this, and therefore I can believe you as to the History you have given me of
this Matter: if any still besitate, let them take the Pains I Have done, to
satisfy themselves. Let them Come and see!

But what do you say, Sir, to it is being an Unknown Tongue?


M. I say there is in it, on Allusion to the Apostles expression of Praying or
Preaching in an Unknown Tongue: And though it is used with a good (...) of
Confidence, It is a comparison without any similitude, as the Objector supposes
there is. Indeed, if we proposed to Sing in Latin, as the Papists do, this
comparison would be just. But though we possibly Sing Tunes that some in the
Congregation cannot sing, yet we sing the same Psalms we ever used to sing. Yea,
if we throw by our Psalm Books and Sing only F. S. L. in the Meeting House, as
some have been so weak, as to suppose we intended; though alas! We Are so dull, we
should I ever have thot of such a thing, if our surmising Objectors, had not
suggested it; but, had we done so, there had been some room for such a ^ram^
Objection. But verily, this Objection will hold against Singing any Tune, for
there is to one Tune, that all in the Congregation that try to sing and do well
to do so, are Masters of, and conseconently in your sense they are an Unknown
Tongue to them. And surely Persons may sing the Words, the Matter to be sung,
in a Congregation when there is eno to lead the Tune, though they were never
acquainted with one Note of the Tune before, and that very acceptably to God,
if their hearts are right with Him. But, let me hear your next Objection, and
try if there is any more force in That, than in This.


N. My second Objection is This, That this Singing by Note is not so Melodious
and Pleasant, as the Usual Way: Some have called it Yelling. Others have said,
they would as leeve hear the Wolves howl. And for my own part, I cannot fancy ^. One
good man said, He never had heard Christ's Voice in this way of Singing since
it came up.


M. As to this Objection also; you may find it sufficiently answered in the
Book I before referred to. And not to enlarge here, I Will honestly confess to you
that before I was pretty well acquainted with the Rules of Singing, I rather
fancied the Usual, than the Regular way: But my Judgment satisfied me the
Regular must be best. And I know, one reason why my Fancy for the present was
most gratified with my singing the Usual way, was, because I was used to that,
and not Master of the other. And hence it is, that Home is Home, be it never so
Homely. And even so the miserable Hottentots (pardon the Comparison!) who think
to adorn themselves with the Gats of Beasts, with all the Garbage in them;
prefer these Guts to a Chain of Gold, because it is what they are used to, and it
pleases their Fancies. But surely if they would exercise Reason, the Ornaments used
by other People, are more beautiful and becoming; or else all the Civilized and
Polite part of the World are deceived and those Dregs of Mankind are in the
Right of it.

Furthermore. I Have said to some of my Hearers, that if any of you A. R. S's
would take the pains to acquaint your selves with the Rules of Singing, so as
to be able to Sing 6 or 7 Tunes tolerably by Art, If they did not then say as I
do, that singing by Note is Unspeakably preferrible to singing the Usual way;
I Would give up the Cause as to them.

Besides, There are few of you A. R. S's, that ever heard Singing in the
several parts of Music; and some of you don't know the Difference between the
Treble and Bass. Hence I heard one, (that your Fraternity set much by) say,
that the Treble and Bass must be sung with the same Voice! And another was
pleased to say in my Hearing, That one Sabbath Day in a certain Meeting House,
there was Four sorts of Singing! for some sung Rowly Way; and some sung the
Usual Way; and some sung the New Way; and some sung Bass. Whence I learnt that
the Usual Way at one Town, and the Usual Way at another, were very Different:
Fas est --. Now there is no man can judge aright of the Melody of Singing by
Note; that has not heard Tunes sung in the several parts, or in Consort; and
that not by Beginners only, but by ideptists, or at least persons well skilled
in the Science of Music; any more, than a man can judge of Reading, by Hearing
one Read that just begins to put his Syllables together.

Again, Consider N. that the Beauty and Harmony of Singing consists very much
in a just Timing and Turning the Notes: every Singer keeping the exact Pitch
the Tune is set in, according to the part he Sings. Now you in the Usual Way,
are very faulty on this account. Hence you may remember, that in our
Congregation we used frequently to have some People Singing a Note or Two,
after the rest had done. And you commonly strike the Notes not together, but
one after another; one being half way through the second Note, before his
Nei'bour has done with the First, (...) Now this is just as Melodious to all
(...)-Musical-Ear, as Aesop was Beautiful to ^ous Eye.

Once more, I put it to your Conscience N. who are the Best Judges of Melody,
Such as can Sing both the Usual Way and by Note; or they that can Sing neither;
or only the Usual Way? Why truly N. the man deserves to be more severely
stigmatized, than some can well bear, that will not readily say, the Former: And
if so, we are sure the Case will be decided in our favor. For the Chief
Musicians in our Country and Nation, recommend the Regular Way, as Unspeakably
most Melodious; and our Reason and Sense tell us so likewise: Whereas it is
only an Ungoverned Fancy tells you the contrary. This several amongst us,
declare upon Experience.

But suppose your way is after all, by you esteemed most Melodious; yet surely
the Consequents of People's learning to Sing by Rule, should prevail with all
that love God, to deny their own Fancy, rather than in the least discourage
such a Method of Singing For, I trust we are all agreed that Singing the Praises
of GOD is a Duty incumbent on us Christians. And if it be a Duty to Sing, it is
a Duty to use our endeavors to learn to Sing. For we don't come Singing, but
Crying into the World. And though some have a more Musical Genius than others,
yet Men don't Sing as naturally, as Pigs Squeak, or Children Cry; but their
Genius must be Cultivated, e're they can Sing with skill and understanding. Now
if we are to learn any Art we shall surely take the E first and most Speedy way
to learn it; and this generally speaking is by acquainting our selves with the
Rudiments and Rules of that Art. If we would teach our Children to Read, we
don't set them first into Chronicles, but to their Hornbook or Primmer. And so
if we would learn to Sing, we must first learn to raise our Notes. -- And I
profess were I to learn the Usual way for my life, I Would first learn to Sing by
Note. And I Will engage, every Master of Song among us will say with me. And this
we know, that there are Multitudes, can learn to Sing no other way, that can
learn by Rule. And will you shut out so great a part of Mankind from joining in
the Worship of GOD, for a mere Fancy, and a Groundless one? When if you turn
the Tables, all that can learn the Usual way easily, can if they will learn the
other. -- I might here (by the way) say something to a Silly Objection, Iv'e
heard, that it cannot be right to Sing by Note; because it is so easy to learn
it. Surely no man need go Seven years to College to know how to answer this!
Will Not you suffer your Children to learn to Read, or Write, or Cipher, because
some, yea the generality of Children and Trung Men, learn all these things with
a great deal of Facility; whilst such as did not learn them when Young, can
never learn them, without the greatest Difficulties, if at all.

Besides, sometimes you object. It Is so Difficult to learn to Sing by Rule,
that it is more pains than profit: more cost than worship. Thus do your
Objections Militate with one another; and I Will leave you to reconcile 'em; or
e'n let 'em fight it out! So then your Usual Way of Singing, (wherein you Sing
commonly the Treble only, not keeping your Pitch, not keeping Time; or turning
your Notes alike) is as much less Melodious (to a Musical Ear and proper Judge
of Harmony) than our Singing a Tune in the several parts of Music with great
Exactness, as a Tune played by an Unskilful Hand, or an Untuned Instrument, is
less Melodious than the same Tune played on a Well-tuned Instrument, with great
Accuracy, by a Skilful Musician. And this I think you may Conceive of, or you are
neighty dull of Apprehension.

And, whereas you tell me, One Good man said, He had not heard Christ's Voice
in this way of Singing by Note, or to that purpose --: I speak solemnly, The
man that talks so, has just reason to consider, and others to suspect, whether
He knows Christ's Voice. Sure I am that the same person, as good as he is, (if
I am rightly informed) betrayed so much ignorance of that Sacred Voice, that I
could scarce have suspected a well-grown ^b, much less a Sheep of Christ's
Flock, could have been guilty of; in aslerting three things; (1) That
Instrumental Music was an Invention of David, and not of Divine Institution,
even under the Law: though the Roval Prophet tells us, Psalm. (...) 1.4. This, i.
e. Instrumental Music was a Statute in Jacob and a Law of the God of Israel.
(2) He asserted, that if Instrumental Music were of Divine Appointment, Organs
were not. Whereas the Jewish Church, however, are expressly exhorted. Isal.
130.4. to Praise God, with Organs. (3) He was pleased to say, that if
Instrumental Music and particularly Organs, were of Divine Institution, yet
the Jews did not play on them, upon the Sabbath Day. Whereas, in the 150 Psalm
the People of God are directed to Praise Him in the Sanctuary with Organs. And
in the 92 Psalm, Entitled, A Isalm or Song for the Sabbath Day; It Is said,
It Is a good thing to give thinks unto the LORD. -- 3. v. With an Instrument of
ten Strings etc. Now unless, your good man, knew Christ's Voice better in his
Word, that has an Immediate relation to Music; I Would advise him, never to Utter
any more such complaint lest he oblige us to conclude, he is as shy of his
Bible, as some A. R. S's are of some other Books printed for their Instruction.

N. Sir! I cannot but say, you have convinced me, there is no manner of sense in
this Objection; and if you as fully answer the Rest, I Will never open my mouth
more against Singing by Note.

M. Well said N. let us hear your next Objection. But you must excuse me from
speaking so largely to most of the other Objections, or I shall grow weary, and
must adjourn to another Opportunity.

N. Sir, my next Objection is, That there are so many Tunes we shall never have
done learning, 'em. If you would set any bounds, that we might know when we should
have done, there would be some sense in it. But some tells us, there is an 150
Tunes, and we need do nothing else but learn to Sing. And I hear that one of
our New Singers, (that is a Pillar among us) says, That there are Six Excellent
Tunes, and if a Man fall into any one of them, he may make Principal Melody.

M. A goodly saving indeed! You Would best get it annexed to the sayings of the
seven wise men of Greece, in the next Edition of 'em. Suppose N. when the Man
fa^ls into one of those GimmTunes, he should unhappily Turn out again, as they
tell me, he does, on some occasions; whether that will not spoil the Harmony? --
But to the Formidable Obj. (which no doubt is sufficient to puzzle fr^le and
all his Followers, to solve,) I Will tell you N. That as all the English Books in
the World are composed of 24 Letters, and when a Child has learned those
Letters thoroughly; and learned to spell and put his Syllables together, he can
read, in another Lad's Book, as well as in his own: and does not complain, --
O! if there were but 10 or 12 Books, I could learn to read with some Courage;
but when I hear of so many Thousand, I Am utterly disheartn'd, I shall never
have done, I must do nothing else but learn to read! So, in Music, all Tunes
are composed of 7 Notes, and when a person has learn perfectly to Name and
Raise his Notes and Turn his Thirds; He may with a little Practice, if within
the age of D^pline, and apt to learn, Sing any Tune he sees pricked at first
sight, or with a little Conning over, or hearing another Sing it; and here is no
occasion to complain of the Multiplicity of Tunes; for he is still at his
liberty to Sing what he pleases.

(...) as to their being Sung Publicly; It Is time eno for People to complain,
when they are burt. How many Tunes soever there are (and indeed there may be Ten
Thousand made by the same Rule that one is) yet, there has hitherto but Five
been Sung in our Congregation, more than were wont to be Sung And as to one of
them, viz. Hackney or, St. Mary's, it has been pricked in one Edition of our
Psalm Books above this 30 Years. As to Stamdish, it has been Sung for many
years, (as I Am informed) in the Church of N. Hampton. As to Dunhead or
Brunswick, It Is King George's Tune (it is said) and I hope none but the
Pretender's Followers will speak against that. As to 85 Psalm-Tune; There is no
other, in which the First Meter of that Psalm in our Version, can be Sung with
any Decorum; and surely our Fathers inserted that Meter to be Sung. And as for
London-New, it was Sung at the Public Election, incomparably well, and to good
acceptance above a Year ago. And I never propose to set any Tune Publicly, but
what I Am assured there is enough to lead the Congregation in the Singing of it;
and if they will not follow, you may guess who is to blame. -- Besides, Variety
delights. And it is strange that People, that are so set against stated Forms of
Prayer, should be so fond of Singing half a Dozen Tunes, nay One Tune, from
Sabbath to Sabbath; till every body Nauseates it, that has any Relish of
Singing. In short, Ministers are Debtors, not to the Weak only, but to the
Strong. They must give strong Meat to strong men, as well as Milk to Babes. And
such as are Chief Musicians and Masters of Song must not only consult the
Gratification of the more feeble sort of Singers ( who if they knew their own
Weakness, would for ever follow others, and not pretend to go before them) but,
they must also set Tunes to Exercise the Gifts of the more skilful, or how
shall they daily improve the Talent, God has given them? Finally, Its said, 1
King. 3.32. Solomon spoke 3000 Proverbs, and his Songs were 100^. Quaere,
Whether this is spoken, by way of condemnation, or of Commendation? Was it to
his Dishonor, that he had so many Songs, or to his Praise? And then, pray
Consider, whether such as reproach us for Singing so many Tunes, are guilty of
what the sweet Singes of Israel complained of, viz. Turning our Glory into
shame? Psalm. 4.2.

N. Sir, I pray spare your self the pai^s of Enlarging any further. I Will never
complain again of Plenty of that which is good, while I have my senses.

M. A just Resolution truly! I wish you may keep of that mind. Let us hear your
next Objection.

N. Sir, you make such fearful work with my Objections I begin to grow ashamed
of 'em. However, you weat me kindly (though you put upon me now and then, I
'count) and I Am willing to heat what you will say to the other Objections. My
Fourth Objection. --

M. Nay, Prithee N. don't mistake me neither. Don't be uneasy at my manner of
Expression. For I assure yea, on the word of a Minister (and that is sacred with
me) It is not any Man's Person, but the Objections against Regular Singing, I Would
expose the weakness of. For notwithstanding the Rude and Unchristian Treatment
I have met with from some A. R. S's, I can freely overlook it, and say in the
Apostles sense, Ye have not injured me at all: But as to the Objections against
Singing by Note, I know 'em to be Ridiculous; and I wish that you all could, or
would see it, as fully as I do. And let this be for an Answer, once for all, to
your complaints of my putting on you. And when [ I] use such Objections against
any thing, I Will give you, or any Man else leave to put as much upon me. But
bring out your Fourth Objection, my Friend! for the time spends, and I long to
be better Employed: or at a more agreeable Entertainment, (...) The Singing
Meeting succeeding this Exercise.

N. Sir, my ary Objection was, That the Practice of Singing by ^re makes
Disturbance, roils and exasperates (...) grieves good People, and couses them
to (...) have themselves indecently and disorderly: And seeing there is a great
many speak against it, and it is en indifferent thing, methinks it is pity that
there should be so much Noise and Towse about it, and that so much pains should
be taken in this matter, when there are things of greater Consequence --.

M. That there are things of greater Moment, (even in the Doctrine of Singing
the Divine Praises) Heaven and Earth are witness, I always assert. But that
Singing by Note is Lawful, Expedient and Best, and should be endeavored by
some, and encouraged by all, These are suffering Truths, that ought to be born
witness to, where our Silence will be Construed a Denial or Dispising of them.
Indeed, if these points were Problematical, or Disputed amongst Wise and
Learned Men; there were some sense (I acknowledge) in this Objection. But
(alas) the Case is far otherwise. And (let the Man make what Figure he will,
and let his Coat be of what Fashion or Color, or other Quality it will) I
profess I Will not affix either of those Honourary Epithets to his Name, that
will not readily own, that whoever will Dispute those points, may also Dispute
Whether Two and Two make Four! A learned Question in truth! For my part, GOD
helping me, I Will never betray any known Truth of Religion, or the Confessors of
it, to secure my own ease; though all this world were against me! I know who has
said, Whosoever shall break one of these least Commands, and teach men so, shall be
called least in the Kingdom of God, i. e. without Repentance, he shall never
come thither. And again; These things (weightier matters) ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other (the lesser points) undone. These Text are no
part of the Apocrypha. And I appeal to all men of sense, whether Christians are
to make Reason and the Word of God the Rule of their Faith and Practice, or the
Cheigo's and Whimsies of some, who have Cor Bonum (we ^ope) but not Caput
Regulatum (we are sure) i. e. Men whose Hearts are better than their Heads.

And whereas you were speaking of acquainting our selves with the Rules of
Singing as an Indifferent thing, I utterly deny it to be so, as to all persons.
Indeed, as to some Elderly People, and such as have a natural Incapacity to
learn, doubtless God does not expect it of them. But as to all that have a
Competent Ability, and Convenient Opportunity to learn, my firm belief is, That
God as really requires it of them, as He does any thing in His Word; and
particularly as He does Singing. 1 Cor. 12.31
For, He that requires the End, requires the Means; or all Expositors (that
I Have met with) are out, in Expounding the Decalogue: For, all take this for a
Granted Maxim, and Expound the Commands by it. But no doubt, you A. R. S's that
are much Wiser than your Teachers; you are the Men, and Wisdom will dye with
you! -- Besides, suppose this were an Indifferency, (which verily it is not)
please to hear the words of the Famous Mr. Samuel Clark, (in his Treatise of
Scandal) If persons (says He) are scandalized at an Indifferency, and then
scandal arise from some superstitious conceit and persuasion, and such as
they have no tolerable pretense or ground of Reason for, they are rather to be
Crossed, than complied with therein; because that is more like to tend to their
Edification, and yielding to them would but nourish them up in their
Superstitious Fancy. As Solomon (he goes on) says concerning a Fool, Prove.
26.4, 5. Answer a Fool (i. e. a Conceited Fool) according to his Folly; i. e.
Smartly; let him not have his way and saying, left (...) be wise in his own
eyes. But, Answer not a Fool, (i. e. a Trectable Fool) according to his Folly,
i. e. Weakly, left thou be like him. He proceeds, so may I say in this case,
Comply not with an Obstinate person in his Erroneous, irrational, superstitious
Fancies, that thou Bolster him not up therein. N.B.
And says Mr. Rutherford, we read not of scandals culpable in God's word, but
where there is some apparent Moral Reason for them. Cit. Clark.

Thus he.

Again, Whereas you say, There are many speak against it: I answer, Not every
where. It is not so, at Boston (that I can learn) nor at Cambridge, where
People have as much Ability and Opportunity surely, to know What Is wha^ (...)
^ur Town, and some others in the Country. But granting it were so, That Is no
solid Argument against it; for, the Gospel it self was said to be every where
spoken against; and I pray God, it may never be said so again, of some Articles
in Divinity, of Unspeakably greater Moment, than Singing by Note. Time was,
when it was said, The whole World sighed, to see it self become an Arian.

Besides, supposing Regular Singing is spoken against by many, Is it not also
spoken and preached, and printed for, and that by as wise and good Men, Men as
able and faithful to judge in this matter as any Anti-Regular-Singer upon
earth, and no Reflection on them?

And whereas you say, Many good People are grieved about it. I answer, That Is
none of their goodness, I Am sure; but their Pittiable weakness at best. And for
any to be angry at it, is to be angry without Cause, if ever men were so. And
you remember, what Christ has said of such, Mat. 5.22. And though we are Commanded
not to give offense, we are not Commanded, not to let People take offense. And if
Good People are offended with us, when we give them no reason to be so, that is
our unhappiness, and not our Sin. The woe belongs to such as take offense, where
there is none given. And if many Good People are grieved; I Am persuaded as many
and as Good as they are, are rejoiced at this matter, and look upon the revival
of the study and Practice of the Art of Music, as an happy Omen that the time
of the singing ^irds is coming on. And on the other Hand, Are they not, with
good Reason, displeased and offended with you A.R.S's? Which some of you, and
some (that find their account in it, I presume) that Connive at and Countenance
you, seem unconcerned about. Whom, if I were worthy to advise, I Would beg them to
remember, that there are some Patrons of Singing by Note, understand themselves
as well, and make as much Conscience of their Duty, as they do; and are as loath
to offend when they can avoid it, as they are: But they remember, Prove. 28.23.
But let who will be Displeased in the Case, I Am Confident the GOD of Order (who
as Alsted says, is the Author and F^utor of all Harmony) is well-pleased that
Singing by Note is promoted in these Churches, and will be greatly Glorified
for it, and by it. There are many Thanksgivings to GOD, for bestowing this Good
Gift on his People, notwithstanding all the Disturbance occasioned by it. And
whether is better, to please GOD, or Men, judge ye!

Farthermore, As to it is roiling the Spirits of Irreligious Men, and giving
Disturbance; -- If you will take the pains to read the Treatise I Have referred you
to, several times, and the Sermon about Prejudice dispersed in these Towns, you
may find an answer to it, and it may be to your Satisfaction. For, I remember,
I heard one of the wifest and best men in this Town, say, to one of the oldest,
Sir (said He) I was my self as much in the Dark about Singing by Note as you
are, but when I heard the Sermon from that Text, Come and see, I went Home (
and advised) and made it a Case of prayer, and read over the Treatise (before
quoted) and really I found so much Reason and Scripture for it, that I Am
satisfied, It Is of GOD. -- An abundant Recompense, I acknowledge, for all my
Pains and Sufferings occasioned by that Sermon!

In short, N. Do you love Peace, so, as to purchase it with the l^ss or
practical Denial of Truth. I tell you truly, It Is a Cursed peace you get upon
those Terms! It Is bought too Dear! No! follow Peace and Holiness. Love the
Truth and Peace, Z^ch. 8.19. Both are best. But better Truth without Peace,
then Peace without Truth. Therefore, (...) Truth and S^ not; N^ not for Peace
it self. And y^ (...) ownes! The Lord Bless his People with Peace! And to
conclude the Answer to this Objection, I Am heartily grieved that any of you are
uneasy; or, I would not have taken so much pains for your Satisfaction, and have
undergone the Drudgery of Answering such Trifling Objections. And I would yet
Gladly spend and be spent to quiet you in a way of GOD; and yield to any thing,
I may Wisely and with a good Conscience; but if after all. Men will be
Humorsome, and wilfully blind, and fly from Books offered for their
Illumination and Conviction, as they would from a Rattle-Snake, as the manner
of some has been, I say, I know who has said, Jer. 15.19, 20. Let them return
unto thee, but return not thou unto them. i. e. says Mr. Clark in his Annot.
Comply not with them in their finful Courses, nor sooth them up therein. You
may read the Twentieth verse at your Leisure. And now please to produce your
5th Objection, and let us try the weight of that.

N. It was this, That this way of Singing is Quakerish, and Popish, and
introductive of Instrumental Music.

M. Well, N. And what is your Sixth? I think (if I remember right) their pretty
near of kin, and therefore let us answer them together.

N. Sir, I find already you will Nonsuit me (...) these Objections, and
therefore I Will only mention them: I shall never plead to 'em. My Si^th
Objection was, that the Names given to the Notes are Baudy, yea Blasphemous.

M. Verily, my Friend, Apollo himself, that Laughed but once a Year, could
never forbear Giggling again, at such Comical Objections. Quis talia sando
temperet a Risu? These Objections certainly labor of the Malady, of Obscurum
per Obscurius, to prove a dark point by that which is more dark. In plain
English, N. A Broad Laugh, is all the Answer such Whimsical Objections deserve:
or rather, a hearty Scoul; or, Deep Sigh, to observe the Doleful Effects of
Man's Apostasy. To be oppressed with such Objections would make a wise man mad,
Eccl. 7.7.

However, To gratify you N. I Will say in a few words! Though we understand
Quakerism and Popery as well, and hate them as much as you do; yet, I Will never
despise what is Laudable in them. I admire the Quakers neat and modest Dress,
and condemn nothing in it; but the wearing it, with Affected Singularity. And
if the Papists sing a better Tune, or with a better Air, than we do, I Would as
soon imitate them, and a thousand times sooner, than the Honestest man among
you, that has no Skill in Singing. You Have heard frequently, That Truth is as
precious in the Church of Rome, as in the Churches of New England. And verily,
the Papists in many Articles, and particularly in their Bodily Devotion, are a
sh^me to many Protestants! If Papists will come Early to Meeting, and behave
themselves in the Worship of GOD with Gravity and Wakefulness, must I (under a
pretense (...) abhorring Popery) make a Trade of Coming, when Prayer is just
done; or run out, needlessly and unexemplarily, before the Exercise is ended;
and go away without the Blessing; or sit and Sleep, or Loll my Head on the
Seat, as if I did so, in the time of Divine Worship, as --? Away, Away! The
Papists themselves will rise up in judgment against Protestants, that act at
this Rate, and will condemn them!

And since you make a Noise (though no pleasant one) about Instrumental Music,
I Will give you an unanswerable argument, that may put you out of all pain about
it: And that is, That, truly, it is too Chargeable a piece of Worship ever to
obtain amongst us; and you may depend upon it, that such as are not willing to
be at the Cost of a Bell, to call the People together on the Lord's Day, and of
a Man to ring it (as it is with too many amongst us) will never be so
Extravagant as to lay out their Cash, (especially, now Money is so scarce) to
buy Organs, and pay an Artist for playing on 'em.

N. Yea, Sir, But what will not People do for their Wills?

M. Why truly N. it is well though it of! They Will do e'n just any thing. Agreeably,
I remember I once heard a Grave yet Facetious Divine observing, That Corruption
will do more than Grace at Building Meeting Houses. But yet, I Will tell you N.
for your comfort, when People grow so extreme flush of their Money, and so
wilful as to lay it out upon Organs (if you and I live to that Day) I can help
you to several Arguments, that some eminent Divines have invented against
Instrumental Music, in Divine Worship. And in the mean time, pray be Easy; and
assure your self, that Singing by Rule, will not in our Day, introduce
Instrumental Music, much less Quakerism and Popery. I promise you, your Usual
way of Singing, would much sooner, dispose (...) to full in with them. Because
the Quakers don't Sing at all, and I should be out of the Noise of it; and the
Papists Sing much better, when they Sing by Rule. I mean only as to the
External part of the Service. But I speak in Jest, and to show you the
Absurdity of this Objection.

But then as to the Baudiness of La, Sol; All I need say is, That as the Fool
thinks, so the Bell Clinketh. No Mortal that can spell would ever have had
such a Though It, and it is a shame to mention it. And I Am sure, I Would never have done
it, but to let the world see, what Treatment we have from you, who have a Zeal
without Knowledge, as I must bear you Record.

But that we may hear no more of this Nasty Objection; I Will tell you, that the
very Letters, F. S. L. are in some Editions in our Psalm Books, and the whole
Mystery of the Business is this, That these Names of the Notes were given them
(as Alsted and Playford tell us) by Guide Aretinus, several Hundred Years ago;
they being the First Syllables of that Saphick, Mi- ra Gestorum Sol- ve Polluti
Fa- muli Tuorum La- bii Reatum.


And these Names have been retained ever since. Because they answer the End as
well as any other. And some Names there must be for the Advantage of the
Learner: But if any will use, A, B, (...) or, Bo-Ce-Di-Ga-lo-ma-ni, proposed by
Alsted, instead thereof, it will serve the turn. And so as to the Names of the
Tunes. St. Mary's, Isle of Wight -- they are to distinguish one Tune from
another, and one Name is us well as another for that End, Though it be isle of
Shoals for Isle of Wight, or Bullbead for Dunbred, as some in Derisien have
called 'em. But then the Names must be such as People commonly agree to call
them by, or it will breed the Confusion of Babel, where, when a Man called for
a Trewel, his Servant brot him a Spade or a Pick-^x. And why may not a Tune be
called St. Mary's as well as St. David's, and so one of our most celebrated
Tunes is termed in our Psalm Books; unless you think with one, that said to me,
He did net know but that Tune was made by King David, about 200 Year ago.
Commend me to that Man, however for a Chronologer, if he is no Musician!

And then, as to the Blasphemy of Fa, Sol, La, it is too foul-mouthed an
Objection to be repeated, and as hideous Nonsense as ever was uttered: and
therefore Good now, N. let us pass on to your 7th Objection, if you please.

N. Well Sir, I hose if all the other were tou light, and weak, to bear the
stress I Have said upon them, This will do the Business, and I presume is
Unanswerable by you.

M. Well N. please to produce it, and I Will try my skill upon it; and if I ^n't
answer it, I Will come over to your side, I Will promise you: if you will come to our
side, if I do. Come, Let Us hear this Mighty, Dead-doing Argument!

N. Sir, It is this, That this way of Singing is Needless, since our Good
Fathers, that knew not this way, are got to Heaven without it. And therefore
what need of all this Adoo and Pudder for Nothing?

M. Why look'ee, N. as to the Good Fathers of some of you A. R. S's, I cannot
say, but that they were unacquainted with this Excellent way of Singing, and I
cannot say whether they could sing any way; nor can I tell, whether they did not
leave the Old Land (as you sometimes call it) to steer clear of Singing by
Rule, tho I hope they had more Wisdom. But this I know certainly and affirm
constantly, that some of our Fathers, that were I suppose, pretty near as Good,
as any of yours, were acquainted with this way of Singing My Father learnt it
at College; and I can Sing a Tune he learnt me by Note when I was a Child; and
I have now in my Study, Tunes pricked with his own Hand, and I cannot be more
sure of any thing of that nature, than of this, That he highly approved of it,
and greatly delighted in it. And one Reason doubtless, why he did not practice
it, was, because his People could not do so; and it is probable he (did, as
another Minister famous in our Neighbor hood, I Have been informed, has said he
did) shuck in with the People, and sang himself out of all. And tho, (I am
humbly thankful) I Have as much reason as some others to reverence the Memory of
my Ancestors, yet I cannot but close with that eminent Man of GOD, Mr. Jer.
Buroughs (of whom it has been said, he was a Prince of Preachers, and sit to
be a Preacher to Princes,) in his Exposition of Hosea; and Edit. and Vol. (...)
556, 557.
where he thus expresses himself, (and my Good Father has set a special Mark
upon it) What a fond opinion is it, and what a sluggish Spirit does it
manifest, to be satisfied with that Knowledge which has been in former times?
Therefore such speeches as those, What shall we be wiser than our Forefathers?
May be answered, we are to be thankful for the Knowledge of our Forefathers, and
say as Master Greenham did, I bless God for what our Forefathers knew, and I
bless God also that bath kept back some of his Counsels for this Generation to
be acquainted with. It Is an argument of a poor spirit to rest satisfied with
small measures of Knowledge; the Light (...) 4 hundred Years ago was small, and
in these Days our Light is small, to that which shall be revealed. It is very
little in the matter of God: Worship and in the ordering of his House.
Therefore had not we need to follow on to know the Lord, and not scorn at the
New Light which God discovers? For though there are no New Truths, in respect of
the Word yet in respect of the Manifestation of them to us, they may be fall to
be New. Thus Mr. Barroughs, a strict Con^tional Divine, and one of the very
Fathers of them. And new ^can't you (...) this to (...) ^sent Case?

Besides, to say it is needless to learn to Sing by Note, for the Reason you
mention, is just as much sense, as the Man's saying, It was needless to learn
to Read, because his Uncle, that could not read had as good Corn, as any Body
in Town. Alas, N. there is many a one I hope got to Heaven, that could not read,
and had a very mean gift in Prayer, or I Am sure some of your Fathers and
Grandfathers (to use a Phrase of the American Apostle's, Dr. Mather's Magnal.
B 3.2^8.
Mr. Eliot,) are Gone the wrong way. And what? Is there therefore no need to
stir up People to learn to Read. And here I Would take occasion to answer a Plea
made by some that never had any hand in the Gun-powder-Plot, that if Singing by
No^ be Right, then Singing the Usual way is ^rong and then what is become of our
Fathers that Sung in this way? I answer, I deny the Corsenarn^. It was not
wrong in them, because they did as well as they could: They offered their Best.
And if they could have Sung better, I believe they would. And if there be a
willing mind, it is accepted according to what we have --. It is not wrong for
him that can read but poorly, or pray, but meanly, to read or pray as well as
he can. But if a man has a Male in his Flock, and sacrfi^ to the Lord a corrupt
thing, he expose's himself t^ the Livine Malediction. He that has two (...)
^epted if he faithfully improve them, whilst ^e that has ten, w^ be accepted,
if he (...) them. Where much is given much (...) little is given, little is
(...) all these Objections to the place from whence they came, and bring on
your Second R^nk of Objections, and Fire the other Round, and let us see, if we
can answer you!

N. Sir, my second set of Objections was against the Persons that are the
Admirers, Promoters and Practitioners of this Way of Singing und r
Consi^ration. And my first particular --.

M. Hold N! One word if you please, as we go ^ng, to all Objections of this
nature; which (it may be) may save you the labor of mentioning, and me of
answering them particularly: And that is, That no Obj. of this kind can touch
the M^rit of the Cause. For if so, are there not with you, even with you? as
scandalous persons, persons of as vile and ignominious a Character, and guilty
of as much folly and iniquity as any in the Town --? Are there no A. R. S's
that are Tiplers, Tavern-haunters, Idle, Sauntering Drones, and mere
Incendiaries --? But though we commend all that are for Regular Singing, on that
account; we are very far from commending any thing victous or of Bad Report in
them. And we pray, that what you see amiss in any of Us, you would mend in your
selves. And consider, are there no scandalous N.Consormisis? Are there no
Hypopocrites in the true Church? And will you then Condemn the True Church, and
give up the cause of N. Conformity for that Reason? Do you dislike the good
Fish, you take in the Net, because there are some and, slide in among them?
Should the Ministers of Christ, reject the Gospel, because by the Pre^ing of
it, some are bro't into the Church, that prove a Pest in it; and when they come
to discover their Hypocrisy and Unsoundness, they wish them out again (...) On
the other side, Are there not some, are there not many yea are not the
principal Encouragers of Regular Singing, such as you ought to Esteem Faithful
Servants of Jesus Christ? And such as are more Proper Judges in this matter
than any of you? And may not you with more Reason, argue thus, There are these
and those, Men of Learning and Wisdom and Piety, for Singing by Rule, and
therefore we dare say nothing against it? Does not the argument hold this way,
at least as well as the other.

You take my M^ing N. I presume; and if you see meet, yet, to mention your
Particulars, pray do so, and don't say you cannot be heard. Only, bring 'em all
out together, for there is never a Barrel the Better Herring; and the time would
fail to enlarge on 'em all.

N. Sir, You Will gratify me to say a few words to each, that I may however, know
Low to answer such as Reproach you on the account of them.

M. It Is well, N. please to say on.

N. Sir, It Is sand (1) That the bringing up of this way is a Contrivance to got
Money. (2) That there is too much time sp^nt in learning. That People Tarry out
Disorderly, and Fam^ly-Religion is neglected. (3) That they are a Company of
Young Upstarts that fall in with this way, and set it for ward, and some of
them are Lord and Loose Persons and guilty of Prophetness in Singing I s^lm
Tunes in Barns and at Plow and Ca^ will make nothing to Sing part of a Psalm
Tune, and then, Cry, St'r up Darby -- Nay, they will Sing Fa, Sol, La, in the
Tavern.

M. Now take an answer N. -- As to getting Money by it; This were a Better
Contrivance (allowing the Objection) and more justifyable, than many approved
of, by some that Object this. And why the Singing Master, is not worthy of his
Reward for his pains in teaching our Children to Sing, as well as the School
Dame and School Master for Teaching our Children to Read, Write and Cipher, I
cannot Devise. For, Music is as Real and Lawful and Ingenious an Art, as either
of the other. I don't say indeed as Useful and Necessary. But to put you, in
this place, out of pain about your Purses; I Will undertake, if you will learn to
Sing, you shall all be taught on free Cost.

And as to spending too much Time, or neglecting Family Religion, (if there be
any ground for such an Objection) we are very sorry for it. I Will countenance no
such things. But I will not therefore condem the Practice, and discourage any from
learning to Sing; but will Exhort them to reform such things, and cut off
occasion, from such as seek it, to speak evil of the things they understand
not. For my own part, as Iv'e the Honor of Conducting this Flock of Christ, I
shall recommend it to Heads of Families, that, when they go out in an Evening
to Sing, they would set their Houses in order before they go from Home. And as for
being out late, it cannot well be avoided, where People go so far, as some must
do; and I wish some that make the Objection (tho this I confess is only.
Argumentum ad Hominem) did not drive a Trade of tarrying out unseasonably, on
less Justifyable Occasions.

And, as to Singing in Barns and Fields -- you may see the Objection answered
in the Treatise, I Have so often referred too. And though there may possibly be some
Deference to be paid to Common Psalm-Tunes; yet it is wonderful to hear those
talk at this rate, that deny the Holiness of Places. For surely the
Meeting House is as Holy as any Tune. Is the One improved in the Worship of
GOD? so is the other. But this Objection arises from a Superstitious Notion,
some have Imbibed, That there is some Sacredness in Tunes. But I assure you,
and can easily demonstrate to you, there is not the least Jot. If any would
suppose there is a Relative Holiness in some Psalm-Tunes, I affirm, there is no
more Real Holiness in the most Celebrated Psalm Tune, than in the Tune of,
Pepper is Black. And if People have taken up any other notion, It Is high time
they should be better informed, and convicted of their Error. Psalm-Tunes and
Song-Tunes are all made by the same Rule: and those that made the Psalm-Tunes
were not Divinely inspired; nor had they Authority to consecrate any Tune to
the worship of GOD. I remember, as I was talking with one good Man on this
Head, he cried out, I Am convinced; for (said he) though the Bible is Holy, the
Covers are not so. -- And further I affirm, the most of the Psalm-Tunes, as
Sung in the Usual way, are much more like Song-Tunes, than as Sung by Rule;
because you have more Supernumerary Notes and Turnings of the voice in your way,
than in ours. An Ingenious Gentleman, who has pricked Canterbury, as some of
you Sing it, finds (as I remember) no less than 150 Notes, in that Tune, in
your way, whereas in our's, there are but 30. Did we propose so many Crotchets,
and Quavers, and Semi-quavers and Demi-semi-quavers, in every Tune, I should
not wonder if you were discouraged from endeavoring to learn to Sing. But
alas! This is what you have generally no Notion about: And yet think your selves
sufficiently accomplished to judge in the Affair --. Yea some Rage again in
their Confidence. And yet sometimes their own Mouths condemn them. I was told
by a very worthy Man, That he was not long since arguing with one of your
Fraternity, and at length used this Similitude, -- You are a Planter Ner'beur.
Now suppose, while you are Planting, there comes a Sailer athwart you. Well! cries
he; What are you doing, Friend? -- A doing (say you)? Why, I Am Planting. --
What at this time of Year? quoth the Sailer. The Planter replys, Yes; when
should I Plant? -- Why (says the Saile^) in August; if you intend to have a
Crop, -- No (says the Planter) you are deceived: Iv'e been a Planter this no
Year, and my Father was a Planter before me, and I know certainly, I should
have no Crop if I should Plant in August. You know better how to Rig and Sail a
Ship, than how to raise Corn. -- You talk like a fool (cries the Sailer) I
knew, you and your Father before you, were deceived: I tell you, you should
Plant in August --. What would you say to him? says my Friend. -- Say? Cries
he: I Would up with my Fist [which he did at that Instant] and hit him a Dab in the
Chaps, [and he gave the Man a good Dowse.] And upon the whole I say, Ne suitor
ultra Creptdam. Let not the Shoemaker go beyond his Last. And every Man to his
Trade, wherein he is to be believed.

Briefly, Whereas you say, it is by some objected, they are young Upstarts --. I
answer, It Is an unparellel'd (I Would almost said unpardonable) piece of Ignorance,
or Impudence, for any to say so. I remember indeed, that one of my Reverend
Brethren, told me, That some of his Hearers made this Objection, at the
Beginning of this Ridiculous Controversy. Whereupon, he took occasion to ask
the Judgment of several Aged Ministers, and of several of middle Age; and
finding they all agreed in their Sentiments about this matter (and whatever he
is for a Christian, I Will be bold to say, He Is a poor Tool of a Scholar; and may
either be Saluted, -- Salve Doctor, sine Libris! or, if he has a Library, His
Books may be Complemented, Salvete Libri sine Doctore; that does not know, that
Music is as proper a Science, as Geometry or Arithmetic: I will not English it
to you, but I say, finding all the Ministers he discoursed, highly approving of
singing by Note) He tells his Friends, Though you were pleased to say there were
no Ministers for it, but some Young Men; yet I find this and the other Aged
Minister of the same Judgment --. Yes, say they, but those Ministers are
superannuated. Well says my Friend, but I Have discoursed with these and those,
middleag'd-Min^ters, and they are of the same mind --. Yes, cry they, Ministers
will hang together right or wrong! -- Horribile d^! I Am amazed to think of the
Perverseness not to say, Atheism, some discover, when under the power of
inveterate prejudice.

Furthermore, There was an Excellent Man of our Church, that told me, about a
Year ago, that some of your Party said, if Old Dr. Mather upprov'd of it, they
should then suspect they were out of the way in opposing it. Upon which I wrote
to that venerable Doctor. And he very kindly sent me his Son's (Dr. Cotton
^ather's) Accomplished Singer, and upon the last ^age of said Book, He wrote
with his own hand, these Words.

I DO concur with what is here Published by my Son, and heartily wish, that
Young People may be Encouraged to Learn to Sing Regul^ly.

INCREASE MATHER. Now, Dr. C. Mather, (in said Book, Page 22 --) thus expresses
himself. It would be very desirable, that People (and especially our Young
People, who are most in the Years of Discip^ would more generally learn to Sing
and become able to Sing by RULE, and keep to the Notes of the Tunes, which our
Spiritual Songs are set unto; which would be to Sing as Or^gen expresses it, --
Agreeably and Melodiously. -- It has been found that in length of Time, in some
(...) our Congregations their Singing has degen^ into an Odd Noise, that has
more of what we want a name for, than any Regular Singing in it whereby the
Celestial Exercise is Dishonored; and indeed the Third Commandment is
tresparsed on. To take notice of the Ridiculous Pleas, wherewith some very weak
People go to confirm this Degeneracy, would indeed be to pay too much Respect
unto them. And they must have strange notions of the Divine SPIRIT, and of his
operations, who shall imagine, that the Delight which their untuned Ears take
in an Uncouth Noise, more than in a Regular Singing, is any Communion with Him.
The Skill of Regular Singing, is among the Gifts of GOD unto the Children of
Men, and by no means unthankfully to be Neglected or Despised. For the
Congregations, wherein it is wanting to recover a Regular Singing, would be
really a Reformation, and a Recovery out of an Apostasy, and what we may judge
that Heaven would be pleased withal. We ought certainly to serve our GOD with
our Best: and Regular Singing must needs be better than the Confused Noise of a
Wilderness. GOD is not for Confusion in the Churches of the Saints; but
requires, Let all things be done Decently. -- The Tunes commonly used in our
Churches are Few; 'Twere well if there were more --. It is to be desired, that
we may see in the Rising General on, a fresh and strong Disposition to (...)
the proper Tunes; that GOD may be (...) Religion Beautified, with a Regu^ ^ing
among us -- Now I should have though it that by Two such Eminent Witnesses, the
Cause of Regular Singing might have been Established. But though I lent this Book
to some, and gave them the preceding account; they regarded it not. After
this, I showed them Mr. Walter's Singing Book, recommended by Fifteen
Ministers. They took as much notice of it, as if the famous Sam. Hide had
commended it. Quis talia fando temperet a Lacrymis? Is this to Obey the voice
of the Lord's Servants? To believe his Prophets? To learn the Law at the Mouths
of Christ's Messengers? I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping,
-- It Is a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation! And especially that it
should be so in a place so famous for Religion, as this has been!

But where now is that Mouth, that said, The Abettors of Regular Singing, were
only Young Upstarts? The man one would think, should blush into a Flame, unless
his Face is harder than a Rock, and he has eat shame and drank after it.

And whereas you say, there are lewd and vicious People that are pleased with
this way: As I said before, Are there not as vicious Persons against Regular
Singing, as there can be for it? And if there are any Good People against it,
It Is more than I know, though I suppose some of them, are Faithful Brethren; but
I Am Confident this is none of their Wisdom and Goodness, but their Weakness and
Carnality; and if they die Martyrs in this Cause, as some have boasted they
would, I dare assure them, they will never obtain the ^own of Martyrdom for their
pains.

In a word, It Is utterly unfair to Charge the faults of all the Pretenders to
this or that way, on the way it self. Are we willing a Judgment of N.
Conformity should be made, from the Principles or Lives of some N. Conformists?
No verily! Therefore, Good now Nei'bour, let us hear no more such Objections,
and come to your Last. Bring on your FORLORN-Hope! And if w^'ve stood the
shower, I hope we shall not flinch for the Drops, of this Puny Objection. You know
my Reference!

N. Sir, I Am willing to do so; for I think you have sufficiently answered all the
former; and for my part, if you can answer this as fully, I Will give up the
Cause; let who will be against Regular Singing, I Will have done, and come over
to your side.

Sir, My last Objection was against the way of bringing Regular Singing into
practice in our Church. Some have said, they had nothing against Regular
Singing, but they dislike the way of bringing it in; they account it is intruded
upon them.

Min. If you would allow me one Random-Guess; I suppose it is 20 to one, but it had
been bro't in right, if some of those Objectors, (who cannot Sing, no not the
Six Excellent Tunes aforesaid, if it were to save their Lives;) and some of
their Queer Comrades, had been consulted, and leading in it. But some Men think
nothing well done, that they have not a Hand, a Chief Hand, in the management of.
If they think themselves neglected, all the Fat's in the Fire^ And they will set
the whole Course of Nat^ in a Flame! -- But you may Remember, N. (if you don't,
I do) that I Have publicly Declared, That as to this, I Am answerable for it. And
I aver, it has been fairly and Regularly introduced; and I shall not be determined
by those, that understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, In
this matter: And if any will be so Hardy as to Arraign my Administrations on
this Score, I appeal to Council. And I Am still of the same mind. And if any
will still go on to Censure me on this Score, and yet decline the proposed
Method: or, if any in other places will do so, upon Hearsays, The Lord Judge
between me and them! And the Good Lord forgive them, who know not what they do!
And for further Answer (though I have not time now to go through the Story of it is
Introduction) I Will hint to you a few things. First, I don't understand your
Notion of Intrusion. Men intrude on a Society, if they deprive them of their
unquestionable Privileges, and oblige them to any thing unwarrantable and
unreasonable -- But who, ever before, complained of being intruded on, for
being urged by their Pastor to the Practice of that which is Laudable and
virtuous, and which they account so.

Besides, You may think possibly, it should have been introduced by a Vote of
the Church. But here you Blunder most miserably, and are ignorant of your own
Principles. For your Platform of Discipline, which when it suits your Turn;
(and I speak soberly, never else that I find) you are very fond of, tells you in
Terms, Chap. 10. Sect. 5. That the Power granted by Christ to the Body of the
Church and Brotherhood is a Privilege, which the Church does Exercise, (1.) In
Choosing their own Officers, whether Eiders or Deacons: (2.) In admission of
Members. -- But not a word about matters of Doctrine or Worship. Here, the
Pastor is Master of the Assembly, and unless he Preach false Doctrine, or
introduce any part, or means of Worship, not warranted by the Word of God; he is
Justifiable before all the World by your own Principles.

And further, Some plead the matter should be decided, by a Vote of the
Congregation: And (though there is neither Precept nor Precedent for such a thing,
that I know of) this seems more Reasonable than the former. For every one in
the Congregation has as much Liberty to Sing, as the Oldest Deacon in the
Church, and as good a Right to decide this Question. For, there are many N.
Communicants of you Anti-Regular-Singers, that know ten times as much about
Singing, and can Sing ten times as well, as any of those of you that are
Communicants. And since you are as much divided about the Persons, who you
suppose have a Right to vote in this Affair, as the Papists, about the Subject
of Infallibility, (for, some of them, say, it is in the Pope alone: others, that
it is in an Aecceminical Council; others, think it is in Beth together, and in
neither separate; and we Protestants justly say, it is in none of them) till
you are agreed, who are to decide the matter by a Vote, it must e'n go
Undetermined in any such way.

But then further I affirm, that the Care (at least) of Setting the Tune, does
properly belong to the Pastor; and supposing he is tolerably skilled in Singing,
it appertains to him to set it. I Am sure, in the Jewish Church, the Levites
were over the Song, 1 Chronicles. 6.31^. chapter 15.19, 22. 2 Chr. 5.12. chapter 7.6. and
30.21. And I see no Reason why Ministers should not be over it now, especially,
when they are Skilful. I Am sure I know no such Ecclesiastical Officer of Divine
Appointment, as a Quiris^er. As for the Deacons, the Business assigned 'em by
the word of GOD, is to serve Tables, and not to Tune the Psalm. And I Am humbly
of opinion, that the Reason why our New England Pastors han't generally done
this Service for the Church, but put it on the Deacons, has been either because
they could not Sing, or because they would free themselves of the Trouble. And
no doubt, if a Minister cannot set the Tune, or it be burdensome to him; he may
direct one to do it; who is most capable and best skilled. For as every man has
received the Gist, so let him minister the same, 1 Pet. 4.10. But such are much
deceived, who think a Minister takes too much upon him, that sets the Tune
himself; especially, if he can Sing as well as any of his People, or if he
cannot, yet Calls upon whom he sees best to do it. The Master of a Family, will
set the Tune himself if he can: and if he cannot, and any of his Children or
Servants can do it a great deal better, I think he is a Proud Man, that scorns
to put them upon it; and to be guided by them in this Exercise and part of
Family-Religion.

And then, in our way, when a Person has been p^^^^d upon to set the Tune, it
has ever been l^^^^^ his Dise^tion, what Tune to set, and How. And agr^^bl^,
when Deacon Tenny (of Blessed Memory) set the Tune in our Congregation, he
(...) Tune of the 119 Psalm, when, (there are yet Living Witnesses that can
well remember) there was but three or four Men in the Town could Sing it. And
yet none ever grumbl'd against him for it, that I can learn. And when I set the
Tune in mother Place, I bro't in a Tune to the 24th Psalm, which is said to be
an Indian Tune, when but about 10 or 12 Men, were Masters of it, as I remember,
when we sung it first. But none called my doing so Intrusion, but all were
pleased with it, so far as I know. And there is the same Reason Now, not to say
a great deal more, why, my setting the Tune, and now and then, one, not so
commonly Sung, should be acceptable. For truly, I never took upon me to (...)
the Tune here, till the Good old Deacon, yet a^ive, had many Years ago, begged
me to Excuse him, in Deacon Tenny's Absence --; and Elder Tenny had desired me
again and again to do it; and a whole Room full of People, at my own House had
done the like, the matter being prop^sed and Discoursed amongst them, and all
acquiesc'd in (...) so far as I perceived (I profess I cannot conceive why they
should not) and Finally, I confess, I took one wrong step; condescending to
propose to the Brethren as I did, whether it would be grateful to them, that I
should for the future Tune the Psalm, acquainting them with Elder Tenny's
Desire, and what Discourse had passed at my own House. Upon making which
Proposal, a Principal Brother of our Church, (after a little Pause) said, Sir,
I^ you will take the T^^^ble of setting the Tune, to be sure it will be grateful
to us. And no Man saying the least word to the contrary, I took their silence
for Consent (as I do in a multitude of other cases) and thenceforth have set
the Tune. And for several Months I set only the usual Tunes, and in the way I
was ever wont to set them; and continued to do so till I was told to my Head
(by some I shall not name) that I set the Tune by Rule --. And indeed, when I see
People so unreasonable, and would be angry with me for Singing by Rule (as they
supposed) I at length resolved never to set a Tune again, any other way than by
Note. And have governed my self accordingly, and intend to do so. And further I
received a Letter from the Reverend and Aged Mr. Wise of ^^sw^ch, wherein he
gave it, as His Judgment, That when there were a s^ff^^^number in a
Congregation, to carry away a Tune Roundly, it was then proper to intr^duce
that Tune: Which Letter I rea^ to the Church; and I never yet set any Tune
Publicly, but there were (as I said before) (...) to carry the Tune, without
the least hazard of making a ^^^^^er.

And now after all (...). I Have used, I never (as I might have added (...) a
word in any Sermon about this U^ace (...) till a great part of the T^^n had for
near halt a Year, been in a mere flame about it; and then, I at first Preached
only some general Truths, that I hoped, by God's Blessing, might compose the
Minds of the Good People amongst us -- I say after all] to be treated as I have
been, not only in this Town, but in other Places, by some, at who^e Hands I
deserve no such Treatment, is not fair, nor just. And I think, I Am justly
offended at it. And I pray God convince and pardon those who in a time of
Temtation, (not knowing that manner of spirit they were a^^ed by) have
shamefully entreated me: And, Deliver me from unreasonable Men!

Thus Net'bour, I Have endured the Fatigue of Hearing and Answering your
Objections. I might say abundance more in my own Vindication, but I will rather
still seek unto God, and Commit my Cause to him, who sits in the Throne Judging
^^ght. And verily, I would not have said so much, Remembering what my late
Excellent Friend, Mr Bernard of Andover, said to me on a special occasion, --
He that is not Tattle-proof, is not sit to live i^ this World, especially in a
Public (...)) but that I know, -- While it is sufficient for ^ Minister, ^^at
he have a Good Conscience, it is necessary for ^is Hearers, that he have a Good
Name.

I might also, have considered what Arguments there are for Regular Singing;
but, besides that the thing is self evident, you may see Arguments sufficient
to satisfy any unprejudiced Person, in the close of Dr. C. Mather's ^ed Singer,
and in the other T^ea^se, I have so often men^ioned; and I must be Excused at
present, being weary with speaking, if you a'nt with hearing.

N. Sir, I Am abundantly satisfied, and I thank you for your pains; and pray God
Reward you; and follow you Good Endeavors among us to forward Regular Singing,
and every other thing that is praiseworthy, with a signal Blessing. And I beg
your Pardon, (...) all you have seen amiss in me, in this matter.

M. I heartily thank you, Nei'bour for your kind Acceptance of my poor
Endeavors, and pray, that if you have received any Light, God may have all the
Glory; and I your Prayers, that God will still assist and bless me in his Work:
That He will forgive all my Follies and Weakness, and sinful Infirmities
attending my best Performances, and bring us at length to serve him Day and
Night in his Temple, and Sing his Praises without Imperfection and without End,
in the Heavenly World. Farewell.

The Epilogue or Conclusion.
BUT thus my Friends, I Have used Similitudes. And wish what I Have offered may be
rightly applied and improved; and if any don't Understand any part of our
Dialogue, or have yet any Objection I have not reached, and fully satisfied; if
they will come to my House (and treat me properly) when I Have Leisure, I will with
all my Powers, endeavor their Satisfaction. And wherein we are agreed, Let us
walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3.16.

And I beseech you all who have Light in this Affair, to put your Shoulder to
this Good Work. Consider, E^ra 10.4.

Finally, Let all our Young People be encouraged to improve the L^ng
Winter-Evenings in Learning to Sing. And if this be to teach Children and
Servants to ^is^hey their Parents, Let 'em e'n say on. This is as Groundless a
Cavil as any of the former. And pray don't let Parents and Masters, by their
Example or any other way, teach their Youth to disobey their Ecclesiastical
Guides and Overseers.

Indeed, You that are in your Min^ity, must not absent your selves from the
Service of your Parents or Masters, without their Leave. But it is to be
supposed they allow you some time for Recreation. And if you spend that in
Learning to ^ing by Note, you do well. I Will be answerable for it, if it appear
otherwise. If your Superiors allow you no time at all for suitable Diversion,
it is very bard; but while it is so, you must e'n bear it patiently, the I hope
we have no such Parents or Masters amongst us. However, I charge you to observe
the Good Orders of the Families you belong to; and be sure don't be absent from
prayers. And in all things approve your selves Good and Obedient Children and
Servants; and Sing at your Work, when you can do it Decently; and learn to Sing
as well as ever you can. And Remember you have a Master in Heaven, and if
Superiors Commands are repugnant to His, you're under no Obligation to obey
them. And now, The Good Lord help us all to remember This, and help us always
to approve our selves to Him, who is our Father and Master in Heaven, that we
may at length meet together, and bear our part in Singing the Song of all the
Creatures. Rev. 5.13. Saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be unto him
that sits upon the Throne and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

