Mr. SYMMES's SERMON, CONCERNING PREJUDICE In Matters of Religion.

A DISCOURSE Concerning PREJUDICE In Matters of Religion. OR, An ESSAY, To show
the Nature, Causes, and Effects of such Prejudices: And also the Means of
Preventing, or Removing them.

By Thomas Symmes, A. M. and V. D. M.

Mat. 21.42. -- Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The Stone which the
Builders rejected, the same is become the head of the Corner. 1 Pet. 2.8. -- A
Stone of stumbling and a Rock of Offense, even to them which stumble at the
Word, being disobedient --. Joh. 6.60. Many said, This is an hard saying, who
can hear it? Gal. 5.11. -- The Offense of the Cross --. BOSTON: Printed by S.
Kneeland, for S. Gerrish, Sold at his Shop in Cornhill. 1722.

THE DEDICATION.
To the Second Church in Newbury, of which the Reverend Mr. John Tafts is
Pastor.
Reverend and Dearly Beloved,
THE Art of Printing (invented, but about two hundred Years since) has been a
vast Service to Religion and Learning. Hence, the Statesman, the Physician, the
Gentleman, the Mechanic, yea, the Ladies, as well as the Scholar, the
Philosopher, the Christian, and the Divine are furnished with agreeable
Libraries. And though it is matter of Lamentation, that this excellent Art, has
been abused, (as Music, Poesy, and other Arts have also been,) to the
Dishonor of Almighty GOD, the Scandal of Religion, the hardening of the wicked,
and the grief of Wise and Good Men: yet the Reformed Churches, and particularly
our Nation, and Land have great cause to be thankful for this noble Invention;
they being hereby richly supplied (not only with various other useful Books,
but) with great plenty of very excellent Sermons, Expositions of Scripture,
Systems of Divinity, and the like; by which, (as many of the eminent Servants
of God being dead, yet speak unto us; so many other worthy Persons, and
especially) the Ministers of the Gospel are still blessed with Opportunities of
rendering their Usefulness more extensive and durable, which I think they ought
to improve with all thankfulness and readiness. For though I Am persuaded we may
be too forward to appear in Print; and am sure that the suppression of some
things I Have seen would have contributed as much, or more to the Honor of the
Authors, their Country and Religion, than the Publication of them: yet I verily
believe that some good and great Divines, who have been and are amongst us,
have been too shy, modest and reserved, and made themselves too far guilty of
hiding their Talent in a Napkin, whilst they have withheld from us what is more
precious than Gold! And truly it is my humble Opinion, that we had much better
hear with some feeble Essays and weak Births from the Press, (which we are
under no obligation in the World to patronize, admit under our ro^f, or touch
with one of our Fingers,) than by rash censuring such honest wellmeant
Composures, and scoffing at the Authors thereof, take an unhappy method to
deprive our selves of the pleasure and advantage of perusing many other more
entertaining Meditations, and Discourses, by thus tempting the worthy Authors
of them (that they may escape the scourge of the tongue, to refuse exposing
them to public view.

In short, I think that as the Ministers of the Gospel (of which Order, I
confess my self the most unworthy) should see, that they have a Call of God, to
Preach in this or that Place; and when they are satisfied therein should not be
discouraged on any score whatever: so when PROVIDENCE calls them to Publish
their Sermons, or other Writings, (and Wisdom is profitable to direct them in
judging of this, they ought unquestionably to do it, and leave the Event with
GOD. For my own part I do and will (relying upon Divine Aids) govern my self by
this Rule.

As for the ensuing Discourse, all I shall say is; that I first Studied it for,
and Preached it to my own People, without the least though it of it is being made
Public, (it being partly occasioned by a most unhappy and unreasonable
Controversy about Singing by Note;) and having offered it in two other
Congregations, where I was soon after called to Preach; I at length delivered
it at your Lecture; where sundry of my Brethren in the Ministry were present,
who expressed their Approbation of it; and several amongst you desiring it
might be published, I at length consented to it; partly to make you some amends
for not gratifying your desires of several Sermons, you some Years since by
repeated Votes asked of me; and partly because I perceive it was not acceptable
to some in whose bearing it was preached: who will, I hope, do me the Justice,
and themselves the Honor to change their minds about it, (if they will vouchsafe
to give it the reading,) and repent of the ill Temper they were in, when it was
delivered to them in the Name of GOD from the Sacred Desk. However, I remember
what is said of the bearers of the most celebrated Preacher that ever was (the
Son of God only excepted) that some believed, and some believed not, Act.
28.24. But the chief Reason (I honestly profess) of my printing the following
Discourse is, because I judge that (such as it is) it is needful, and may (if
God please to bless it) be useful amongst us in this part of the Country, and
wish there were no occasion for it elsewhere. And though I might easily have
enlarged on the Nature and Signs of Prejudice; and did so, especially on the
latter, in my own Pulpit: yet I was loath to add any thing to this Sermon, that
was not in it, when delivered to you: but if this find acceptance, I design
another Discourse concerning Christians Prejudices against one another, if God
give Opportunity, (unless any of my Reverend Fathers or Brethren will undertake
that Subject, which I should very much rejoice in,) and if my Friends encourage
my proceedings in that work, I may therein speak more largely to the Head
mentioned.

And now, Brethren, I thankfully acknowledge my obligations to you, for your
kind acceptance of my poor Endeavors, from time to time, in the work of the
Ministry: praying GOD, who has greatly blessed the Gospel amongst you,
especially upon the first Settlement of your present worthy Pastor (One Hundred
and Thirty six Persons being added to your Church in the space of Three Years;
whereof 80 were added in one Year, and 31 of them in one Day, May 1.1715.) that
He would take delight to dwell amongst you, and pour out abundance of his
Spirit on you and yours: And entreating your constant fervent Prayers for me
and mine: and particularly, beseech you to follow this Discourse (which Heaven
has made serviceable to several in hearing it) with your Requests, that it may
be useful to such as shall see meet to read it.

I am Brethren Your Hearty Friend and Servant, THOMAS SYMMES.
Bradford, December. 27.1721.
A DISCOURSE concerning Prejudice in Matters of Religion.
JOH. 1.46. And Nathanael said unto him, Can there my good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and see.


IN the Text before us, there are Two things Observable. First, A Doleful
Effect of Prejudice. Secondly, A proper Remedy pref^ib'd, for the Care of it.

First, We Have a doleful Effect of Prejudice, in the former part of the verse;
Nathaniel said, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Where,

Obs. 1. THE Person under the Influence of Prejudice. His name was Nathanael,
But who he was is uncertain. However, we know, that he was a very Good Man. Our
Blessed Savior Himself, bare witness of him; that He was an Israelite indeed,
v. 47. He was a Man of great Integrity, both in the Sight of GOD and Man: A
Man, in whole Spirit there was no Guile. i. e. None Allowed; none Reigning:
none Imputed. This was Nathanael's Character, who was notwithstanding in some
measure under the Power of Prejudice. But then,

2. LET us consider, What this Excellent Man, was prejuc'd against, or with
Relation to. It was not against any Maxim in Philosophy. That had been no great
Wonder, for there are Multitudes of Good Men that are no Philosophers, and are
not capable of Judging of Abstruse points in Philosophy. It was not against any
inconsiderable Person, who had by his Irregularities, in a great measure
sorfeited his Credit, with this good Man. No! But,

1 HE was Prejudiced against the Greatest Truth of Revealed Religion, Even
this; That Jesus of Nazareth i^ the True Messiah. Philip being called by Christ
to be an Apostle, and finding Nathanael; tells him, that they had found Him of
whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the Son of
Joseph, i. e. The Messiah; The Consolation of Israel, whom many were then
justly expecting. But Nathanael could not receive this Truth. He believed in
the Messiah, Who, he thought was yet to come: But did not believe, that Jesus
was He. hence he was prejudiced against the Greatest and Best Man that ever was
in the World, even the Man Christ Jesus. Not believing Him to be the Messiah,
as indeed He was; He must needs esteem Him a Grand Impostor. Hence also, he was
prejudiced against the Greatest Dety in Christianity, even that, of Receiving
Jesus Christ. Thus Christ came to His own, and (for the present) His own
received Him not. Nathanael's Prejudice, so blinded his mind, that he could see
no Form nor Comeliness in Jesus Christ, who is Fairer than the Children of Men,
even altogether Lovely: He could by no means believe Him to be the Messiah, and
hence disputes against believing in Him.

IT is then, no New thing, for Real Saints to be prejudiced for a Time and in a
Degree, against some of the Best Men in the World, yea, against some of the
most Important Truths and Duties of Religion.

Obs. 3. THE true Reasons of Natbanael's Prejudice against Christ; or, whence
it was, that he labored of such Prejudice. Now this was owing partly, to
Nathanael's Ignorance and Misapprehension: And partly, to Philip's
Defectiveness in preaching Christ to Nathanael.

1. HIS Prejudice arose from his Ignorance and wrong Notion of the Messiah.
For, One Absurdity admitted, is productive of many others. Can any good thing
come out of ^areth? q. d. Can any worthy Excellent Person, Can the Promised and
long-expected Messiah come out of such an obscure, contemptible Place as
Nazareth? And out of a Place of which the Scripture did not make mention, as
whence the Messiah should arise. The People made the same Objection. Chap.
7.41. Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Nathanael considering the (...) of the
Place, and not having a right notion of the Doctrine of Christ's Humiliation,
and Expecting (as the Jewish Church did) a Temporal Savior, be was Prejudiced
against Jesus of Nazareth and could not at present, believe Him to be the
Messiah, and as such receive Him.

2. BUT then, His Prejudice was occasioned partly, by the Defective Account
Philip gave him, of our Savior. Nathanael was a Man, well acquainted with his
Bible no doubt: A Man that had searched the Scripture and understood from
thence, that according to Mic. 5.2. the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem,
and not in Nazareth, or Galilee. Now some think that Philip supposed Christ to
be born at Nazareth, and that He was really the Son of Joseph; and hence, fell
in, with the Vulgar way of speaking, calling our Savior (as He was Usually
termed) Jesus of N^zareth, the Son of Joseph. Note hence.

THAT Vulgar Expressions are sometimes very improper, and founded on great
Mistakes. Indeed, had Philip thoroughly understood himself, and having spoken in
the Popular Style, had he expounded himself, and informed Nathanael, that
Christ was born in Bethlehem, though called Jesus of Nazareth, because that was
the Place of His Residence, or, for any other sufficient reason: And that He
was really the Son of GOD, though called the Son of Joseph, because he was the
Husband of His Mother, the Blessed Virgin; He might possibly have prevented
Nathanael's Prejudice, and obviated his Objection, against Christ. But it may
be he was himself ignorant in these Points. And his Defect may teach the
Ministers of the Gospel to use their utmost Discretion, that they may
anticipate any weighty Objection, that might arise in the minds of their
Hearers: And to take heed, they don't beget or confirm Prejudices in their
minds, against the Truth, by an over-popular and unguarded way of Expressing
themselves, and by not using proper Distinctions, where the subject calls for
them. Hence also Hearers should be cautioned, that they don't Reject any Truth
in Religion, because not so properly expressed, in some Sermons, as could be
desired. And that they should make allowance for the Ir^firmities of Preachers,
who (...) best, know but in part, and Prophesy but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.

Secondly, WE proceed to consider, the Remedy prescribed by Philip, for the
Cure of Nathanael's Prejudice, in the Close of the Text. Come and See. q d.
Don't rashly conclude, that Jesus is not the Christ! Though I cannot readily
Answer your Objection, yet I am satisfied He is the Messiah. And I don't ask
you to pin your Faith on my Sleeve, but would have you come ^o Christ your
self; and hear His Doctrine, See His Miracles; Observe His Con^tion, and
Compare all with the Unerring Oracles of GOD; and then judge if This is not the
Messiah. Don't determine, before you have impartially Considered the matter. This
is what Christians ought to do, in matters of Religion, and should not take up
Prejudices from Reports and common Vogue. Or, if they have ta^ up Pre^udices
against what their Spiritual Guides inform them is the Truth, or their Duty;
they should take this Method to Remove them. They should Come and See. Examine
things impartially, Be willing to be convinced of and ready to embrace the
Truth; and attend their Duty, so far as Christ shall discover it to them.
Coming to Christ, attending His Directions, is the Best Method to See our Way
through the Wilderness of this World, to that which is to Come.

IN further speaking to our Text, I shall take Occasion (by Divine Assistence)
to Discour^e of the Nature, Causes and Effects of Prejudice: And also, of the
Method of preventing or Removing Prejudices in matters of Religion. I might
also have considered the Signs of these Prejudices and the Obligations
Christians are under to take heed of imbibing them; or to endeavor to lay them
aside: But this would draw out my Discourse to an undue length: I Will therefore
content my self to speak particul^y, only to the Four Heads first mentioned.
And,

First, LET us consider the Nature of Prejudice. Or, What we'er to understand
here, by Prejudice. Now (though the word is frequently used in a different sense,
yet) by Prejudice, (agreeably to the Notation o^ the Word) we intend here, A
Rash Judgment before Trial: or, a Wrong Judgment formed in our Minds, before
we are well appriz'd of the Thing or Person we are to judge of Now our Mind is
prepossessed, the Judgment is forestalled (as we say) or, we prejudge the Thing.

THE Object of Prejudice in general (as we here use the Word) is any Thing or
Person. There are no Persons, but we may possibly be prejudiced with respect to
them, either against them, or in their favor. There is no Error in Religion so
absurd, but some or other may embrace it. There is no Truth so evident, no
Practice ^o commendable, but some or other may stumble at it.

THE Prejudices that arise in our Minds, may not only be distinguished in
regard of the Object of them (some respecting Persons, others, Things: Some
relating to Points in Philosophy or Politics; others, to Matters in Religion,
which we are now to consider.) But in respect of the degree of them. Some are
more inveterate and deeply rooted, others are more slight and easily removed.
But then,

Secondly, LET us take a view of some of the Causes of Prejudice in Matters of
Religion, and see whence it is that even Good Men, are sometimes under the
Instuence of Prejudice. And here I might say, that it is owing Originally to
the Corruption of our Natures. From the Beginning it was not so. GOD made Man
Upright, perfectly free from all wrong Sentiments. But Man by his Apostasy, has
lost the Primitive Rect^ade of his Nature; and all his Powers are depraved and
disordered. His Understanding is darkened; His Will and Affections are become
Rebellious and Ungovernable: the Possions firangely bias the Will; and both
have a very powerful ^uence on the Understanding to push it on to make a
judgment of Things and Persons, before it is rightly informed; and hence it
comes to be filled with Prejudice.

NOW this Corruption remains in part even in good Men; and does in this way
frequently discover it self in them.

AGAIN, It might be added, that Satan has a great hand in the Prejudices that
are to be found in Christians against the things of GOD, as well as in those
against One Another. That Grand Adversary has near Access to our Minds, and a
Power of Suggesting Thoughts to them. He can if permitted, fill Men's Hearts.
Act. 5.3. He can misrepresent Persons and things to our Minds. He carries on
his Accursed Designs against us, very much in this way. He can blind the Mind.
2 Cor. 4.4. He can enter into Men. Luke 22.3. And some he leads Captive at his
Will. 2 Timothy 2.^6. And this he does by first filling the Mind with Prejudice.

Briefly, IT might be Observed, that it proceeds from the Just Judgment of GOD
upon some Persons and Societies; that the Minds of Men are filled with
Prejudice in Matters of Religion. GOD in His spotless Sovereignty does
sometimes thus punish Sin with Sin. We read of those, who because they received
not the Love of the Truth -- for this cause GOD shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a Lie, 2 These. 2.10, 11. It also proves a
Comprehensive Judgment on some Families, Towns and Churches, yea Countries;
that some Good Men are prejudiced with respect to some Things and Persons.

BUT to be more particular, (not that I pretend to Enumerate all the special
Causes of Prejudice, for they being various, according to the various Objects
they refer to, this would be an endless Task) I will mention a few Instances,
which will help to illustrate the Point.

First. PREJUDICES in Religion sometimes arise, from a Misunderstanding, or
Misapplication of the Sacred Scriptures. The Apostle Peter observes that in the
Epistles of the Great Doctor of the Gentiles, there were some things hard to be
understood -- which says he, the Unlearned Wrest -- 2 Pet. 3.16. The Original
Word rendered Wrest, is a Meraphor, (say the Critics) from Tormentors, who put
a Man on the Wrack and Torture him so long, till they make him speak what he
never meant to speak. Thus some Persons serve the Scriptures, they force a
sense upon it, which the Holy Spirit never intended, nor came it into, his
mind. There are many that hear the Word that do not understand it. Mat. 13.19.
Preachers may justly expostulate with some of their Hearers, as our Blessed
Savior did with some of his, Joh. 8.43. Why do you not understand my Speech?
Yea this is sometimes the Case of Christ's Disciples. Joh. 12.16. These things
understood not his Disciples at the first. Others, they Understand indeed, but
they misapply the Word. Sometimes, they apply to others what they should apply
to themselves, and miserably blunder in the Application they make to
themselves. And hence they are prejudiced against many Truths and Duties in
Religion, and against those that don't think with them.

AGAIN, Oftentimes these Prejudices are the product of Education. We suck in
Prejudice, even from the Breast. The Prejudices of Education are sometimes very
numerous and commonly very powerful. The mind being in our tender Years, more
susceptive of Impressions of this kind. And such Prejudices are not eradicated
but with great difficulty. They Are often propogated from the Father to the Son,
and from one Generation they are transmitted to another. This we see awfully
verifyed in the Prejudices the Jewish Nation are under against Christianity,
and by many sorrowful Instances amongst Christians of various Opinions in
Circumstantial Points in Religion. Too many Christians taking up their
Principles in Religion very much upon Trust from those that have the Care of
their Education, they are unaccountably prejudiced in their favor and against
the contrary. Men's Posterity often approve their sayings and Practices, though
they are not good, Psalm. 49.13.

AGAIN, These Prejudices Sometimes arise from the Great Veneration Men have for
Ancient Customs, or what they falsely call, Ancient. There are indeed Customs
that are Lawful and Commendable, To such the Apostle refers, 1 Cor. 11.16. And
the more Ancient such are doubtless the more Venerable. But there are also vain
Customs, Jer. 10.3. Yea, there are Abom^ble Customs, that sometimes obtain too
far among a Professing People. Lev. 18.30. And some Customs that were o^e
Allowable and Laudable, may in Process of Time become inexpedient (...) Sinful,
witness the Love-F^asts, and H^ly Ki^ practiced ^n the Primitive Times, to say
nothing o^ some obsolete Customs of this Land.

NOW many Persons are much swayed by Custom. Custom is a Law with them. And in
many Cases it should be so. But ^or want of Distinguishing and duly comparing
Customs with the Rule, many are betrayed into woeful Prejudices against many of
their Fellow Christians that cannot submit to the Customs they have a Fondness
for. Now such as are governed by Custom, and are not able, or don't give
themseves leave to Examine the Grounds of Custom, and whither it be Consonant
to Reason and Scripture, will necessarily be prejudiced in some measure against
the Truth, whenever the Customs they follow, happen to be unlawful or
inexpedient.

AGAIN, Sometimes Men's Prejudices in Matters of Religion owe their Original to
their great Affection to, and high esteem of these and those Persons, and their
mean tho'ts of others. There are too many who in this respect have the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons. They receive the Word as the
Word of Man, and not as the Word o^ God: Contrary to the roble practice of the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.13. They practically call those whose Persons they
have in Admiration, their Fathers; though our Savior has expressly said, Call no
man Father upon Earth, Mat. 23.9. i. e. Submit not your Faith and Conscience in
Matters of Religion to any Humane Authority; nor give up your selves absolutely
to the conduct of any Man's Judgment in Matter of Faith. But search the
Scripture daily, To the Law and to the Testimony, or, Come and See! Now when
Persons will Embrace and Commend a Tenet or Practice, merely for the sake of
some they have an high e^teem of and reject a Principle or Practice, because some
they have a mean opinion of are zealous for it, this will of Course ^eget
Prejudices in their Minds.

IT has been well said,

Amicus Plate, Amiens Aristotle's, sed ^gis Amien ^titas!

AGAIN, Sometimes Men's Unweary Arguing from Events, produces Prejudices in
their Minds. By this means persons are sometimes prejudiced against the
Servants of CHRIST. Thus when the Inhabitants of Melita of old, saw the Viper
fatten on the Apostles Hand, they immediately thence inter, that he was a
Murderer; and therefore though he had escaped the Sea, Vengeance suffered him not
to live, Acts 28.4. But the Wise Man has told us that all things here come
alike to all. And a greater than he has taught us, that the greatest Sufferers,
are not always the greatest Sinners. Luke 13. ^nit. Men are sometimes ready to
condemn these and those Principles and Practices, merely because they occasion
Division. But this argues they are prejudiced in the Case. And this way of
Arguing from the Event occasions this their Prejudice. But don't such forget,
Joh. 7.7. So there was a division among the people because of him. And
agreeably says our Savior to His Disciples, Mat. 10.34 -- I came not to send
peace, but a Sword -- We. Eventually. Indeed, in many Cases we may and ought to
argue from Events, but we cannot do so in all. I said therefore Prejudice
proceeds from an unwary arguing from Events. It is not always sufficient to
prove^ Action faulty, because the Event of it was Trouble some, or the occasion
of a World of Sin; for Christ is a Scope of Stumbling and a Rock of Offense.
Not ^ffy the Person, but the Doctrine of Christ is so. 1 Cor. 1.23. The
Preathing of Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishuess. And there are many (...) that stumble at the word. 1 Pet.
2.8.

AGAIN, Some Peoples Prejudices are occasioned by their Lusts and Idols. Thus
the Disciples of Old were prejudiced against Mary's Anointing our Savior at
the House of Simon the Leper. Matthew says, they would indignation, saying, to what
purpose is this waste (...) Chap. 26.8. Mark tells us, They murmured against
her, Chap. 14.5. John informs us, that Judas Iscariot that betrayed him, said,
Why was not this Ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
Chap. 12.5. And adds, ver. 6. Not that he cared for the poor, but this he said,
because he was a thief and had the bag, and bare what was therein. It was their
Coveteousness that produced their Prejudice against that Noble Action, and the
Godly Woman by whom it was done. Thus Men's inordinate Love of Money prejudices
them against the Doctrine of giving Alms, and Works of Piety, or devoting their
Tenths to Pious Uses. And their Love to many other Lusts, prejudices them
against the Ministry of the Word: And the Administration of Discipline and
Censure of the Church.

FINALLY, (to mention no more Particulars) Men's Prejudices are often owing to
the Unskilfulness or Unfaithfulness and Cowardice, or Unexemplariness of the
Ministers of the Gospel. Some Pretenders to the Sacred Function are Unskilful
and cannot: Others are Cowardly and ^are not; others are Idle and Lukewarm and
do not; Others are Unfaithful and will not rightly divide the Word of Truth.
They Preach themselves, study their own Ease and Secular Interest; Prophecy
smooth things; and daub with Untempered Mortur; Crying Peace, Peace, when there
is no Peace! Hence the People are Prejudiced against the Truth! Thus when the
false Prophets of Old had flattered Ahab, that he should prosper at
Ramoth-Gilend, this Prejudiced him against the Truth delivered to him by
Micaiah, and confirmed h^s hatred of him, so that he ordered the Prophet to
Prison, with direction that he should have Prisoners fare. Thus those Ministers
that don't speak the Oracles of GOD, plainly, boldly, zealously and yet
prudently, and live agreeably, will Prejudice their Hearers, it is to be feared,
against the Truth faithfully dispensed by others.

AND now having considered some of the Causes of Men's Prejudices in Matters of
Religion, I might have shown the Causes of Christians Prejudices against one
another: And said that sometimes Christians (such as they are) are Prejudiced
against others; because others are Prejudiced against them: Or, because they
too easily take up Reports of their Fellow Christians, without enquiring into
the Foundation thereof: or, because they hear of others Failings, but not of
their Humiliations: The News of which is not wont to fly so swiftly as that of
their Miscarriages: But it is beside my present design to insist on these
things. Let us therefore,

Thirdly, CONSIDER, Some of the Woeful Effects of Prejudice in Matters of
Religion. These are very numerous; A few Instances may be proposed under two
Heads. 1. They hinder much Good. 2. They do much Harm.

First, THEY hinder much Good. They hinder Men's doing good. They often hinder
Men's accepting Christ and Entering on a Course of Religion. Some are prejudiced
against engaging in a Course of Religion, because they imagine that the power
of Godliness is inconsistent with Pleasure; others, because they apprehend it
will hurt their Worldly interest: Like the Young Man in the Gospel, who went
away from Christ Sorrowful, because he had Great Possessions; and could not
find in his heart to sell all, to buy the Pearl of great price; or, because
they observe that some Professors of Religion, don't live answerably to their
Profession. By such groundless Prejudices, some are diverted from giving up
themselves to GOD.

AGAIN, These Prejudices, as they obstruct a work of Conversion, so they hinder
a work of Reformation. So long and so far as Men are prejudiced, either in
favor of their own Corrupt Tenants, or Irreligious Practices; or against the
Truths and Ways of God; they will hold fast deceit and refuse to return. If
they have left off to be wise and are gone back from God, and are turned aside
after lying vanities; they will not return, or but feignedly, while their woeful
Prejudice are retained. Briefly, let what will be amiss, and let it be ever so
obvious, while the Man is under the Malignant Influence of Prejudice, he will
hold on his Way, and wax worse and worse.

AGAIN, Prejudice in matters of Religion hinders Men's Receiving Good. It
lamentably obstructs the success of the Gospel, the Efficacy of the Word,
Sacraments and Censures. The Word though ever so Excellently Preached will not
profit, unless mined with Faith, received in Love, laid up in the Heart, and
practiced in the Life. Now Men will not do this, while prejudiced against the
Word. So then, these Prejudices, hinder Men's doing and receiving Good: They
hinder the Divine Blessing from accompanying their Endeavors and the Means of
Grace, and consequently the Glory of GOD and the Good of Souls, which is the
Chief Good.

Secondly, THEY do much harm, they do a World of Mischief. First, they often
hurt Men's Credit, fully their Reputation, darken their Character, and render
them ignominious to a great degree.

HENCE, it is that Men often speak and act very Unreasonably; they are so far
from carrying it Christianly, that they don't show themselves Men. They Are like
those the Apostle Peter describes, they speak evil of the things they
understand not: Or, like those we read of, 1 Timothy 1.7. They understand neither
what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Now it is very dishonorable for any
thus to (...) themselves, and act like the Horse and Mule that have no
Understanding: Or, like the Adder, (...) a deaf ear to the voice of the
C^^r^er, charm he (...) so wisely.

AGAIN, These Prejudices hurt Men's (...). To say nothing of their natural
Tendency to lessen M^s ^istates, by occasioning their mispence of Time in
needless and Endless Dispates; By indisposing them for, or taking them of from
their E^ess, (though (...) such things have mine Eyes sees) i will consider only
the (...) Influence of these Prejudices. From hence it is often(...) Men take
wrong Me^ in Getting; and don't take right Courses in laying out their (...)
They Are sometimes so prejudiced against the (...) of Doing Good with their
Estates, through their (...) Love of the World; that they don't Honor the Lord
with their Substance; but withold more (...), Rob God Himself of his (...),
and this brings (...) to Poverty, or prevents the Blessing of God, which ^keth
R^, from accompanting their Labors and (...) in their particular C^ings.

AGAIN, These Prejudices (...) Meas. Posserity. As was said before, they are
often propagated from one Go^ation to another. And no wonder, for Christians
are too often, more zealous in some Little Points that are the Objects of their
Prejudice, than in the weightiest Matters in Religion. Now GOD is will not to vi^
the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children -- And since it is not unusual for
the same mo^ Causes to produce the same Effects, they may justly expect, that,
if Prejudice in the Parent, hindered the Divine Bless^, and proour'd the Divine
Malodiction; it will produce the same effect on the Child, that is under the
Instance of it. Thus Men Entail a Curse on their Posterity by their Prejudices
in Religion.

FURTHERMORE, These Prejudices, hurt Men's Souls. Were it only Men's Names,
Estates and Families that were hurt, it were sad, but this is not all. They
hurt their Souls, and that innumerable ways. They are sinful in themselves, and
expose Men to numberless Temptations to Sin. They lay Men open to the Wiles of
Satan, and give him (who loves to fish in troubled Waters) a great advantage to
betray them into many Sins: They greatly quench and grieve and vex the Holy
Spirit, and cause Him to suspend his Assisting and Comforting Influences. They
hinder Men's Growth in Grace, and render them sometimes, mere Dwarss in
Christianity all their Days.

AGAIN, They are Hurtful to Societies. They often occasion abundance of Sinful
Contention and vain Jangling. They set on Fire the whole Course of Nature, and
sometimes throw all into the last Confusion. And because of these things God is
often angry, with whole Churches, and Nations and Kingdoms. None that are
acquainted with Church History will doubt the Truth of this --

IN short, The Prejudices of Christians in Matters of Religion, tend to bring
an Odium upon Religion it self and the Professors it; yea they reflect
dishonor upon the Glorious Author of it, which is the greatest Mischief that
can be thought of. As nothing does so much Commend Religion to the Love, Esteem
and Practice of Men, as Unity and Charity among the Professors of it, joined
with their otherwise Blameless and Useful Lives: So, Nothing does more
effectually Scandalize the World against Religion, and cause them to set their
Mouths against the very Heavens, than Sinful Contentions and Animosities and
want of Christian Charity among the Professors of it. Now if Prejudice be at
the Bottom of all this, then that is ultimately the Blameable Cause that
Religion is brought into Disrepute, and that Men say to the Almighty depart
from us. But thus I Have mentioned some of the Doleful Effects of Prejudice in
Religious Matters, and proceed in the Last place to propose a Method of
Preventing or Removing such Prejudices. And here are Two Inquiries to be
briefly Answered.

First, WHAT should Christians do, to prevent these Prejudices? That they
may not be infected with this Contagious Malady?

I Answer,

First, THEY should take heed of being prejudiced at the Dispensers of the
Word, or Professors of Religion. When once persons are prejudiced against the
Dispensers of the Word, they will by and by be prejudiced against their Ministry;
their way of Preaching, yea against the Matter they preach. They Will sometimes
groundlesly Suspect the Preacher has some particular Reference to their Case
(and pray Sirs what if he has?) and this is an Unpardonable Crime with them!
Hence they Nauseate and Disrelish the Best Sermons, and several ways they
discover this; forgetting, Ministers are to give to every one their Portion in
its Season, whither they will hear or whither they will forbear, and that upon
pain of Eternal Damnation if they repent not. Ezekiel. 33.8. Such are therefore
Unreasonable Men, with a witness (from all of whom, Libera nos Domine!) that
are angry with the Ministers of CHRIST for telling them the Truth, seeing
herein they do, but what it is their Duty to do; Necessity is laid upon them
and woe be unto them if they do it not. They should then beware of being
prejudiced against the Ministers of Religion, that would Steer clear of
Prejudices in Religion. For most certain it is, that when Men have learnt on
any score to despise the Messengers of the LORD; they will soon despise the
Message, and loath the best Sermons they can preach, as the Israelites did the
Manna in the Wilderness. Hence those very Sermons which whilst they were free
from Prejudice, against the Ministers of the Gospel, they would have highly
applauded, and thought they could scarce exceed in Commending, now they will Hiss
as scarce worth the Hearing. I speak what I know, and testify what I have seen
in several Instances! Horres^o R^ferens.

AGAIN, They must also take hoed of being prejudiced against the Professors of
Religion, and looking upon them in general as a Company of Hypocrites. For
though its probable there is none of our Churches, wherein there are not some
Hypocrites, yet the Law of Charity obliges us to hope, that many it may be the
most are Sincere. And such are very unjust that condemn all, for the sake of
some few. And they act very unsafely in this respect, in that this their way
tends to prejudice them against Religion.

Secondly, THEY should be well acquainted with the Word of GOD, and Read and
Hear it and submit to it as the Word of GOD.

THE Sacred Scriptures are able to make wise unto Salvation, to enlighten the
Eyes; and make wise the Simple. They are perfect, Teaching all that is
necessary to be Believed and Done in Religion. And so long and so far as our
Judgments and Practices are governed by the Word of GOD, we are safe; there is no
Danger of our being prejudiced against the Truths and Ways of GOD. But when we
depart from this Rule, we are immediately in Danger. So then Christians should
search the Scriptures daily and diligently, and labor to Understand what they
Read and Hear, and Submit to what they find to be the Truth, how contrary
soever to their Opinion or Practice, Humor or Interest: Or to the Opinion or
Practice of any other Person or Party. Christians must therefore Read and Hear
the Word, as the Word of GOD, and not as the Word of Man. For when once
Christians come to hear Sermons as the Word of Man and look no further, not
considering in whose stead the Ministers of the Gospel stand while in the
Discharge of their Office; and in whose Name they speak; they will soon be in
danger of saying at least in their Practice, as the Hearers of the Prophet
Jeremiah, Chap. 6.16, 17. -- We will not Walk therein -- We will not Hearken:

Thirdly, THEY should take heed of Superstition. Some Persons are much addicted
to Superstition. Thus it is with most that are of a Scrupulous Conscience.
They Are ready to look upon many things as Sins, which God has not forbidden: And
many things as Duty which GOD has not required. They Would be wiser and holier, not
only than their Teachers, but then God Himself. Whereas it is by the Law, we
attain the knowledge of Sin, And where there is no Law there is no
Transgression. Now as Prejudice sometimes begets Superstition, so Superstition
leads to Prejudice, and not seldom ends in it, as in an enchanted Circle.
Christians then must carefully avoid Superstition, or beware of thinking
themselves or others, obliged to do more than the Law requires, or to abstain
from what the Law no where forbids.

Fourthly, COME and See. i. e. Get and maintain within you a Teachable,
Governable Disposition. Come and See. (...) Exercise your Reason. Don't shut
your Eyes against the Light. Hear Counsel and receive Instruction that ye may
be wise in your Latter End. Show your selves Men, and act like Causes by
Counsel. Remember how you have received and heard. Consider and take Advice.
Particularly, Come and See the Evil Causes of Prejudice^ See how it is owing
Originally to the Corruption of our Nature; and that Satan has a deep Design in
promoting Prejudice in the minds of Christians; and that sometimes against some
of the least Commands, knowing what our Savior has said, Man. ^.19. Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so,
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do
and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. Come
and see that the Righteous God, does sometimes suffer this own Servants to
labor of these Prejudices, for a Time and in a Degree. Peter himself, was
prejudiced against the Doctrine of our Saviors Sufferings. And how severely
(...) our Savior rebuke him, Mat. 16, 23. Get thee behind me Satan --.

AGAIN, Come and see the Doleful Effects of Prejudice, how it makes way for
Sattn's entering into Men, and gives him a great Advantage against them: How it
keeps Christ out of the Soul, and keeps Multitude of Souls out of Heaven. And
oftentimes, it is a small matter at first that occasions the Prejudice, or that
Persons are Prejudiced about, that proves fatal and ruinous. A small matter
sometimes prejudices Christians against one another, whereby they are betrayed
into many Sins, and diverted from many Duties, and they are left to go on in
the paths of the Destroyer, heaping up Wrath against the Day of Wrath --.

Finally, BE much in Prayer to GOD to keep your Hearts and Minds through Christ
Jesus. All our Endeavors to keep our selves will be in vain unless GOD
undertake for us. He is Isreal's Keeper, He keeps the feet of His Saints! Let
us then commit the keeping of our Souls to Him, who is able to keep what we
commit to Him; and to present us faultless before the presence of His Glory
with exceeding Joy!

But then the

Second Enquiry is, WHAT should Christians do when under Prejudice, to get
their Prejudices Removed? What shall they do, that their Minds may be cured of
this evil Disease, which weakens and defiles their Minds; Unfits them for and
hinders them in then Operations, Tarnishes their B^y, and will prove deadly to
the Soul, unless it be realed

First, COME and See. If you have any reason to suspect, if any Wise, Knowing,
Experienced Christians suggest to you their Fears you are infected with this
Disease, Come to the Word and to the House of GOD, and try your selves by the
Signs of Prejudice proposed there. It Is a ruled Case, determined by the
Infallible Judge of Com^ersies, even Jesus Christ, That be that does evil
bateth the Light, -- Job. 3.20. It Is also an Argument of Prejudic, when Persons
reject Principles and Practices in Religion, because embraced and professed and
attended to, by such as they have no Charity for. Alas the Truth is as precious
in the Church of Rome, as in the Churches of New England. This Truth can lose
nothing of its Excellency because believed and professed by an Heretic. Its
never the less a precious Truth, That its safest to Trust to the Righteousness
of CHRIST alone for Justification, because Bellarmine the Atlas of Popery
confessed it at his Death. Its never the less a precious Truth and a
Fundamental Article of our Holy Religion, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
because the Devils in our Saviors Time confessed it (without doubt) with a
cursed Design to prejudice the World against it. Now this I say, Try your
selves by such Signs; and be willing to know you are infected with this
Distemper, if you are so. What Good will it do you to persuade your selves, you
are well, when you are Sick. Some People in a Phrenzy, or Delirious, when the
Mortal Fever is even at the height think themselves well, and they would
destroy themselves if not prevented. But before the Distemper prevail thus far,
see your Malady, and see your Danger; See the Necessity and Advantage of your
being healed, and also the Necessity of your being in the Use of Means. You
will never be cured if you do not do so. The whole have no need of the
Physician, but they that are Sick.

Secondly, SEEK out seasonably and in good earnest for Help. The longer you
delay, the more the Disease will prevail, and the more difficult will be the
Cure. If other Methods avail not, repair to your Spiritual Physician, your
Pastor, and be content to follow his Direction, and, don't be angry with him,
for telling you that you are infected (as the manner of some is) and giving you
an Account of the Rise, Seat and Tendency of your Distemper, and how 'twill
operate, and what you must do to be cured; and for doing his utmost to heal you.

Thirdly, FOLLOW the Instructions of your Spiritual Physician, so far as they
are consistent with Scripture and Reason, and don't meddle with such as don't
understand your Malady, or with such things as may be a disservice to you. This
is though it Reasonable amongst Men, in other Cases, we all readily submit to this
Method, when we or ours are Sick --. We don't baulk the Directions of the
Physician because the pursuing of them, will put us in Pain, or make us Sick,
or it may be occasion us some shame, and a little shock our Modesty. Well, Let
us be as wise for our Souls.

Finally, LOOK (...) GOD to direct to, and bless Means for your Cure. Without
Him, we are all Physicians of no value! He is the Great Physician of Souls, The
Lord our Healer. And though He will have us use the Means, we must not rest in
them, but wait on Him for a Blessing. And in as much as in this Case, our
Disease is also our Sin, we must bewail it before God, and beg of Him
Repentance and Forgiveness.

I shall now shut up the Discourse, with saying Two Things upon the whole,

First, LET us Pity and Pray for and as we can be Helpful to such as Labor
under such Prejudice as we have heard something of. We are all of us Objects of
Pity, when and so far, as we are under the power of such Prejudice. We are then
especially objects of the Divine Compassion in that respect, and woe unto us if
God should mark such our Iniquities against us! We are also, under such
Circumstances so far objects of the Pity of our Fellow Christians. Let us then
have Compassion one toward another, and manifest it, by Praying heartily one
for another: Bearing one another Burdens, and making all ^sonable Allowance
one for another; and Endeavoring with the Meekness of Wisdom to heal one
another. Indeed Christians that seem wilfully prejudiced, are to be admonished
and reproved, but then we must do it seasonably and suitably: still remembering
and governing our selves by these Rules, Let all things be done to the Glory of
God: To Edification and in Charity, as well as Decently and in Order.

Secondly, LET us all take heed of Prejudice in Matters, wherein Religion is
concerned. This is our Luty, Wisdom and Interest. The Light of Nature, The Word
of GOD. The woeful Experience of the People of GOD oblige to this. These
Prejudices render us so far unlike to God. While we indulge them we are making
work for Repentance, and lay our selves open to the Devices of Satan. Let such
as think they stand, take heed then, least they fall. He that is not Prejudiced
in this or the other case, and that stands and wonders at his Neighbor's
weakness, may be as miserably Prejudiced in some other case, it God see meet to
let loose his Corruptions, and suffer the Evil One to assault Him. Let us then,
not be high-minded but fear!

AND now to Him that is able to keep us from falling, or, to recover us if
fallen, under the Influence of Prejudice in Religion; To the only Wise God our
Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and Ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
To be Sold by Samuel Gerrish, Bookseller near the Brick Meeting House in
Cornhill Boston.

A Defense of the New England Charters. By Jer. Dummer Esquire Price stich'd 1 s.

A Very plain and easy Introduction to the Art of Singing Psalm Tunes; With the
Cantus or Trebles of Twenty eight Psalm Tunes, contrived in such a manner as
that the Learner may attain the Skill of Singing them, with the greatest ease
and Speed imaginable. By the Rev. Mr. John Tufts. Price 6 d. or 5 s. the duz.

THE Grounds and Rules of Music Explained: Or, An Introduction to the Art of
Singing by Note. Fitted to the meanest Capacities. By the Rev. Mr. Thomas
Walter. With a Collection of Psalm Tunes, in Three Parts, viz. Treble, Medius,
Bass. Printed from Copper Plates, engraven with great exactness and curiosity.
And a Recommendatory Preface by sundry Reverend and Learned Ministers of the
Gospel in Boston, etc. Price, stich'd in marble Paper, 4 s. single, and 42 s.
per duz. Or, Bound for 5 s. single, and 52 s. the duz.


