A MODEST PROOF OF THE Order and Government Settled by Christ and his Apostles
IN THE CHURCH.

BY SHOWING

I. What Sacred Offices were Instituted by them. II. How those Offices were
Distinguished. III. That they were to be Perpetual and Standing in the Church.
And, IV. Who Succeed in them, and rightly Execute them to this Day
Recommended as proper to be put into the Hands of the Laity.

BOSTON: Reprinted by Tho. Fleet, and are to be Sold by Benjamin Eliot in
Boston, Daniel Aurault in Newport, Gabriel Bernon in Providence, Mr. Gallop in
Bristol, Mr. Jean in Stratford, and in most other Towns within the Colonies of
Connecticut and Rhode Island 1723.

The Publisher TO THE READER.
I Was advised by some pious Persons, who desire Peace and Union amongst
Christians, to re-print this Discourse, in hopes of its good Effect on all
impartial Readers.

The Arguments being wholly Scriptural, are not only convincing, but managed
with so much Charity, that few Books of Controversy in Religion can expect a
better Reception.

Upon a serious perusal of this Piece, it will appear clear and evident, That
whosoever justly sustains the Character of a Minister of the Gospel of Christ,
has, besides his Internal Qualifications, an External Visible Commission
delivered to him, by those who have Power and Authority to grant it: From
whence these Inferences do naturally flow.

First, That the Ministers of the Church of England, who freely own that the
Power of Ordinations was first vested in the Apostles, and from them, through
all Ages since, in a succession of Bishops, from whence they derive their own
Ordinations, are to be acknowledged true Ministers of the Gospel.

Secondly, That it is a daring Offense to intrude into the sacred Function,
without a regular designation to the Exercise of it. See Numb. 16.40. 2 Samuel,
6.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 26.19, 20, 21, 22. Heb. 5.4, 5.

Thirdly, That People ought to endeavor after all the Assurance they can
attain to, that they have the Means of Grace in the Word and Sacraments, duly
administered and dispensed unto them, by Persons fully authorized for those holy
Offices. For since the Priest's Lips are to preserve Knowledge, the People
ought to be satisfied that they are really such, at whose Mouth they seek the
Law. And,

Fourthly, That it is a very criminal Presumption, and an unsufferable
Insolence in some, to value their Gifts at so high a rate, as to think
themselves by the virtue of them, entitled to the Ministerial Office, without
being admitted by the Imposition of the Hands of those, whom Christ has ordered
to preside over the affairs of his Church.

Fifthly, That since there is no approaching before God's Altar, without the
appointed Rites of Consecration, nor any meddling with his Institutions without
his Order and Command; Those invaders of the sacred Services, cannot be said to
be the Ambassadors of God, or accounted the Stewards of the Mysteries of
Christ, who presume to touch those holy Things, with their unhallowed Hands,
and like Saul, would sacrifice without a Call, 1 Samuel 13.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
For those who offer strange Fire before the Lord, their Incence must be an
Abomination to him, Levit. 10.12.

Lastly, Though we can by no means question our Savior's Gifts and Abilities,
yet he did not enter upon his Ministry, until he was solemnly inaugurated into
that Office; for he glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, which was said unto him at his Baptism,
Luke 2.22. So when he was about to leave the World, be Commissioned others to
go upon the great Embassy of Reconciliation, to transact in his Name, and
proclaim and seal his Pardons, saying, As my Father sent me, so send I you:
Whereupon he immediately gave them the power of Censures and Absolutions, John
20.22, 23. Matthew. 28.19, 20. And they also before their Death, imparted their
Power to others, by Imposition of Hands. Thus the Apostles ordained seven
Deacons, Act. 6.5, 6. among other Services, to Preach and to Baptize, in the
Exercise of which Offices we find St. Philip, one of them, diligently employed,
Acts 8.1 etc. Thus Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church, Acts
14.23. And thus St. Paul, who had ordained Timothy and Titus, appointed Titus
to ordain Elders in every City in Crete, Tit. 1.5. And that these sacred
Offices should continue in a regular Ministry to the end of the World, is
undeniable from Math. 6.18. and Chap. 28.19, 20. and Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And
finally, that there was a pre-eminence of Jurisdiction and Authority in some of
these Church-Offices over others, is plainly proved in this Treatise, in the
Apostolical Dignity (to which the Episcopal must needs succeed) over the
seventy, and the Deacons; and St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, where
we find many marks of the Power of those Bishops over their inferior
Presbyters, as to Ordain them, or upon occasion to promote them to a higher
Order, to Judge and Censure them, and if the case required, to proceed to
Deposition. This is the standing Ministry that the Church of England claims a
Part and Lot in: This is the Nature and true Notion of a Gospel Ministry, as we
find it founded by our Savior and his Apostles.

A Modest Proof OF THE Order and Government Settled by Christ and his Apostles
IN THE CHURCH.
MY design is at present, to represent to the World, what was the primitive
Model, or Form of Church Government; what was settled by our Savior, and his
Apostles, in this point; and that from what is recorded of the matter in the
Books of the New Testament: This is evident from the Title Page; and the end of
this undertaking is in order to let all Parties contending for various Forms
see which is really the right one, with which if they compare their own, they
may be enabled to continue it or reject it as it agrees with, or deviates from
the first Institution.

Now the Church however harrassed and disquieted, with a great variety of
Disputes and Debates, about points of Doctrine and Discipline; yet heard little
or no noise made, for above 1400 years, about this point of Church Government.
One Aerius started a debate, but had so few to second him that it died with
himself, and left his name on record among Heretics.

The goodly Order and Government instituted by Christ, stood firm for many
Ages; and under it the Church flourished, and the Christian Religion mightily
prevailed, notwithstanding the violent Persecutions of those times: But at
length it was invaded, and suppressed by the Usurpation and Tyranny of the
Romans Papacy. A secular Power, and Dominion was set up; and the Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline of the Church, following the fate of its Government,
were corrupted. Error, Superstition, Idolatry and Tyranny, the Pillars of the
Papal Kingdom, were introduced: And all maintained, on the one hand, by a most
false and blasphemous Pretension to an Absolute infallible Power and Authority
derived from Christ; and on the other, by a most horrid and cruel Persecution
of all who did but matter the least Dissent.

Thus lay the Church for some Ages, groaning under this Antichristian
Usurpation, struggling and wrestling even unto Blood and Martyrdom, to recover
its primitive Purity and Liberty. It pleased the Lord at length, to deliver it
in part, and to retrieve its Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, by a
longwish'd for Reformation: A Reformation which had been much more happy and
complete, had not the Adversary scattered his Tares among the good Seed which
sprung up in Briars and Thorns: Had not some Doctrines and Customs, maintained
by one part of the Reformed Church, and rejected by an other, occasioned not
disputes, which gave no less disturbance to the Church, than they yielded
Pleasure and Diversion to the Common Enemies.

Among other differences this was one; that while the greatest and most
considerable part of the Reformed Church, retained the Ancient Order and
Government, and vindicated it from the Usurpations and Encroachments of the
Papacy, Call. Inst. lib. 4. Cap. 10. 32. ne eccelesia ecclesiae contemnat ob
externae disciplinae variatatem.
Others (upon what considerations I shall not enquire) were pleased to set up a
new Form and Model of Policy, with a modest kind protestation, that these their
different Measures, should be no Ground of breach between them, and other
Reformed Churches: But this did not prevent Disputes upon that Head, and every
Church defending its own Model, as most agreeable to the first Institution, the
debate came to that height, as to occasion a sad Rupture and Schism; a Schism
which has produced no where more woeful effects, than in these three Kingdoms:
What Alienation of Minds among professors of the same Reformed Religion, what
Confusions and barbarous Cruelties, what Convulsions and Revolutions in Church
and State, what public and private Mischiefs, have sprung from this Root of
Bitterness, the Histories of the past Age, give a very sad and lamentable
Account: And above all, the malignant Influence it has had on Religion, to
obstruct the Life and Practice of true Christianity, cannot be sufficiently
regretted.

I doubt not but the Common Enemy, and they whose trade it is to fish in muddy
Waters, have been very active to blow this Coal; but that which has sometimes
made this Debate break forth in Vesuvian Flames, and be disputed with Fire and
Sword, with Blood and Wounds, is, That it has been incorporated into, and
joined with other Political Debates and State-differences; It were easy to
demonstrate this, did not the evidence of it render it needless; that Political
Interests and State-differences, have all along been interwoven with this
contest about Church Government, and have supported and maintained it: And
perhaps at the Bottom, it is none of the least prejudices against Episcopacy,
that they of that Persuasion have generally asserted the just Rights and
Prerogatives of Princes, as the surest Foundation of a Kingdoms Happiness and
Tranquillity; and accordingly have maintained the Doctrines of Non-resistance,
and Passive Obedience, etc. whereas its Rival Government has been thought by
some, more serviceable for Checking and Curbing the Power of Princes. Certain
it is, there is too much of a Carnal and worldly Spirit, that keeps this Debate
so long alive; and there is little hopes it will die, 1 Cor. 3.3.
till Christians be more animated with the true Spirit and Temper of the Gospel.

I am sensible there have been many Volumes which have appeared in the World
upon this Argument, which may seem, or be expected to have exhausted the
Subject on both sides; and this may be a prejudice against my present
undertaking, as superfluous: And the little good effect those Volumes have had,
may make it be looked upon as Presumption in me to fancy that what I have to
offer will do any good, where so little has been effected by those that have
gone before me. But I remember the Story of Spiridion, a famous Bishop, for
Piety, Hospitality and many Miracles, who, is said, to have confounded, at the
Council of Nice, a certain Philosopher, who by the subtilty of his Arguments
against Christianity, sought to imbarass the Bishops. Spiridion takes the
Discourse, and prays the Philosopher, in the Name of Christ, to hear him; and
so goes on, repeating the Articles of the Christian Faith, which, when the
Philosopher heard, with great Astonishment he said; So long as any reasoned
with me, I opposed other Reasons; but now when God speaks to me, by the Mouth
of that old Man, I am not able to answer, I find a secret force upon my Spirit,
convincing me and persuading me. I shall with God's Assistance, follow the
Method of this holy Man, in giving as plain and impartial an Account of the
Order and Government instituted by Christ and his Apostles in the Christian
Church, as I am able to collect from the sacred Records of the New Testament,
to which I purpose closely to adhere. Possibly, what I offer may have as good
effect upon some of my Readers, as the good Bishop's like Conduct upon another
Occasion, had with the Philosopher: And a clear, and full View of the first
Scriptural Institution of Church Government set before our Eyes, may enable all
Parties to see most clearly which of the Forms now contended for and promoted,
bid fairest to be true Copies of the Divine Original.

To proceed the more Methodically, I shall produce what I have to say upon this
great Subject, under these four Heads.

I. First, I will show what sacred Offices, were instituted by Christ and his
Apostles, in the Church. II. Secondly, I will make it appear, how these Offices
were distinguished, and demonstrate an Imparity among them. III. Thirdly, I
will examine whether any of them were extraordinary and temporary, and prove
that they were not, but designed to be perpetual, and standing in the Church.
IV. Fourthly, supposing these Offices to be standing, I will show who succeed
in them, and rightly execute them to this day.
I. First, then, I am to show what sacred Offices were instituted by Christ,
and his Apostles in the Church.

When our blessed Lord appeared in his public Ministry, in the beginning
thereof he called many unto him, to be his ordinary Attendants, of whom, some
had been trained up under John's Ministry; These were in a peculiar manner his
Disciples, in distinction from the multitude of Proselites, who were gained by
his preaching and Miracles; and he made use of the Ministry of these his
Disciples, in baptizing such as were proselited, as those were baptized, John
4. v. 1.2.
who were made Proselites under the old Dispensation. The Eminent Prophets whom
GOD raised up to his People, gathered a School or College of Disciples,
called, The Sons of the Prophets, who were trained up under their Inspection
and Discipline to the Prophetical Office: So it is to be conceived of the
Disciples of John the Baptist, and of our Lord, that they were as two
Seminaries wherein many were trained up, under the Discipline and Instruction
of these two eminent Masters as Candidates for the Gospel Ministry: Our blessed
Lord being thus attended, with his Disciples, Mat. 9. went about, in his own
Person, all the Cities and Villages, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing every Sickness and every
Disease among the People. And when he saw the Multitudes come Flocking to him
from all quarters, v. 35.
he was moved with Compassion on them, because they fainted, (being it is like
wearied with their long Journies) and were scattered abroad as Sheep having no
Shepherd. (...). 36, 37, 38.
Then said he to his Disciples, the Harvest truly is plenteous, but the
Laborers are few, pray ye the Lord of the Harvest, that he send forth
Laborers to his Harvest. Upon this St. Mark tells us, Mark the 3d. v. 13.14.
He goes unto a Mountain, and calls unto him whom he would, Luke 6. v. 12.13.
and they came unto him. St. Luke adds, "That he went to this Mountain to pray,
and continued all night in Prayer to GOD, and when it was day, he called unto
him his Disciples, and of them he chose and ordained twelve, that they should
be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach; whom also he named
APOSTLES.

Some time after, Luke 9. v. 1, 2.
He called these twelve together, and gave them Power and Authority over all
Devils, and to cure Diseases, and sent them forth to preach the Kingdom of GOD,
and to heal the Sick; We have their Commission at large, Matthew. 10. After their
return from executing which first Commission, they continue with their Master
as his constant Attendants; and we read not, that, during his abode on Earth,
they were sent forth a second time; until he gave them their last and full
Commission, a little before his Ascension.

Some time after the return of the Apostles, He appointed other seventy, Luke
10.
and sent them forth, with the same Commission and the same Power, that he had
sent the Apostles, to preach the Gospel, to cast out Devils, to heal Diseases,
and almost in all things with the same instructions, concerning their Conduct:
which makes the Continuator of Pool 's Annotations on the place, say, how some
come to imagine a difference of Order betwixt them and the Apostles, I cannot
tell: Call. Inst. lib. 4. Cap. 3 Sect. 4. dignitate Apostolis minores, Officiis
proximi, au^s secundo ab Apostolis loco Christius designavit.
Yet Calvin scruples not to call them, in dignity less than the Apostles, next
in Office to them, designed by Christ in the second place after the Apostles.

Here we see, in what a solemn manner, Christ instituted the first and prime
Officers of his Church, who are particularly described by their Number, Names,
and that honorable Designation by which he called them: Whom he also named
Apostles.

Indeed all the difference expressed in these two Missions, is, that we read
not of such a solemn Inauguration of the seventy unto their Office, as of the
twelve; and that the Twelve were particularly honored with the Title of
APOSTLES, even before they were sent forth (of the importance of which Name, we
shall afterward enquire); but the seventy, though they were sent forth
immediately by Christ, are no where so called, but only Disciples. But though
their Commission was much the same, with what was given to the Apostles, (who
had not as yet received their full Commission) yet it is most certain, that
they were two distinct Orders of Gospel Ministers: they are never numbered
together, but in two distinct Classes. The Apostles are still twelve and not
eighty two; And (which puts it beyond all question) when a Vacancy falls in the
College of Apostles, by the Apostasy of Judas, Acts 1
what a solemn Work was there, at the Translation of one from the Number of
Disciples, that he might be reckoned and numbered with the Eleven, and succeed
to Judas his Apostle-ship?

Thus have we seen two Orders of Gospel Ministers instituted by Christ himself.
There is a third Order instituted by his Apostles, that of Deacons. The
occasion, design, and manner of instituting this new Order, we have fully set
down in the sixth Chapter of the Acts of the holy Apostles, from the first to
the seventh verse.

Of this Institution I shall only observe, That it was made by the twelve
Apostles, to whom the Government of the Church was principally committed, and
who had Power and Authority to institute new Offices and Officers as the
Exigence of the Church should require; That these Deacons were appointed and
set apart to their Office by the Apostles, with the Ceremony of Prayer and
Imposition of Hands, which was usual in designing and appointing Persons to any
sacred Office, in the Gospel Ministry: And further, that these Deacons thus
separated and ordained, were invested with some share of the Apostolic Office,
particularly of Preaching and Baptizing, as well as managing the public Stock
of the Church, which they exerted in subordination to the Apostles, under their
Inspection and by their Direction; That Stephen was a Preacher (and the rest of
them, of whom we have nothing on record, save their Names) as well as Philip,
cannot be doubted. Stephen by his Zeal in propagating the Gospel, became the
first Martyr; and of Philip we expressly read, that by his Preaching, he
converted Samaria and initiated the Converts there, into the Christian
Profession by Baptism. Hence we afterward find him dignified with the
honorable Title of Philip the Evangelist, Act. 8. and 21.2.
though but one of the Seven.

This I observe to show, the vast difference betwixt these Gospel Deacons
instituted and ordained by the Apostles, and those who are named Deacons under
the Presbyterian Model, without any Ordination or Power to Preach or Baptize,
that none may be imposed upon by the bare Name, to think them to be of Divine
or Apostolic Institution.

Thus much shall serve to show what I promised in the first place, what sacred
Offices were instituted by Christ, and his Apostles in the Church.

II. I now come to what I promised in the second place, to make it appear how
these Offices were distinguished; and to demonstrate an imparity among them.

Now of the last mentioned, there is no debate; all acknowledge that Deacons
were different from, and inferior to the two former Offices of Apostles, and
the Seventy; it is of these two that some are pleased to pronounce that they are
one and the same; whereas what I have already observed of their Institution,
plainly shows them to have been distinct Offices, and they are every where
spoken of in Scripture as such: particularly in that enumeration of Gospel
Officers, I Cor. 12.28. God has set in his Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers: Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all
Teachers? Though every Apostle was a Prophet and Teacher, the Superior Order
including the Inferior; yet every Prophet and Teacher, was not an Apostle (as
for the rest in that Enumeration, they are not distinct Offices, but various
and different Powers and Gifts wherewith the Gospel Officers were endued.)

Supposing then the Deacons inferior to the Apostles and Seventy, the question
is concerning the twelve who were called Apostles, and the seventy and others
of their Order, who go by the name of Prophets, in a Gospel Sense; Ministers of
the Word and Sacraments, Acts 15.32. Ephesians. 2.20. Chapter 3.5. 1 Cor. 14.3.
such as Judas and Silas were; who are also called Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, in the 4th Chapter to the Ephesians and the 11th Verse.

I say, the question is whether these Prophets, Pastors and Teachers and
Evangelists, were of the same Office and Order with the Apostles? Or, whether
they were of a distinct Office and Order, and inferior to that of the
Apostles? For clearing this we must consider their Commissions, and the
Exercise of their Office conformable to their Commissions.

And first of the Apostles. All that their first Commission did bear, was to
Preach the Gospel and to Administer the Ordinances of Religion; and this was
all the exercise of their Apostolic Office that we read of, during Christ's
bodily presence with them, and in this, (as I said) they differed little from
the seventy: But when Christ was to leave the Earth, having finished the Work
of our Redemption, He enlarged their Commission, and put them in actual
exercise of their Apostolic Power and Office. Matthew. 28.17, 18.
All Power (says he) is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore
and Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, and lo, I am with you always even to the end of the World.
Luke 24.50.
And he lifted up his Hands, and blessed them, and said unto them, As my Fathen
sent me, John. 20.21.
so send I you, and thus saying, he breathed upon them, and said unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose soever Sins ye forgive, they are forgiven, and
whose soever Sins ye retain, they are retained. We read moreover, Acts 1.
That through the Holy Ghost he gave Commandments to his Apostles whom he had
chosen, to whom he showed himself alive after his Sufferings, by many
infallible Signs, being seen of them for the space of Forty Days, and speaking
unto them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. Cave's Antiq. Apost.
Introduct. 1.^


All this Commission and Instruction was given particularly to the Apostles, as
being his Prime and Special Delegates, whom he entrusted with the Affairs of
his Church, to act and do, in his Name and his Authority: And this is the
common Notion and Importance of the Word Apostle, according to the use of the
Word among the Jews: He is a Messenger endued with peculiar Letters of
Authority and Commission, whereby he acts as Proxy and Deputy of him who sends
him; and it is a Proverb among the Jews, that every Man's Apostle is as
himself: What he does by virtue of his Commission, is looked upon to be as firm
and valid, as if the Person himself had done it.

These Twelve then whom Christ named Apostles, were to represent his Person, to
act as his special Ambassadors, to communicate his Will and Mind, to preach and
propagate his Gospel, to instruct and disciple the World in the Doctrines and
Precepts of Christianity, and on this Doctrine to found and build the Church,
and to govern the same in his Name and Authority, constituting and ordaining
Ministers of Religion, settling good Order, and disposing all Affairs for the
Edification of the Church, determining and deciding Controversies in Religion,
composing Differences, inspecting and superintending the ordinary Pastors in
the Discharge of their Office, censuring and punishing contumacious Offenders,
and loosing such as were Penitent. 2 Cor. 11.28.
This the Apostle calls the Care of all the Churches, especially them of his
Province; for, their Commission was unlimitted and universal, not only in
respect of Power, to discharge all Acts of Religion, relating either to
Ministry or Government; but also in respect of Place, not being confined to any
particular Province, but sent to the whole World; yet for the more orderly
executing their Commission, they are said, by the Ancients to have parcelled
the World among them: and something like this seems to be insinuated on two
several occasions by St. Paul himself.

This Power and Authority conveyed by Commission to the Apostles, 2 Cor. 10.13.
Gal. 2.9.
was equally, conferred upon all of them; Whatever Order there was among them,
yet no Superiority or Power of one Apostle above another: Though Paul, with
respect to his former state, counted himself the least of all the Apostles,
being before a Persecutor, and one born out of time, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10.
as he words it. Yet as to Power and Authority, he owns himself not Inferior
even to the chiefest Apostles.

And as their Office was high and eminent, no less were the Gifts and
Endowments, by which they were qualified for it: They had been Eye and Ear
Witnesses of Christ's Life, Doctrine, Miracles; and besides the benefit of his
public Ministry, had enjoyed the Advantage of his private Converse, and were
well acquainted with all the Passages of his Life, at least from his entering
into his public Ministry, till the Day of Ascension: They were immediately
taught and instructed by him in all things, pertaining to the Kingdom of GOD:
He had opened their Minds to understand the Scriptures, and endued them with
the Holy Ghost, to guide them into all Truth, so that they were infallibly
secured from Error, in delivering the Doctrines and Principles of Christianity:
And to confirm their Doctrine, they were endued with many Extraordinary Gifts
and Powers, to work Miracles, to heal all manner of Diseases, to cast out
Devils, to speak with diverse Tongues, to interpret strange Tongues, to foretell
things to come, to discern Spirits, to inflict Corporal Punishments on
Notorious Sinners; and (which was peculiar to them) they had Power to confer
these Extraordinary Gifts upon others.

Thus have I given you an account of the Commission by which the Apostles
acted, I come now to consider the Commission given to the other Order of Church
Officers, instituted by Christ, the Seventy Disciples; in whom the Order of
Presbyters and ordinary Pastors and Teachers is supposed to be founded: Now, as
it is already shown. They received their Commission immediately from Christ, as
well as the Apostles, and were authorized to preach the Gospel, and endued with
Extraordinary Gifts of working Miracles, healing Diseases, etc. and unto them
no less than unto the Apostles, Christ said, He that hears you, bears me,
Luke 10.16.
and he that rejects you, rejects me, and be that rejects me, rejects
him that sent me. So that in their Measure and Proportion, so far as their
Commission extended, they were Christ's Messengers and Ambassadors also, though
not in the same Order and Quality with the Apostles, as we have seen in part
already.

Indeed from the Account we have of them and their Ministry in the Sacred
History, we cannot frame a more just and true Notion of this Second Order of
Church Officers, than that they were instituted to be Assistants and Helpers to
the Apostles in the Work of the Gospel.

And I know nothing which will give us a better Reason for this Notion than
this Consideration, that as it was the same Lord and Lawgiver, the same
Master Builder, who had framed the Civil and Ecclesiastical Policy among the
Jews, under the Legal Dispensation, who does Erect this New Fabric of his
Gospel Church; so it is reasonable to expect as great a Symmetry and Proportion
between the one and the other, as the Difference of the two Dispensations will
allow: And it is the Opinion of many Ancient and Modern Divines, That our
Blessed Lord in many of his Gospel Institutions, had some respect to the state
of things in the Jewish Church, as might be showed in many Instances: And
particularly will appear in these Offices, which he instituted in the Gospel
Church, not only in making them of a Superior and Inferior Order, as under the
Mosaic Dispensation, but also, as to the Reason and Design of these different
Orders; for after Aaron and his Sons were installed in the Priest's Office, GOD
gave unto them the whole Tribe of Levi to Minister unto them, in the Charge of
the Tabernacle. Numb. 3.
So also, when Moses was vexed with the untowardliness of the People, and
complained to GOD of the Weight and Burden of his Charge, and that the Care and
Government of such an unruly People was committed to him alone; the Lord orders
that Seventy Men, of the Elders of the People, be chosen and presented before
him at the Door of the Tabernacle, Numb. 11.
and he took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, and put it upon them, that they
might bear the burden of the People with him, and he might not bear it alone.
Now, whether the Apostles after their first Progress, returned with any such
Complaint of the greatness of their Charge, we read not, except it be
insinuated by St. Mark, when he says, Mark 6.13.
That after their return, Christ called them apart to a desert Place to rest
themselves a while: However, certain it is, our Blessed Lord well knew the
greatness of their Work, and shortly after, instituted that other Order of
Gospel Ministers, the Seventy to be Assistants to the Apostles; and accordingly
we find the Apostles frequently making use of the Ministry and Assistance of
them of that Second Order, either taking some of them along with them in their
Travels, to Minister unto them in propagating the Gospel among the Jews or
Heathens; or else fixing them in places where the Gospel was received, and
Churches founded; or else in sending them with Apostolic Orders to Churches
that were at a distance: And it is probable that according to the different
Exercises of their Ministry, they were designed sometimes Evangelists, when
they labored in converting Jews, or Heathens to the Faith; sometimes Pastors
and Teachers, when they exercised their Ministry among them that were already
converted; and generally they pass under the Name of Brethren and Elders, or
Presbyters, in distinction from the Apostles.

From these different Commissions given to the Apostles and the Seventy, it is
evident that there was a Distinction betwixt their Offices, and that the
Apostolic Office was Superior to that of the Seventy, which great Truth may
also farther be shown by several very weighty Arguments: For although the
Apostles did manage the Authority we suppose they had, so much with the Spirit
of their Lord and Master, who, though he was their Lord and Master, yet humbled
himself to wash their Feet, John 13.13.15.15.
and treated them rather as Friends than Servants, and behaved himself among
them as one that served, although they (I say) following his Example, Luke
22.27.
behaved themselves with the greatest gentleness and sweetness of Temper toward
their Inferiors seldom making use of their Authority in any severe manner;
whereof we have a notable Instance in the Epistle of Paul to Philemon, a
Minister of the Gospel, where he says, Philem. ver. 8, 9.
Though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee, that which is
convenient, yet for loves sake, I rather beseech thee. Yet, that they had such
Authority over the other Pastors and Teachers in the Church, appears from
several Instances of their exercising it in several respects and ways, as is
recorded in the Sacred History. I shall instance in some particulars in
Confirmation of this Truth, in the order as they occur to us in Holy Writ.

1. And First, we read that the Apostles abode for some time in Jerusalem, and
the Brethren with them (no doubt according to some Order given them by their
Lord) to settle and establish the Christian Church there; but when the
Persecution arose about Stephen, all almost, except the Apostles, were
scattered abroad through the Regions of Judaea and Samaria: Philip, one of the
Seven Deacons, went down to Samaria, preached the Gospel, wrought Miracles,
converted many of that City to the Faith, and initiated his Converts by
Baptism: Others went as far as Phenice, Cyprus, and Antioch, where a great
number believed and turned to the Lord: When the Apostles heard of this, Acts
8.^
Peter and John are sent to Samaria, to confirm and settle the Church there,
and to confer upon them the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. For though the Brethren
had Power to Preach and Baptize, and Work Miracles, yet it belonged to the
Apostles to settle and establish Order in the new founded Churches, and to
confer the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; Paul and Barnabas were also sent to Antioch
upon the like Errand. Acts 11.22.


2. Secondly, We find that when the Apostles went abroad to execute their
Commission in Discipling the World, they were attended by some of the Brethren,
as their Assistants and Ministers: Six attended Peter from Joppa to Cesarea,
Acts 10.13.
and from thence to Jerusalem; and to them it was that he gave Orders for
Baptizing Cornelius's Family; and them he brings as Witnesses for his
Vindication, when challenged by them of the Circumcision, for his Converse with
the Gentiles. Paul and Barnabas had John, 11.12.
surnamed Mark, one of the Seventy, for their Minister, in their first
Progress, who after some time departed from them, 12.25.13.5. Verse 13.
for which Paul is highly displeased with him, and will not admit him again to
be one of his Attendants, because he had departed and went not with them to the
Work. 15.38.
This was the occasion of some Contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas, which came
to that height, that they departed asunder the one from the other; Barnabas
going to Cyprus, attended by Mark, his Sister's Son; and Paul to Syria and
Cilicia, attended by Silas.

As Paul's Province was enlarged, by the Conversion of many Cities and
Countries unto the Faith, the Number of his Attendants and Assistants in the
Work of the Gospel did also increase, many accompanied him from place to place,
besides these Pastors, whom he settled in every City that had received the
Gospel.

3. Thirdly, These Inferior Pastors were generally very obsequious to the
Orders of the Apostles, going whither they sent them to Visit planted Churches;
coming when they called them, to give their personal Attendance; and serving
with them in the Work of the Gospel, as Sons with their Fathers, as Paul says
of Timothy. Phil. 2.22.


4. Fourthly, When any of them proved Refractory and Disobedient to the Orders
of the Apostles, they are blamed for it, and sometimes threatened with Censures;
such were some Teachers at Corinth, who despised and decried Paul's
Apostleship, 1 Cor. 4.18, 19.
whom he threatens for their disorderly Conduct with the Apostolical Rod.

5. Fifthly, And when he is giving Apostolical Orders, for Redressing and
Reforming some Irregularities and Abuses in the Public Worship, occasioned
through the Pride or Impudence of some of their Prophets and Teachers, who (it
seems) were too much puffed up with their Spiritual Gifts; he writes to them in
an Authoritative Style; What? says he, Came the Word of God out from you, 1
Cor. 14.36, 37.
or came it unto you only? If any Man think himself to be a Prophet or
Spiritual, Let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the
Commandments of the Lord, i. e. that I as an Apostle, have Power from the Lord
to give Commandments and Orders in these matters, which concern the decent and
orderly Performance of the Public Worship; but if any be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. He complains also of others, who added Affliction to his Bonds,
preaching Christ out of Contention and Strife, disowning his Apostleship,
refusing to receive his Commands; yea walking contrary to his Orders, while
others preached Christ out of Love, owning his Apostleship, knowing that he was
set for the Defense of the Gospel. Phil. 1.15, etc
And when this holy Apostle's Back was at the Wall, in Prison, and hazard of
Death, many who had been formerly his Attendants and Assistants in the
Gospel-work, deserted him, when he stood most in need of their Ministry; 2 Timothy
4.10,
which, he prays, might not be laid to their charge.

6. Sixthly, In like manner St. John the Apostle complains of one Diatrephes,
who affected a pre-eminence over the Church, disowned the Authority of the
Apostle, refused to receive the Orders which he sent to the Church, or the
Brethren by whom he sent them; yea, presumptuously took upon him to cast these
Brethren, and such who were willing to receive them, out of the Communion of
the Church, and to all, added contemptuous and slighting Words of the Apostle;
whom the Apostle threatens, when he comes, to chastise for his Pride and
Insolence, John 3.9, 10
in rejecting the Orders of his Superior, and arrogating to himself that
Superiority to which he had no Call or Title; for which Malepertness, the
Apostle no doubt exercised his Apostolical Power in censuring him, if he did
not prevent it by Repentance.

In a Word, through all the New Testament History, we read of none who opposed
the Authority of the Apostles, but such as were Heretics and Disturbers of the
Church's Peace, who every while made it their Business to depress the Credit
and Authority of the True Apostles; and to gain the more easily Proselites to
their false Doctrines, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
they either pretend that they themselves were Apostles, or else that they
themselves were Commissioned by the Apostles, whereas truly they were such as
had departed from the Communion of the Apostles, Acts 15.24.
as St. John tells us. 1 John 2.^9.
And St. Jude gives us this Account of them, Jude 11.
We unto them, they have gone in the way of Cain, a Murderer of his Brother,
and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam, a covetous Wretch, and have
perished in the gainsaying of Corah, a proud ambitious Levite, who disdaining
to subject himself to that Order God had settled in his Church, and Murmuring
to be set in a lower Station among the Levites, Numb. 16.8, 9, 10.
aspired to the Priesthood. Now it is not easy to understand, how these
Heretics could correspond with Corah in his Sin, if Christ had settled a
Parity among Church Officers, and not a Superior and Inferior Order.

And as all true Pastors and Teachers were faithful and dutiful Assistants and
Helpers, with the Apostles in the Work of the Gospel, and punctual observers of
all Apostolic Orders and Commands: So on the other hand, The Apostles paid
always that respect unto the Pastors, that was due unto their Character, not
treating them as Underlings and Servants, but as Brethren and Fellow Laborers
and Helpers, admitting them to all their Consultations about Church Affairs,
joining their Names with their own, in the Apostolical Decrees and
Constitutions; yet always, with a clear Indication of Distinction and
Subordination of their Order unto that of the Apostles. Yea, See Acts 1. and
15. 22, 23.
and in some of Paul's Epistles to the Churches, after that he designs himself
the Apostle of Jesus Christ, he subjoyns the Names of some of his Brethren, his
Assistants and Fellow-helpers in the Work of the Gospel. And he does most
earnestly recommend to the Church, That they have their Pastors in Reputation
and Honor. Philip. 2.29.
That they know them that labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and
admonish them, and that they esteem them very highly in love for their works
sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.6. and 17.
That they remember their Rulers with Respect, obey them, and be subject to
them.

Notwithstanding which, when his Apostleship is called in question, or when it
is set upon a Level with the Inferior Order, with what holy Zeal does he assert
the Dignity and Authority of his Apostleship: So when the Factious Corinthians
began to slate themselves in Parties, and to set in Opposition, or at least,
upon a Level with him, some of their Teachers, saying, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo: He owns himself the Planter, Apollo the Waterer; Himself the
Master Builder, Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.6. etc.
and others, as Builders with him. It Is true, in this matter, he but borrows
his own Name and Apollo's, Chap. 4.6.
as he tells us; for it was far from the Apostles to set up themselves, as
Heads of Factions one against another, neither did any of the faithful Pastors,
such as Apollo was, attempt any such thing. No, it was the turbulent Pastors
and Teachers who introduced these Factions, with design, no doubt, to depress
the Authority of the Apostle, and advance their own, and to gain Followers. To
correct the Arrogance of these Teachers, who being puffed up with their
Spiritual Gifts, durst thus set up themselves in Competition with, or
Opposition to, the Apostle; and the Fickleness and Fondness of the Corinthians,
their Admirers and Followers, he represents several things, and an heavy
Complaint of the ill Treatment he, and other Apostles, had met with from them.
He puts them in mind, that though they had ten thousand Instructers in Christ,
yet they were obliged to own him as their Father, who had begotten them in
Christ by the Gospel, and therefore ought to be Followers of him. And if this
his Fatherly Admonition did not reclaim them, he threatens both these Factious
Teachers and their Abettors with his Apostolic Rod. 1 Cor. 4.
It was upon the same, or the like occasion, that we find him with holy
Keenness asserting and proving his Apostleship, magnifying his Office, boasting
of that Authority he had received from Christ, and once and again maintaining
that he was not Inferior to the chiefest Apostles. 1 Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 10, 11, 12,
13. Chapters.
To what purpose all this, either their denying his Apostleship, or his
strenuously asserting it, if there had not been an Eminency of Power and
Authority in the Apostolate, above the Ordinary Pastor and Teacher?

Prophecy, says Chrysostom, Sermon. de util. S Scrip. Tom 8. page 114. Edit.
Savil.
the Gift of Miracles, the expelling Demons, the Order of Pastors and Teachers,
were all Spiritual Powers, and Ensigns of great Authority; but the Apostolic
Eminency was far greater than all these, which he therefore calls a Spiritual
Consulship. An Apostle having as great Pre-eminence above other Officers in the
Church, as the Consul had above all other Magistrates in Rome; which is allowed
by Calvin, Inst. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. Sect. 2.
who acknowledges a Bishop to be, ut Consul in Senatu, as Consul in the Senate.

Thus, I think, I have done with what I proposed to make appear in the Second
Place, having demonstratively shown how the Gospel-Officers were distinguished,
and that there was a Disparity among them.

III. I am to examine, Thirdly, Whether any of them were Extraordinary and
Temporary, and prove that they were not; but desig^^^^^ to be perpetual and
standing in the Church.

And this is the Hinge on which the whole Controversy in this matter depends,
yea, all the Authority and Obligation of Christ's first institution, as to the
present Church; for if his Institution was Extraordinary and Temporary in any
part, it is so far as it was of this Nature, no Rule or Standard now: But if
the Order he instituted was to be perpetual and standing, then it continues
Obligatory to the end of the World; and it must be to all Christians, what the
Pattern in the Mount was to Moses and the Jews, a constant Standard by which
the Church is to be molded and framed in all After-Ages: I shall therefore
impartially examine into this matter.

And, 1st, it is acknowledged by all, that many of the Gifts and Powers
wherewith both Apostles, and other Pastors were endued, were Extraordinary and
Temporary, being designed only, as the Apostle says of Tongues, 1 Cor. 14 22.
for Signs, to convince Unbelievers of the Divinity of that Doctrine which they
saw attested by such Miraculous Operations: But the Gospel-Doctrine being once
sufficiently attested and confirmed, there was no further need of continuing
them, and they have long since ceased in the Church.

2dly, It Is also acknowledged, that some things peculiar to the first Apostles,
were Extraordinary and Temporary, and expired with their Persons. Such as,
Their having been eye and ear Witnesses of Christ's Life, Doctrine, Miracles,
Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension. Their having received their Commission
immediately from Christ. Their being infallible Guides in delivering the
Doctrines of the Gospel. Their unlimitted Commission to all the World, and
Jurisdiction over all Churches. Their Power to confer miraculous Gifts on
others, to discern Spirits, and to back their Censures with corporal
Punishments, as on Ananias and Saphira and Elimas: and perhaps, to these may be
added their power to institute new Gospel Officers and Ministries, as the
exigence of the Church should require; as they did that of Deacons. All these
extraordinary Powers and Gifts, whether they which were peculiar to the
Apostles, or such as were common to them and other inferior Ministers, had a
particular respect to the first planting of the Gospel, and the erecting and
constituting of the Christian Church in the World: which when performed, these
extraordinary Powers ceased: but,

3dly, Besides these, There was the ordinary Power and Authority of the
Apostles, which was to serve the Edification, good Order and Government of the
Constituted Church in all succeeding Ages: Such as, Their power to preach the
Gospel, administer the Sacraments, and perform all the Offices of Religion,
common to them with other Pastors. More particularly, to preserve the Offices
instituted by Christ in his Church, by ordaining Ministers of Religion in all
the three distinct Offices: To Govern the Churches, and superintend both
Pastors and People: To Judge, Correct and Censure Misdemeanors either in the
one or other: To settle good Constitutions agreeable to the Word of God, for
the orderly and decent performance of all the Ordinances of Religion, Public
Worship and other Affairs of Discipline, as the exigence of the Church should
require: And finally, By their Authority and Care, to preserve the Church from
the Corruptions of Error, Superstition, Faction, Schism, and Profaneness, by
their right use of the Keys and the Power of binding and loosing committed to
them: All which are proper parts of the Apostolic Office, always necessary for
the good of the Church; and no part more necessary than their Authoritative
Inspection, over the ordinary Pastors, that they be well qualified for the
Pastoral Office before they be admitted thereto, and when admitted, they
perform the same, with Faithfulness and Diligence, with Prudence and
Discretion, and in Peace and Concord with their Brethren. Now, these things
being premised, I come to an impartial Examination of the matter in hand.

And here I must needs confess I think there is nothing more evident upon the
slightest Examination than that Christ in Instituting these Orders and Offices,
designed, that they should be standing and unalterable Constitutions in his
Church, to continue for its Edification to the end of the World: And of none,
is the unalterableness of Institution more evident, than of the Apostolic
Office, (which some contend to be temporary and extraordinary.)

For 1st, When Christ gave them their full and last Commission, He enjoins them
to teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
whom they should Disciple, to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded
them, of which the Order and Offices, he had instituted, were a part, which
accordingly they were to settle in all new founded Churches: And then he adds,
Lo I am with you always to the end of the World: But how could that be, if their
Office was to expire with themselves? We must then understand it, as a promise,
not to them only, but to their Successors also: not to their Persons only, but
to their Office, which was to continue to the end of the World, even so long as
Christ was to have a Church upon Earth.

1 Cor. 12.28.
2dly, The Apostle S. Paul tells us, God has set some in his Church, first
Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers (what follow, are not distinct
Offices from these, but extraordinary Gifts conferred on them.) God has set,
even He, who settled the Ordinances of Heaven, which none can alter, has fixed
these different Orders in his Church: or rather, to use the Apostles Simile, as
God has set various and different Members in the natural Body, some more
excellent and honorable, yet, all useful and necessary to the Beauty and
Integrity of the whole; he has done the same by his Church: So that whoever
would deprive the Church of any of these Sacred Offices set in it by God,
endeavors no less than to mutilate and deform it, to pluck out one of its
Eyes, or cut off one of its Hands: And how heinous the Guilt must be, so to
treat the Body whereof Christ Jesus is Head, let them consider who presume to
do it.

But farther, Thirdly, in the 4th Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13.
we have an uncontestible Testimony, proving the perpetual continuance of these
Offices instituted by Christ, taken from the end and design for which they were
instituted: He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of
the Faith and of the Knowledge of the Son of GOD unto a perfect Man, unto the
Measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; Ver. 14.
That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about by
every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men and cunning Craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive: Where it is plain, these Offices were to continue
till the Church should be perfected, fully brought in, and fully advanced, and
till it should be beyond all hazard of being seduced, that is, to the end of
the World. We see the end for which these Offices were Instituted, and how long
they were to continue, expressly set down.

If any say, That here are more Offices than are pleaded for: The Answer is
obvious, that these different Designations do not import different Offices, but
different Exercises of the same Office: For Instance, an Apostle, Presbyter or
Deacon, might be a Prophet, Evangelist, Doctor or Teacher. If employed in
converting Jews or Heathens to the Faith, he did the Work of an Evangelist, and
on this Account Philip, one of the seven Deacons, is so called. If in
Instructing them who were already Converted, Acts 21.8.
that was the Work of an ordinary Pastor: If he labored mainly in explaining
and confirming the Doctrines of Christanity, he acted the Part of a Doctor or
Teacher: If he further improved these Doctrines to Edification, Exhortation and
Comfort, that was the Work of the Prophet, 1 Cor. 14.3. Acts 15.32.
in the Gospel Sense. Thus Judas and Silas, two Presbyters, are called
Prophets; so that all these are reducible to the three Offices, of whose
Institution we have given a particular Account.

And now, if these different Orders of Gospel Ministers instituted by Christ,
were designed by him to be perpetual standing Offices in his Church, for its
Edification, good Order and Government, to the end of the World, as is evident
from what has been said; there must of Necessity be a Succession of Persons,
duly called to these Offices, according to Christ's Institution, that the
Offices themselves may be capable of continuing standing in the Church.

And to erect and set up a new Office Paramount to these instituted by Christ,
such as the Papacy, is intolerable Presumption; for who can have a Power and
Authority in the Church above Apostles who were Christ's immediate Delegates,
but Christ himself?

And it is no less Presumption to cut off, or abrogate any of these Sacred
Offices: It Is an overturning that Order established by Christ in his Church,
and altering and changing his Institution: It is a Sacrilegious Robbing the
Church of these Ministers which Christ in his infinite Wisdom thought necessary
for her Edification and Perfection. You know what a dreadful Curse is
pronounced against them, who either add to, or take away from, the Institutions
of Jesus Christ in the 18th and 19th Verses of the 22d Chapter of the
Revelations of St. John.

If it be pretended, that now at least, in the present State of the Church,
both the Apostolic and Prophetic Offices, may be, to as good Purpose, and as
great Benefit of the Church, performed by the ordinary Pastors, acting in
Parity, and that it is therefore needless to keep a distinction of Offices:
This is to pretend to be wiser than Christ: It is to confound and jumble
together the different Orders instituted by him: It is to set up a new Model
different from what he not only established, but also appointed to continue in
his Church to the end of the World; it is to cashier Christ's prime Officers
and Representatives, and the Churches principal Guides: And to deprive the
Church of the Pledges of her Lord's Care and Kindness which he gave her, when
he Ascended up unto Heaven.

If then our Blessed Lord's Institution be preserved, there must be Apostles,
as well as Presbyters and Deacons who are not disputed, that is, Successors to
them in their Office in the Christian Church: And who are they? Sure, not every
Pastor, nor yet any number of them, however moduled into lesser or larger
Judicatories: I Honor their Order and Office, but would not have them take too
much upon them, nor go beyond their Sphere: They are indeed the Successors of
the Seventy, if duly admitted to the Pastoral Office, and may well rejoice in
that honorable Station to which they are advanced in God's Church, if they
Walk worthy of it; but let them remember, that the Whole Seventy could not fill
the Chair of one Apostle, (for no Man may take this Honor to himself, but he
that is called of GOD) until the Holy Ghost did determine the Choice of one to
that High Office: I doubt not, but there were upwards of seven hundred Eminent
Pastors, and all endued with Extraordinary Gifts, in the Days of the Apostles:
But were all Apostles? Says St. Paul, No, they, were not.

IV. Which brings me to what I promised in the Fourth and Last Place, to show,
supposing these Church-Offices to be standing, who succeed in them, and rightly
execute them to this Day.

I need but do it of the Successors to the Apostles, for when that is done, the
other comes in of Course.

And in clearing this Point, I must put you in mind of what was observed under
the foregoing Head, That the Apostles were endued with some Powers and Gifts,
which had a peculiar Reference to the first Planting and Propagating the
Gospel, and the first Gathering and Constituting the Christian Church: These
were Extraordinary, and did expire with themselves; and in these they have no
Successors.

But the question is concerning the Ordinary Power and Authority of the
Apostolic Office, as it was instituted and appointed by Christ, to be a
standing and continuing Office in his Church when constituted, to serve for the
Edification, good Order and Government thereof to all succeeding Ages: The
Apostles were an Order of the Gospel Ministers, Superior to Ordinary Pastors
and Teachers, to whom Christ in a special Manner committed the Care and
Government of his Church: To dispense the Word and Sacraments, and perform all
Offices of Religion: To Ordain Ministers of Religion according to his
Institution: To Govern and Superintend his Church both Pastors and People: To
Judge, Correct, and Censure Misdemeanors in the one or other: To settle good
Orders and Constitutions for the orderly and decent performance of all
Ordinances of Religion, Public Worship, and Exercise of Discipline, and to
preserve the Church from Corruption of Error, Superstition, Faction, Schism,
and all Irregular Practices. All these are proper Parts of the Apostolic
Office, always necessary for the good of the Church; and they are also the
proper Officers of a Bishop, Overseer or Superintendent. So that it is very
evident, that in this ordinary and continuing Part of the Apostolic Office,
Christ has instituted the standing Office of Bishops in his Church, that is an
Order of Gospel Ministers, Superior to Pastors and Teachers, to whom he has
committed the Power and Authority abovementioned.

That the Apostles were actually Bishops, and their Apostleship a proper
Episcopacy, as it is expressly called, Acts 1.20. and that they actually exerted
an Episcopal Power and Jurisdiction over the Churches, and the ordinary Pastors
and Teachers, Presbyters and Deacons, I have fully showed in the Second
Inquiry. And accordingly we find the Ancients do frequently in their Writings
call the Apostles, Bishops; and no less frequently do they style the Bishops
Apostles, as being their Successors in ordinary; by which it is evident, they
understood, that in the Apostles, the Episcopal Office was instituted, and that
in Bishops the Apostolical Office is continued in the Church: But this is
beyond my Province, having confined my self in this Inquiry, to what Light the
Sacred Records afford.

And in consulting them we find it evident, First, That the Apostles were a
Superior Order of Gospel Ministers to Presbyters and Ordinary Pastors and
Teachers: That to these Apostles Christ Committed the chief Care and Government
of his Church, as his special and immediate Delegates and Trustees: That the
Inferior Pastors and Teachers did always own and acknowledge the Apostles as
their Superiors, and did readily receive and obey their Orders: That this
Apostolic Order, Superior to Presbyters and Deacons, was to continue in the
Church: all which we have fully cleared from Scripture in the former Enquiries.
Now, what Order of Gospel Ministers is there, Superior to Ordinary Pastors and
Teachers, but that of Bishops, in whom the Apostolic Order is continued in the
Church?

Either then Bishops must be the true Successors of the Apostles, or else they
have no Successors at all, and the Apostolic Order and Office is quite
Extinct, and the Church is totally deprived of the prime and chiefest Office
instituted by Christ for its Edification, good Order and Government: And
finally, There is now no such Order of Men extant in the World, to whom that
large and ample Commission which Christ gave only to his Apostles, does belong:
To them it was he gave the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, the Power of Binding
and Loosing: Them he sent as his Legates and Ambassadors to the World, as the
Father had sent him: Them he instructed in, and entrusted with the great
Affairs of his Kingdom, and to them he made that encouraging and gracious
Promise, Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the World. Now, who can
lay Claim to that Commission, or the Promise annexed, but the Apostles and
their Successors? And if they have no Successors now, that they themselves are
Dead, all that Commission falls, and the Promise with it; which is absurd to
think, and it is horrid even to conceive what consequences would follow.

Secondly, It is evident also from Scripture, That the Apostles in their own
time did confer upon other; the Apostolic Power and Authority; which they had
never done, if they had thought that the Office was confined to their own
Persons, and was to end with their respective Lives: They understood better the
Mind of their Lord and Master, and the Importance of his Promise, to be with
them to the end of the World. Hence they rightly concluded, That they were to
commit the Commission given to them, unto the Hands of other faithful Persons,
who should in like manner transmit it to others in a continual Succession, to
the end of the World. Accordingly their first Work was to choose one to succeed
Judas; and by the Direction of God, Matthias is received into the number of the
Apostles: So when James, the Brother of John, is killed by Herod, another of
that Name was Bishop of Jerusalem; to whom as such, Acts 12.17.
St. Peter notifies his miraculous Deliverence. He who presided in the Council
at Jerusalem. Acts 15. Acts 21.18.
He to whom St. Paul made his Address when he came thither: and he of whom he
speaks in the 19th Verse of the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians,
whom he calls an Apostle, and the Lord's Brother: This James some will have to
be another, than James, commonly called the Less, one of the first Twelve
Apostles; that he was one of the Seventy, commonly called James the Just,
advanced to the Apostolate; but however this be, certain it is, That Paul and
Barnabas were received into the Apostolic Office, Acts 26.16.
Paul immediately called thereunto by Christ at his Conversion. But Barnabas in
the ordinary manner, when he received that new Name from the Apostles, Acts
4.36, 37.
which signifies Son of Consolation. Both of them owned afterward by the
Apostles, James, Peter, and John, as their Fellow Apostles; and in Testimony
thereof, they gave them the Right hand of Fellowship, Galat. 2.9.
and a particular Commission to the Gentiles.

Besides these we read of others raised from among the Ordinary Pastors to the
Apostolical or Episcopal Order; and endued with a Power and Authority over
Churches, and their Pastors and Presbyters; (under what Designation I shall not
dispute, inasmuch as the thing is evidently Matter of Fact) for after this
manner, Paul actually gave to Timothy such an Episcopal Power over the Church
of Ephesus, and the Presbyters and Pastors thereof; by virtue of which
Commission, he is Authorized and Instructed in all the Exercise of the
Episcopal Power. 1 Timothy 1.^.
To Command and Charge them, (the Pastors) that they Preach sound Doctrine:
Chap. 2.
To prescribe Rules for the Public Worship, particularly, that Prayers be
offered up for all in Authority: To examine and judge Persons duly qualified
for the Sacred Offices of the Gospel, Chap. 3. And 5.22.
and to give Impositions of Hands to, or Ordain none but such as are found duly
qualified: To guard diligently against false Doctrines and seducing Spirits,
and put the Brethren in mind, and command them that they give not heed to such
Doctrines and Seducers: To Judge, Chap. 4.
Correct and Censure Offenders even Presbyters, (...) 5.19.20.
after due Examination and Conviction: To encourage and promote to higher
Degrees such Deacons or Presbyters as were faithful and diligent: And, in a
Word, Chap. 3.13. And 5.17.
he is instructed how in all things to behave himself, as a good Ruler and
Governor in the Church committed to his Care and Inspection; and that with
these very remarkably solemn Obtestations: Chap. 5.22. Chap. 6.13, 14.
I charge thee before God, that thou observe these things without partiality or
preferring one before another. I give thee charge in the sight of God and of
Jesus Christ, that thou keep this Commandment. O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy Trust. Ver. 20.
The like Power and Authority is conferred on Titus over the Churches in Crete.
Titus 4.5. Ver. 9, 10, 11.
That he should set in Order the things that were wanting, and ordain Elders or
Presbyters in every City: And, that he should stop the Mouths of the unruly who
taught things they ought not: And that he should rebuke them sharply that they
may be sound in the Faith: And that if any after due Admonitions, should
continue obstinate, he should censure him with Deposition and Excommunication.
Chap. 3.10.


These are such evident Proofs of an Apostolical or Episcopal Power conferred
upon one Pastor over other Pastors and Teachers, as ought in Reason to satisfy
all Men who are not immediately prejudiced against the Episcopal Order. I will
not contend, but that in the Exercise of this Power, they may have taken the
Advice and Concurrence of the Faithful Pastors in these Churches, and concerted
Affairs with them: and not done things in an Arbitrary and despotick manner, as
Calvin observes; Yet he allows they had such a Presidency over the Pastors,
Calvin's Inst. Lib. 4. Cap. 3. Sect. 15.
as the Roman Consul had in the Senate, and more I plead not for.

If it be said, That Timothy and Titus acted only as Paul's Delegates, it
weakens not the Argument, but rather corroborates it, for it still holds that
there was in the Apostles, a Superior Power and Office, above that of
Presbyters, which might be conferred upon and committed to another, whether by
Delegation, or by Investiture and Ordination of the Person into the Office, to
which that Power and Authority belonged, comes all to one. It is to as little
purpose to say, that Timothy and Titus exercised this Power and Authority over
the Pastors of Ephesus and Crete, as Evangelists: for 1. If the Power was
really Apostolical and Episcopal, it is all one under whatever designation they
exercised it; But 2dly, It Is altogether groundless; for we find no such Office
of an Evangelist instituted, distinct from that of Apostle, Presbyter, or
Deacon, but that it was a common designation to all who were the first Planters
of the Gospel among Jews, or Heathens, which cannot hold in the present case,
for their Commission is not only to the unconverted Heathens at Ephesus or
Crete, but to the Churches already settled, and Pastors instituted, in the
actual Exercise of their Ministry in these places over whom they are charged to
exercise this Episcopal Authority, as they will answer to Jesus Christ, the
Supreme Lord of his Church.

And what has been hitherto observed, makes it to me, very evident, and I
think may make it to any other unprejudiced Person at least highly probable,
That the Angels of the Seven Churches of the lesser Asia, were Persons of the
Apostolical and Episcopal Order: For since there was such an Office of Apostles
and Bishops instituted by Christ in his Church, whose Office was to Superintend
Churches and the Pastors thereof, and by their Authority to settle good Order,
to prevent and correct Abuses and Corruptions in Pastors and People: Who else
could these Angels be, but Officers of this higher Order? Who therefore are
accountable for, and charged Particularly with, any Disorder or Corruption
tolerated in their respective Churches: And commended for suppressing and
correcting these Disorders, and Purging their Churches of Heretical Teachers.

And, Finally, we cannot entertain the least Doubt of it in our Minds, but that
the Holy Apostles, to whom our Lord gave special Commission and Power, to Plant
and Settle, and Govern his Church in his Name, would be most faithful and
exact, in settling that Order, and Instituting these Offices, in all fully
constituted Churches, which their Lord had appointed; and would be careful to
leave the Church at their Death, under the same Order and Government, furnished
with the same Offices and Ministers which Christ himself her Lord, had
instituted and appointed for her Edification.

Neither can it be conceived, that any. Christian Church could look on herself
as rightly Constituted, if any of these sacred Offices instituted by Christ and
his Apostles had been wanting.

And now, having plainly from uncontestible Matters of Fact, Recorded in the
New Testament, represented the Order and Government, the different Offices and
Powers instituted by Christ and his Apostles, in the first modeling of the
Christian Church; I might add for Confirmation of all that has been hitherto
alleged, that all the Records we have of the Ancient and Primitive Church do
harmoniously attest, That this Order, and these Offices instituted by Christ,
were inviolably preserved for many Ages; and so positive are they, as to that
prime Office of Apostles and Bishops, that they give us particular Catalogues
of the Bishops who succeeded the Apostles, in governing the most famous and
principal Churches in the World: But to insist on this, would force me beyond
the Bounds within which I proposed to contain my self in my first Entrance upon
this Subject.

I shall therefore only give the Testimony of Calvin in this Matter, because
perhaps his Authority may go further with some, than that of the Ancients: You
will find it in the 1st and 4th Sections of the 4th Chapter of his
Institutions, where treating of the State of the Church, and the Form of its
Government before the Papacy, he says to this purpose: It will be useful in
this Matter, to know and consider the Form of the Ancient Church, which will
represent before our Eyes, a certain Image of the Divine Institution: Although
the Bishops of those Times, framed many Canons, by which they seem to strain
Things beyond what is expressed in Holy Writ; yet with that Caution did they
frame all their Order and Government, according to the only Rule of God's Word,
that you may easily see they had almost nothing in this Matter disagreeable to
the Word of God. Yea, though something might be wanting in their Order, yet,
because with a sincere Study they endeavored to preserve God's Institution,
and erred not much from it, it will be very profitable, briefly to recount what
kind of Custom they had. As we have shown, there is a threefold Ministry
commended to us in Scripture; So whatever Ministers the ancient Church had, it
distinguished them into three Orders, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons.

And. 4. That every Province had among their Bishops, one who was an
Archbishop, and that in the Council of Nice, Patriarchs were appointed, who in
Order and Dignity might be superior to Archbishops; This was for Preservation
of Discipline, that if any thing happened in any Church which could not well be
determined by a few, it might be referred to a Provincial Synod, and if the
Affair were of such Importance that it required a greater Discussion,
Application was made to the Patriarch with the Synods, from whom there was no
Appeal, but to a General Council: The Government thus constituted, some did
call an Hierarchy, a Name improper (as seems to me) surely not used in
Scripture; for the Holy Spirit would provide, that in the Matter of
Church Government, None might Dream of a Principality or Dominion; but if
laying aside the Name, we view the Thing it self, we will find that the ancient
Bishops had no mind to frame any other Form of Church Government, than what was
prescribed by God in his Word. Thus far Calvin.

And I would conclude with these Words, but that I am obliged, for further
clearing what has been hitherto observed, to consider some Passages of
Scripture that are commonly objected against what I have advanced.

And, First, it is alleged, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are
promiscuously used in Scripture, and therefore they signify but one and the
same Office: It is Answered by some, That this is a great Mistake: And that
wherever Bishops are named, we are to understand Bishops properly so called,
and not Presbyters, which they make appear from the Texts brought in favor of
the Community of Names; for Instance, Acts 20.27, 28. They say, Paul called
both Bishops and Presbyters unto him, and that the Clergy of all the Cities
thereabout were there; for Paul, during his three Years abode in Asia, had
Conversed with the Bishops and Presbyters of other Places, than of Ephesus, and
his appealing to their Knowledge, Verse 18.
proves that they were present, so that what he says, ver. 28. was principally
directed to the Bishops, and secondarily and by way of Reflection to the
Presbyters. To Titus 1. Ver. 5, 6, 7. it is answered, That what is there to be
found, only proves that he should Advance the Presbyters under him, and Ordain
Bishops, and Dispose of them unto Cities, fixing them to certain Cures; so it
follows, for a Bishop must be blameless, etc. There were Presbyters before at
Crete, and Titus was to ordain some of them Bishops: So 1 Timothy 3. is to be
understood of Bishops properly so called, that were to be ordained to preside
over other Cities, as Timothy did over Ephesus. Phil. 1.1. may be understood of
the Bishops of Philippi, and other neighboring Cities, who were wont to
convene and meet together; or it may mean that Paul, and the Bishops and
Deacons that were with him, Salute the Saints at Philippi. This Answer however
not obvious to every one, yet clearly shows how uncertain that alleged
Identity of Names is.

But though we should not look upon this Answer as absolutely conclusive, but
grant an Identity of Names; yet it will not follow, that there was an Identity
of Offices; for Names are common in Scripture, where Offices are acknowledged
to be distinct. Thus Hebrews the 3d and the 1st, Christ is called an Apostle;
and 1 Pet. 2.25. he is called a Bishop; 1 Pet. 5.1. John, Ep. 2.3. 1 Cor. 3.5.
2 Cor. 3.6. Col. 4.7, 17.
Peter and John call themselves Presbyters; and the Apostles and Pastors are
frequently called Deacons. 1 These. 3.2.
Now it cannot from thence be argued, that the Apostles and Presbyters Office
was one and the same with the Deacons: The Name of the Genus is usually given
to the Species: The Superior Office including the Inferior, all Apostles were
Presbyters and Deacons, though not vice versa: Therefore the Identity of
Offices is not to be argued from the Identity of Names: for according to the
Presbyterians themselves, the Name Presbyter is common to the Pastor, and
Ruling Elder, yet the Offices are vastly distinct.

But, Secondly, several Texts are adduced, in which it is alleged, That Parity
among Church-Offices is peremtorily commanded; such as Matthew. 20.26. The Lords
of the Gentiles, etc. and the parallel places, Luke 9.47, 48. Luke 22.24. 1
Pet. 5.3. To which it is answered in general, That these Scriptures cannot by
any just Rules of Interpretation be understood as condemning a Disparity among
Gospel Ministers, nor a Superiority of one Order above another; nor a more
eminent Power and Authority in some to Govern the Church above others; nor all
Jurisdiction of one Gospel Office above others, but only that, which is
exercised with imperious Bitterness and Domination; nor are they interpreted to
any such purpose by any Judicious Person of either Persuasion: So that it is
not fair, honest, or ingenuous Dealing, in any to make use of these Texts, as
condemning Imparity among Gospel Officers, in order to amuse the Populace and
Simpler Sort, who are oft-times soon taken with the Sound of Words, without
considering the true Sense and Importance of them.

But to answer this Objection more particularly, 1st, That only is forbidden
Gospel Ministers, which was practiced by the Lords of the Gentiles, that is,
Secular Dominion and Authority; and it was certain, it was this that the
Disciples had in their View, when they contended who should be greatest; for
they were mightily possessed with the Jewish Opinion, that Christ's Kingdom was
to be a Temporal Kingdom; and it is this mistake that Christ removes.

2dly, That Dominion which the Lords of the Gentiles exercised, was not one
over another, but over their Subjects, so that if it take away all Power of one
above another, it will destroy the Power of Ministers over their Flocks: Now,
though Lording over God's Heritage is expressly discharged; 1 Pet. 5.3. Heb.
13.7.17.
yet the Pastors Power and Authority over them, is expressly asserted, where
they are called Rulers, and the People commanded to obey them: It would also
destroy the Power of Synods and Presbyters, where Ministers rule over Ministers.

3dly, There are in St. Luke, some Expressions, which plainly imply a
Superiority or Eminency of Power, in some over others, when it is said, He that
is greatest among you: And when Christ proposes his own Example in what he
there enjoins them, saying, I am among you as one that ministers; yet none
will doubt he was their Lord and Superior, so that the command of Ministering
takes not away the Superiority and Power.

4thly, It cannot be thought that our Savior condemned a Disparity among
Gospel Ministers, when it is so evident that he actually instituted Ministers
of different Offices and Degrees, first Apostles, then Seventy others of a
Second Order; and his Apostles instituted a Third Order of Deacons, who it is
certain was Inferior to Presbyters, as these were to the Apostles.

5thly, If our Lord had designed to forbid all Disparity or Subordination among
the Ministers of the Gospel; it is like, he would rather have stated the
Opposition between them and the Ministers of Religion under the Mosaic
Dispensation, and not the Lords of the Gentiles.

But Thirdly, whereas that Passage in the 1st of Timothy, the 4th Chapter, and
14th Verse, is brought to prove, That Presbyters have a Right or Power to
ordain Presbyters, and other Gospel Ministers: It is answered, That place
proves no such Thing. For S. Jerome, a zealous Asserter of the Rights of
Presbyters, acknowledges that Ordination belongs, if not solely, yet chiefly to
Bishops. And both Ancients and Modern, and among these, Calvin, understand
Presbyter in the aforesaid Place, not of the Consessus or Collegium
Presbyterorum, the Assembly or Consistory of Presbyters; but of the Munus or
Office it self, or the Ordination of the Office of a Presbyter; so that the
Laying on of the Hands of the Presbyter signifies no more than when he was
ordained a Presbyter; as if St. Paul had said, Take heed that the Grace
conferred on thee, when I ordained thee a Presbyter, Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. Cap.
Sect. 16. ad finem.
be not in vain: Thus Calvin interprets that place; and what confirms this
Gloss, is the Karisma, or Gift spoken of, seems to have respect to these
extraordinary Gifts conferred by the Laying on of the Hands of the Apostles in
the Ordination of Pastors, to which the Assistance and Concurrence of others
was not necessary.

But granting that Presbytery is to be understood of the meeting of Presbyters,
yet it will not prove that they had full Power and Authority to Ordain; for
here, at the most they did but concur and assist in the Ordination of Timothy,
as is evident from 2 Timothy 1.6. where the Apostle calling him to stir up that
Gift, says, that it was conferred on him by laying on of Hands. Certain it is,
that Apostles did Ordain without the Concurrence of Presbyters; but I read not
that ever Presbyters ordained without an Apostle or Bishop; and in an Action of
that Nature and Importance, it may at least be a just ground of Doubt and
Scruple, that there is no Warrant or Precedent to be found for it in Scripture,
without which I know not how any can be fully persuaded in his own mind. How
far an absolute necessity may alter the case according to the common Axiom,
That many things may be lawful for a Senate when they have no King, that are
not when there is one, I shall not determine.

CONCLUSION.
AND now having finished what I designed at present, that is, having
demonstrated from the Scripture's Account of these Matters, what was at first
settled in it, and having thence deduced what is at present the true Form of
Government in the Church of Christ: I shall only add, by way of Conclusion, a
short Expostulation, in the Spirit of Meekness and Love; and calmly enquire,
What is the Ground of all that Noise and Clamor, Hatred and Prejudice, raised
against them who are of the Principles, as to the Point of Church Government,
which are here asserted?

It Is evident we own Christ Jesus the Lord, Head, King, and Lawgiver to his
Church, who has Power and Authority to settle and establish Order and
Government therein, and to institute and appoint what Offices, and in what
manner he pleases, in his Spiritual Kingdom.

We are fully persuaded, that He, who is of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, has
disposed all Affairs relating to the Government of his Church, in the most
excellent method, in the way and manner that tends most for the Peace and
Unity, Order and Security, Edification and Salvation of his Church and People.

We find, plainly and expressly, Three distinct Offices instituted by Christ and
his Apostles; one Prime and Chief, the Twelve Apostles; and two Subordinate,
the Seventy Disciples, and Seven Deacons: These Three Orders of
Gospel Ministers are unquestionably of Divine Institution and Appointment. And
we cannot find in all the New Testament, that any of them was Extraordinary and
Temporary; no, not the least Insinuation to move us to think, that after a
short time any of them was to cease. On the contrary, we have the same Evidence
for their perpetual Duration, that we have for their first Institution.

And now let any impartially Judge, who do most truly assert Christ's Kingly
Office, and the Prerogatives of his Crown? They who plead for his Institution,
and closely adhere thereunto, and to the Offices which he has appointed in his
Church; or they, who make bold with his Institution; to abrogate the prime
Office he instituted, as how long since antiquated and out of use; and that
only upon a false and groundless Supposition, that it was Extraordinary and
Temporary. The falseness of which I have already showed under my Third Head,
and shall now represent briefly of what a dangerous consequence it is to
Religion, to allege that any of the Offices instituted by Christ, were
Extraordinary and Temporary, appointed only to serve the Infancy and First
Constitution of the Church, but not to continue in it when once constituted.
This makes the Rule and Standard of our Religion uncertain and unfixed, and
opens a Gap to all Errors: At this rate, and upon the same pretense, Quakers,
and others, cast off the Gospel Institutions, of Holy Orders, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, etc. for, say they, these were only Temporary Ordinances; but now
all the Lord's People are Holy, they are all Prophets, the Manifestation of the
Spirit, which is given unto all, has outdated all these Rudimentary Elements.

If any, thus principled, could but gain such an ascendant over the Populace,
as to inspire them with this Notion, and thereby influence them as much against
the Order of Presbyters, as they have been against that of Bishops; What should
then become of Order in the Church, or any Gospel Ordinance? God forbid! That
any such wild Caprice should ever seize on Christian People; but I make the
Supposition to represent thereby the dangerous Consequence of that Principle,
That some of Christ's Institutions were but Temporary: For it may be improved
as much, and on as good ground, against the Office of a Presbyter, yea, against
the positive Instructions of the Gospel, as against the Office of a Bishop; and
there may come such an unhappy Juncture, when one as well as another, and all
as well as one, may thus come to be thought unnecessary. For alas, if the Truth
may be told, it is greatly to be feared, that not only the Office of Bishops,
but of all Pastors, yea, all the Sacred Institutions of Christ, are become
intolerable unto too many (...), who want but a favorable Opportunity to vent
their minds, and say, Come, let us break their Bonds asunder, and cast away
their Cords from us.

How will they be able to answer God, or their own Consciences for it? Who have
solemnly combined together to ruin and overthrow that Order, settled by Christ
in his Church, and have left no Stone unturned, in their restless Endeavors,
to bring the Sacred Offices of Bishops, and Pastors Ministering under their
Inspection and Government, into perpetual Contempts; and having industriously
set themselves to oppose and frustrate all their Gospel Administrations; and
not only to alienate the Minds of poor simple People from their Lawful
Governors and Pastors, but with Noise and Clamor, and bitter Invectives, to
inspire them with the highest Rage and Fury to commit the most horrid Outrages
on their Sacred Persons, as good Service done to God; and all upon no other
Account, but their firm adherence unto the Institution of Jesus Christ.

Father forgive them, they know not what they do: Lord lay not this Sin to
their change, but mercifully open their eyes, that they may see the evil of
their ways, and may be converted to the Way of Truth and Godliness, Peace and
Charity, Unity and Order, and Eternal, Saved: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now unto GOD the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be Glory Everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.

