THE Ancient Testimony OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS, REVIVED: By the Order and
Approbation of the YEARLY MEETING held for the Province of Pennsylvania and
Jerseys. 1722.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Andrew Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in
Second-street. 1723.

THE Ancient Testimony OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS, REVIVED, etc.
Dear Friends,
HAVING lately by an Introduction to our Book of Discipline, Introduction.
given a short Hint how our respective Meetings, for Church Affairs, do
consist, and by what Authority, and Example, they came at first to be
instituted, we think well at this Time, for the further Information, and
Encouragement, of our Youth, and others, whose Faces are (...) toward Zion, to
signify, that by living Experience, we find, and can with good Conscience
declare and testify, that the same blessed holy Spirit which led us to believe
and receive the Doctrines and Principles of Truth, The bell Spirit (...) to good
Or^^.
(as they were declared by Christ and his Apostles in the holy Scriptures) did
and now does, lead us into the like holy Order and Government to be exercised
among us, as it was amongst the primitive Christians, in Sanctification and
Holiness.

The Church defined. 1 Cor. 1.^.
FOR the Church of God is a Gathering of them that are sanctified by the Word of
Truth, called to be Saints, who are Members of the Body, even the true Church,
whereof Jesus Christ is the Head: But before any can come to be true Members of
that Body, they must witness the fiery Baptism of the Holy Ghost, Fiery Baptism.
to initiate them into this true Church; and as they follow Christ, in the
Regeneration, (...) 19.18.
they will witness a Purity of Living, and be qualified to act and judge for
him, Qualifies (...) God.
who in dispensing his holy Spirit, does in his infinite Wisdom, minister unto
every Member a Measure thereof which operates diversely for the edifying of the
Body, there being some Apostles, some Teachers, some Pastors, some Elders,
young Men and Babes; (...) 4.28.
for all are not Apostles, Elders, nor Babes; yet all who are truly gathered
are Members, and as such, have a Sense and Feeling of the Life of the Body
flowing from the Head Jesus Christ. And whilst they remain in that Sense,
acting with all Lowliness, Meekness, Ephesians. 4.2.
and long suffering, forbearing one another in Love, endeavoring to keep true
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, they will be endued with right
Judgment, seasoned with pure Charity, ver. 3.
and perfect Love, which is the Bond of our holy Communion, and
Church Fellowship.

AND as we become thus initiated and qualified, The Government of the Christian
Church to be in perfect Unity.
we shall be enabled to maintain the holy Order and Government abovementioned
in perfect Unity; and according to the Degree of Faithfulness we are found in,
New Jerusalem o^ Church of Christ Rev. 21.2.
shall more and more see the holy City New Jerusalem coming down from God out
of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, and the River of Water
of Life proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, which being the
true Church, ver. 12. The Wall and Foundations thereof.
had a Wall great and high, signifying the Excellency of God's Power
encompassing those that are within this Church, and keeping out all that would
invade or hurt it: ver. 14.
And this Wall had twelve Foundations, and on them the Names of the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb; which denotes that the Doctrines of the Apostles are to
be embraced, and those that are not founded upon them to be rejected and shut
out of this holy City which had but one Street, and that is the Way to the Tree
of Life, where the true Members of the Church of Christ are traveling in the
Unity of his blessed Spirit; Act 432.
and so they become of one Heart, and of one Soul, as the Multitude of them
that believed in the Apostle's Days were, in which precious Unity we shall feel
the Life of Righteousness.

AND as we come to feel this Life, Glory of this ^piritual Di^pensation.
and therein experience the Arisings of this glorious Day of Love and Light,
with the Increase of this blessed Unity, we shall more and more witness the
Glory of this spiritual Dispensation by knowing God's Tabernacle with us, Rev.
21.3.
and his dwelling in us, and the peaceable Government of the Lamb among us
mysteriously signified by the descending of this holy City; and as we abide
here, we shall with John see no more Sea, Rev. 21 1. Against Division in the
Church.
that is, we shall not degenerate into that outrageous and dividing Principle
that has at Times prevailed in some that walked amongst us to manifest they
were not of us; Romans 12.1.
but shall present our Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is our reasonable Service, and not be conformed to this World, but
transformed by the renewing of our Mind, proving what is that good, acceptable,
and perfect Will of God, ver. 3.
and then none among us will think of himself more highly than he ought ^ but
will think soberly according as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of
Faith.

FOR having Gifts differing, ver. 6. Gifts differing.
as said the Apostle, according to the Grace that is given to us, whether
Prophecy, we s^all prophesy according to the Proportion of Faith, or Ministry
we s^all wait on our Ministry, (...) he that teaches, on Teaching, or he that
exhorts, on Exhortation, he that gives will do it with Simplicity, he that
rules with Diligence, he that s^eweth Mercy with Cheerfulness; Romans 12.9.
our Love will be without Dissimulation, abhorring that which is evil, cleaving
to that which is good, kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly
Love, ver. 10,
in Honor preferring one another, ver. 11,
not slothful in Business, but providing Things honest in the Sight of all Men,
and yet have our Minds kept above the surfeiting Cares of the World, by being
fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, rejoicing in Hope, 12, 13, 14.
patient in Tribulation, continuing instant in Prayer, distributing to the
Necessity of Saints, given to Hospitality, blessing them which persecute us,
and not curse.

We shall also, be of the same Mind one toward another, Several Duties.
affecting not high Things, but condescending to Men of low Estate; Romans 12.16,
17. 1 Pet. 3.9.
not wise in our own Conceits; nor recompense to any Man Evil for Evil, or
Railing for ^^^ling; Romans 12.18. ver. 21.
but overcome Evil with Good; and as much as lies in us, live peaceably with
all Men, having the same Love, doing nothing through Strife or vain Glory, but in
Lowliness of Mind, Phil. 2.2. ver. 3.
each esteeming the other better than themselves; the strongest and best
gifted, not despising the meanest, nor they envying the strongest; but all in
their respective Stations and Degrees will walk by the same Rule, Phil. 3.16.
be of one Accord, ^and mind the same Thing, Charity in all its Branches to be
maintained.
heartily joining to maintain Charity in all its Branches, and carry on the
Affairs of Truth in the Lamb-like Spirit to the Honor of God and Comfort one
of another in him, and then we shall demonstrate that we experimentally know
there is one body, Ephesians. 4.51.
and one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in us all.

BY all which, Church Fellowship.
it is manifest that our Church Fellowship stands in the Bond of Charity and
true Unity of the holy Spirit the Fruit whereof, as faith (...) ^postle, Ephesians.
^.^
is in all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth, Love, The Fruit of the Spirit.
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against
such there is no Law; Gal. ^.22. ve^ 14. The Law fulfilled.
for the Law is fulfilled in one Word, says the same Apostle, even this, Thou
s^alt love thy Neighbor as thy self, which is that perfect Charity we speak
of, and desire all may come unto, and be preserved in; so that God ( who is
Love) may take Delight in us, and make his Abode with us, and then shall we
walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16, 17.
and nor fulfill the Lusts of the Fles^, for the Fles^ lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh.

The Works of the Flesh. Gal. ^.19.
THE Works of the Flesh are manifest (said the Apostle (...) to the Galatians^
which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, ^^^lations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Her^^^es,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, R^velling and such like, and they that do such
things s^all not inherit the Kingdom of God And the same Apostle, when he wrote
to the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, and Coloss, testifying against the
like Evils, Ephesians. 5.4, 5.
and against foolish Talking and Jesting, he added, that no Whoremonger, nor
unclean Person, Colos. 3.^.
nor covetous Man who is an Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.6.7, 11.
for because of th^se Things comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of
Disobedience: Be not therefore (said he) Partakers with them, and have no
Fellows^ip with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove them.

Ephesians. 4.19,
AND the same Apostle speaking of some who were past feeling, had given
themselves over to Lasciviousness to work all Uncleanness with Greediness: 20,
But ye, (said he to the Believers) have not so learned Christ: If so be, 21,
that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him as the Truth is in Jesus;
22,
that ye put off concerning the former Conversation the old Man which is
corrupt, according to deceitful Lusts; 23,
and be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind; and that ye put on the New Man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness; 24,
wherefore putting away Lying, 25,
speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor; for we are Members one of another:
And after 26,
he forbad them to be angry and give Place to the Devil, he would have them that
stole, 27,
ste^l no more, and that 28,
no corrupt Communication should proceed out of their Mouth; 29,
but that which is good to the Use of edifying, that it might minister Grace to
the Hearers, and that all Bitterness and Wrath, 31.
and Anger, and Clamor, and evil speaking should be put away with all Malice.

Romans ^.29.
AND the Apostle having testified against those who were full of Envy, Murder,
Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whisperers, Backbiters, ver. 30.
Haters of God, despightful, proud, Boasters, Inventers of evil Things,
disobedient to Parents; ver. 31.
without Understanding, Covenant-Breakers, without natural Affection,
implacable, unmerciful, ver. 18.
and such as held the Truth in Unrighteousness, he says, Know ye 1 Cor. ^.^.
not that the unrighteous s^all not inherit the Kingdom of God: Be not
deceived, neither Pernicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effe^^^te,
nor (...) of themselves with Mankind, 10,
nor Theives, nor Covetous, nor Drunkenness, nor Revilers, nor Ext^rtioners,
s^all inherit the Kingdom of God; 11.
and such were some of you; but ye are w^^^ed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. By
this we may clearly understand, that the vilest of People, as they give Way to
the Power and Word of Truth may be sanctified, and so become Members of the
Church of Christ, which is great Encouragement for all to submit themselves to
the divine holy Hand that leads them to Repentance and Amendment of Life.

Apostates. 1 Timothy ^.20.
BUT we may observe, that notwithstanding the many Cautions 2 Timothy 2.1^.
and repeated Advice of the Apostles, 3.^.
yet some in their Days, as in our Time, 4.^
who professed the Truth, 3 John 1.^.
and seemed in Measure redeemed out of the Evils of this World, Gal. 2.4.
fell 1 Cor. 1.12.
into these and the like Enormities which the Apostles testified against; 5.1.
and some others who were then gathered into the Belief of the Principles and
Doctrines of the Gospel of Christ, fell from those Principles as some have done
in our Day; in which Cases such as stood firm in the Faith, had Power by the
Spirit of God (after Christian Endeavors to convince and reclaim those
Backsliders) to exclude them from our spiritual Fellowship and Communion, as
also the Privileges they had as Fellow Members, which Power, we know by good
Experience, continues with us in carrying on the Discipline of the Church in
the Spirit of Meekness.

THEREFORE, we say, Power in the Church to (...).
as our Brethren have heretofore concluded, that where any in the Church of God
pretending Conscience or Revelation, shall arise to teach and practice (however
insignificant or small in themselves) whether Principles or Practice, yet if
they be contrary to such as are already received as true, and confirmed by
God's Spirit in the Hearts of his Saints; and that the introducing of these
Things tend to bring Reproach upon the Truth, as such as are not edifying in
themselves, and so stumble the weak; those who have a true and right
Discerning, may in and by the Power of God authorizing them (and no otherwise)
condemn and judge such Things; and their so doing will be obligatory upon all
the Members that have a true Sense, because they will see it to be so, and
submit to it.

Innovations.
WHATSOEVER Innovation, Difference, or diverse Appearance, whether in Doctrine
or Practice, proceeds not from the pure Moving of the Spirit of God, or is
not done out of pure Tenderness of Conscience, but either from that which being
pufft up affects Singularity, and there-through would be observed, commended
and exalted, or from that which the Malignity of some Humors and natural
Tempers, which will be contradicting without Cause, and secretly begetting
Divisions, Animosities and Emulations, by which the Unity and unfeigned Love of
the Brethren is lessened or rent, all Things proceeding from this Root and
Spirit, however little they may be supposed to be of themselves, are to be
guarded against, withstood and denied as hurtful to the true Church's Peace and
Hindrance of the Prosperity of Truth.

Things that some deem Lawful, are not so to us.
AND now we come to take Notice of some Things that others professing
Christianity, deem lawful, which are not so to us, as swearing and fighting,
Swearing.
or going to War when required by lawful Authority. The first we testify
against, because it is contrary to the express Command of our blessed Savior,
who said, Mat.^.3.
Swear not at all; and the Apostle James writing to the twelve scattered
Tri^^s, who, according to their Law, were to swear by the Lord, and perform
the^ Oaths to him, Tim. 5.12.
says, But above all Things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, nor by any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yes; and your
Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. By this we believe, that all Oaths
commanded or allowed by the Mosaical Law, which took their Beginning from Want
of Truth and Faithfulness, as well as the Oaths of those Times, are totally
abrogated, and instead thereof the speaking of Truth established; and we are
greatly thankful to God that our Superiors in Great Britain have been pleased
to grant Relief and Ease to us in that Point, and hope it will be a firm and
renewed Obligation upon us to keep peaceable, faithful, harmless and honest
toward all the Children of Men: And then we shall assuredly be preserved out
of those Con^ests, Fallacies, Strife and Perfidies against which Oaths were at
first introduced as a Remedy, and are still alleged to be a Security.

AND since we must not swear at all, Admin^string Oaths.
we cannot administer Oaths to others, therefore let all of our Community who
are or may be concerned as Magistrates, be tender of God's Honor in this
Matter.

AND as for Wars and Fightings, Wars.
they are altogether unlawful to us, because our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
(who for the Excellency of his Government is called the Prince of Peace) I^a.
9.6.
in his blessed Sermon upon the Mount commanded that we should love our
Enemies. Mat. 5^.3^.


AND the Apostle Paul exhorts not to avenge our selves, Romans 18.19, 20.
but if our Enemy hunger, we must feed him; if he thirst give him Drink: But it
is evident, 2 Cor. 10.3.
that War teaches to hate, famish and destroy them. The same Apostle declares,
that we war not after the Flesh, Ephesians. ^.12.
nor wrestle against Flesh and Blood: But outward War is according to the
Flesh, and against Flesh and Blood, for the shedding of the one, and destroying
of the other. The same Apostle says further, 2 Cor. 10.4.
The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God; so are not
the Weapons of outward Warfare; and the Apostle James testifies, ^^m 4.1.
that Wars and Fightings come from Lusts, and those Lusts war in the Members of
carnal Men: But such as have crucified the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts,
cannot indulge them by waging War; nor can the Servants of Christ fight, John
18.36.
because his Kingdom is not of this World. So that when Peter used the Sword,
his Lord and Master reproved him, saying, Put up again thy Sword into his
Place, for all they that take up the Sword, s^all perish with the Sword. We are
not without sorrowful Instances of some that have been educated in the
peaceable Principle here asserted; and yet because so far degenerated from it
as to use the Sword; and they perished by the Sword; which is herementioned
only as a Warning to those who by pursuing the Vanity of their Minds, may
happen to stray out of the pure Path of Peace, and fall into the like
Inconveniences.

BY all which it may appear, Christ's Banner.
that Jesus Christ the Captain of our Salvation calls those that lift
themselves under his Banner, to bear his Cross, and abide in Humility,
Patience, Simplicity and true Charity, and not any Ways indulge the least
Thought of Revenge, Against Revenge. Romans 1^.17.
or rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing; much less endeavor to
advance themselves by the fraudulent Stratagems of War; but suffer true Love to
take Place of Wrath, and Forgiveness to overcome Injury and Revenge; so the
Lamb will be preserved before the Lion, and the Lion resign to, and lie down
with the Lamb.

AND although these Testimonies of Christ and his Apostles are ^o clear against
Wars and Fightings, yet our elder Brethren, and some of us formerly, Sufferings
of Friends.
suffered much because we could not ourselves bear Arms, nor send others in our
Places, nor pay for buying of Drums and other military Attire, as also for not
observing those Days which were appointed to crave a Blessing for Success to
the Arms of the Nation where we lived, or to give Thanks for the Victories
acquired by the Effusion of much Blood.

THERE are other Things, Flattering Titles, Bowings, etc.
as giving flattering Titles, uncovering the Head, and cringing to Men, calling
the Days and Months by the Heathen Names, and drinking one to another, drinking
Healths, Riotings, Games, etc.
Banquetings, and using Games, Sports, Plays, Revels, Comedies, and such like
(which many of the Professors of Christianity allow) are not at all lawful to
us, because they not only wast that Time which is but lent us, and should be
spent to the Honor of God, but also naturally draw Men from God's Fear; and we
know the Testimony of the Spirit, of Truth is against them, R B. 548.
and the inward Convictions of Light and Grace in our own Hearts, (...)
prevailed upon us to lay them (...).

Sports, etc. (...) 545.
(...) ^ed Christians a^ (...) ^ing forth of our (...) People to go (...)
Ga^^^^^, (...) Music, Dancing, Wrestling, running of Races, and the like,
counting it not inconsistent with Religion so to do, which was so abominable in
the Sight of God that he was pleased to raise a holy Zeal in our elder Brethren
against those ungodly Practices, Drinking Healths, etc.
and against drinking Healths, Banquetings and riotous Living, which not only
provoke People to Excess of Eating, Drinking, Laughter, foolish Talking,
Jesting, and such like Things that are sinful, and in no wise becoming the
Solidity, Gravity and Sobriety which Men professing Christianity ought to be
adorned with; but it is obvious, that such as run into those Excesses, bring a
Scorn and Slight upon their Profession, to the Grief of the honest hearted, and
not only so, but they lay themselves open to commit all such Vices as the Devil
may tempt them to.

AND our constant Testimony has been, Scripture Language.
and is against saying YOU to a single Person, not only because it is contrary
to the true Propriety of Speech and Scripture Language, Arrogance.
but it gratifies that proud Haman-like Spirit which possesses the Heart of
such who would arrogate to themselves the Homage and Reverence due to God,
requiring to be addressed in such Language as they judge more honorable than
that which they bestow upon the Almighty.

AND because our ancient Friends and Elders in the Truth could not join with
that Spirit, Respect to Men.
they suffered deeply for their innocent Testimony against it, and yet upon all
Occasions showed the decent Respect due to Men and maintained in the Wisdom of
God, Ho^^^ to Superiors.
the true Honor and Obedience due from Subjects to their Prince, Inferiors to
Superiors, from Children to Parents, and Servants to Masters, whereby the
mutual Relations betwixt those different Ranks and Degrees of Men have been and
are asserted and endeavored to be established after the Manner of our Savior
and his Apostles were pleased to direct.

NOW before we go further, we think proper to give some Accounts of our
Principles and Practices concerning those mutual Relations or Ranks of Men. Of
Kings and Rulers. Romans 13.^.
And first of Kings, Rulers, and Magistrates, as it is our Belief, that the
Powers and Government we live under are of the Lord, so we acknowledge that
Fidelity and Subjection is due to those who are in Authority over us, expecting
only the Benefit of those good Laws which are deemed our Birthright as English
Subjects, and not the Protection by Gun and Sword which others make the Terms
of their Allegiance: and we faithfully own, Magistracy. Romans 13 2. 1 Timothy 5.17.
that Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, and those who rule well are worthy of
double Honor, and deserve to be really valued and much esteemed, not by giving
them vain Appellations or flattering Titles, nor by bowing the Body, or
uncovering the Head, nor by feigned Words called Compl^ments, but by obeying
their just and lawful Commands, wherein the true Honor and Subjection due to
them does chiefly confessed.

AND it has been, Supplications for Kings, etc.
and is our frequent Concern according to pure Leadings and (...) of God's holy
Spirit in our ^^^^st Approaches to the Throne of his Grace to make
Supplication, 1 Timothy 2.^.
Prayer, Intercession, and giving of Thanks for Kings, and all that are in
Anthority: And we have not been wanting in our respective Places and Stations,
to put People in Mind, as the Apostle exhorted, Tit. 3.1.
to be subjected to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and submit
to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14.
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent by him for the Punishment of Evildoers, and Praise of them that do well;
Romans 13.4.
for so the Magistrates are Ministers of God to us for Good, bearing not the
Sword in vain, being Revengers to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil: and
for this Cause pay we Tribute also, for they are God's Ministers attending
continually on this very Thing.

YET when Laws and Statutes were made, Laws against Conscience.
requiring certain Conformities which for Conscience Sake could not be complied
with by our faithful Friends, G. F. II. 291.
some Magistrates, instead of the Sword of Justice, took up the Sword of
Persecution against them; nevertheless they did not resist, but patiently
suffered the spoiling of their Goods, grievous Imprisonments, Scourging and
Banishment from their tender Families, Friends and Relations, choosing, as the
holy Apostles did in the like Case, (...) 5.29.4.^0.
to obey God rather than Men; for they could not but speak the Things which
they had seen and heard; and for all this cruel Usage and Sufferings, they paid
their Taxes and Tributes, Mat. 22.23.
rendering to Caesar the Things which were his, and to God the Things that were
his; for so was the Will of God, 1 Pet. 2.15.
that with well doing, they should put to Silence the Ignorance of foolish Men.

Distinguish from good Laws.
AND here it is necessary to distinguish between the Laws or Statutes which
occasioned those Sufferings, 1 Timothy 1.8,
and the Law, which the Apostle said, is good if a Man use it Lawfully, 9,
^^^wing this, that the Law is not made for the righteous Man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for Sinners, for unholy and
profane, for Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of Mothers, 10.
for Man-slayers, for Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with
Mankind, for Men-stealers, for Liars, for perjured Persons, and for any other
Thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine.

Dear Friends,

IT is evident, that it was designed by those Statutes, Uniformity of Worship
to humane Ministry.
not only to bring all to one Form of Worship contrived by human Invention; but
also to establish a Ministry and Ministers called and ordained by Men, R. B.
438, 4^9.
many of whom judged the Life, Grace, and Spirit of God no essential Part of
their Ministry, nor any necessary Qualification of their Ministers, which
Judgment of theirs being against the Law of the Spirit of Life, and the divine
Institution of our Savior's Spiritual Worship, must needs be contrary to sound
Doctrine.

NEVERTHELESS to uphold their human Ministry, Provision for Ministers.
ample Provision was made for Maintenance of their Ministers; and to extort it
from such as could not for Conscience Sake, own, hear, or receive their
Ministry. But when it pleased God to discover to our Friends and Elders, John
4.23, 24.
that they who worship the Father, most worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and
be brought to the true Unity thereof, and not into a mere outward Conformity,
they were soon led to embrace the ancient, (...).
holy, living and free Ministry, which at the breaking forth of this Day and
Dispensation of the New Covenant, was plentifully bestowed upon Men and Women,
who (having received the true Knowledge of Things Spiritual, and being in
Measure purified and sanctified) were called, moved, and ordained to minister
by the inward Power sad Virtue of the Word of Life, 1 John 2 20, 2^.
feeling a peculiar Unction from the holy One, to prepare and supply them in
the Work of this Ministry. 1 Pet 4.10, 11.
And as every one ha^ received the Gift, even so they ministered one to another
as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God; approving themselves in much
Patience, in Afflictions, (...), in Necessity, 2. Cor. 6.4.
in Distress, in S^rip^s, in Imprisonments, etc. and as they freely received,
they freely gave, seeking the Salvation of Souls, 1. Cor. 9.18. Acts ^0.33.
and keeping the Gospel without C^^^ge, coveting no Man's Silver, Gold, or
(...). And this pure, free and living Ministry of the Word does in a good (...)
(thro'the great loving Kindness of God) continue amongst us hitherto.

BUT th^se Ministers ordained Ministers ordained (...) 3.^^.
by Men are of a contrary Disposition, for (...) preach for Hire, and divine
for M^^^y, and look for the^ G^^^ from their Quarter, (...) 6.11. (...) 3.5.
and prepare War against such as put not into their Months; and so they have
always done. And because our Friends could not in good Conscience contribute to
support their false Ministry, G. F. II. 192. Persecution.
they stirred up Persecution, and turned the Magistrate's Sword backward, and
the Laws against the righteous, which was also contrary to found Doctrine, as
well as the true Use and End of good Laws Royal Law. Jam. ^.^.
and far from fulfilling the Royal Law according to the Scripture, which the
Apostle James sums up in these Words, Thou s^alt love thy Neighbor as thy
self: Therefore, with what Justice could those Statutes be put in Execution
against our Friends for their peaceable Meeting to worship God in Spirit and
Truth, since our most holy Savior and Bishop of Souls declared, John 4.23, 24.
that the Father seeks such to worship him. And for ever blessed and happy will
they be who are found of him, and willingly submit to his Requirings, both to
believe on him, and worship him in his own Spirit, as also conscientiously to
suffer for his Name and Testimony. Phil. 1.29.


SO, Dear Frinds, Carnal Sword differs from the Sword of Justice.
having by the foregoing Hints briefly observed how the material or carnal
Sword, invented by Men to execute their Wrath and Revenge upon their
Fellow Creatures, differs from the Sword of Justice ordained of God for
Punishment of evil Doers, and Praise of them that do well; as also having in
Part showed our Duty, to Kings and Rulers, we come now to treat of those
Relations between Children and Parents, Duties of ^hildren and Parents
Servants and Masters, whose respective Duties each to the other, are best
express^d in the Apostle's Words, (...) 6.1. (...) 3.^0.
who said, Children, they your Parents in the Lord, for this is right; Honor
thy Father and Mother, (which is the fast Commandment with Promise) that it may
be well with thee, and thou may live long in the Earth.

AND ye Fathers, Parents to Children.
provoke not your Children to Wrath, lest they be discouraged; Ep^ 6^. Col.
3.21.
but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

SERVANTS, Duty of Servants to Masters.
be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the Fely, with Fear and
Trembling, Ephesians. 6, 5, 6, 7, 8.
in Singleness of your Hearts as unto Christ, not with Eye-Service, as
Men-Pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the
Heart, with good Will, doing Service as to the Lord, and not to Men, knowing
this whatsoever good Things any Man does, the same s^all he receive of the
Lord, whether he be bond or free: Col. 3.^5
But he that does Wrong, s^all receive for the Wrong which he has done; and
there is no Respect of Persons. 1 Timothy 6, ^, 2.
Let as many Servants as are under (...) Yoke, count their own Masters worthy
of all Honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. And
they that have believing Masters, let them not despise them because they are
Brethren; but rather do them Service, because they are faithful and bel^^ed,
Partakers of the Benefit. ^^hor* Servants to be obedient unto their own
Masters, Ti^ ^ 10.
and to please them well in all Things, not answering again, or Gainsaying; no^
purloining, but s^ewing all good Fidelity; that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God o^^ Savior in all Things. And the Apostle Peter bids Servants o^ subject
to their own Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18
with all Fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward; ver.
19.
f^r this is thank-worthy, if a Man for Conscience toward God endure Grief,
suffering wrongfully.

MASTERS, Col. 4.1.
give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing also that ye
have a Master in Heaven, Ephesians. 6.9.
neither is there Respect of Persons with him.

Exhortations to Parents, and Children.
AND as the good Apostles were moved in their Day, by the Lord's holy Spirit
thus to exhort, so in a Measure of the same Spirit, our Friends and Brethren
have in this Day been concerned to desire that Parents might be exemplary to
their Children in Conversation, and in keeping out of the vain Fashions,
Customs and Pride of the World, by adorning themselves modestly, and in
Plainness, observing the Scripture Language, wherein is true Propriety of
Speech: And that a godly Care and Concern should be upon the Minds of all
Parents to watch over their Children with Supplication to the Lord, that they
be not drawn away from the Innocence, Simplicity, and Plainness of the Way of
Truth, and in a Sense thereof to reach the Witness in them, that so they might
feel in their own Spirit a Degree of Fear and Reverence toward God instructing
them to ^llow his Council and obey his Voice; Deuteronomy. 6.7.
and as the Tribes of Israel were required of God to teach his Precepts
diligently unto their Children, and talk of them when they sat in their Houses
and walked by the Way, and when they laid down, and when they rised up, so
should Parents be concerned to acquaint their Children how the Lord led them
from one Degree of Faithfulness to another, in a Denial of the World's corrupt
Ways, Language, and Customs. Re^ra^^ory Children. (...) 1^94
But if Children reject their Parents or Guardians Advice, and prove
refractory, they are to acquaint the proper Meetings therewith, in Order to
have further Advice and Assistance for reclaiming s^^^ Children.

AND that all Parents be watchful over their Children, Parents (...) their
(...).
and careful not to suffer them to get into Pride and Excess, but to keep them
to that decent Plainness which becomes the People of God; that the Sin of the
Children may not be upon their Parents, nor they exposed to Ruin by their
Parents Neglect, or evil Example in Word or Deed.

AND our Advice is, Children to have Learning.
that all Friends Children have so much Learning as to read the holy Scriptures
and other English Books, and to write and cast Accounts so far as to understand
some necessary Rules in Arithmetic, and for that End let the Rich help the
Poor.

Children to have ^rades.
AND that Friends of all Degrees take due Care to bring up their Children to
some useful and necessary Employment, that they may not spend their precious
Time in Idleness, which is of evil Example, and tends much to their Hurt.

Not to (...).
AND that it is a very evil Thing for Children to answer their Parents crosly or
frowardly; but if they think amiss of what is proposed or said, they should
answer soberly and dutifully; for Parents are to be regarded and obeyed next to
God, and if Parents become poor or helpless, their Children ought according to
their Abilities to relieve and help them.

Ordinance of Marriage.
IN the next Place, we are to show what our Principles are concerning that holy
Ordinance of Marriage, which may be reduced to these three Particulars.

FIRST we ought not to marry with those who are out of the Belief and
Profession of the blessed Truth as it in Jesus, or being of another Judgment or
Fellowship, or pretending to the Truth, or making Profession thereof, walk not
in some good Degree answerable thereunto.

SECONDLY, we ought not to marry by the Priests, who take upon them to join
People in Marriage without any Command from the Law of God, or Precedent, or
Example from the holy Scripture for so doing.

THIRDLY, We ought not to suffer such kind of Ma^^^ages to pass among us, which
as to the Degrees of Consanguinity, Affinity, or which by Reason of Precontract
or otherwise, are in themselves unlawful, or from which they may be any just
Reflection cast upon our Way.

AS to the first, Against (...) ^ying with these ^f different Persuasion.
we say, that if such as make Profession with us, and believe in the Light, and
own the Doctrines and Principles of Truth, concerning the Spiritual Appearance
and Manifestation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, should marry with such
as do not so profess and believe, or with such as profess the Truth, and walk
not in some good Degree answerable thereunto, we cannot have Unity with such
Marriages.

But if any should think it strange that we dislike joining in Marriage with
those that are not of our Profession, R. B. 210. Mixed Marriages (...) unequal
Yoking.
though some of them may otherwise be of a civil Deportment, we can say from the
Testimony of the Spirit of God in our Hearts, that such mixing in Marriages is
an unequal Yoking, and ought not to be suffered amongst us: And if any should
think it lawful, yet some know by Experience, that it has not been expedient,
but very hurtful, and of ill Consequence to the Parties, as well as a Grief to
their honest Friends and Relations, and frequently ends in Woe and Ruin of
themselves and their Children

Genesis 24.4. ^6 ^5. ^^. 1, 2 Ne^. 13.^3.
AND we find that the Judgment of Truth in the Patriarchs and Prophets was
against mixed Marriages in their Time, because of the dangerous Effects which
attended them, in drawing God's peculiar People into corrupt Language,
Heathenish Customs, gross Idolatry, and at Length into a total Separation from
the holy Sanctuary, and Protection of the Almighty.

Against the Priests (...) Authority to marry.
AS to the Second concerning the Priests assuming Authority to marry, our
concurrent Testimony with all our faithful Brethren and Elders, is, and has
been, against that Usurpation which seems to be an Invention to get Mon^y. R.B.
^1 1^
And they themselves have confessed, that it is no Part of the Essence of a
Marriage: But it is most evident to us, Mutual Promise, etc. agr^d Marriage.
that (after the Consent of Parents or Guardians and Relations is had, and
other due and orderly Proceedings are made, according to the Rules and
Discipline of our religious Society) the mutual Promise and Agreement of the
Parties before Witnesses in our Meetings appointed for such Solemnities,
amounts to an actual Marriage, 6 M^d. 155. 3 Le^. 376.
which the Law cannot make void, nor the Parties themselves dissolve by
Release, or other mutual Agreement.

DIVERSE Instances might be brought where Marriages have been adjudged good in
Law, Marriages good in Law, though not solemnized by Priests.
though they were not solemnis'd by Priests, for Brevity we omit; and shall only
mention a Cause which our honorable Friend and elder Brother George Fox in his
Journal, p. 249. said was tried in the Assizes at Nottingham in the Year 1661.
A Law-Case. See Ha^^'^ Life by Bp. Burnet, p. 73, 74.
The Case was thus; Some Years before, two Friends were married among Friends,
and liv^d together as Man and Wife about two Years; then the Man died, leaving
his Wife with Child, and an Estate in Copy-hold-Lands: When the Woman was
delivered, the Jury presented the Child Heir, who was accordingly admitted;
afterward one that was near of Kin to the Child's Father brought that Suit,
thereby intending to deprive the Child of the Inheritance; and to effect this,
he would prove the Child illegitimate, alleging the Marriage was not according
to Law. After the Council on both Sides had done pleading, No Favourer of
Quakers.
Judge Archer directed the Jury to find the Child Heir, which they did
accordingly.

BY this we may understand, Our Method of marrying.
how far we are justified in the Method of consummating our Marriages by mutual
Promises, which are made with much Awe and Reverence, in the Presence and
Audience of God's People, at their religious Assemblies. But it is to be
understood, that though we are present at such Solemnities, yet we marry none,
but are Witnesses thereunto, We merry none.
as any other Spectators may be.

We thus enlarge upon this Head, Suggestions ag^nst our Marriages cleared.
that none may be imposed upon by those who insinuate, that such as are not
married by a Priest, their Children will be deemed illegitimate; G. F. Ep. 278.
for some pretending to be of us, believed those false Suggestions, or made Use
of them to color their selfish Views, and sinister Ends, and so far renounced
the Testimony of Truth as to be married by Priests. Therefore let such weak
ignoble Spirits, Promoters of marrying by Priests to be censured.
with all those that promote, or are present at any such Marriages, be dealt
with, and bought to repent of their Outgoings, or be censured for the same.

AS to the third and last Particular, Marriages with Persons pre-engaged, or ^f
too near a (...) to be allowed.
it is our Sense and Judgment, that none amongst us move or proceed, in Order
to marry with such as are pre-ingaged or contracted to others, before they are
duly discharged or released of that Pre-engagement, and that no such Procedure
be made by such as are within the Degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity, being
not allowed by us, or prohibited by the Laws and Usuages of England.

WE do not in the least suppose, by what we object against marrying by the
Priest, Marriages by Priests or others not supposed void.
or others differing from our Way, as if their Marriages were void; neither do
we take upon us to hinder any to marry otherwise than by tenderly advising such
as are like to go contrary to our Discipline, and if they reject our Advice, we
refuse to be Witnesses and Concurrers with them, and if they go right, and make
regular Steps in their Procedure, to the Satisfaction of the Meetings whereto
they belong, we allow them to consummate their Marriages according to the good
Order and Method which our Fathers and Elders in the Truth, did at first
establish in the Wisdom and Power of God.

AND it has been a constant Rule since Discipline was first set up amongst
Friends, Our Marriages to pass the Men and Women's Meetings. G. F. Ep. 282.
that all their Marriages should be laid before the Men's and Women's Meetings
who were to take Care that such as come before them were clear from all other
Persons on that Account; and that no Man should speak to a Woman, Id. 360.
in Order to Marriage before he had the Consent of his own Parents or
Guardians, and then spoken to her Father and Mother, and had their Consent; and
if she had no Parents alive, but Guardians or Trustees, then to speak to them
and have their Consent, and proceed accordingly; and we find the Reason of this
was, for that some formerly did speak neither to Father nor Mother, till they
had drawn out and entangled the Affections of the Daughter, and that brought
great Troubles and Discontents upon the Parent, and amongst Friends. And
therefore this was to be enquired into in the Men's and Women's Meetings, where
the Marriages were to be spoken of; and so it is, or ought to be amongst us,
Consent given not to be retracted without Care.
and if Parents or Guardians have once consented or approved of such Addresses,
they ought not to retract the same without giving such Reasons as in the
Judgment of the Monthly Meeting, whereto they belong, shall be sufficient for
so doing.

AND where Men and Women draw out the Affections one of another, and after a
while go to others, G. F. Ep. 281.
and then do the like, this ought to be censured as a scandalous Practice.

AND it has been the early Care, Second Marriages.
and is the decent Practice amongst Friends, not to consummate Second Marriages
sooner than a Year after the Death of Husband or Wife. (...)
And that before Widows are allowed to marry, Ca^^ should be taken that
Provision be made for their Children by former Husbands, as Occasion may
require.

Dear Friends, We do not prescribe these Rules, Superficial Compliance.
as thinking a bare superficial Compliance with them to be sufficient, for we
know (...) formal Hypocrite may go far that Way, Hypocrites.
and not discover himself till his Turn is served. Therefore our Desires are,
that in this important Affair of Marriage a godly Care may come upon all such
as may be concerned therein, A godly Care to (...) a Spiritual Joining in
Marriage.
as it has been and is upon the Faithful to know their Hearts and Spirits truly
and sincerely given up in Chastity and Purity of Love one toward another, with
a free Resignation to the Will of God, and holy Resolutions to serve, obey, and
follow him through the various Exercises, Difficulties and Trials which may
attend them in a married State, and as they stand in his Council, they come to
know a holy joining in Spirit, and the Blessing from above to descend upon them
in their Undertaking; and when they come to enter into the Marriage-Covenant,
they will according to their Growth in the blessed Truth, be sensible of God's
heavenly and Spiritual Joining; this is the honorable Marriage that is
sanctified by the Spirit of God, and owned by his People.

AND when Man and Wife are thus joined together, Duty of Husbands to Wives.
Mat. 19.6. Ephesians. 5.^^ ver. 25. Col. 3.19. Ephesians. 5.33.
let no Man put them asunder; but let the Husband love his Wife even as
himself, and as Christ loved the Church, and not be bitter against her, and let
the Wife reverence her Husband, and submit and be subject unto him as is fit in
the Lord.

THUS far we think proper at present, to collect and lay down our Principles
and Practice, in Order to be published for the Help and Service of the Youth
and weak among our selves, and for the Information and Satisfaction of others.

Signed in and by Order of the said Meeting this 19th Day of the 7th Mo. 1722.
by Samuel Preston.


