HEALTH, A POEM.

HEALTH, A POEM.

SHOWING HOW TO Procure, Preserve, and Restore it.

To which is annexed, THE DOCTOR'S DECADE.

By DARBY DAWNE, M. D.

The Fourth Edition, Corrected.

Published for the Benefit of the Inhabitants of N. England.

BOSTON: Reprinted by ^. Fleet, for Benjamin Eliot, at the lower End of the
Townhouse, and John (...) on the South Side of the Townhouse, 1724.

THE PREFACE
IT was a usual Saying of the great Lord Verulam, That not one Man of a
Thousand died a natural Death; and that most (...) had their Rise and Origin
from Intemperence. Therefore,

Unerring Nature learn to follow close,
For quantum sufficit is her just Dose;
Sufficient, clogs no Wheels and tires no Horse,
Yet briskly drives the Blood around the Course*
And hourly adds unto its Wastes, Supplies,
In due Proportion to what is spent and dies;
Whilst surfeiting corrupts the purple Gore,
And bankrupts Nature of her long-lived Store;
And thus the Soul is from the Body tore
Before its Time. --
Which, by a temperate Life, in a clean Cell,
Might full a hundred years with comfort dwell,
And drop, when ripe, as Nuts do slip the Shell.
Trust not to Constitution, 'twill decay,
And twisted Strength, its Fibers wear away;
As close wove Garments of a strong-spun Thread
The Woof frets out and tears away the Web^
So Soul and Body though never so well conjoined,
The longer that they wear the more they g^^ind,
Then the cracked Organ must impair the M^nd.
All finite Things tend to their own undoing,
But Man alone's industrious to his Ruin,
For what with Riot, Delicates, and (...).
Turns (...) himself to undermine.
Besides the ^^^den Snares laid in our way,
The sudden Deaths we hear of every Day,
The smoothest Paths have unseen Ambuscades,
And Insecurity, Security invades;
For no Man knows what is the next Hour's Event,
Man lives as he does die, by Accident.
How soft is Flesh, how brittle is a Bone!
Time eats up Steel, and Monuments of Stone,
And from his Teeth art thou exempt alo^^*
What Warrant have thou that thy Body's proof
Against the Anguish of an aching Tooth?
How soon's a Fever roused by accute Pains?
The smallest Ails have all their Parti^ans;
And in intestine Wars they may divide,
And Life's Deserters list on the wrong side.
Diseases, like true Bloodhounds, seize their Dam,
And prey upon the Carcass whence they sprange.
Be always on thy Guard, watchful and wise,
Lest Death should take thee napping by ( Surprise.
Drunkenness and Gluttony steal Men off silently and singulatim, whereas Sword
and Pestilence do it by the Lump; but then Death makes a Halt, and comes to a
Cessation of Arms, but the other knows no Stop nor Intermission, but
perpetually jogs on and depopulates insensibly and by Degrees; and though this
i^ every Day experienced, yet Men are so enslaved by Custom and a long Habit,
that no Admonotion will avail: so true is that Saying, That he that goes to the
Tavern at first for the Love of the Company, will at last go thither for the
Love of Liquor: and therefore it was excellent Advice the ingenious Dr. Baynard
gave his Godson.

(...) a Tavern-Door, my Son,
(...) sacred Truth write on thy Heart;
It Is easier Company to shun,
Than at a Pint it is to part.
For one Pint draws another in,
And that Pint lights a Pipe;
And thus in the Morn they tap the Day*
and drink it out ever Night:
Not dreaming of a sudden Bounce,
From Vinous Sulphurs stored within;
Which blows a Drunkard up at once,
When the Fire takes Life's Magazin.
An Apoplexy kills as sure
As Cannon Ball, and often as soon;
And will no more yield to a Cure,
Than murdering Chain-shot from a Gun.
Why should Men dread a Cannon Bore,
Yet boldly 'proach a Pottle Pot?
That may fall short, shoot wide, or over,
But Drinking is the surer Shot.
How many Fools about this Town,
Do quaff and laugh away their Time*
And nightly knock each other down,
With Claret Clubs, of No-Grape Wine!
Until a Dart from Bacchus' Quiver,
As Solomon describes right,
Does shoot his Tartar through the Liver,
Then (Bonus Noscius) Sot good Night.
Good Wine will kill as well as (...),
When drank beyond (our Nature's) (...)*
Then Wine gives Life a mortal Stab,
And leaves her weltring in her Wounds.
Wounds! that no Physic Art can heal,
And very rarely that they feel
The Stroke, the Moment it does kill.
Many a Soul with great Difficulty (...) weak and worn-out Carcass to its daily
Rendezvous, who perhaps for many Tears has been nothing else but the Vintner's
Conveniencer to carry his Liquors between the Hogshead and the Piss-Pot.

But when alas! Men come to die
Of Dropsy, Jaundice, Stone or Gout,
When the black Reckoning draws nigh,
And Life (before the Bottle)'s out:
When (low drawn) Time's upon the Tilt,
Few Sands and Minutes left to run;
And all our (past gone) Tears are spilt,
And the great Work is left undone.
When restless Conscience (...) within,
And in Despair begins to bawl,
Death, like a Drawer, then steps in,
And asks, Gentlemen! do you call*
I wish that Men would timely think
On this great Truth in their full Bowls,
Both I and Will of Ludgate Hill,
And all our Friends round Paul's.
When a Man's Distempers stare him in the Face, and he is summoned to lay down
his Dust, he, alas! then sees the Folly of his Ways, and what a miserable
Purchase he has made with his misspent Time, Health and Money; and like a
Malefactor at the Gallows, makes some short Speech of Warning to his
Companions, who give him the Hearing, and perhaps are drunk with his own Cl^^^t
at his Funeral.

But, alas! the Destruction of himself is the least Part of the Tragedy, the
Mischief is struck deeper, and entails hereditary Diseases on his innocent
Posterity, to the eternal Infamy of his Name and Family; when the poor
Offspring of his wretched Carcass inherits nothing but the Schedule of his
Distempers, and dwindles away a miserable Life, in Pills, Plasters, and
Potions. I wish that Men may think of this, and prize and pr^^erve a good
Constitution and Stock of Health before it be too late.

I cannot letter close this Epistle, than as the same Author observes the old
Romans to have done, to their Friends.

Cura ut Valeas: For Health once gone,
All Comforts perish with it, and are none;
Riches, and Honor, Music, Wine, and Wit,
Wax fiat and tasteless with the Loss of it.
Could Youth but see with gouty old Men's Eyes,
One Stretch upon their Back would make em wise;
And Drunkenness (the damned first Cause) despise.
But such is giddy Youth's unhappy Fate,
When crippl^d and nail^d down are wise too late.
Unhappy Man! that drinks his own undoing,
As though his Business were, to pledge his Ruin.
And that brave Texture his found Parents knit,
With Pipe and Pot he does unravel it.
As if the Gods in Anger gave him Wealth,
To sacrifice to Bacchus, Youth and Health*
Health of all earthly Blessings '^i^ the best,
Which most is valued when it is (...) possessed.
AN ESSAY TO A RULE of HEALTH
The Definition. HEALTH is a free, easy, and perfect Enjoyment of all the
Faculties of Mind and Body to due Performance of the Animal Functions, without
any Impediment, Pain or Molestation.

Which is thus to be (...)
IF twice Man's Age you (...)
Let Reason guide you, (...)
Let all the Passions of the (...)
Be subject unto her (...)
She checks all Rashness, and gives Time
To think, and re-think each Design:
Those that do thus, before they act,
It Is rarely seen, repent the Fact:
This makes an easy, quiet Mind,
(The greatest Blessing of Mankind;)
And he that in this Bliss does share,
Enjoys a Ray of Heaven here.
Fly all Excess, and first take Care
Of Wine and Women to beware.
Sport, dally, and tattle with 'em rarely,
And marry not a Wife too early;
Stay till you're grown, and Joints are knit,
And you have Money got and Wit:
For he that weds before he is wise,
Is shackled by a Fool's Advice:
Alas! then he may see his Fate,
And feel it too, when it is too late.
In single Life live pure and chaste,
Lest from your Face your NOSE you cast.
And is it not a great Disgrace,
To lose (...) of your Face?
Tho Tears (...) may atone for the Sin,
Yet (...) no NOSE again:
So never (...) forbidden Fruit,
But think (...) ^OSE, when tempted to it.
Till Hunger pinches, never eat,
And then on plain, not spiced Meat.
Desist before you eat your fill,
Drink to dilute, but not to swill,
So no Ructations you will feel.
Let Supper little be and light;
But none makes always the best Night;
It gives sweet Sleep without a Dream,
Leaves Morning's Mouth sweet, moist, and (clean.
A little Breakfast you may eat,
But not so as to satiate:
But Dinner then you must postpone,
Till farther in the Afternoon;
For never load fresh Food upon
your Stomach, till the former's gone;
For whatsoever is swallowed thus,
Turns putrid and cadaverous:
And taking more than Nature needs,
Of most Distempers are the Seeds.
Accustom early in your Youth
To lay Embargo on your (...)
And let no Rarities invite, (...)
To pall and glut your App^^^^e:
But check it always, and giv^ over
With a Desire of eating more.
For where one dies by Inanition,
A thousand perish by Repletion.
To miss a Meal sometimes is good,
It ventilates, and cools the Blood,
Gives Nature time to cleanse her Streets
From Filth and Crudities of Meats.
For too much Meat, the Bowels ^urr,
And Fasting's Nature's Scavenger.
When as your Stomach nauseates,
And ke^ks at Smell or Sight of Meats:
By Vomit fetch away the Load
Of Phlegm and undigested Food,
And do it soon, before it dwells
So as to tinge its Tunicles;
And breed sow'r Ferment, which begets
Unsavory Belches, and sick Fits,
And Steams, which taint the Mouth and Gums*
With foeted Smells, like ulcer'd Lungs:
And after Vomits, always use
Emollients soft, to cool and smooth;
For Reaching makes the Stomach sore,
Which Lenitives will best restore.
Bleed only, when you find the Blood
Abound, or Stagnate, then it is good;
Which you may very easily guess,
By heavy, stiff, Unyieldiness.
Short Breath, high Pulse, and caetera*
Then quickly take some Blood away*
But more especially in Stitches,
Pleuritic Pains, and pungent Twitches;
Then out of Hand without Delay,
Take a good Quantity away.
For Purging I shall give no Rule,
But after Glutt'ny and cramming full,
It Is good to empty and to cool;
Though forced Evacuations are,
Such as we ought to use with Care,
Since it is not known what we can spare.
For Physic drives off with the Blood,
Some Parts of the substantial Good,
And if you would keep the Balance even,
Dame Nature must be led, not driven;
By Methods mild, and by Degrees,
We should relieve her Grievances:
As Fasting, Exercise, and Time,
And Water heals the Wounds of Wi^^*
But where the Fever's peracute,
It will not admit of long Dispute;
When Life's chief Fortress is attached,
Quickly consult, and quickly (...)
For many a Life has slipped away*
By careless trifling, and delay*
So when the Case is very (...)
Spare neither vomiting, nor (...)*
Provided that your Judgment's tight,
And take the Indication right;
Even then be not the only Agent,
Lest a dead Corpse should prove your Patient;
But call in Doctors of more Skill,
Who may you cure, or help you kill,
Then let it happen as it will.
You cannot be found Felo de se,
If slain in learned Company.
When struck in Years, strong Drink forbear,
Especially of Wine beware;
Old Men of Moisture want Supplies,
And Wine of all Sorts, heats and dries,
Twitches and Cramps, their Tartars give,
Hence they step short, and straddle stiff;
For vinous Spirits prey upon
Nutricious Juice, and vital Balm;
This makes 'em rabid, lean, and thin,
With loose and flabby, wrinkled Skin.
Water and Whey, of Drinks are first,
They cool, dilute, and quench the Thirst;
And next to those is good small Beer,
Not sow'r, but smart, and brisk, and clear.
Not that in general I condemn
A Glass of generous now and then;
When you are faint, your Spirits low,
Your String relaxed, 'twill bend your Bow,
Brace your Drum Head, and make it tight,
Wind up your Watch, and set you right:
But then again the two much Use
Of all strong Liquors is the Abuse*
It Is Liquid makes the Solids loose,
The Texture and whole Frame destroys,
But Health lies in the Equipoise.
The greatest part of the World's content,
With Adam's Ale, pure Element;
And who so strong, and does more Work,
Than does the Water drinking Turk?
And when the Stomach's out of order,
No Cordial, like a Glass of Water;
This, this has baffled all the Slops,
Of Ladies Closets, and the Shops.
As Water's best, so 'twas the first
Of Liquors made to quench (...) Thirst
Of Men, of Beasts, of Plants, and Trees*
From whence they all have their Increase *
Its Uses are too manifold,
And marv'lous great ever to be told;
Its Particles constituent,
Are too minute an Element.
Its Make and Texture, Crasis, (...)
Are too stupendiously fine
For Virtuoso's to descry,
Though Glasses come t'assist their Bye
Cease then, vain Search! let that alone,
Hid, with all Essences unknown;
But be content that the Creator,
Has blessed the World with so much Water.
It works itself (as being thin)
Int' all the Pores and Parts within;
Helps all Secrations in their Uses,
And sweetens sharp and sour Juices;
Tempers hot Bile, thins viscid Phlegm,
And moderates in each Extreme;
Damps the fierce AEstus of the Blood,
Abates the Fevers boiling Flood;
Dilutes the Salts, melts off their Points,
And acrid Particles disjoints;
And is the only Liquor that
Never grows eager, sharp or flat:
Give it but Motion, Room and Air,
Its Purity will never impair:
Experience daily shows it true,
That Water only this can do.
All other Liquors made by Art,
Grow rancid, vapid, sour, and tart.
Choose Water that is cool, and thin;
Such as feels smooth, and soft to the Skin,
Looks clear, and bright, and chrystaline:
The lightest Water is the best,
That is, without or Smell or Taste:
Which standing long, yields few Contents,
Of Scum, or Clouds, or Sediments;
Such as will lather cold with Soap,
Though never was sainted by the Pope,
(As Bridget, Anne, and Winifred,)
For it is the Water does the Feat,
The Saint's the Varnish and the Cheat;
And he that has a Spring like this,
Has with good Air a double Bliss.
Never give way to Sloth and Ease,
For Laz'ness is a great Disease;
And when it has Possession got,
It makes the Man a stupid Sot:
When Sleep does first desert you, rise;
Next, wash the Gum from off your Eyes:
Cold Water pure will clear the Sight,
Comfort the Eyes, and keep them bright.
Indulge not Drowsiness, unless
It does proceed from Weariness.
'Thout some Fatigue, there is no so and Sleep,
It Is eating without Appetite;
For those that start in Sleep, or shake,
Find small Refreshment when they wake:
And when you rise, approach not near
A Fire, except the Cold's severe:
And then, at distance take the Heat,
Because it does inhebitate;
And Sloth, and sluggishness induce,
And spoil your natural Rest by Use.
This Custom, Students must avoid,
For Memory is by Heat annoyed
And by hard drinking quite destroyed.
For Reminiscence is strongest where
The Head^s serene, and cool, and clear;
This Truth is seen in Regions cold,
There what they read they always hold.
But it is the Nature of a Wit,
Soon to invent, soon to forget;
For from the Brain that is hot and dry,
The slight Impressions quickly fly:
Whereas in moist and phlegmy Brains,
The Stamp's struck deep, and long remains*
Though it is allowed, there are some few,
That have good Wits, and Memory too.
Rise early, with the Summer's Sun,
Especally when you are Young;
For he that early walks the Fields,
Takes all the Sweets that Flora yields;
Just as the Sun unlocks the Blooms
Of all their fragrant, rich Perfumes;
Besides, with Morning Air he is treated,
Not by the Sun Beams overheated;
Which cools the Lungs, and fans the Blood,
And makes the Spirits brisk and good,
After a bad Good-fellow-Hood
Had left their springy Parts uncurl'd,
Like a loose Sail that is unfurled,
Those Air and Action buckle up,
When ruffled by a Midnight's Cup.
After an idle drunken bout,
Walk and take Air, never sleep it out;
By which you will avoid the Harms
Of Headache, and sick Stomach Qualms:
For sleeping with a Load of Wine,
Does all its Fumes within confine;
Which are of dangerous Consequence,
For Apoplexies spring from hence.
Palsies, and Tremors, and the rest,
Which mostly Drunkards do infest,
From Ferments in the Body pent,
Which early rowzing may prevent*
For Gouts, and Stone, and such Diseases*
Dwell most where Luxury and Ease is*
Such a Tormenter never rages
Among VVhey-Drinkers in poor Cottages*
Who live in Health till mighty Ages;
And to the Grave at a hundred Years,
Carry their Memory, Eyes, and Ears.
Who then in Ale, or worse brewed Wine,
Would drown his Health, and so much Time*
For whilst Men tipple, prate, and lie,
Life on smooth Skeets slides swiftly by.
In Walking let your Clothes be thin,
But not too tight, or strait to the Skin,
That cool fresh Air may close the Pores;
This oftentimes that Health restores,
Which too much Warmth turned out of Doors:
For loss of Strength declares what Hurt
Those get that wear a Flannel Shirt:
For through a constant Dilatation,
The Spirits spend by Perspiration.
In Bed lie warm, but not too hot,
Nor yet too soft, for that is a Fault;
Soft Feathers have Attraction such,
As draws the natural Heat too much,
The Flesh makes flabby, loose and weak,
The Coun^tnance dead, and pale, and bleak.
Of Heats and Colds take special Care,
Windows, and Doors, that let in Air;
A Crack, or Crevice, in the Wall,
Hurts more than does an open Hall:
And safer it is to stand in the Street,
Than where two Doors of Entries meet*
Walk to be warm, but not to sweat,
Or by Degrees take down your Heat;
Drink not until you are very cool,
And gently move to get a Stool.
Yet sometimes let your Feet be wet,
But in your wet Shoes never sit;
For while you're running in the Dirt,
The Action keeps you from the Hurt:
And often wash your Skin all over,
It gives a Spring to every Pore;
Returns the Heat upon the Blood,
Which makes all bad Digestions good.'
Lodge not fine Touth with aged Bones,
Nor much converse with Pains, and Groans;
For Bodies that are old and dried,
From juicy Youth will be supplied;
These suck their Spirits, make 'em pale*
So vital Vigor needs must fail;
For the aged, through the young one's Pores;
His own decrepid Limbs restores:
For what by Contract, what by Sweats,
What the Touth loses, the other gets:
This makes 'em pallid, thin and weak;
As if Hag-ridden in their sleep.
And on the other Hand, it is naught
To lie with one that is over fat;
Such sweat and over-heat the Child*
By which a good cool Habit's spoiled;
For in a moderate Temperature,
The welfare of the Child's secure.
In short, observe, the tender Young
Should be well nursed, but laid alone.
But above all, take special Care
How Children you affright and scare^
In telling stories of things seen,
Sprite, Demon, and Hobgoblin;
Hence they will contract such Cowardice,
As never will leave them all their Lives,
And then the Idea's of their Fears
Continued unto riper Years,
Can by no Reason be suppressed,
But of it they will be so possessed,
They Will sweat, and quake, and start and stare,
And meet the Devil every where.
Terrors have changed some Men gray,
Took Limbs, and Speech, and Sense away;
Have topsy-turvy'd Brains and Sculls,
Turned some Men mad, and some Men Fools:
Have made a Soul skip like a Sprite,
And leave the Body bolt upright:
Stark staring ghastly, dead, and stiff,
Like Lot's sad monumental Wife.
Anger avoid, and also Grief,
They both are Enemies to Life,
And fatal often in Extremes,
To which side ever the Passion leans.
In both let Reason mitigate,
She will the Fury soon abate,
If she is consulted not too late.
For I have seen fierce Anger checked,
By seeming Deafness, and Neglect;
Take off the Fuel, the Fire will die,
Silence alone will p^t it by,
If not blown up by a Reply:
Let it blow over, if you can bear,
In at one, out at the other Ear;
Storms hurt not in a Thoroughfare.
Late Watching does much Injury
To Nature's whole Economy;
Impedes, or wholly does defeat
The making of her Work complete;
For all Secrations are made best
In The quiet state of Sleep and Rest;
When all the Faculties of the Mind
Are to their (soporal) Cells confined;
Then all the vital Functions are
('Cause not disturbed by mental Care)
Each to his Office to repair,
And mend the Breathes, and Decays,
Made by Disorder any ways
In Life's vast Labyrinth and Maze;
Which through unknown Maeander run,
And circulates to where't begun,
And restless in its Course, keeps on.
For the Heart clacks on, and is a Mill,
That Is independent of the Will,
And like an Engine squirts the Blood,
Forcing up Hill the purple Flood;
A constant Fountain that displays
Its Rivulets ten thousand ways;
Moved by a secret Power unknown,
And yet that Power is not its own:
Restless from the first Stroke it gives,
To the last Moment that it lives;
Its Office is to mesh and beat,
And make the Chyle consimulate
With balmy Blood and nitrous Air,
(All have i^th' Work their proper share)
Which Inspiration does prepare.
That Air again the Lungs explode,
When robbed of its nitrous Load;
This grinds Life's Grist, yet takes small Toll
For carrying of it through the Whole,
And lodging at each Office Door,
Sufficient for their daily Store.
And here I Would ask, what human Tongue*
Can praise enough that wondrous One,
That made this great Automaton?
Here let the prostrate World adore
His infinite Goodness, Wisdom, Power.
Of Exercises, Swimming's best,
Strengthens the Muscles of the Chest,
And all their fleshy Parts confirms,
Extends, and stretches Legs and Arms;
And with a nimble retro-spring,
Contracts and brings them back again.
As it is the best, so it is the sum
Of Exercises all in one:
And of all Motions most complete,
Because it is vi'lent without Heat.
And next to Swimming, Riding's good,
It shakes the Bowels, stirs the Blood,
And gives a Motion to a Stool,
But bad to ride with Belly full;
For shaking does precipitate,
Ever you have digested half your Meat;
Besides, your Guts, if fat, it squelches
And causes Fumes and sour Belches:
It Is also in hard Livers naught,
Or when oppressed with Wind or Thought,
It stirs up Flatus Hypocon:
If so, desist from riding on:
For It makes it fly into the Head,
Where Dizziness and Fumes are bred;
Then Life's in Danger, if you totter,
Be your Horse Pacer, or a Trotter:
So let the Rider take a Care,
Lest from a stumbling Horse or Mare,
He don't take Earth in taking Air.
But the true benefit in riding,
Is much and long in the Air abiding;
Fasting and always jogging on,
And drinking nothing that is strong;
But guzzling on a Journey's wrong:
And then perhaps, you^ll gain your Point,
If your Horse keeps your Neck in Joint.
Of dry consumptive Coughs beware,
They always grow much worse in Air;
For Places high, and Air serene,
Are for thin Bodies found too keen:
For all the Air, on Hights, and Hills,
'Cause robbed of watery Particles,
Holds Nitre naked, and not sheathed,
And so are naught, for all short breathed:
As well as Airs too thick with Smoaks,
One pricks and tickles, the other choaks:
But where it is clear, and not too high,
With Mixture due of moist and dry,
It Is there the Lungs have Liberty
To play their Fan most pleasantly.
The Air is best on rising Hills,
Also near grav'ly running Rills;
For where the Soil is hard and dry,
The Air is good, whether low or high,
The watery Steams will take off Heats,
And much abate nocturnal Sweats.
In Holland, where it is all low Ground,
Habitual Coughs are rarely found;
But when Catarrhs and Rheums infest,
Warm and dry Airs are surely best.
For if Consumptions cured can be,
(Which is a mighty Rarity)
Three Things in chief you need prepare,
Milk, Traumatics, and Change of Air.
And if with these, cold Baths you get,
To temper down the hectic Heat,
He may go barefoot, as a Goose,
Who lives in hope of dead Men's Shoes.
Though riding is extremely good,
Yet, Health lies more in choice of Food;
A general Rule we may go by,
Is eating such things 'specially,
As are least apt to putrefy.
New Milk and Rice, Bread Corn and Roots,
Fresh Sallets, and fresh gathered Fruits,
Sweet Butter, Oil, and well made Cheese;
For those who mostly feed on these,
Live long, and gently wear away,
Perceiving not their own Decay,
To the utmost Point of the fatal Day.
Then without Pain, like Lamps expire,
With the last Spark of vital Fire.
For Life's a Lamp, its Oil well spent,
Leaves when it goes out, a fragrant Scent:
Thrice happy he, whose virtuous Name,
Is Incense, and perfumed Flame,
On the Altar of immortal Fame.
So, Reader, if thou art so wise,
To put in Practice this Advice;
The World will wonder to behold
Thou look so young, and art so old.
The Doctor's Decade;
Or the Ten Utensils of his Trade.

For in Ten Words the whole Art is comprised*
For some of the Ten are always advised.
VIZ.

Piss, Spew, and Spit,
Perspiration and Sweat;
Purge, Bleed, and Blister,
Issues and Clyster.
THESE few Evacuations,
Cure all the Doctor^s Patients,
If rightly apply^d
By a wise Physic Guide:
For an Error in these,
Is worse than Disease;
So cannot be too wary,
Where Cases do vary;
For a Dose often too much,
Turns PUG over the Perch.
What more they advance,
Is all done by Chance;
Even Steel and the Bark,
Do tilt in the Dark:
Though Opium, alas!
May put by a Pass,
And lull a Disease,
By a seeming false Peace;
Yet these Physic Allies
Use such Fallacies,
And fail us so common,
We cannot depent on 'em;
So as to a Cure,
There' none can be sure.
Most other Specificks
Have no visible Effects,
But the getting of Fees,
For a promise of Ease;
(Much like the South S --)
Though our Glasses of late
Has furnished the Pate
With Philosophical Prate;
As to read learned Lectures
On a T -- and its Textures;
And can see in the Sp -- m
Generations to come:
Like Tad-poles a swimming
To the Land of the Living.
Yet for all this fine Show,
No more do we know,
Than did old Quid pro Quo;
That famous Compounder,
And first Physic Founder.
For then all their Blunders
Were esteemed as Wonders,
And admired as much
As some do H -- b C -- h*
For Physic then took,
Much more by the Look*
Than by the Success,
Which is the best Test.
To look big, grave, and dull,
And talk half like a Fool,
Denotes a wise Skull.
To be deaf, and half blind,
Were Perfections of Mind,
For all such Defects,
Were to Folly as Checks:
For few were thought wise,
Who saw with both Eyes.
Yet none of these Blinkers
Were accounted Free-Thinkers,
As is seen by the Treacle
Where Health lay in Pickle*
That ancient Farrago,
Exploded long ago,
Yet it is such a Medicine.
Once had the Pope's Blessing;
And so is Catholic,
Though not Apostolic;
For It has not a Mission
From Luke the Pysician.
But why do we them blame,
When we play the same Game*
And make up strange Mixtures,
Of different Textures;
Which fret and ferment,
Till their Fury is spent;
And in our Guts jar,
And there raise a War,
From a Heterogen Medicine*
The Strife is intestine.
But where the Ingredients
Are mixed from Experience,
By their Homogeniety,
They Will never disquiet ye;
For ill Compounds are owning
To our Simples not knowing;
For their Virtues unless
The Plants will confess,
We must all acquiesce,
And Practice by Guess.
Till the College reveals
What their Prudence conceals;
For the Arcanas of Art,
To none they will impart;
Those sacred Archives,
Which enrol all our Lives,
Are lodged on high Shelves,
Out of the Reach of themselves,
For when they fall sick,
What they give upon Tick,
The Doctors never take,
For fear of Mistake:
But always mistrust,
What they believed at first;
Whilst the practicing Youth
Swallows all for a Truth.
For whatever they read,
They believe as their Creed,
But will find when they try,
That Authors will lie;
For in Physic there is Legend,
As well as Religion;
But the older they grow,
The less they will know;
For in being often out,
It creates in 'em Doubt:
So themselves they will never kill,
By Potion or Pill;
No Powders nor Bolus,
Nor Issue* of the Shoulders,
Nor en^^^ed in Blisters;
Those Shrouds of the Sisters
By the Devil contrived
To ^lay Men alive,
As if the Sick didn't feel,
When they are skinned like an Eel.
Then a P^^iste^ applied
To the Remains of the Hide,
Which tears off the rest,
Next time it is dressed;
By some little Hell-Cub,
Or Spawn of old Belz'bub;
Or Mellil^t his Master,
With a whole Sheet of Plaster,
To shroud him complete*
From the Head to the Feet*
Sent by his Physician,
To manage the Inquisition;
For one half that dies
Are spur-gall'd by his Flies,
And flayed out of their Lives
But the Devil a Doctor,
Will flay his own Back sore*
What his Patients endure,
He Will avoid to be sure:
Their Groans and their Aching,
Does fright him from taking;
Nor shall any Slops
But Wine wet his Chops:
So all Med^cines defies,
As he does Spanish Flies,
From experienced Opinion,
There Is little Help in 'em.
But as Death does draw near,
Their Art is their Fear;
Trusting more to Small-Beer,
A Horse and fresh Air,
Than to Physic and Prayer.
From whence I suggest,
They Are too wise for the rest.
FINIS.

