New Castle uponDelaware, May 28. 1724. THIS being the Anniversary of His
Majesty's Birthday, Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Baronet, our Governor, came to the
Courthouse, attended with the principal Inhabitants of the Place, and after
having caused the King's Chart^^ to be published for Erecting the same into a
Body Corporate and Politic, with many Valuable Privileges, by the Name of the
City of Newcastle; HE made the following Speech to the Corporation.
Mr. Mayor, and Gentlemen of this City and Corporation,
ALTHOUGH I have complied with your Desires at this Juncture, and always find a
very agreeable Satisfaction within my self, when it is in my Power to
contribute any Thing toward the Happiness and Prosperity of a People, who are
immediately under my Care, yet I must put you in Mind, that your Gratitude on
this Occasion is principally, and I may say wholly due to the benign Influences
of a most gracious KING, by whose Authority you are now happily possessed of
many Valuable and Great Privileges, and whose Royal Pattern of Love and
Tenderness to all his Subjects, must inspire such as have the Honor to be
employed under him in the Administration of the Affairs of Government, with
some Share of that mild, but just and steady Conduct, which so eminently shines
from the Throne in a much greater Luster, than has been known to this, or any
former Age.

WHEN we consider the happy Period unto which the Wisdom of his present Majesty
has brought not only the Affairs of has own Dominions, but of all Europe, it is
impossible for us to withstand the Force of our Duty to such a Prince, whose
Rule and Command terminates in the particular Happiness of his own People, and
a general Benevolence to Mankind.

A FREQUENT and grateful Remembrance of the many Blessings we enjoy under the
present Reign, must certainly stir up in us a very affectionate Sense of the
common Benefits that attend an Equal, Just, and Free Government, where the
Magistrates are esteemed and respected in their several Degrees, according to
the Opportunities which they have of maintaining the Rights and Liberties of
the People with Regard to that Legal Constitution upon which they are Founded,
and by which only they can be preserved.

NATURE simply considered without the Improvement of Civil Government, does
indeed put Mankind on a perfect Equality; but since the absolute Necessity of
Human Society proceeds from the reciprocal Obligations which in the Course of
Life Men cannot avoid receiving from each other; it will follow, that the
Government of any Society is only the voluntary Establishment of an Artificial,
but just Force, upon every individual Person, to discharge such Obligations as
he has received from the Public or his Neighbor, with Justice and Gratitude:
As any Magistrate therefore, who will presume to exercise the Authority of his
Office, beyond the equitable Intent, and plain Sense of this General Rule, may
doubtless be charged with Injustice and Partiality; so on the other Hand, what
Person soever shall take upon him to vilify or detract from the Character of
any PRINCE, GOVERNOR, or other inferior Magistrate in Authority, who
evidently make this equitable Principle the Rule of their Actions; he will be
distinguished, by every just and good Man, either as an open Enemy to the
Commonwealth, or as an abject Slave to his own vile and unruly Passions, which
not only render him incapable of doing or intending any Good to the Public,
but even of receiving and enjoying the common Benefits which of Right appertain
to the Freedom of an English Government.

THE long Acquaintance which I have had, with the principal Inhabitants of this
Place, encourages me to hope, that a due Reflection on those Things which I
have now recommended to the present Magistracy of this City, will in some
Measure assist them and their Successors, to act in their several Stations from
Time to Time, as becomes Loyal Subjects, Faithful Magistrates, and affectionate
good Neighbors: Always considering that their own Honor, Interest and
Reputation must be built upon the Ease and Happiness of the People under their
Care, and on no other Foundation whatsoever.

THE Governor and his Lady were afterward entertained at Dinner by the
Magistrates, where the KING's Health, his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales,
and all the Royal Family, with many other Loyal Healths were drank, with
several Discharges of the Canon belonging to the Place.

June 1. The following Address was presented to Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. in
Answer to his Speech of the 28th of May.

To His Excellency Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Counties of
Newcastle, Kent and Sussex upon Delaware, and Province of Pennsylvania.
The Humble Address of the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of the
City of NEW CASTLE.
May it please your Excellency,
THE many real Advantages, Privileges, and peculiar Blessings which the present
glorious Reign of our most Royal Sovereign, bestows on the Subject, are not
wholly appropriated to those only who have the Happiness and Pleasure of being
more immediately under his Majesty's Eye, but even We who are far distant and
remote from His Sacred Person, feel the benign and diffusive Influence of His
most just and steady Administration, in the full Enjoyment of our ancient
Rights as well as in the considerable Addition made thereunto, by granting to
us at this Time the Privileges of a Body Corporate and Politic.

AND as with unfeigned Hearts and the greatest Gratitude, we humbly acknowledge
our Sense of His Majesty's Bounty by your EXCELLENCY's Means conferred upon us,
so we hope in our several Stations to improve the Royal Favor, by justly and
impartially executing the Powers granted to us, in that Manner which may best
suit the Peace, Happiness, and Interest of those who are immediately concerned
therein.

AND while our Breasts are thus full of our Royal Sovereign's Great Benevolence
to Mankind in General, and to us in particular; We are well assured it is
impossible, That any of the Powers granted to us in his Majesty's Name, can be
so misapplied, as to injure or molest even the meanest of our Fellow Subjects.

WE should be unworthy of your Care, SIR, and highly ungrateful, if we did not
also acknowledge this last singular Instance of your tender Regard for our
Welfare; and as by a just Application of the Privileges, you are daily
obtaining for us, we shall endeavor to render the Body of this Corporation
more and more worthy of the same; so shall we ever continue to pray, That His
Royal Majesty's Favors to the People of this Government, may Long and Late be
distributed from Your EXCELLENCY's Hands,

We are Your EXCELLENCY's Most Humble Servants, etc.


Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by S. Keimer, in High Street, and W. Read in
the City of Newcastle.


