AN ESSAY ON Scripture-Prophecy, Wherein it is Endeavored TO Explain the Three
Periods Contained in the XII Chapter of the Prophet DANIEL.

With some Arguments to make it Probable, That the First of the P^^^^ did
Expire in the Year 1715.

(...)

(...) Printed in the Year MDCCXXIV

The CONTENTS.
THe Introduction, Page 1. The Words of Daniel, containing the Three Periods,
p. 11. Sect. 1. Of the Persons and their Office, p. 12. Sect. 2. Of the Number
of Years meant by Time, Times and an Half, p. 23. Sect. 3. The Method of the
following Enquiry, p. 35. Sect. 4. Nebuchadnezzars Vision of the great Image,
p. 40. Sect. 5. Daniel's Vision of the four Great Beasts, p. 63. Sect. 6. Of
the Little Horn, and the other Characters of the same Power, p. 8^. Sect. 7. Of
the first Period, p. 98. Sect. 8. Of the Time of the End, p. 109. Sect. 9. Of
the Wise and the Wicked, p. 116. Sect. 10. Of the Second Period, p. 127. Sect.
11. Of the Third Period, p. 150. Sect. 12. A Review of the three Periods, p.
158*
AN ESSAY, ON Scripture-Prophecy Wherein it is Endeavored To Explain the Three
Periods contained in the 12th Chapter of the Prophet Daniel, with some
Arguments to make it Probable, that the first of these Periods did Expire in
1715.
Introduction.
IT has always been the Policy of the Teachers of False Religions, to keep
their Principles from being nicely Examined into by the People, and it seems,
for the same Reason, a Mark of a True One, when it is submitted to the Enquiry
of Mankind, and when they are invited to be their own Judges, by those who
instruct them: The Accomplishment of Prophecies is of this Kind, it is an
Appeal to the World, and to this effect we find it insisted on by the Prophet
Isaiah, in the following Passages, as a Convincing and Distinguishing Proof of
the True God, in Opposition to Idols.

I am the Lord, Isaiah xlii. verse. 8.
that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to
graven Images.

Behold, v. 9.
the former Things are come to pass, and New Things do I declare, before they
spring forth I tell you of them.

Produce your Cause, says the Lord, bring forth your strong Reasons, chap.
xli. v. 21.
says the King of Jacob.

Let them bring forth and show us (...) shall happen, v. 22.
let them show the former Things what they be, that we may consider them, and
know the latter End of them, or declare us Things for to come.

Show the Things that are to come hereafter, 23.
that we may know that ye are Gods; yea, do Good or do Evil, that we may be
Dismayed, and b^hold it together.

Behold, ye are of nothing, 24.
and your Work of naught, an Abomination is he that chooses you.

Let all Nations be gathered together, chap xliii. verse. 9.
and let the People be assembled; Who among them can declare this, and show us
former Things? let them bring forth their Witnesses, that they may be
Justified, or let them hear and say, it is Truth.

Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, 10.
and my Servant whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe me, and
understand that I am He.

I have declared, and have saved, 12.
and have showed when there was no strange God among you, Therefore ye are my
Witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God.

I have declared the former Things from the beginning, chapter xlviii, 3.
and they went forth out of my Mouth, and I showed them, I did then suddenly,
and they came to pass.

I have even from the beginning declared it to thee, v. 5.
before it came pass I showed it thee, l^st thou should say, mine Idol has
done them, and my graven Image, and my molten Image has commanded them.

Thou have heard, 6.
see all this, and will not ye declare it? I have showed thee now Things from
this time, even hidden Things, and thou did not know them.

They are created now, 7.
and not from the beginning, even before the Day when thou heardst them not,
lest thou should say, Behold, I knew them.

Thus does the Prophet Isaiah employ the the strongest Terms to Recommend the
Study of Prophecy, and the Observation of the Events which confirm the Truth of
it; and St. Peter applies the Old Prophecies to the Times after Christ's Birth,
in these words,

Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently, 1 Pet.
i. 10.
who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you.

Searching what, 11.
or what manner of Time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them, did signify,
when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that
should follow.

Unto whom it was Revealed, 12.
that not unto themselves, but unto Us they did minister the Things which are
now Reported unto you by them that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the
holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, which Things the Angels desire to look into.

And as the greatest Arguments made use of to the Jews, to prove that Christ
was the Messiah, were taken from their Prophets, so that the like Arguments
might not be wanting through-out all the Times of the Christian Church, St.
John has left us,

The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, Rev. i. 1.
to show unto his Servants the Things which must shortly come to pass; and he
sent and signified it by his Angel unto his Servant John.

Blessed is he that Reads, 3.
and they that Hear the Words of this Prophecy, and keep those Things which are
written therein, for the Time is at hand.

This Prophecy appears chiefly to be contained within A Book written within,
Rev. V. 1.7.
and on the backside, Sealed with seven Seals, which the ^amb -- took out of
the Right Hand of Him that sat upon the Torone, and Opened the several S^als
one after another, chapter vi. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12. chapter viii. 1.
whose Contents compared with History, will be found to describe all that was
to come to pass in the Roman Empire, after the Time of St. John's writing,
which was about ninty five years after Christ's Birth.

This is, in all appearance, the same Book, in which Daniel is ordered To shut
up the Words, and Seal the Book, Dan. xii. 4.
even to the Time of the End, when it was to be further Explained by St. John,
and Unsealed, in order of Time, as the Events were to happen, which are the
only complete Interpreters of Prophecy, According to St. Peter's Observation, 2
Pet. i. 20.
That no Prophecy of the Scripture is its own Interpreter (as it ought to be
rendeed, and not as in the English Translation, Of private Interpretation.)

If therefore that Time of the End is not a^^ady come, Dan xii. 9.
it is in vain to attempt any Explanation of the Periods mentioned in this
Chapter of Daniel, for the Words are closed up, and sealed, chapter xii. 9,
till the Time of the End. But when that Time comes Many shall be Purifyed and
made White, 10.
and Tried, but the Wicked shall do Wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall
Understand, but the Wise shall Understand: So that as certainly as the Prophecy
ought to be obscure till that Time, it ought to be plain after it is come, to
those who are meant by the Wise. And if it can be shown what those Events are
which the Prophecy referrs to, and that they are already happened, in order as
they are described by Daniel, and Explained by St. John: Then it must be
confessed, that the Time is come, and that those who will not understand are
Wicked, that is, engaged in interest to Oppose the Truth, and will deserve to
have that applied to them which our Savior, on a like occasion, says of the
Pharisees, Mat. xvi. 3.
O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky, but can ye not discern
the Signs of the Times.

By which charge of Hypocrisy, our Savior did not mean, that the Pharisees
knew him, and yet denied him against their Conscience; for he observes, That
they did not discern the Times, that is, did not know him, and yet this was an
Hypocrisy, though they were not sensible of it; for their Power and Advantage
blinded them so, that they deceived themselves, and opposed his Doctrine out of
Hypocrisy or guilty Prejudice.

The Application of this to Daniel's Distinction, will not be difficult, 2 Timothy
iii. v. 15.
when it comes to be shown, that it relates to a Time when the World was to be
divided into Two great Contending Parties, One of which would adhere to the
Scriptures, and therefore are called Wise unto Salvation; and the other Party
would adhere to that Cause which is supported by human Policy, Jude 16.
holding Men's Persons in Admiration because of Advantage; and is therefore
called in Zachariah by the distinguishing name of Wickedness, Zach v. 8.
that had a House, 11.
built it in the Land of Shiner, Dan I. 2. Rev. XII 6.14. xvii. 5.
which Daniel informs us was at Babylon, and which agrees with the Woman in the
Wilderness, and the Babylon in St. John.

Now to make these things plainer by a particular Enquiry, I shall compare
several Passages of Scripture with one another, and with the Remarkable Events
in History, and submit it to the Reader, Whether the study of Scripture
Prophecy deserves the Neglect or Prejudice it generally meets with in the
World; or, Whether it is not far more reasonable, as well as more becoming
Christians in Profession, to follow St. John's Advice.

Blessed is he that Reads, and they that Hear the Words of this Prophecy,
Rev. I. 3.
and keep these Things which are Written therein. And again, chapter xxiii. 7.
Blessed is he that keeps the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book.

And he enforces it with these Solemn Threatenings.

For I testify unto every Man that hears the Words of the Prophecy of this
Book, 18.
If any Man shall add unto these Things, God shall add unto him the Plagues
that are written in this Book.

And if any Man shall take ^^ay from the Words of the Book of this Prophecy, 19.
God shall take away his Part out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy
City, and from the things which are written in this Book.

AN ESSAY On the Three Periods in the 12th Chapter of the Prophet Daniel,
contained in these Words,
AND I heard the Man Clothed in Linen which was upon the Waters of the River,
Dan XII 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.
when he held up his Right Hand and his Left Hand unto Heaven, and Swear by Him
that lives forever, That it shall be for a Time, Times and a half; and when He
shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of the Holy People, all these
things shall be finished.

And I heard, but I Understood not, 8.
then said I, O My Lord, what shall be the End of these Things?

And he said, Go thy way Daniel, 9.
for the Words are Closed up, and Scaled till the Time of the End, many shall
be Purifyed and made White, 10.
and Tried, but the Wicked shall do Wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall
Understand, but the Wise shall Understand.

And from the Time that the Daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, 11.
and the Abomination that makes Desolate, set up, there shall be a Thousand
Two Hundred and Ninety Days.

Blessed is he that waits and comes to the Thousand Three Hundred and Five
and Thirty Days. 12.


But go thou thy way till the End be, 13.
for thou shall Rest, and stand in thy Lot, at the End of the Days.

SECT. I. Of the Persons and their Office.
THe three Periods, are Time, Times and a half, One Thousand Two Hundred and
Ninty Days, and One Thousand Three Hundred and Thirty Five Days. And that their
Meaning and Connection with one another may appear, it will be necessary to
take the whole Passage which I have cited, in the Order in which it lies, and
explain every Expression in it particulary, as I go along.

"And I heard the Man Clothed in Linen, Dan. xii 7.
"which was upon the Waters of the River.

This Man Clothed in Linen, is amply described in the beginning of this
Vision, which comprehends all the three last Chapters of Daniel, Dan. X. 1.
and was Revealed unto Daniel -- in the third year of Cyrus -- as he was by the
side of the great River, 4.
which is Hiddekel.

Behold, a certain Man Clothed in Linen, 5.
whose Loins were girded with Fine Gold of Uphaz,

His Body also was like the Beryl, and his Face as the Appearance of Lightning,
6.
and his Eyes as Lamps of Fire, and is Arms and his Feet like, in Color, to
polished Brass, and the Voice of his Words like the Voice of a Multitude.

This Description is, evidently, of the same Person who is Represented in St.
John, -- like to the Son of Man, Rev. I. 13.
Clothed with a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the Paps with a
Golden Girdle.

His Head and his Hairs were White like Wool, 14.
as White as Snow, and his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire;

And his Feet like unto Fine Brass, as if they burned in a Furnace; 15.
and his Voice as the Sound of many Waters.

Where Waters in St. John answer to Multitude in Daniel, Rev. XVII. 15.
according to St. John's own Interpretation, The Waters which thou saw --
are Peoples and Multitudes --

And in what Sense he wears a Golden Girdle, is Explained by this place of
Isaiah, Isa. XI. 5.
And Righteousness shall be the Girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness the
Girdle of his Reins.

The same Person is again described in St. John, as -- A Mighty Angel come down
from Heaven, Rev. X. 1.
clothed with a Cloud, and a Rainbow was upon his Head, and his Face was, as
it were, the Sun, and his Feet as Pillars of Fire.

And the Account that Daniel gives, That he -- alone saw the Vision; Dan. X. 7.
for the Men that were with him saw not the Vision, but a great Quaking fell
upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves, is a Circumstance that
Confirms this Opinion, That the Person is the same who appeared to St. Paul,
Acts. IX. 7.
when the Men who journeyed with him stood Speechless, hearing a Voice, but
seeing no Man; which Voice said, I am Jesus whom thou Persecutest. 5.


The same Person is Represented by Daniel in the Vision of -- the third of
Belshazzar -- standing before him as the Appearance of a Man. Dan. VIII. 15.16.


And I heard a Man's Voice between the Banks of Ulai, which called, and said,
Gabriel, make this Man understand the Vision.

Where Gabriel receives Orders from the other, who is his Superior. And in the
same manner in the Vision of the third of Cyrus, Dan: X. 5, 8.
The Man Clothed in Linen, struck Daniel so with This great Vision, that no
strength remained in him. And it is manifestly another inferior Person that is
represented as an Hand that touched him, which set him upon his Knees, 10.
and upon the Palms of his Hands.

And said unto him, 11.
O Daniel* a Man greatly beloved, Understand the Words that I speak unto thee,
and stand upright, for unto thee am I now sent --.

By which Words this last may be discovered to be Gabriel, that was, in a
former Vision, ordered to make him Understand the Vision; and it is put out of
all doubt, that it is he, by the Continuance of his Discourse in the Vision of
the third of Cyrus, where he acknowledges That Michael one of the chief Princes
came to help him: Dan. X. 13.
and that there was none that holds with him in these things but Michael your
Prince. 21.


And that this Observation may have its full Extent, it may be Remarked, that
after Daniels Prayer in the first of Darius, he says: Yea, whiles I was
speaking in Prayer, Dan. IX. 21.
even the Man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the Vision at the beginning, being
caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the Evening Oblation.

And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, 22.
O Daniel! I am now come forth to give thee Skill and Understanding.

Now there is No Vision at the beginning, in this discourse, but only a Prayer,
and all the Vision comes after: By which it may be understood, that Daniel
means, That Gabriel was the Person of whom he says in the Vision of the first
of Belshazzar, Dan. v^^. 16.
I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the Truth of all
this; so he told me, and made me know the Interpretation of the Things.

And this is the first Vision, or the Vision at the beginning, in order of
Time, which Daniel is said to have had peculiarly to himself, though he
interpreted the Visions of others before; and accordingly it is said, cap viii.
1.
In the third Year of the Reign of King Belshazzar, a Vision appeared unto me,
even unto me Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the first. Which must
be that in the seventh Chapter.

In the same manner it is, that St. John in the close of the Revelations speaks
of Gabriel and Michael, though in other Words, when he says,

The Lord God of the Holy Prophets s^n^ his Angel to th^w unto his Servants the
Things which most ^herily be done, rev. xxii 6,
And afterward, I Jesus have sent min^ Angel to tef^fic unto you these Things
in the Churches: Ves 16,


And indeed, as the Lamb alone was worthy to Open the Book and to loose the
Seals thereof. chap. v 2, 5, 9.
He alone, was that Michael the great Prince, who stands up for the Children
of the People; Dan xii. 1,
to whom Daniel belonged, and alone could answer that Question, chap. 8.13.
that is proposed to him, by the other Saint, who asked that certain Saint, How
long should be the Vision concerning the daily Sacrifice? etc. Where it
presently after appears, that this Saint who asked the Question, was Gabriel,
Verse. 16.
and he that answered it, was in all probability, the Man Clothed in Linen.

A Question to the same effect is asked him, and, in all likelihood, by the
same Person, when it is Represented, Dan. xii 5.
That Behold, there stood other Two, the One on this side of the Bank of the
River, and the Other on that side of the Bank of the River.

And One said to the Man clothed in Linen, which was upon the Waters of the
River, 6.
How long shall it be to the End of these Wonders?

Where it must be Observed, That the word Translated Other, in Verse 5. may
signify likewise the Last, and is here to be taken in that sense, meaning
Michael, chap. 12.1.
(who was mentioned just before) and Gabriel, who had been speaking to Daniel
all the while, from the end of the X Chapter till the very preceding Verse.
And when he had done speaking, Daniel is Represented as coming out of a
profound Attention, which the Angel's Silence put an end to; Then, as was
natural, he Looked up, and behold, chap 12.5.
there stood these last Two, etc. And in the next Verse the Words Translated,
Upon the Waters of the River, may be rendered, 6.
Highest up the stream of the River, which is exactly conformable to the
Original. And according to this Interpretation, the Man clothed in Linen, may
be One of the Two in the former Verse; and the Other is He that speaks in the
beginning of the sixth Verse, where the word [One] is put in to complete the
Sense, but is not in the Original, and really alters the Meaning. All which is
perfectly conformable to the Description in the viii Chapter at the 13 and 16
Verses.

All these Descriptions perfectly agree with Our Savior's Office of
High Priest, Heb. ix. 11,
Of good Things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made
with Hands; for which Reason He is entered into Heaven it self now to appear in
the Presence of God for us. 24,
And therefore he is the only Person who can consult the Spiritual Urim and
Thuminim, Deuteronomy. xxxiii 8,
and give answer to those who are Jews by the Circumcision of the heart. Romans
ii. 29,


I have been the more tedious and particular in Discovering who those Two
Persons (mentioned by Daniel and St. John) are, because it is a strong Argument
to prove, that the Subject on which they are Represented, speaking in the same
manner, in different Visions, is really the very same Subject, and that
therefore the VIII. Chapter of Daniel is to be Explained by the same Key with
the VII and XII Chapters, and with the XII, XIII and XVII Chapters of St.
John's Revelations. And of this Observation I shall make great Use, Dan. xii.
11,
when I come to Explain the Taking away the Daily, and Setting up the
Abomination that makes ^esclare.

And now that I have enquired, Who was this Man Clothed in Linen, which was
upon the Waters of the River, and what was the Occasion upon which he is here
Represented in this Solemn Manner, I go on to Explain what is meant by this
Expression.

-- When He held up His Right Hand, Deuteronomy. xi^ 7,
and His Left Hand unto Heaven, and Swear by Him that lives forever.

The manner of a Solemn Appeal to God, by Holding up both Hands toward Heaven,
was Practiced by Moses, when the Israelites Fought with the Amalekites. Exodus
xvii. 12.
And what follows, Explains the Reason of this Posture; for after the Lord had
promised Moses Utterly to Destroy Amaleck, Moses says, The Lord has Sworn, 16,
That the Lord will have War with Amaleck from Generation to Generation.

In which word, the Expression [The Lord has Sworn] is in the Original [The
Hand upon the Throne of the Lord] which Throne of God is Heaven. Mat. v. 34,
From whence it is plain, that Lifting up the Hands unto Heaven, was a Posture
used in the most Solemn Oaths, and accordingly it is described in Daniel, where
these words follow, And Swear by him that Lives For Ever. This Oath is the
same with that in St. John's Revelations, and (as I have already shown) taken
by the same Person, Rev. x. 5.
where The Angel which stood upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, Lifted up His
Hand to Heaven,

And Swear by him that lives forever and ever, 6.
who Created Heaven, and the Things that therein are; and the Earth, and the
Things that therein are; and the Sea, and the Things which are therein, --

It has been already shown, who that Angel was, and as the Substance of the
Oath which follows, is a Prophecy, so it was the Character of the High Priest
in Office to Prophecy; which is observed by St. John, upon the Advice that
Caiphas gave the Jews, viz.

That it was expedient that one Man Dye for the People. Joh. xi. 50,


And this spoke he not of himself, 51,
but being High Priest that year, he Prophesied that Jesus should dye for that
Nation;

And not for that Nation only, 52,
but that also he should gather together the Children of God that were
scattered abroad.

It was therefore in the Exercise of the Priestly Office, that the Man Clothed
in Linen in Daniel, and the Mighty Angel in St. John, are Represented as
declaring the Will of God.

SECT. II. Of the Number of Years meant by Time, Times, and an Half.
THIS leads me to the subject matter of this Solemn Oath, which is in Daniel
thus expressed.

That it shall be for a Time, Times, and an half, Dan. xii. 7,
and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of the Holy People,
all these things shall be finished.

And in St. John the same is intended by the following words,

" -- That there should be Time no longer. Rev. x. 5. 6,


But in the Days of the Voice of the Seventh Angel, when he shall begin to
Sound, the Mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared by his
Servants the Prophets.

Daniel's Expression, Dan. xii. 7,
That it shall be for a Time, Times, and an half, refers to the Question in the
foregoing Verse,

How long shall it be to the End of these Wonders? 9


And that Question obliges the Reader to observe, That it is at the End of a
long Scries of Prophecy, which b^gan at Chap. X. and is there introduced in
this manner,

Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy People in the
Latter Days, Dan. x. 14,
for yet the Vision is for many Days. And again,

But I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of Truth. 21


The same Introduction is to be found in the VIII Chapter, where Gabriel is
sent to make him understand the Vision. Who, Dan. VIII. 16.
upon that tells Daniel, Understand, O Son of Man, for at the Time of the End
shall be the Vision. 17.
And afterward,

-- Behold, 19.
I will make thee know what shall be in the Last End of the Indignation, for at
the Time appointed, the End shall be. And concludes,

" -- It shall be for many Days. 26,
"

And to the same effect Daniel informs Nebuchadnezzar; That there is a God in
Heaven that reveals Secrets, Dan. II. 28.
and makes known to King Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the Latter Days.

And in the Vision of the first of Belshazzar, The Period, Until a Time, Times,
Dan. VII 25.26.
and the dividing of Time," is applied to a Power, whose Dominion was to be
taken away, to consume and destroy it unto the End.

By comparing of all which Characters of the Time, as I did before of the
Persons represented in the Visions, it is evident, that the II. VII. VIII. and
XII. Chapters of Daniel relate to one and the same Subject, and are to be made
use of to Explain and Illustrate one another; and if that is not sufficient to
give light to the Prophecy, we will find an entire satisfaction by observing
where St. John treats of the same Period, both in the words of Daniel, when he
says, Rev. XII 14.
that the Woman is Nourished in the Wilderness for a Time, Times and half a
Time and in other Words, which mean the same thing, and in one place, Verse. 6.
relate to the same Woman in the Wilderness that they should feed her there a
Thousand Two Hundred and Three Score Days. And upon another Occasion relate to
the Witnesses, who shall Prophecy during a Thousand Two Hundred and Three Score
Days, Chap. XI. 3.
Clothed in Sackcloth.

The same Period is again mentioned under another Measure of the same Time,
when it is said, Rev. XI. 2.
that the Gentiles shall tread under the Holy City Forty and Two Months: Rev.
XIII. 5.
and That the Mouth speaking great things, shall have Power given him to
continue Forty and Two Months.

It is very plain from all these Passages compared, that, Time, Times, and a
half, One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Days, and Forty Two Months, mean all
the same thing, and consequently, that the Word Time signifies a Year, Times,
two Years, and half a Time, half a Year, since three Years and a half,
consisting of Three Hundred and Sixty Days each, make just One Thousand Two
Hundred and Sixty Days, or Forty Two Months; and it is well known, that the
most ancient Year among the Chaldeans, was divided in their Calendar into
Twelve Months of just Thirty Days each, which makes just Three Hundred and
Sixty Days.

The only thing that has any Difficulty in these places which I have quoted,
is, to know what is here meant by a Day. It will be very obvious by considering
the many things that are to be done in the time of One Thousand Two Hundred and
Sixty Days, that they cannot possibly be done in the space of three natural
Years and a half; but it comes then to be inquired, by what it can be certainly
known, what they mean, and in this the Books of Moses and the Prophet Ezekid,
have given all the light that can be desired.

First, ^ev. XXIII. 3.
In the Institution of the Sabbath, where it is plain that the Sabbath of Days,
which every Person was to keep, Chap. XXV. 4.
represented another Sabbath of Years, which the Land was to keep.

Secondly, When Moses denounces Gods Judgments on the Jews for Murmuring at the
Report which the Spys brought back of the Land of Cenaan, Numb. XIV. 34.
he tells them After the Number of the Days in which ye searched the Land, even
Forty Days (each Day for a Year) shall ye bear your iniquity's, even Forty
Years. --

Thirdly, In Ezekiel's Vision concerning the Siege of Jerusalem: Ezekiel. IV. 4.
He is commanded to Lie (...) his left Side, and lay the iniquity of the House
of Israel upon it, according to the Number of the Days that thou shall lie upon
it, thou shall bear their iniquity.

For I have laid upon thee the Years of their iniquity, acording to the Number
of the Days, 5.
Three Hundred and Ninety Days, so shall thou bear the iniquity of the House of
Israel.

And when thou have accomplished them, 6,
lie again on thy right Side, and thou shall bear the iniquity of the House of
Judah Forty Days, I have appointed thee each Day for a Year.

These passages seem to be so full and clear a Proof, that it was a Figure well
understood among the Jews, to use a Day to signify a Year, that I would not
add any thing further on the Subject, if Daniel himself did not furnish an
instance of his using it, which may be easily cleared up by History, but is
very difficult to be apprehended in any other way of Interpretation.

When a Hand touched Daniel, Dan. X. 10.11.13.
and it was said to him, Unto thee am I now sent. Gabriel goes on to inform
him, that The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood him One and Twenty
Days; and adds, But lo, Michael, one of the Chief Princes came to help me, and
I remained there with the Kings of Persia.

Now it is known from History, that Cyrus had been One and Twenty Years chosen
Prince or General of the Persians, who were then a distinct Nation from the
Medes, before the destruction of Babylon, in which Cyrus joined his Uncle
Cyaxares, called in Scripture Darius the Mede, and so it was One and Twenty
Years before that Prince was ready to execute the design of Providence in that
great Expedition which brought about the Deliverance of the Jews out of the
Captivity, whose Prince was Mich^^^, and accordingly it was this Michael, who
is likewise, The Lord that stirred upon the Spirit of C, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI (...).
23. Ezra. I. 1.2.3.4
King of Persia, (in the first year of his Reign in Babylon) that he made a
Proclamation thro'-out all his Kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,

Thus says Cyrus, King of Persia, The Lord God of Heaven has given me all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and he has charged me to build him an House an
Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

Who is there among you of all his People? Ezra. 1.3.
His God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and
build the House of the Lord God of Israel, he is the God which is in Jerusalem.

And whosoever remains in any place where he sojourneth, 4.
let the Men of his Place help him with Silver, and with Gold, and with Goods,
and with Beasts, besides the Free Will Offering for the House of God that is in
Jerusalem.

This may be compared with Isaiah, where we find, That the Lord says of Cyrus,
Isa. XLIV. 28.
He is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my Pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy Foundation shall be laid.

Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, XLV. 1.2 3.4.
to Cyrus, whose Right Hand I have holden, to Subdue Nations before him.

All this seems a natural Explanation of that Verse in Daniel, and Confirms the
Observation, Dan. X. 13.
That Days were used in the Figurative Style to signify Years, even in the
Account of Things past, by the same Prophet, who imploys them in that Sense in
his Predictions of Things to come, as in the Two Thousand three Hundred Days,
Dan. VIII. 14. XII. 11.12.
the One Thousand two Hundred and Ninety Days, and One Thousand three Hundred
and thirty Five Days, and in effect, though in other words, when he mentions
Times, XII. 7. VII. 25.
Time, and an Half, or Times, Time, and the dividing of Time; and in a very
particular manner in the Seventy Weeks, IX. 24.
which no Interpreter, not even Roman Catholic, has ever pretended to be other
than Four Hundred and Ninety Years; and their general Agreement in taking this
Passage as the Protestants do in their Arguments against the Jews, to prove the
Coming of Christ to be according to the Prophecy, cuts off all their Pretenses
to refuse taking a Day for a Year in other Passages of Daniel, when it is made
use of against themselves.

But before I leave this Subject, I must not omit an Ex^mple in the Gospel,
where our Savior himself uses a Day for a Year, when

-- There came certain of the Pharisees, Lake XIII. 3^.
saying unto Him, Get thee out, and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee.

And he said unto them, 32.
Go ye and tell that Fox, Behold, I cast out Devils, and I do Cures to Day and
to Morrow, and the Third Day I shall be Perfected.

"Nevertheless, 33
I must Walk to Day and to "Morrow, and the Day following --

In this place it cannot be our Savior's meaning that he had but Three days to
live; but that He was by His Father appointed to carry on His Ministry Three
full Years; And this was the full Number of Years which he was to Perfect or
Complete, besides a few Months, which not making up so much as half a Year, are
not mentioned in this short and occasional Reply.

Thus it appears, that by a Day, among the Jews, it was usual, in the
Figurative Style, to mean a Year, and so this Period of Time, Times and an
Half, or Forty two Months, or One thousand two hundred and sixty Days, may
justly be allowed to signify One thousand two hundred and sixty Years. And
here some Eminent Chronologists have endeavored to show, that since every one
of these Years did consist but of three hundred and sixty days among the
Chaldeans, that in the adding up of the Sum, no more natural Days should be
counted than 1260 times 360, which would shorten the Term by more than five
days in every year. But it must be considered, that neither the Chaldeans, nor
indeed any other Nation, did at the end of a considerable number of common or
Solar Years, count any more than we now do, but that they either suffered five
days to pass over without counting them at the end of every year, or when in a
few years they perceived the Seasons to go contrary to their Calendar, they
threw in a Month extraordinary, to bring them right; and whatever way they
varied this, still we find, in effect, that they counted no more years, at the
long run, than the Sun actually performed; and therefore we must follow their
Method through-out, and according to their Calendar allow no more than 360 days
to a year, in computing the number of the Figurative Days, which signify
Years. But ^hen we consider how many of these Years are past and gone, we must
not only Observe the Calendar, but also make the same Allowances that the
Ancients did, from time to time, and then we are sure to agree with them in
every part of our Calculation.

SECT. III. The Method of the following Enquiry.
AND now that I have sh^wn what is meant by Time, Times and a Half, Dan. XII. 7.
I go on to consider what is meant by the words that follow,

And when He shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of the holy People,
all these things shall be finished.

The Expression is very short, but sufficient to Remind Daniel, that it should
certainly come to pass, as he had been informed already in the Vision of the
Four Beasts, That He shall speak great Words against the most High, Chap. VII.
25.
and shall wear out the Saints of the most High, and think to change Times and
Laws; and they shall be given into his hands until a Time, and Times, and the
dividing of Time.

The Sameness of the Period shows plainly, that the [He] is the same in both
these Places; and the Description of Wearing out the Saints of the most High,
Chap XII. 7.
is very agreeable to that of Scattering the Power of the holy People; And
their being given into his hand until Time, VII 25.
Times, etc. has the same Force with, When he shall have accomplished to
scatter the Power of the holy People, XII 7.
all these shall be finished, that is, All these Time, Times, etc. for the word
[things] is not in the Original.

All that is wanting to understand these two Places, is to know who is meant by
this [He] and that is to be learned more particularly from the preceding Verse
in the VII Chapter.

-- Ten Kings that shall arise, and another shall rise after them, Chap. VII.
24.
and He shall be diverse from the first, and He shall subdue Three Kings. And
then follows,

"And He shall speak great Words against the "most High, and shall wear out the
Saints, 25.
etc.

But as this is the latter end of a Vision, that consists of several parts,
which by the Description are Explained to be Successive to one another, it is
not possible to apprehend the full Evidence of what is meant by these last
Words, without observing their Connection and Consistency with what goes
before, and with other Visions on the same Matter; and then it will, I believe,
be past dispute, to what they relate, and to what Period of Time alone they can
be applied.

They are part of the first Vision which Daniel himself had Originally, as I
observed before, which was in the first of Belshazzar, and this Vision contains
a general Abridgment of the History of what was to happen from his own Time
downwards, in a distinct Method, which he himself expresses thus, in short,

"These great Beasts which are Fou^^^ are " Your Kings, Dan. VII 17.
which shall arise out of the Earth.

But the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, 18.
and possess the Kingdom forever, even for ever and ever.

The same Series of History had been expressed as methodically, but not so
particularly in the Vision which Nebuchadnezzar saw, and which Daniel
interpreted to him, and ended with telling him, Dan. II. 45.
that The Great God had made known to the King what should come to pass
hereafter.

The Vision of the third of Belshazzar, VIII. X. XI. XII.
and that of the third of Cyrus, serve in most particulars, to illustrate and
explain that of the frst of Belshazzar, Dan. VII
and all these considered together, are sufficient to clear up History, till
the latter Period of the fourth Beast, and to make that more evident, what is
in Daniel must be compared with the descriptions given by St. John in his
Revelations of The great Red Dragon, Rev. XII. 3. XIII* 1.111 XVII. 7.
and of The Beast which rose up out of the Sea; and of The other Beast which
came up out of the Earth: And of the Woman and the Beast that carries her.

Now that all these things may be considered in their proper place and order,
there does not seem to be a more natural and easy Method, than first to go
through Nebuchadnezzar's Vision of the great Image, with Daniel's
interpretation of it, and then to resume the same Subject as it is represented
to Daniel himself under the figure of four Beasts, and there to take in the
concurring places of Scripture which generally allude to that figure, and but
seldom to Nebuchadnezzar's great Image.

This last therefore as it is a complete abridgment of it self, will give the
most familiar and easy notion of the main Scope of Daniel and St. John's
Prophecies, and when that is well apprehended, it may be attempted with better
Success to range in order the particular branches of them, and the
circumstances which have attended the great turns and most remarkable changes
which have happened in the World.

SECT. IV. Nebuchadnezzars Vision of the great Image.
IN the second Year of the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. II. 1.
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed Dreams, wherewith his Spirit was troubled, and his
Sleep brake from him.

Then the King commanded to call the Magicians and the Astrologers, 2.
and the Sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to show the King his Dreams, so they
came and stood before the King.

And the King said unto them, 3.
I have dreamed a Dream, and my Spirit was troubled to know the Dream.

Then spoke the Chaldeans to the King in Syriack, 4.
O King, live forever! Tell thy Servants the Dream, and we will show the
Interpretation.

The King answered and said to the Chaldeans, 5.
the thing is gone from me, if ye will not make known unto me the Dream, with
the Interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in Pieces and your Houses shall be
made a Dunghill.

But if ye show the dream and the Interpretation thereof, Chap. II. 6.
ye shall receive of me Gifts and Rewards, and great Honor, therefore show me
the Dream and the Interpretation thereof.

They answered again, and said, 7.
let the King tell his Servants the Dream, and we will show the Interpretation
of it.

The King answered and said, 8.
I know of certainty, that ye would gain the Time, because ye see the thing is
gone from me.

But if ye will not make known unto me the Dream, there is but one decree for
you, 9.
for ye have prepared Lying and Corrupt Words to speak before me, till the Time
be changed, therefore tell me the Dream, and I shall know that ye can show me
the Interpretation thereof.

The Chaldeans answered before the King, and said, 10.
there is not a Man upon the Earth that can show the King's Matter, therefore
there is no King, Lord, nor Ruler that asked such things of any Magician, or
Astrologer, or Chaldean.

And it is a rare thing that the King requires, 11.
and there is none other that can show it before the King, except the Gods
whose dwelling is not with Flesh.

By all this Discourse it is plain that Nebuchadnezzar believed that these Wise
Men, etc. had a supernatural Art,. and if they had, he argued justly, that they
could as well tell him the Dream, as the certain Interpretation or
Accomplishment.

But whether the Wise Men pretended to this supernatural Art till now that they
were forced to own the contrary, or whether they were only Men of Learning, and
it was the superstition of the People, and not their own Pretensions, that made
them pass for Conjurors, Dan. I. 20. chap. II. 13,
as seems most probable, since Daniel and his Fellows were reckoned among them.

However that was, They were, it seems, obliged upon this occasion to undeceive
Nebuchadnezzar, and accordingly they gave him an Answer that disowned any
supernatural Art in themselves, and allowed that none but the Gods could Answer
such a Question as the Kings, which Gods they did not pretend dwelt with Flesh,
that is, inspired them.

It seems therefore, that all that they now pretended to, was to be skilled in
that figurative Language, which had been usually employed in true Prophetical
Revelations, and so could without any inspiration explain the importance of the
Terms, and put the matter into Words commonly used and easily apprehended.

In the same manner it seems to have been that the Magicians in Pharaoh's Court
employed their Art and Skill to impose upon him, as far as Juggling Tricks would
go. But where their Tricks failed them, they cried out, Exodus VIII. 19
This is the Finger of God. By which they gave up all Pretense to being
themselves Divinely Inspired.

But Daniel when he was brought before the King, gave him a proof or a Sign,
that what he was going to explain, would really come to pass, since he told him
what no Body could know but God and the King himself, when he was reminded of
his Dream.

The King answered and said to Daniel, Dan. II. 26,
whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto me the Dream
which I have seen, and the Interpretation thereof?

Daniel answered in the presence of the King and said, 27.
The Secret which the King has demanded, cannot the Wise Men, the Astrologers,
the Magicians, the Southsayers show unto the King.

But there is a God in Heaven that reveals Secrets, 28,
and makes known to the King Nebuchadnezzar, what shall be in the latter Days.
--

As for thee, O King, thy thoughts came into thy Mind upon thy Bed, 29,
what should come to pass hereafter, and he that reveals Secrets, makes
known unto thee what shall come to pass.

But as for me, 30.
this Secret is not revealed to me for any Wisdom that I have more than any
living, but for their sakes that shall make known the Interpretation to the
King, and that thou might know the thoughts of thy Heart.

Where Daniel gives two Reasons why God has instructed him in the Kings Matter,
one that he might be inclined to deal favorably with the Jews now in
Captivity, and the other that he might be well assured that what he was warned
of in a Dream, would certainly come to pass, and was not a common Dream.

The Description of the Dream it self comes next.

Thou, O King saw, Dan. II. 31,
and behold a great Image, this great Image, whose Brightness was Excellent,
stood before thee, and the form thereof was Terrible.

This Images Head was of fine Gold, his Breast and his Arms of Silver, 32,
his Belly and his Thighs of Brass.

"His Legs of Iron, his Feet part of Iron "and part of Clay. 33,


Thou saw till that a Stone was cut out without Hands, chap. ii. 34,
which smote the Image upon his Feet that were of Iron and Clay, and brake them
to pieces.

Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver and the Gold broken to
pieces together, 35,
and became like the Chaff of the Summer Thrafhing-Floors, and the Wind carried
them away, that no place was found for them, and the Stone that smote the
Image, became a great Mountain.

"This is the Dream, 36,
and we will tell the "Interpretation thereof before the King.

Thou, 37,
O King, art a King of Kings, for the "God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom,
"Four, and Strength, and Glory.

And ^heresoever the Children of Men dwell, 38,
the Bea^ts of the Field and the Fowls of the Heaven has he given into thine
Hand, and has made thee Ruler over them all; Thou art this Head of Gold.

Daniel had before informed the King, That He who revealed Secrets, 29,
made known unto the King what shall come to pass.

And therefore what was already past, was not to make any part of the Dream.
The Assyrian Monarchy had been very Powerful, and the Babylonish Kingdom,
(which was founded on the Ruins of it) had subsisted some years before
Nebuchadnezzar, but it was the Design of this Prophetical Dream, to describe
only what was Yet to come; and so the first Kingdom, meant by the Head of Gold,
contained only Nebuchadnezzar and his Followers to the Third Generation, as it
is limited in Jeremiah's Prophecy,

And now have I given all these Lands into the Hand of Nebuchadnezzar, Jerem.
xxvii. 6.
the King of Babylon, my Servant, and the Beasts of the Field have I given him
also, to serve him.

And all Nations shall serve him, and his Son, and his Sons Son, 7.
until the very time of his Land come, and then many Nations and great Kings
shall serve themselves of him.

He was, undoubtedly, the greatest Conqueror of his Time, and had Success
wherever he made War, and so was a King of Kings, or a great Monarch; and the
Spoils of every Nation which he attempted to Conquer, were given into his Hand.
And this Babylonish Kingdom lasted till the Death of his Grandson Belshazzar.

And after thee shall arise another Kingdom Inferior to thee -- Dan. II. 39.


The word Inferior denotes, That the second Kingdom was Represented by the
Breast and Arms, which were lower in the Image than the Head, and were of
Silver, a Metal next, in order of Metals, to Gold; and for the same reason,
the Third is called, just after, The Kingdom of Brass, which carries on the
Order observed in the Description of the Image; But neither of th^se
Expressions means, that these Monarchies were less Considerable than the first.

This Second Kingdom was the Kingdom of the Medes and Persians, which was the
prevailing Monarchy after the taking of Babylon, till the Time of Alexander the
Great; and then came another Third Kingdom of Brass, which shall bear Rule over
all the Earth. Dan. II. 39.


This Grecian ^^^^archy, begun by Alexander, comprehended many Countries in
Europe, which had not submitted to either of the two first Monarchies; and
indeed, at its first setting up, took in all that was then considerably Peopled
in the World, which is according to the Style of the Scripture, meant by All
the Earth. For the Romans were then a very small inconsiderable Colony, though
afterward they grew strong enough to put a Period to all the Branches of the
Grecian Monarchy.

But the Expression, Shall bear Rule over all the Earth, may well be thought to
relate further to a Time when the Grecian Empire was to be set up again by
Constantine, whose Dominion was much more Extensive than Alexander's. I shall
in the Sequel of this Discourse produce several probable Reasons for this last
Interpretation. But now I must go on in Order.

And the Fourth Kingdom shall be strong, as Iron, Dan. II. 40.
forasmuch as Iron breaks in pieces and subdueth all things; and as Iron,
that breaks all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

This was the Roman Power, which Conquered all that had belonged to the
Babylonish, Persian or Grecian Monarchies; and this Power continued Strong and
United for a very long period; but at last there came a very great Change in
their Affairs, which is next described.

And whereas thou saw the Feet and Toes, 41.
part of Potters Clay, and part of Iron; The Kingdom shall be Divided, but
there shall be in it of the Strength of the Iron, forasmuch as thou saw the
Iron mixed with Miry Clay.

And as the Toes of the Feet were part of Iron and part of Clay, 42.
so the Kingdom shall be partly Strong and partly Broken.

And whereas thou saw Iron mixed with Miry Clay, 43.
they shall mingle themselves with the seed of Men, but they shall not Cleave
one to another, even as Iron is not mixed with Clay.

Here is an Account of the great Change in the Roman Empire, when the Barbarons
Nations, well described by Clay, possessed the Western part of the Roman
Empire, and the Roman Emperors still preserved the Eastern part to Themselves:
Thus They mingled themselves with the the Seed of Men: Genesis VI. 2.
in the same Sense that The Sens of God saw the Daughters of Men, and took to
them Wives, of all which they chose; That is, the Princes of the World took as
many Women, among the common People, as they liked. And this appears to be
Moses's meaning, by what follows,

When the Sons of God came in to the Daughters of Men, Genesis VI. 4.
they bore Children to them, the same became Mighty Men, which were of Old, Men
of Renown.

In the same manner, when the Noble and Ancient Roman Emperors were to share
the Empire with Mean and Upstart Nations, as the Goths, Psalm LXXXII 6.
Van^^^, etc. They (that is, these Emperors, who were as Gods) Mingled
Themselves with the Seed of Men. Dan. II. 43.
But they did not cleave one to another. Their Dominions became entirely
Separate, and they did not interfer with one another in the same Countries, but
subsisted at the same time as two Neighboring Powers, till at last,

And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, 44.
which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left to other
People, but it shall break in pieces, and Consume all these Kingdoms, and it
shall stand Forever.

Forasmuch as thou saw that the Stone was cut out of the Mountain without
Hands, 45.
and that it brake in pieces the Iron, the Brass, the Clay, the Silver and the
Gold, The great God has made known unto the King what shall Come to Pass
hereafter; and the Dream is Certain, and the Interpretation thereof Sure.

This Represents the Kingdom of Christ, which being The Stone which the
Builders Rejected, Luke XX. 17.
the same is become the Head of the Corner.

Whosoever shall fall upon that Stone, 18.
shall be broken; and on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to
Powder.

One part of this has been fully Accomplished from our Savior's Time to this
day, upon all who have Persecuted the Followers of Christ, who, 1 Pet. II. 4.
coming unto the Lord as a Living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but Chosen
of God, and Precious.

They also, 5.
as lively Stones are built up a Spiritual House, etc.

Their first Persecutors, the Heathen Roman Emperors, fell under the Conquering
Sword of Constantine; Deuteronomy. XXXII. 18.30.31.
and their last Persecutors (the Popish Powers, who have endeavored to Crush
the Reformation) have themselves, one after another, Split upon that Rock. 1.
Cor. X 4.


And the Protestant Interest in Europe is now come to that Height, that it will
not be very difficult for them, if they are again Provoked, Luke XX. 18.
To Grind their Enemies to Powder.

It is, evidently, to this Time, that Isaiah and Micah Refer, when they say,

And it shall come to pass in the Last Days, Isa. II. 2. Micah IV. 1.
that the Mountain of the Lord's House shall be Established in the Top of the
Mountains, and shall be Exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it.

And the Prophet Isaiah in another place, Isaiah XXIV 23.
after he had described the Lord of Host's Reigning in Mount Zion and
Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously, he adds, XXV. 3.
The City of the Terrible Nations shall fear Thee, and The Branch of the
Terrible Ones shall be brought Low. 5.


Here is a plain Allusion to Babylon, which being The Head, Dan. II. 31.
gave the Name to This Image in Daniel, whose Form was Terrible, and which did
not loose its Name, even in the Branches, as appears by St. John's Mystery
Babylon the great, Rev. XVII. 5.
written in the Woman's Forchead. And this naturally leads me (now that I have
Explained the several parts of this Dream) to make Two Observations upon the
whole.

I. It may be observed, first, That the next Chapter where Nebuchadnezzar,
(unmindful of the Warning of this Dream) sets up a Golden Image to be
Worshipped, Den. III. 1 -- 6.
is a good Illustration of the great Propriety of this Dream, to Represent the
whole Scene of Tyranny that was to follow to the end of the World, which would
be as one. Image or Idol, 6.
which, Whosoever falls not down and Worshippeth, shall be cast into the Burning
F^ery Furnace. Though the Persons who have used this Cruel and Arbitrary Power,
have been different, and the Form of Government has often Varied, yet it has
not fared better with the People or Subjects: They have still continued in the
same Slavery, though under different Masters, and this is still with the greater
Propriety of Speech Represented by an Image or Idol, because the Superstitious
Conceits of Mankind have been the chief Instruments of their Misery, for
nothing imposed more on them than the Divine Honors that Princes often Assumed
to Themselves in their Life Time, and which were Universally paid them, after
their Death; and as this was the chief Source of the Heathen Religion, so it
was by this Deceit chiefly, Math. XX. 25.
that The Princes of the Gentiles Exercised Dominion Over them: for, First, The
People was made to believe, that Kings after their Death were Translated to
Heaven, and ought to be Worshipped as Gods, and from hence it grew Customany to
make Statues, in Honor of them, before which the Ignorant Multitude used to
Worship and offer Sacrifices: These Statues of Kings and Emperors, St. Paul
calls, These Dumb Idols, 1 Cor. XII. 2.
unto which the Gentiles were carried away; Whereas he says, Chap. VIII. 4.
We know that an Idol is nothing in the whole World, and that there is no other
God but One; 5.
For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or Earth, (as there
be Gods many and Lords many.)

But to us there is but One God -- and One Lord. -- 6.
And again,

What shall I say then, 1 Cor. X. 19.
that an Idol is any thing, or that which is offered in Sacrifice to Idols, is
any thing?

But I say, 20.
That the things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils, and
not to God. --

Where the word [Devils] should be rendered Demons, which was the Name the
Heathens gave to their Deified Princes, and means the same with those that were
called Gods, as there be Gods many and Lords many. 1 Cor. VIII 5.
Now the Psalmist Explains to whom all this belongs, when he says, Psalm I
XXXII 6.7.
I have said, ye are Gods -- But ye shall dye like Men, and fall like one of
the Princes.

But Secondly, Though the great Quantity of Idols that were Worshipped, were in
Honor of the Dead, yet the Living Princes of the World had generally the same
Honors paid them.

The Address which the Wise Men made to Nebuchad^^zzar of, O King, live for
ever! Dan. II. 4. IV. 34.
was wishing him that Everlasting Dominion which himself afterward confesses,
belonged only to the Most High.

The Petition of the Princes to Darius, VI 6.
to whom they also said, King Darius, live for ever, 7.
was to make a firm Decree, That whosoever shall ask a Petition of any God or
Man for Thirty Days, save of thee, O King, shall be cast into the Den of Lions.

Which placed him in the stead of the Gods for that Time, and shows, that it
was the Practice of the Persians to treat their Princes as Gods, while they
were alive. In like manner, Alexander made himself be Worshipped as the Son of
Jupiter Ammon, and the Roman Emperors Augustus and Domitian, while alive, were
called Davi or Gods; And it grew a Custom after the Antonines, to adore the
Emperors Pictures, which were fixed on the Standards of the Army. So that the
Idolizing of Princes in their Life Times, was practiced under all the four
Monarchies.

And thus it appears, that the Great Idol in Daniel, was very properly used as
a Representation of the Grand Imposture under living Princes, who were
Worshipped as Gods, which was to continue to deceive the whole World from
Daniel's Time forward; and which St. John Expresses in another Figure,
Representing only what was to come after his Time, by

A Red Dragon having Seven Heads and Ten Horns: Rev X. I. 3.
of which he afterward says, And the great Dragon was cast out, 9.
that Old Serpent, called, the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole World.

By which it appears, that the like Delusion had commenced long before the
Period, or the great Image in Daniel, even from the first Time, that at the
Instigation of the Serpent, that is, the Spirit of Ambition, and the love of
Absolute Power, Genesis III. 5.
Man would be as Gods, knowing good and evil: When he withdrew himself from his
Obedience to God who had created him for good only: I ^1. IV. 8.
And by Cain's slaying his Brother Abel, we may observe, how early a Man
assumed that Right over another Life, which belongs to God only, and which is
the first Eminent instance of Arbitrary and Cruel Power.

The like Crime is Recorded of Lamech. 23.
And soon after, VI. 11.
the Earth was filled with Violence, for which Reason it appeared Corrupt
before God, who sent a Deluge to Destroy all, except Noah and his Family.

It was not long after the Deluge, when among the Descendants of Ham, there
arose Nimrod, who began to be a Mighty One in the Earth, X. 8.10.
and whose Kingdom was at Babel (which is the same word in the Original that is
elsewhere rendered Babylon) where they attempted to Build a City and a Tower,
whose Top might reach to Heaven, XI. 4.
and to make them a Name, lest they should be scattered abroad over the Face of
the whole Earth. And this design was directly in Opposition to Gods Command:
Replenish the Le^^h: I 28. XI. 6.
But that they set aside, and would have nothing Restrained from them, which
they had imagined to do.

And we find the same Ambitious Arbitrary Power afterward Remarkably exercised
by the Pharaohs; and in process of Time, sometimes Egypt, and sometimes Assyria
had the greatest part of the World under them, till the Kingdom of Babylon was
set up, which made the Golden Head in the great Image. And thus by a short View
of Ancient History, Rev. XII. 9.
we see what had been all along the Idolatry that had deceived the whole World:
Dan. II. 31.
Which Daniel and St. John allude to in the great Image, and the Old Serpent.

II. It must be Observed in the Second place, That the Image is supposed to
remain entire in all its parts, Till that a Stone was cut out without Hands,
II. 34.
which smote the Image upon his Feet, that were of Iron and Clay, and brake
them to Pieces.

Then was the Iron, 35.
the Clay, the Brass, the Silver and the Gold broken to pieces together, and
became like the Chaff of the Summer Threshing Floors, and the Wind carried them
away, that no place was found for them.

The design of this is plainly to show, that the distinguishing Characters of
the several Monachies should Continue during the whole Period; and in this,
Rev. XIII. 1.
it agrees with the description of the Beast in St. John, That rises up out of
the Sea: which will be found to be the Fourth Beast or Empire in its last
Period, but it is described, 2.
Like unto a Leopard, with Feet like a Bear, and a Mouth like a Lion.

Which will appear to be the Beasts that Represented the Three First Monarchies
in the same manner as the Brass, Silver and Gold of the Image had done.

Now this shows, how properly there ought to have been, (as there really has) a
Babylon in the last Period of the great Image, which should notoriously assume
the divine Honors formerly paid to Heathen Princes, and which the Christian
Emperors were too Religious and Modest to accept: But the Man of Sin in his
Babylon, 2 Thessalonians. II. 3.4.
sits in the Temple of God, as God, without being ashamed.

The Ch^ff of the Summer Threshing Floor, Den II. 35.
has an evident Allusion to the Time when our Savior was to come with a Fan in
his Hand, Math. III 12
that he may thoroughly Purge his Floor, and gather the^ Wheat into his Garner,
XIII 24 30.36 43.
and burn up the Ch^ff with unquenchable Fire. And to the Parable of Burning
the Tares of the Held, Rev. xiv 14.15.16
and to the Harvest of the Earth, that was Ripe, in St. John's Revelation.

Which Instances may serve at present for a Specimen of the Harmony and exact
Conformity of the Figures used in Scripture in different places.

But as it is impracticable to discover all the Comparisons that may be made of
this Vision of the Image, with other Passages, till the principal Vision which
is Parallel to it, of the Four Beasts is explained, I shall proceed to give as
particular an Explanation of that Vision, as I have of the Other, and then what
has been already sh^wn in a transient View, will be better Understood, and set
in a much stronger Light.

SECT. V. Daniel's Vision of the Four great Beasts.
IN the first Year of Belshazzar King of Babylon, Dan vii. 1.
Daniel had a Dream and Visions of his Head upon his Bed, then he wrote the
Dream, and told the Sum of the Matters.

Daniel spoke and said, I saw in my Vision by Night, 2.
and behold the Four Winds of the Heaven strove upon the great Sea.

And Four great Beasts came up from the Sea diverse one from another. 3.


This is the first Vision, which we have an Account, was originally
communicated to ^aniel,

The four Winds of Heaven represent the Powers of the World, as in Jeremiah.
verse. 2.


Upon Elam will I bring the four Winds from the four Quarrers of Heaven, Jer.
^iix 36.
and I will scatter them toward all these Winds, and there shall be no Nation,
whither the Outcasts of Elam shall not come.

The great Sea being the place where the natural Winds have their full play, it
is a proper Metaphor, for that Extent of Country which is the Scene of these
Winds in the Figurative Sense, which are the contending Nations of the World.

And in this sense Isaiah says: The Wicked are like the troubled Sea, Isa.
Lvii. 20.
when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt.

The word Beasts is afterward explained.

These great Beasts which are four, are four Kings, Dan. vii. 17.
which shall arise out of the Earth.

And this being all the Interpretation, given in this Chapter, of the three
first Beasts, I shall Interpret every one singly, and, as I go along, consider
what light other Chapters of Daniel afford to explain them.

The meaning then of this general abstract of the Vision is, that the great
Contentions among the Nations of the World should produce Four great Empires
different from one another, and successive, as appears by what immediately
follows.

The first was like a Lion, vii. 4.
and had Eagles Wings: and I beheld till the Wings thereof were plucked, and it
was lifted up from the Earth, and made stand upon the Feet as a Man, and a Man's
Heart was given to it.

Jeremiah expla^ns the Lions coming out of his Thicket, Jer. IV. 7.
by The Dest^over of the Gentiles being on his way. And as the Lion was always
reckoned the King of Beasts, so it was a natural Figure to represent the first
Monarch, whom Daniel called a King of Kings: Dan. II. 37.
The rest of the description is taken from a Passage in a Vision which belongs
to Nebuchadnezzar alone, which is thus expressed,

The same Hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven
from Men, IV. 33.
and did eat Grass as Oxen, and his Body was wet with the Dew of Heaven, till
his Hairs were grown like Eagles Feathers and his Nails like Birds Claws.

And at the end of the Days, 34.
I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine Eyes unto Heaven, and mine Understanding
return^d unto me, and I blessed the Most High, and (...) Prais^d and Honored
him that lives For Ever, whose Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, and his
Kingdom i^ from Generation to Generation.

This is an exact Commentary upon the Expressions in the description of the
first Beast, and it must not be wond^red at, that Nebuchad^^zzar alone is
described, and not his Successors, because in him fell the Glory of that first
Monarchy, though it was not Destroyed till Belsh^zzar's Time; and we shall find
that Daniel mentions no more Particulars of the other Beasts, than their first
and most bright Transactions, as shall be shown in all the rest, as they come
in order, and indeed it would be impossible to do more in so short a Compass as
the bounds of a Chapter.

And behold another Beast, Dan. VII. 5.
a second like to a Bear, and it raised up itself, on one side, and it had
three Ribs in the Mouth of it, between the Teeth of it, and they said thus unto
it, Arise devour much Flesh.

Solomon explains this Figure of a Bear, as that of a Lion, when he says,

As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, Prove. XVIII. 15.
so is a Wicked Ruler over the Poor People.

Its raising it self on out side, is more fully explained in another Vision of
Daniel, under a different Figure, where this Medo-Persian Empire is more
particularly Described and Interpreted.

In the third Year of the Reign of King Belshazzar, a Vision appeared unto me,
Dan. VIII. 1.
even unto me Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the first.

And I saw in a Vision, 2.
and it came to pass when I saw, that I was at Shusban, in the Palace, which is
in the Province of Elam, and I saw in a Vision, and I was by the River of Ulai.

Then I lifted up mine Eyes, and saw, 3.
and behold, there stood before the River a Ram which had two Horns, and the
two Horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up
last.

Which higher is plainly Persia, and the same with the Side on which the Bear
raised it self, for in the Interpretation the Angel says,

"The Ram which thou saw^st having two "Horns, are the Kings of Media and
Persia. 20.


The Figure of the three Ribs in the Mouth of it, Dan. VII. 5.
which said unto it, Arise devour much Flesh, is explained in the Vision of the
third of Cyrus,

"Also, XI. 1.
I in the first Year of Parius, the Mede, "even I stood to confirm and to
strengthen him.

And now will I show thee the Truth, Behold, there shall stand up yet Three
Kings in Persia, 2.
and the Fourth shall be far Richer than they all, and by his Strength, through
his Riches, he shall stir up all against the Realm of Grecia.

These Three Kings were Cyrus, Camb^ses, and Darius Hystespes, who stood up
after Cyaxares, here called Darius the Mede, and were great Conquerors, VII. 5.
and are therefore called Three Ribs, which probably mean Jaw-Bones with rows
of Teeth, as it is said Crocodiles have, one within another; and these are very
proper to devour much Flesh.

The reason why the Fourth is not reckoned among them, is, because the first
three only advanced or aggrandized the Monarchy. But Xerxes, XI 2.
though Stronger and Richer than they, yet by provoking Greece, laid a Fountation
for the Ruin of what the others had Built up; and as, in fact, he was entirely
Unsuccessful and Unfortunate in that Attempt, from him may be dated the Decline
of the Persian Monarchy; and in his Time expired that Remarkable Character of
the Ram, which had been maintained during their three first Kings, which is
thus expressed,

I saw the Ram pushing Westward, Dan. VIII. 4.
and Northward, and Southward, so that no Beasts might stand before him,
neither was there any that could deliver out of his Hand, but he did according
to his Will, and became great.

Now when Xerxes pushed Westward he was smartly Repulsed, and forced to give it
over after many Losses.

After this, I beheld, and lo, another like a Leopard, VII. 6.
which had upon the back of it Four Wings of a Fowl; the Beast had also Four
Heads, and Dominion was given to it.

A Leopard is the swiftest of all the Beasts of Prey, and is by Jeremiah
applied to a Powerful Prince.

A Leopard shall watch over their Cities. Jer. V. 6.


A Fowl is likewise a Figure of a Destroying Power, which is employed by
Jeremiah, among others, of the same Force.

And I will appoint over them Four Kinds, says the Lord, Jer. XV. 3.
the Sword to Slay, and the Dogs to Tear, and the Fowls of Heaven, and the
Beasts of the Earth, to devour and destroy.

And I will cause them to be removed into all Kingdoms of the Earth, 4.
because of Manasseh, etc.

And Wings are used, as the Image naturally imports, for the Extensiveness of a
Country or Dominion, as it is employed by Isaiah,

And gather together the Dispersed of Judah from the Four Corners (the Original
is Wings) of the Earth. Isa. XI. 12.


So that what is meant so far, is that the Grecian Power should begin with a
Rapid Conquest, and then be divided into Four Parts, which should extend
toward all the Corners of the Earth.

But here follows another Figure, which ought not to be confounded with what
goes before.

The Beast had also Four Heads. Dan. VII 6.


This Character of Heads, is explained by St. John in the Description of the
Fourth Beast.

The S^ven Heads, are Seven Mountains. Rev. XVII. 9.10.


And there are Sev^n Kings, Five are fallen, One is, and Another is ^oty^t come.
Which should b^r^ndred, And are Seven Kings, for [there] is not in the Greek.

Now since St. John is so exact an Interpreter of Dan^el in the sequel of this
Vision, it ought to be allowed, that wherever Daniel is not particular enough
to explain his own Terms, St. John is always to be admitted to explain them.

And therefore as the Seven Heads are generally allowed by the best
Interpret^rs to mean Seven Forms of Government, which the Fourth Beast came
under successively, so the Four Heads may well be supposed to mean the same
thing of the Third Beast.

But this will seem still more likely, when we consider, how this Vision agrees
with the Description of the same Emp^re under the Figure of a He-Goat.

And as I was considering, Behold, Dan. VIII. 5.
an He-Goat came from the West on the Face of the whole Earth, and touched not
the Ground, and the Goat had a notable Horn between his Eyes.

And he came to the Ram that had two Horns, 6.
which I had seen standing before the River, and ran unto him in the Fury of
his Power.

And I saw him come close unto the Ram, 7.
and he was moved with Chol^r against him, and smote the Ram, and brake his two
Horns, and there was no Power in the Ram to stand before him, but he cast him
down to the Ground and stamped upon him, and there was none that could deliver
the Ram out of his Hand.

Therefore the He-Goat waxed very great, and when he was strong, 8.
the great Horn was broken, and for it came up Four notable Ones toward the
Four Winds of Heaven.

And out of one of them came forth a little Horn, 9.
etc.

The Interpretation of all this is added in the ^^me Chapter.

And the Rough Goat is the King of Grecia, Da^. VIII. 21.
and the great Horn that is between his Eyes, is the first King.

Now that being broken, whereas Four stood up for it, 22.
Four Kingdoms shall stand up out of he Nation, but not in his Power.

And in the latter time of their Kingdom when the Transgressors are come to the
full, 23.
a King of fierce Countenance, and Understanding dark Sentences, shall stand
up.

The first part is very plain of Alexander and his Followers. But the latter
Time of their Kingdom, when the Transgressors should come to the full, and this
little Horn was to stand up, who would be a King of Fierce Countenance, and
Understanding dark Sen^ences, plainly refers to the Ten Horns in the seventh
Chapter, who were Ten Kings that shall arise, Dan. VII 20.24.25.
and to the little Horn which came up, whose Look was more Stout then his
Fellows, and should think to change Times and Laws.

But there is still another help to Illustrate this whole Matter, in the Vision
of the third of Cyrus;

And a mighty King shall stand up, that shall Rule with great Dominion, XI. 3.
and do according to his Will.

And when he shall stand up, his Kingdom shall be Broken, 4.
and shall be Divided toward the Four Winds of Heaven, and not to his
Posterity, nor according to his Dominion which he Ruled, for his Kingdom shall
be plucked up, even for others besides those.

Here is a plain account of the Four Heads, or different Forms under which the
Grecian Empire should come,

First, Under one Mighty King that shall stand up; who is Alexander.

Secondly, XI. 4.
When his Kingdom shall be Broken, and shall be Divided toward the Four Winds
of Heaven.

Which was accomplished under his Four Followers in the Kingdoms of Macedonia,
lesser Asia, Syria and Egypt, for so many they were at first, though indeed two
of them fell much sooner than the other two; but, as I observed before, Daniel
touches only on the first ^trokes of each Remarkable Period.

Thirdly, When the Kingdom was plucked up, by the Romans, who one after another
conquered Macedonia, and lesser Asia, and Syria and Egypt, and made all the
Grecian Monarchy become Provinces to Rome.

Fourthly, When the others besides those came, which is, when Dioclesian, first
in Nicomedia, and then Constantine, in Bysantium, erected a new Greek Empire,
which for some time gave the Law to Old Rome, till afterward it was divided
again into the Eastern and Western Empires.

By this means that Riddle is Unfolded, how the same Little Horn which came up
at the latter end of the Fourth Beast, Dan. VII. 8.
whose Teeth are indeed said to be of Iron, 19.
which is the Metal of the Fourth Kingdom in the great Image, but his Nails
are said to be of Brass, which was the Metal of the Third Kingdom; How, I say,
the same Little Horn, which came out of the Fourth Beast, did also come out of
one of the Horns of the Third, Dan. VIII. 9.
which was the Maced^man Kingdom, for to that both N^^^media and ^^sontium
belonged. In the latter ^^me of then Kingdom; that is, at the Revival of that
Greek Empire, which had been su^k in the Roman for many Hundred Years.

And to Confirm this Interpretation, St. John in his Description of the Be^st
which rises ^p out of the Sea, Rev. XIII. 1.
which had Seven Heads and Ten (...), and on his Horr^ Ten Crowns, by which, I
shall show, he meant the New Western Empire, says, it was like to a Leopard, 2.
which was Daniel's Emblem of the Greek Empire; and if the Western Branch was
said to be like a Leopard, the Eastern Branch, to which it was perfectly like,
may well be thought to be there meant by that Leopard to which the other was
like, it being the Greek Empire Renewed again by Constantine.

This indeed was an entire Riddle, not possible to be explained, till the Times
of Dioclesion and Constantine, and seems to have contributed more than any
thing to Shut up the Vision, Dan. VIII. 26.
for it should be for many Days, before it was possible to unfold it without
knowing the certainty of suture I verts. And when I come to show that in this
VIII. Chapter the whole Period from Lom^^l's Time to the Fall of Sp^rit^^l
Babylon, is exactly set down, it will appear very reasonable that such seeming
Difficulties should be raised, as should prevent the easy connection of this
with the VII. Chapter, l^st the Mystery should be discovered before it was
proper: But this will be further considered under the Fourth Beast, to which I
now proceed.

After this, I saw in the Night Visions, Dan. VII. 7.
and behold, a Fourth Beast, Dreadful and Terrible, and Strong exceedingly, and
it had great Iron Teeth, it devoured and brake in Pieces, and stamped the
residue with the Feet of it, and it was diverse from all the Beasts that were
before it, and it had T^n ^orns.

I considered the Horns, 8.
and behold there came up among them another l^^^l^ ^^^n before whom there were
three of the s^s H^^rs plucked up by the Roots, are (...) his Horn were Eyes
like the Eyes of a Man, and a Mouth speaking great Things.

The same Description is again Resumed a little after in the following words,

Then I would know the truth of the Fourth Beast, Dan. VII 19.
which was diverse from all the others, exceeding Dreadful, whose Teeth were of
Iron, and his Nails of Brass, which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue with his Feet.

And of the Ten Horns that were in his Head, 20.
and of the other which came up, and before whom Three fell, even of that Horn
that had Eyes, and a Mouth that spoke very great Things, whose Look was more
stout than his Fellows.

I beheld, 21.
and the same Horn made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them. The
Interpretation of all this follows:

Thus he said, 23.
The Fourth Beast shall be the Fourth Kingdom upon Earth, which shall be diverse
from all Kingdoms, and shall devour the whole Earth, and shall tread it down
and break it in Pieces.

This is the First State of the Roman Empire, it was diverse from the Others,
because it had Seven Heads, or different forms of Government: Whereas the First
Beast or the (...) had but One Head or form of (...) ^^^ch.

The Second, had (...), the Mede and Persian: The Mede had (...) chief
Government, till the Death of Da^^^ the Mede: and then the Persian ^^^w Highest.

The Thud or G^^^^n had Four Heads, as I obs^^v^d before, under, 1st,
Alexander; 2dly, his Followers; 3dly, The Roman Proconsuls; 4thly, A New Greek
Emperor, sprung from the Romans.

And now this Fourth Beast had Seven of these Heads, which made it diverse from
all the Others.

This Distinction of Seven Heads is not expressly mentioned by Daniel, as the
Characters of the first Three Beasts are, who were either in being, in his
Time, or soon after; But this Fourth Beast was reserved to be fully explained
by St. John, who describes it thus,

-- And behold a great Red Tragon having Seven Heads and Ten Horns, Rev. XII. 3.
and Seven Crowns upon his Heads.

The Reason why the Roman Empire is here described by a Dragon, seems to be,
because Trajan, the first Emperor, of whom St. John Prophesies, and who
Reigned very soon after the Revelations were written, did after his Conquest of
the Dacians, take their Standerd, which was a Dragon and made it a Roman
Standard.

St. John here, and in other places, follows Daniel's manner of Description,
which represents in the Vision a Figure, as existing at onc^^ (...) Picture,
which in the Explanation appears (...) contain several parts, that are
Successive, in order of Time.

Thus the great Image appears all of one Piece, though the parts of it are
found by the Interpretation to have existed one after another.

So the Four great Beasts came out of the Sea, and seem to have been seen all
at once, though in the Explanation they are plainly Successive.

And thus it is of this great Red Dragon, whose Seven Heads are Successive, and
were indeed all in Being before the Ten (...), as St. John exprelly says, where
he comes to relate what he learned from the Angel,

-- Here is the Mind which has Wisdom: Rev. XVII. 9.
The Seven Heads are Seven Mountains.

And there are Seven ^^^g^, Five are fallen, 10.
and One is, and the Other ^s not yet come; and when he comes, he must
continue a short Space.

This is a plain Account both of the Scene of the Vision, which was Rome, built
on Seven Hills, and of the various Forms of Government, by which she was
Remarkable, and of which ^^citus describes the first Six in the first Words of
his Annals, to have been, 1st, Kings; 2dly, Consuls; 3dly, Decemvirs; 4thly,
Tribunes with Consular Power; 5thly, Dictators, as often as the Public Danger
required it; and 6thly, Emperors.

And these were all fallen in St. John's Time, Except the Sixth, which was of
Emperors at Rome, and the Seventh of Emperors at Constan^inople, Was not yet
come.

And under that Head the Empire was to be divided into two Parts, Rev. XII. 3.
the Dragon which preserved a Crown upon its Seventh Head, and a ^^^st that
should rise out of the Sea, XI^I. 1 2.3.
with a Seventh Head, on which no Crown is seen, but which was soon Wounded to
^^^^h, and so was only to Centur^e a short Space, after the Dragon had given
him his Power and his Sea^, and great Authority.

Now all this is p^rf^^tly Justified by History, for after that the Seat of the
Ro^^^m L^^p^e was removed to C^^^^an^^^^ple, where the name of Dragon r^^^^^d,
because it was the Continuation of the Old Roman Power, as that of L^^p^rd was
Re^^v'd, because it Ren^w'd the Gr^^^^n.

These Emperors Found^d and Supported a new Empire at Rome, which differed in
nothing so much from the Other, whence it was derived; as in its Duration; for
the Eastern Branch at Constan^^nople preserved its Power many hundred years,
but the W^stern, at Rome soon f^ll into the Hands of the Barbarous Nations,
whom we find in D^m^l next described:

"And the Ten Horns out of this Kingdom are " T^n Kings that shall arise. Dan.
VI. 24.


In the description of the Old Roman Empire, by The great Red Dragon, Rev. XII.
3.
there are these Ten Horns mentioned as the last Stage of that Power: but the
Crowns are represented on the Heads. In the d^scription of the Renewal of that
Empire in the West, XIII. ^.
the Beast that ris^s up out of the Sea, had S^ven Heads and T^n Horns, and Ten
Crowns upon his Horns. Which makes a manifest Distinction between the Condition
of the Old Roman Empire tran^ferr^d to Constan^^nople, with a Crown, which it
c^^^inued long to wear on the Seventh Head, and the Condition of this New
W^stern Roman ^mpire, whose Seventh Head was s^on, as it were, Wounded to
Death, and these Horns clapped on to stop and heal the Wound; so that they only
deserved the name of wearing Crowns. And indeed that Western Empire, from the
time it grew totally distinct from the Other, under Honorius, never enjoyed my
case or security, but from first to last, was always oppressed by the Ravages
and Depredations of the Ba^^erians, till, in fine, they divided it amongst
themselves, and then, and not till then, the Empire enjoyed Rest under its Ten
new Masters, Rev. XIII. 3.4.
to the Wonder of the World, who Worshipped the Dragon that gave Power to the
Beast, and Worshipped the Beast: That is, divided their Obedience between the
Empire of the East, and these New Kingdoms, which were set up in the West. For
Worshipping, as I have already sh^w'd, rightly expresses that Unreasonable
Idolatrous Respect which Mankind have in all Ages shown to Absolute Princes, by
treating them as Gods.

These Ten Horns are most particularly explained in the same place where the
Seven Heads are distinguished, in order of Time,

And the Ten Horns which thou fawest, XVII. 12.
are Ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom, as yet, but receive Power as
Kings One Hour with the Beast.

By this we learn, that they were not in being in St. John's T^me, that they
were not in being together, and were to form one Beast, which is just before
called the Eighth, who is of the Seven; that is to say, that the Seventh Form
of the Roman Government, should, upon its Division into the Western and Eastern
Empires, at last receive a Total Alteration in the W^st, which would be an
Eighth, in order, but would be one of the Seven first, revived again: XVII. 8.
Which was formerly, and is not, at the time St. John writes, and yet is (or
should (...)) when Men are supposed beholding it in the Vision: And this was
that of the Decemvirs, which was one of the Five first Forms of the Roman
Governments, and which was Renewed again in the Ten Kings, who came out of the
Bottomless Pit, (or Abyss, as it is in the Original,) that is, the Unknown
Barbarous Countries, whose Extremities were undiscovered, and which surrounded
the Extent of the Roman Empire, called the Sea. Of these Barbarous Nations some
came from about the Caspian Sea origin^lly, till by degrees they settled in
Germany and ^^^ace, and others from Sweden, Denmark and Moscovy; and when they
invaded the Roman Empire, they were but Ten, 1st, Visi-Goths, C^r ^ig. de
Occid. Imperio. Ed. B^^sil. 15^9. page 639
2dly, Vandals, 3dly, Francks, 4thly, Burgundians, 5thly, Hunns, 6thly, Alans,
7thly, Sueves, 8thly, Herules, 9thly, Ost^o-Goths, and 10thly, Lombards. That
these Ten Nation^ taking the Government of the Roman Empire into their Hands,
revived the form of the Decemvirs, may ^^th^ more properly said, since the
first Decemvirs were erected purposely to bring New Law^ from Greece, and
establish them in Rome. And, in like manner, these Ten Ba^^erors ^^^ens
introduced their own Laws into the Roman Empire.

Thus we find, that Seven Heads had fully expressed all the Variety that would
happen in the Roman State, even after this nighty Change, when the East
continu^d S^rong as Iron under One Head, Dan. II 42, 43.
and the W^st Broken into ^en Toes of Clay, which did not cleave to the Iron.

By which we may Obs^rve, how precisely this Vision of the ^o^r Beasts, does in
its end, as well as during all its Continuance, preserve a Likeness to the
several Periods alluded to in the Vision of the Great Image.

SECT. VI. Of the Li^^l^ Horn, and ^he other Characters of ^he same ^ew^.
PUt now we com^ to a Roma! able Power that was to gr^w up after, (or as the
Original will b^ar l^h^n^^) these Ten K^^ngs.

And Another shall ^se after them, Dan VII 24.
and He shall be diverse from the first, and He shall subdue three Kings.

This was Literally performed by the Bishops of Rome, who were the cause of the
Ruin, Car. Sigon. de. O^^id. I^ je^^o. page 381.
I^^st, Of the ^errles, whose King Odoacer, a^^er the Loss of a Battle against
Theoderick the Coth, then sent to Italy by Z^no the Emperor, to drive him out,
retired to Rome, but he found the Gates shat against him by the People, who had
at that Time no body but the Bishop of any considerable Authority among them;
and so ended the Kingdom of the ^errles.

Secondly, page 491.
Of the Ostio-Co^^s, against whom the Bishop of Rome solicited the Emperor
J^st^exian, to send his General Nerses, who Conquered them, with the Assistance
of the Lemberds, and ^^oe^rrs, King of that Nation, immediately after ^^st
man's Death, erected the Kingdom of the I^mbe^^s in ^^ly; page 529.
and thus f^ll that of the Os^^c-Go^hs.

Th^^^ly, Of the I om^erds, against whom the Bishops of Rome invited ^^p^^ and
^^^^lo^^rg^e, and they destroyed the Kingdom of the Lomba^^s; which is a well
known piece of History.

The same Little ^^n is again described in the next Chapter, Dan. VIII. 9
as ^axing c^ce^ding great; and in the Interpretation he is sad to Stand up in
the latter Time of their Kingdom, 23.
and when the Transgressors are come to the Full: Which Term of Transgressors
agrees well with St. John's description of that State of the Beast when it wore
the names of L^^sphe^ny upon its heads, Rev. XIII. 1.
as well as the Ten Crowns on its Ten Horns: XVII. 14
And when the Ten Horns shall make War with the Lamb.

The latter Time of their Kingdom, Dan. VIII 23.
is another Mark of the Time when the little Horn in the VIII Chapter begins:
Now we have already considered the latter Time of the Grecian Monarchy, and
have shown it to have been, in all probability, when Constantive renewed the
Greek Empire.

But we may strengthen that Observation, if we take notice, that this Little
Horn which is said to subdue Three Kings out of the Ten, VIII. 24.
is in this VIII Chapter described, C^sting down some of the Host of Heaven,
and of the Stars to the Ground, and stamping upon them.

And St. John tells us how many of these Stars were cast down, (out of Heaven:)

And there appeared another Wonder in Heaven, and behold, a great Red Dragon,
Rev. XII. 9.
having seven Heads and ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his Heads.

And his Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, 4.
and did cast them to the Earth. --

Here is a Wonder in Heaven, Representing the fourth Kingdom in this World;
which shows, that Heaven, in the Vision, means no more than Power and
Government, and Earth, the Subjects or Common People. And here are the third
part of the Stars cast down to the Earth; which by so early a Dream as Joseph's,
meant no more than so many Eminent Persons, as it is plain, was a common Figure
in his Time, by this Passage.

Joseph Dreamed another Dream and told it his Brethren, Genesis XXXVII 9.
and said, Behold, I have Dreamed a Dream more, and behold, the Sun and Moon,
and the eleven Stars made Obeisance to me.

And he told it to his Father, 10.
and to his Brethren, and his Father Rebuked him, and said unto him, What is
this Dream that thou have Dreamed? shall I, and thy Mother, and thy Brethren,
indeed, come to bow down our Selves to Thee to the Earth.

But it is well known by the Event, that they did Bow Themselves down to him,
and so the Dream proved a true Prophecy. And thus we see, that the Stars of
Heaven may mean the same with the Ten Horns.

But it remains to show, that this Tail in St. John, means the same with the
little Horn; and this Isaiah helps us to make out, without dif^^^^ty;

The Ancient and Honorable, he is the Head, isa. IX. 15.
and the Prophet that Teaches Lies he is the Tail.

And we know, that St. John calls him the false Prophet, Rev. XIX. 2^.
who wrought Miracles before the Beast.

And we find in another place, that Isaiah was no Stranger to the Figure of the
Dragon and the Beast that rises up out of the Sea. XIII. 1.


In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong Sword shall punish
Leviathan the piercing Serpent, Isaiah XXVIII. 1.
even Leviathan that Crooked Serpent, and he shall slay the Dragon that is in
the Sea.

But to return to the Description of the little Horn, and his subduing Three
Kings, which are in Daniel and St. John called Stars, Dan. VIII. 10. Rev. XII.
3.
and a third part of the Stars of Heaven, as indeed Three is the third of Ten,
as nearly as it can be divided.

It will be proper in this place to show the Reason of varying the Figure,
under which this little Horn is represented, and that will serve to Confirm the
Observa^^ns already made.

In the Vision of the four Monarchies, He comes in, in his Order, and as a
Power that had small Beginnings in the last Stage of the Fourth Beast, Dan VII
20.24
as a little Horn after or behind the rest of the Horns: A Bishop of Rome, who
was not very considerable at first, but that grew by Degrees to have Eyes like
a Man, and a Mouth speaking great Things, till his Look was more stout than his
Fellows.

In St. John's XII Chapter, w^ere the History of the old Heathen Empire, its
Persecution of the Christians, and its Destruction by Constantine are the
Subject, This little Horn is represented as the last thing that would arise out
of the Remains of this Roman Empire, and so ^s properly expressed by the Figure
of a Tail. Rev. XII. 4.


In the XIII Chapter, where the rise of the new Western Empire is described,
and the Wound it received by the Abolition of its Emperors, and the setting up
the Ten Kings in their Room, by which the Wound was Healed, XIII. 3.
that is, the Disorders of the Empire Abated, This little Horn is represented,
not in his first State of Bishop of Rome only, who was not very great while the
Emperors lasted, but when the Ten Horns had at last succeeded in their Room,
then this little Horn showed himself in his advanced State, as described by
Daniel, Dan. VII 8.
of a Mouth speaking great Things, and accordingly St John says of the Beast
that was Wounded and Healed, Rev. XIII. 3.


And there was given unto him a Mouth speaking great Things and Blasphemies. 5.


In the same sense that Aaron was given to Moses, instead of a Mouth, Exodus IV.
16.
where the Mouth is a different Person from him to whom it was given.

And in the same Chapter of the Revelations, that this Power may be more
particularly described, his original is traced merely as it relates to himself.

And I beheld another Beast rising up out of the Earth, and he had two Horns
like a Lamb, Rev. XIII. 11.
and he spoke like a Dragon.

This Power was to be distinguished by its being a Succession of Persons, taken
out of the Earth, which signifies, the Common People, as in fact, the Popes
have always been; They are not like other Princes, of Noble Families, but are
Elected out of a number of Cardinals, 1 Kings, vii 31.
who rise often to that Dignity from little Priests, 2 Chronicles. xi. 15.
taken from among the lowest of the People.

The Two Horns like a Lamb, Rev. xiii II.
express emphatically his Pretension to be the Representative, or, as he calls
himself, the Vicar of Jesus Christ, who was the Lamb Slam; and the Two Horns,
show whence the Figure is first derived, viz. from the Lamb of the Passover,
which was to be without Blemish, Exodus xii. 5. Levit. I. 10.
and a Male; and this was always the Rule of the Burnt Offerings, it was to be
a Male without Blemish; for, the Males were the Lords.

The speaking like a Dragon, Rev. xiii 11.
signifies, that notwithstanding his Pretenses to be the Vicar of Christ, he
really would take upon him to Command with the Power and Cruelty of a Heathen
Persecuting Roman Emperor, who is described by a ^ragon standing before the
Woman ready to be delivered, to devour her Child. Rev. xii^ 4.


And that Woman is Christ's Church.

The last Character given of the Sea of Rome, is not of the Person of the
Popes, or their Successors, but of the Church of Rome, xvii. 3.4.5.15.
under the Figure of a Woman, who is called Babylon, who sits on many
Waters, who are People and Nations, etc. and who Reigns over the Kings of the
Earth.

According to this Image it will follow, that the Succession of Popes will be
expressed by Bell, which was the Image of the old King Belus, worshipped in
Babylon; and of this Jeremiah Prophesies,

And I will Punish Bell in Babylon, Jor. II. 44.
and I will bring forth out of his Mouth that which he has swallowed up, and
the Nations shall not flow together any more unto him, yea, the Wall of Babylon
shall Fall.

And what Bell or Belus had been in the most ancient Time, Nebuchadnezzar was
afterward, and therefore is called the Head of Gold of the Terrible Image;
Dan. ii. 33.
and for that reason in this New Babylon the Head of that Church is naturally
expressed by Nebuchadnezzar, or the King of Babylon: And in this sense the same
Prophet Jeremiah says, just before,

Thus says the Lord the God of Israel, Jer II. 33.
the Daughter of Babylon is like a Threshing-Floor, it is time to thresh her,
yet a little while, and the time of her Harvest shall come.

Nebuchadnezzar, 34.
the King of Babylon, has Devoured me, he has Crushed me, he has made me an
empty Vessel, he has swallowed me up like a Dragon, he has silled his Belly
with my Delicates, he has cast me out.

It is very plain, how well this description agrees with the time when Christ
shall Math. iii 12.
thoroughly purge his Floor, and when the xiii. 30.40.
Time of the Harvest, and of Gathering the Tares to be Burnt in the Fire, is
come; and when Rev. xiv. 15.
The harvest of the Earth is Ripe; and this, Nebuchadnezzar who swallowed Jer.
LI. 34.
like a Dragon, agrees very well with the two Horned Beast, who Rev. xiii. 11.
spoke like a Dragon.

And it is very easy to see, that the Prophet Jeremiah did not here mean Old
Babylon, but the same New Babylon of St. John, since

In those Days, and at that Time, Jer. L^. 20.
says the Lord, the Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none, and the Sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will Pardon
them whom I will Reserve.

How can this be said with any Propriety of the old Jews, who after their
Return from their first Captivity in Old Babylon, Rejected the Messiah, and
were again destroyed and dispersed for their Sins? Nor is their second
Dispersion over to this Day; so that the destruction of Babylon, meant here by
Jeremiah, can be no other than the Destruction of the same Babylon, which St.
John Prophecies of, and which is yet to be expected.

I have now explained the first Characters of the little Horn, in the VII of
Daniel, that he should rise after the Ten Kings, Dan. VII 24.
and be diverse from the first Ten, and should subdue three Kings: And shown
what other Passages may serve to Illustrate and Confirm these first Characters.

SECT. VII. Of the First Period.
I Go on now to the other parts of his Description, which serve to six the Time
of his Beginning.

And he shall speak great Words against the Most High, Dan. VII. 25.
and shall wear out the Saints of the Most High, and think to change Times and
Laws, and they shall be given into his Hand, until a Time, Times and the
Dividing of Time.

The Continuation of the Description which I have not yet mentioned in the next
Chapter, where Gabriel in^^^prets, is to the same effect;

And his Power shall be mighty, but not by his own Power, VIII. 24.
and he shall destroy Wonderfully, and shall prosper and practice, and shall
destroy the Mighty and the Holy People.

And through his Policy also, 25.
he shall cause Crast to prosper in his Hand, and he shall magnify himself in
his Heart, and by Peace (or Prosperity) shall destroy many.

And to this agrees the short Expression in the XII Chapter, which I have made
my Principal Business to explain in this Essay,

-- It shall be for a Time, Dan. XII. 7.
Times and an Half, and when he shall have accomplished to seatter the Power of
the Holy People, all these things shall be finished.

St. John speaks in the same strain and there was given unto him, (that is, to
the Beast risen out of the Sea,,) Rev. XIII. 5.
a Mouth speaking great Things, and Blasphemy's, and Power was given unto him,
to continue Forty and Two Months.

And he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, 6.
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.

And it was given unto him to make War with the Saints, and to Overcome them, 7.
and Power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations.

And all that dwell upon the Earth shall 8.
Worship him, whose Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb Slain
from the Foundation of the World.

And afterward, where the same Power is represented, Rev. ^iii 11.
as coming out of the Lorth with two Horns like a Lamb, but speaking as a
Dragon. It is thus continued,

And he exercised all the Power of the first Beast before him, 12.
and ^^us^d the Farth, and them which dwell therein, to Worship the first
Beast, whose deadly Wound, was Healed.

And he does great Wonders, 15.
so that he makes Fire come down from Heaven, on the Earth, in the sight of
Men.

And deceives them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those Miracles, 14.
which he had Power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to them that dwell
on the Earth, That they should make an Image to the Beast which had the Wound
by a Sword, and did live.

And he had Power to give Life unto the Image of the Beast, 15.
that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that, as many as
would not Worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed.

And he causes all, both small and great, Rev. xiii 16.
Rich and Poor, Free and Bond, to receive a Mark in their Right Hand, or in
their Foreheads.

And that no Man might buy or s^ll, 17.
save he that had the Mark or Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name.

Here is Wisdom, 18.
let him that has Understanding, count the Number of the Beast, for it i^ the
Number of a Man, and his Number is Six Hundred Three Score and Six.

All these Passages compared with one another, give so full and plain an
Account of the Popes of Rome, from first to last, that a very moderate
Knowledge of History serves to satisfy us, that they are meant of them, and
cannot be applied to any other.

His Dan. vii 25.
Speaking great Words against the Most High, and Rev. XIII. 5.
Blasphemies, and Dan. vii 25.
Wearing out the Saints of the Most High, and, Dan. viii. 25.
through Policy causing Craft to prosper in his Hand, and permitting none to
Rev. XIII. 17.
buy or sell without the Mark, are a literal Description of the Impiety of the
Pope, in assuming divine Honor and Power to Himself, of his Persecuting all
true Christians in the most Cruel Manner, of the deep Policy of the Court of
Rome, and of their denying all the common benefits of Life to all who are not
of their Religion.

But we shall see yet more certainly that the Papacy is described, when we
consider the more particular Strokes of his Conduct, He exercises all the
Power of the first Beast before him, XIII. 12.
and causes the Earth, etc. to Worship the Beast that had the Wound by a
Sword, but did live.

The Power that the Popes and their Pri^sts have had over the Consciences of
the People, has been employed to inspire them with a Slavish Obedience to their
Princes, and by means of this the Pope can likewise serve himself in his turn,
by making Fire come down siom Heaven on the Earth, 13.
in the sight of Men; that is, by delivering over all that Offend him, to the
Secular Arm, for Heaven stands for Government, Fire for Persecution, and Earth
for the People, so he excrcises all the Power of the first ^^^st, by being the
Director of M^ns Conscien^^^ (...) h^^^^ the Temporal Princes to the Obedience
of the People, and the Temporal Princes are his Executioners, as often as he
Pleases to Persecute Heretics or Schismatics, as he shall call them.

The Image of the Beast that had the Wound, Rev. XIII. 14.
was the setting up a new Western Empire in Charlemagne, which by the Popes
Consecration was so respected, as to be universally Acknowledged, and to grow
so great as to Punish all who would not Worship him, that is, 15.
who disputed his Title or Power.

The Mark of the Beast, may allude to the Custom of signing themselves with the
Sign of the Cross, by which all Papists make themselves known.

And the Number of his Name, was the Number of the name of a Man, Latinus,
(lateinos in Greek, in which St. John writes) and according to the Greeks
manner of counting by their Letters, l -- 30 a -- 1 t -- 300 e -- 5 i -- 10 n
-- 50 o -- 70 s -- 200 666

this word makes just 666. which exactly agrees with History, for the Papacy was
set up in the La^n Church, and never could Master the Greek Church totally.

But among other Characters, the Division of the Period into Time, Times and a
Half, carries in it a strong Proof, that the whole is perfectly well adapted to
the Bishops of Rome, under these three States, 1st, their Rise, 2dly, their
Greatness, and 3dly, their Decline.

The Western Roman Empire, fell with Valentinian III. in the Year 455, upon
whose Death Genserick came and killed Maximus the Usurper, and sacked Rome.
This Valentinian III. had a little before, in 445 given Orders to Aetius his
General in France, in which he says,

That whereas the Bishop of Arles, Car Sig de Occid. Imperio page 306.
had presumed to ordain Bishops without the leave of the Pope of Rome. It is
provided by the Apostolic Authority, and by Ours, That neither He nor any
Other may be suffered to do the like for the future And at the same Time he
published an Edict in Conjunction with Theodosius the II. Emperor of the East,
by which it it was ordered, Novel. Valenti. post Cod Theodo. Tit. 24. de
Episc^. Ordin.
That it should not be lawful for the Bishops of Gaul, or any others, to
undertake any thing (against ancient Custom,) without the Authority of the
Venerable Pope of the Eternal Town. But that whatever the Authority of the
Apostolical See shall Ordain, shall be a Law to all other Bishops.

And Marcian the Emperor of the East, did, Car Sigon. p. 314.
in 450. write to the same Pope Leo I. in these terms, We write to your
Holiness, who holds the first place among the Bishops of the Divine Faith, that
by your Orders a Council may settle the Peace of the Church. And in another
Letter he proposes, That a Council may declare what is profitable for the
Christian Faith by their Act, as your Holiness shall constitute, according to
the Rules of the Church.

So that the Popes had then that Power acknowledged to belong to them, by the
Emperors both of the East and West, which they have exercised, more or less,
ever since; and therefore it seems more re^sonable to date the Rise of the
Papacy, (...) from the year 606. when (...) the (...) obtain (...) of Universal
b^^^^ from the Emper^r (...), since the Popes had been such, in effect, long
before. The B^^hop of Rome took his Rise therefore, as Head of the Church, when
he became the Principal Person in Rome, immediately on Valent^^ian's Death, and
Gens^^^ck's leaving Italy in 455. Then he that lets was taken out of the
way, and the Man of S^n, 2 These. II. 3, 7, 8.
or Wicked, revealed. The Western Empire was then Taken out of the Way; for the
Mock Emperors, who were changed by Ricimer, the Gothic General, at Pleasure,
for One and Twenty years after, had never the Power, but only the Name of
Emperors. But these Bishops of Rome were able, by the^ influence on Temporal
Princes, even during their Rise, to destroy one after another, the three
Kingdoms of the Herules, Goths and Lombards, and at last by making Charl^^agne
Emperor, they received from him their Temporal Sovereignty in Italy; but as he
still kept them under him, by reserving a Negative in Himself and his
Successors, at the Election of Popes, they did not come to their height till
815. when Lewis Le Debonnaire succeeded his Father Charlemagne in the Empire,
and being a weak Prince, confirmed and enlarged his Fathers Grants to the Sea
of Rome, and neglected to insist on his N^gative in the Election of a Pope,
after they had ventured to elect one without his leave: And then expired the
first Time or 360 Years of the Rise of the Papacy.

2dly, The Second Period, from 815 reached to 1535. in which Year the
Reformation was at its Height in ^ermany, was just fixed in England, by
abrogating the Popes Power by Act of Parliament, and first preached in France
and Switzerland; and this Period was just of 720 Years, or Two Times, which
included the whole Term of the Greatness of the Papacy.

3dly, Its Decline was from the Reformation till the Death of Lewis the XIV.
who was the last great Power that attempted to extirpate Heresy, as they
called the Reformation; And how much the Authority of the Sea of Rome, then
lost, appear plainly by the disrespectful Treatment of the Popes famous
Constitution, Unigenitus, after that King's Death in the Kingdom of France, so
that with him fell the Balance of Power, on the side of the Church of Rome;
for those Popish Princes, who in the last Wars have sided with the Protestants,
have really hurt the Interest of the Popish Cause, as much as any others,
Matthew. XII. 26.
according to our Saviors Expression, If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided
against himself, how shall then his Kingdom stand? And this last Period is of
Half a Time, or 180 Years, beginning at 1535. and ending in 1715. And if from
the Death of Lewis XIV. the Kingdom of France shall, as well as the Emperor,
and other Popish Powers, continue in the same Interest with the Protestant
Ones, in opposition to the Pretensions and Claims of the Papacy, as it has
hitherto done, It is certain, that the Sea of Rome has lost the Balance of
Power on its side, of which that Court seems very sensible, as appears by the
late Popes Protestation at Cambray, in 1723. where we find these Remarkable
Words,

Can Christian Princes flatter themselves with the hopes of concluding a
lasting Peace, when the Depriving of the Holy See and the Vicar of Jesus Christ
of their undeniable Rights, is made a Foundation of it?

And thus, I hope, I have made it Probable of the first great Period, to what
time it may belong.

That it shall be for a Time, Dan. XII 7.
Times and a Half, and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of
the Holy People, all these shall be finished.

SECT. VIII. Of the Time of the End.
HAving now fully Explained the 7th Verse of the XII Chapter of Daniel, which
determines the first Period, I go on to what introduces the recond.

And I heard, but I understood not; then said I, O My Lord, Dan. XII 8.
what shall be the End of these Things?

There was no probability that Daniel should Understand a Description that
belonged to the Romans, a Nation then not known in Asia, and to the last Scene
of their Power, which was not to begin, till almost a Thousand Years after the
Time of this Prophecy.

And in this Uncertainty, it was natural to enquire, if there was any thing
more to happen after what he had heard?

And he said, go thy way Daniel, for the Words are Closed up and Sealed, D^n.
XII 9.
till the Time of the End.

By this answer of the Angels, Daniel was Commanded to rest satisfied without
Enquiring more particularly about the meaning of what he had heard, because the
Accompl^shment, that alone, was able to explain it fully, would not be till
that Time should come which is called, the Time of the End, and that therefore
according to the Nature of Prophecy, as explained by St. Peter, 2 Pet I 20.
That it was not its own Interpreter, he was to be contented to let it remain
Closed up and Sealed till it should be explained by degrees, Dan. XII 9.
when the Seals should be Opened first in Heaven, Rev. VI 1, 3, 5, 7 9, ^2.
VIII. ^.
by the Lamb, in St. John's Vision, and then upon Earth, as the several parts
of St. John's Vision should come to pass, in order of time, one after another:
and it will be found, that in the last or Seventh Seal were contained the
Events that relate to this Time of the End: for then, and not till then, did
that Power commence, who was to scatter the Power of the Holy People for a
Time, Dan XII. 7, 11.
Times and a Half, and was to take away the da^^y Sacrifice, which may be made
appear by observing, that the Angel did, at the beginning of this Seventh Seal,
take the Censer and fill it with Fire of the Al^ar, and cast it into the Earth,
Rev. viii 5.
which I shall, in its proper place, prove to be a description of the same
thing with Scattering the Power of the Holy People, and Taking away the daily
Sacrifice. But I must first examine this Expression, Time of the End; Time is
not here in the Original expressed by the same word that is used for Time where
we find, Time, Times and a Half, Dan. XII 7. VII. 25.
or, Time, Times and a Dividing of Time; and in these last places the Original
Word signi^^ ^^a Fixed Time, or an Appointed Time, and is found, by what I have
already sh^wn, to be a Year, which is a certain, Fixed or Limited Time: But in
the first case, Time is expressed by a different Hebrew Word, which signifies
Time in General, or Duration, and therefore of the End is added to determine
what that Time was; and this is expressed by the same Word in the Original, and
on the same Subject, where, just before, in a warning of those things that are
to be Shut up and Sealed, Dan. XII 4.
even to the Time of the End, what is most Remarkable, is, that

-- There shall be a Time of Trouble, XII. 1.
such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same Time, and at
that Time thy People shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written
in the Book.

The same Time of Trouble is thus mentioned by Jeremiah,

Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it, Jer. X^^ (...) 7.
it is even the Time of Jacob's Trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

This Time of Trouble, so that none is like it, must be the same with what in
St. Matthew is called,

-- Great Tribulation, Matthew, x^iv. 21.
such as was not since the Beginning of the World to this Time, No, nor never
shall be.

And in St. Mark, -- Days of Affliction, such as was not from the beginning of
the Creation which God created, Mark XIII. 19.
unto this Time, neither shall be.

And in St. Luke, -- The Days of Vengeance, Luke XXI. 22.
that all things which are written may be fullfilled.

-- In those Days there shall be great Distress in the Land, 23.
and Wrath upon this People.

And they shall fall by the Edge of the Sword, 24.
and shall be led away Captives into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be
Trodden down of the Gentiles, until the Times of the Gentiles be fullfilled.

And if we would know what are th^se Times of the Gentiles, St. John informs
us, when he says,

-- The Court that is without the Temple is given unto the Gentiles, Rev. XI. 2.
and the holy City shall they Tread under foot forty and two Months.

Thus we find, that this Time of the End, and Time of Trouble, upon a due
Tracing of it, includes the whole Period of the Forty two Months, which means
the same Thing with the Time, Times and a Half, Dan. XII 7.
mentioned in the Angels Oath, in Daniel, and which may, on this Occasion, be
proved to agree exactly, as I before asserted, with the Oath in St. John, Rev.
X. 6.
That there should be Time no longer, which should be rendered, That there
should not be yet another Time; that is, in other words, That this should be
the Time of the End.

And what follows, gives the Reason of this way of speaking, and shows what was
this Time of the End. For when The Seventh Angel shall begin to Sound, 7.
the Mystery of God shall be Finished, as he has declared by his Servants the
Prophets.

And accordingly, when the Seventh Angel Sounded, XI. 15.
it is said, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord.

By which, compared with the whole Thread of this Chapter, We may perceive,
that the Mystery of God, which was then Expired, consisted in the Sufferings of
the Witnesses, who had then finished their Testimony, Rev. xi. 7.
of a Thousand two Hundred and Threescore Days, XI. 3.2.
Clothed in Sackcloth. Which was Contemporary with the Forty Two Months,
during which the Gentiles were to tread under Foot the Holy City.

And thus we may observe, that This Mystery of God, as it was Contemporary
with, so it was Opposite to that Mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. II. 7.
which was the Mystery written in the forehead of the Woman in the Wilderness,
Rev. XVII 6.
who was Drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and who was to be Nourished in
the Wilderness for a Time, XII. 14.
Times and a Half. Where it is again observable, that the Greek word used in
Time, Times and a Half, is not the same with the Greek word used where it is
said, There should be Time no longer, Rev. X.
as the same has been observed in the Hebrew. And by this we have a Specimen of
the exact and nice Care used to express these Prophetical Visions, so that
there may be no Confusion or Uncertainty to perplex a careful Enquirer into the
meaning of the Expressions; for though in the Translation it sounds Odly, that
the Time of the End, should be a Time, Times and a Half, yet if the Original
were du^ly rendered, it would be very easily apprehended, that the Time of the
End may include Three certain Measures of Time and a Half, which upon
Examination appear to be Prophetical Years, and include all those One Thousand
Two Hundred and Sixty Prophetical Days, Rev. xi 3.
during which the Witnesses are to Prophes^, Clothed in Sackcloth; and at the
end of which Time of Trouble, Den. XII ^.
these Witnesses, who are written in the Book, are to be delivered.

SECT. IX. Of the Wise and the Wicked.
ANd now having observed what is the Time of the End, next follows a General
Character of Mankind in that time.

Many shall be Purified and made White, Dan. XII. 10.
and Tried, but the Wicked shall do Wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall
Understand, but the W^^e shall Understand.

These that are P^rif^d and made White and T^^ed, are the same that are called
in the first of Dam^'s V^sions, The Sam^s of the Most High, Dan. vii. 25. VI^I.
24. XI 32.
and in the next, The Holy People, and in this last of Daniel's Visions, The
People who do know th^^r God, who shall be Strong and do Exploits.

And they that Understand among the People shall instruct many, 33.
yet they shall fall by the Sword and by Flame, by Captivity and by Spoil, many
days.

Now when they shall fall, 34.
they shall be helped with a little help, but many shall cleave to them with
Flatteries.

And some of them of Understanding shall fall to Try them, 35.
and to Purge and to make them White, even to the Time of the End. --

H^re is a kind of Paraphrase upon that short general Character, given in the
11 h Verse of the XII. Chapter, which is justifi^d by History. And we may
easily be satisfied from thence, that during the Time of the End, Dan. xi. 32.
when such as did Wickedly against the Covenant, were corrupt by Flatteries,
those that did know their God were Strong, and did Exploits; for there has been
always, during the Times of Popery, Men of Integrity and Courage, who have
publicly taught and wrote against the Corruptions of that Church, and Numbers
of People who have followed them, as particularly the Vandois and Albigeois,
but they have been Overpowered with Persecutions and Croisades, till at last,
before they were quite extinguished, the Reformation came in to their
Assistance; but this did not make a sincere Change in great Numbers who
professed it, Psalm Lxxviii 36.37.
but they Flattered the Reformed with their Mouths, while their Hearts were far
from them, and still continued to like the Policy, and Grandeur, and Power of
the Church of Rome, and by this means there is wanting a second Purging, even
among those who call themselves Reformed, Matthew xxiv, 14
which will not be completed till the End comes.

With this Description of Daniel's agrees what we find in the Prophet Isaiah,
when he describes "the Covering cast over all People, Isa. xxv. 7.
and the "Vail that is spread over all Nations.

But God will destroy it, and, 8.
wipe away Tears from all Faces, and the Rebuke of his People shall he take
away from all the Earth.

There would then be some by whom it should be said in that Day, 9.
We have waited for him, and he will save us. And again,

-- In the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, Isa. xxvi. 8.
have we waited for thee, the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the
Remembrance of thee.

With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, yea, 9.
with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early, for when thy Judgments are in
the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness.

Let Favor be showed to the Wicked, 10.
yet will he not learn Righteousness, in the Land of Uprightness will he deal
Unjustly, and will not behold the Majesty of the Lord.

Lord, when thine Hand is lifted up, 11.
they will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed for their Envy at the
People, yea, the Fire of thine Enemies shall devour them.

Here are the Wise and the Wicked, and those that cleave to the Wise with
Ilatteries, Dan. XI. 34.
and their final Destruction, when the Time of the End comes, when the Ten
Horns themselves shall hate the Whore and eat her Flesh, Rev. xvii. 16.
and all that are her open or secret Friends, which Isaiah calls the Fire of
thine Enemies devouring the Wicked in the Land of Uprightness.

But the most exa^t Commentary upon Daniel, as on all other occasions, so on
this 10th Verse of the XII Chapter of that Prophet, is in St. John's
Revelations, where he sees

Another Angel ascending from the East, having the Seal of the Living God, Rev.
vii. 2.
and he cried with a loud Voice to the four Angels, to whom it was given to
hurt the Earth, and the Sea,

Saying, 3.
Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Trees, till we have Sealed the
Servants of our God in their Foreheads.

And I heard the Number of them which were Sealed, Rev. vii. 4.
and there were Sealed an Hundred and Forty and Four Thousand of all the Tribes
of the Children of Israel. And here it might be proved, if the compass of this
Treatise would permit it, that these One Hundred and Forty and Four Thousand
are the same with the Two Witnesses in Sackcloth. Rev. xi. 3.


So far there were but few that Understood, who are likewise mentioned in
Ezekiel, when the Lord said unto the Man with the writers Ink-horn, Ezekiel. IX. 4.
Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a
Mark upon the Foreheads of the Men that Sigh, and that Cry for all the
Abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

And to the others he said, in mine hearing, 5.
Go ye after him through the City, and smite, let not your Eyes spare, neither
have ye Pity.

Slay utterly Old and Young, 6.
both Maids and little Children and Women, but come not near any man upon whom
is the mark, and begin at my Sanctary; then they began at the Ancient M^n which
were before the House.

And he said unto them, Ezekiel. IX. 7.
Defile the House, and till the Courts with the Slain; Go ye forth, and they
went forth and Slew in the City. Where Ezckiel calls that Jerusalem and the
City which St. John calls the Earth and the Sea, etc. viz. the Christian Roman
Empire.

But afterward St. John gives an account of a great Addition to this small
Number, by which means there were in all many that Understood, and were W^se.

After this, Rev. vii 9.
I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude, which no Man could Number of all Nations,
and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, Clothed with White Robes, and Palms in their Hands.

There follows a Doxology, or Thanksgiving from them, and then the Angel
informs St John,

These are they which came out of great Tribulation, 14.
and have Washed their Robes and made them White in the Blood of the Lamb.

Therefore are they before the Throne of God, Rev. VII 15.
and serve him Day and Night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne
shall dwell among them.

They shall Hunger no more, 16.
neither Thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any Heat.

For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, 17.
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of Water, and God
shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes.

Here is a plain Description of the Reformation, when great Multitudes washed
their Robes, by Purifying their Worship, and came out of great Tribulation, by
escaping the further Persecution of the Church of Rome. Thus were the One
Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty days of Tribulation shortened for the Elects
sake, Matthew* xxiv. 22. Amos viii. 11.12.13. Isa. xlix. 8.9 10.19.25.
who after that, did not Hunger or Thirst after the Words of the Lord, nor were
the Heat or Sun to smite them after the Prisoners were to inherit the desolate
Heritages, or the Wilderness, and the Captives of the Mighty, and the Prey of
the Terrible delivered.

But it will be still more evident, that the Reformation is here intended, if
we observe, That all Kindreds, Rev. xiii 7.
and Tongues, and Nations, were at first under him that opened his Mouth in
Blasphemy against God, 6.
and that likewise, All that dwelt upon the Earth W^rshipped him; as likewise,
that the Woman, 8.
called, Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of
the Earth, xvii. 1 5.15.18.
did sit on many Waters; which Waters were People, and Nations, and Multitudes,
and Tongues: And that this Woman was that great City that Re^gneth ever the
Kings of the Ear^h.

So that once, all the Common People, as well as the Great Kings of the Earth,
that Ruled the People Cruelly and Tyrannically, were altogether Subject to the
Church of Rome and her Popes. But where the Slaughter of the Witnesses is
described, XI
(who were those who still continued in Tribulation, bearing Testimony to the
Truth, under Persecution in Popish Countries) There we find two Parties
described, who are very differently disposed to them.

They of the People, 9
and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, shall see their Dead Bodies three Days
and a half, and shall not suffer their Dead Bodies to be put into Graves.

And they who dwell upon the Earth, Rev. XI. 10.
shall Rejoice over them, and make Merry, and shall send Gifts one to another,
because these two Prophets Tormented them that dwelt on the Earth.

And after three Days and an half, the Spirit of Life from God entered into
them, 11
and they stood upon their Feet, and great Fear fell on them which saw them. By
this last Verse, compared with Ezekiel, Ezekiel. xx^vii. 1 to 11.
it was plainly a friendly Office to keep these Dead Bodies out of Graves, in
order to their Resurrection: And here it is plain, that they of the People and
Kindreds, etc. that is, some of the People, XI. 9. VII. 9.
etc. are the same with the great Multitude of all Nations and Kindreds, etc.
and that the Remainder of the People and Kindreds, etc. were yet under those
who dwell on the Earth: XI. 10.
But to put this out of all doubt, we need only observe, That when the Angel
flies with the Everlasting Gospel to XIV. 6.
Preach to them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, then immediately after, another Angel followed, Rev. XIV. 8.
saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. By which it is plain, they that adwell
on the Earth are supposed to have the remainder of the People and Kindreds,
etc. under them, and when they shall likewise embrace the P^formation, that
then all the People and Kindreds, etc. shall be no longer under the Mo^th
speaking Blesphemies, or the great Whore, and then his Power, and her Empire,
Z^ch. II. IV. V. J^de 8, to 23. Rev. xii. 7.
will fall. Thus by comparing St. John with Daniel, (without taking in
Zathariah and St. Jude, who might be shown to have the same in view, but would
swell this Treatise too much.) I hope I have fully Explained, how we are to
apprehend the Accompishment of this Prophecy,

Many shall be Purified, and made White, and Tried, Dan. XII 10.
but the Wicked shall do Wickedly, and none of the Wicked shall Understand, but
the Wise shall Understand.

SECT. X. Of the Second Period.
I Now go on to the express Words which six the second Period.

And from the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, Dan. XII 11.
and the Abomination that makes D^^^late, s^t up, there shall be a Thousand
Two Hundred and Ninety Days.

This Verse Determines the whole Period of the Daily's being taken away, (for
Sacrifice is no where in the Original) and of the Abominations Continuing, from
the Time that the Daily was Removed, and the Abomination set up.

There is another Passage in Daniel, which relates to this Daily, in his Vision
of the third of Belshazzar, Dan. VIII. 9.10.
where he is describing the little Horn which waxed exceeding great, even to
the Host of Heaven, and cast down some of the Host, and of the Stars to the
Ground, and stamped upon them.

He goes on to give the most distinguishing Character of this Little Horn.

Yea, Dan. viii 11.
he magnified himself, even to the Prince of the Host, and by him the Daily was
taken away, and the place of his Sanctuary was cast down.

And an Host was given him against the Daily, 12.
by Reason of Transgression, and it cast down the Truth to the Ground, and it
practiced and prospered.

Then I heard one Saint speaking, 13.
and another Saint said unto that certain Saint which spoke, -- How long shall
be the Vision concerning the Daily, and the Transgression of Desolation, to
give both the Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden under Foot?

And he said unto me, 14.
Unto Two Thousand and Three Hundred ^ays, then shall the Sanctuary be
cleans^d.

In clearing up these two Passages of the last Chapter of Daniel, and the VIII.
which both mention this taking away the Daily, and setting up the
Transgression, or Abomination of Desolation.

First, It is observable, (as I have already shown) That the two Persons
speaking, as well as the Subject of their Discourse, are the same in both
Visions, viz. Michael, Dan. X. 5.
or the Man Clothed in Linen with a ^^lden Girdle, and Gabriel, or the Man
sent to make Daniel understand the Vision. VIII. 16.
Wherefore I shall not now Repeat what has been so fully treated of in the
beginning of this Treat^se; and this is a strong Argument that these two
Passages are on the very same Subject.

Secondly, As the Man Clothed in Linen with a Golden G^^^le, has been shown
to be Our Savior, Heb. IX. 10.
who is the High-Pri^st in his own Tabernacle: It will be very Natural and
Consistent, to suppose the Daily no other than what belonged to his Tabernacle,
and not that which was peculiar to the old Tabernacle and Temple of the Jews.

Thirdly, Exodus xxi. 38.
This Daily cannot be the Lamb offered Day by Day continually, because that was
not offered in the Sanctuary, but on the Brazen Altar, XXVIII. 1, 2, 3, 4.
which was without the Sanctuary.

It can therefore only mean the Daily in the Sanctuary, on the Altar to burn
Incense, xxx. 1, 3.
overlaid with pure Gold, Which Moses was commanded,

-- Thou shall put it before the Vail, Exodus XXX. 6.
that is by the Ark of the Testimony, before the Mercy Seat that is over the
Testimony, where I will meet with thee.

And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incense every Morning; 7.
when he dresseth the Lamps, he shall burn Incense upon it.

And when Aaron lights the Lamps at Even, 8.
he shall burn Incense upon it, a perpetual Incense before the Lord throughout
your Generations.

Ye shall offer no strange Incense thereon^ nor burnt Sacrifice, 9.
nor Meat Offe^^^ neither shall ye pour Drink Offering thereon.

This was then as much a Daily, as th^^^ (...) the Daily Oblation or Sacrifice
on the Brazen Altar; which was to be a continual Burnt Offering thro'-out their
Generations, XXIX. 42.
and the former agrees with Daniel's Expression, whereas the latter does not.

This likewise agrees with Ezekiel's Expression, when the Man with the writers
Ink-horn, wa^ to set a Mark on them that Sighed, his order is, Ezekiel. IX. 6.
Come not near any Man upon whom is the Mark, and begin at my Sanctuary.

In the next Chapter Ezekiel gives a Description that is like to Dan. VII 9, 10.
Daniel's and Rev. IV. 1. VII. 15.
St. John's Descriptions of Gods Throne, and his Temple in Heaven, but no ways
suit with Moses's Tabernacie or Solomon's Temple. The X Chapter begins thus,

Then I looked, and behold in the Firmament, Ezekiel. X. 1.
that was above the Head of the Cherubims, there appeared over them, as it
were, a Saphire-Stone, as the Appearance of the like^^ss of a Throne.

And he (that is, 2.
the Ancient of Days) spoke unto the Man Clothed in Linen, and said, Go in
between the Wheels, even under the Cherub, and fill thine hand with Coals of
Fire from between the Cherubims, and scatter them over the City --

Now this agrees exactly with St. John's Description, Rev. VII 3, 4
after the Servants of God were Sealed in their Foreheads, during which
sealing the four Angels were not to hurt the Earth and the Sea; Rev. vii. 3.
and which four Angels are the Four first of the Seven which he saw standing
before God, VIII. 2.
and to them were given seven Trumpets.

And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, 3.
having a Golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he
should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints, upon the Golden Altar, which
was before the Throne.

And the Smoke of the Incense, 4.
which came with the Prayers of the Saints, ascended up before G^d out of the
Angels Hand.

And the Angel took the Censer and filled it with Fire of the Altar, 5.
and cast it into the Earth, and there were Voices, and Thundrings, and
Lightnings, and an Earthquake.

Here is a plain taking away the ^^ily Offering of the Incense from the Golden
Altar, and scattering the F^^e on the Ear^h, that is, among the Common People,
which Ez^kiel calls the City; and so the Pu^ity of the visible Worship of the
Christian Religion being taken away, There was no true Ch^^sti^n Church left,
but among the Servants of God, Sealed in the Forehead, Rev. vii. 3.
who were dispersed here and there over the World.

Thus I have, I think, sufficiently shown what was the meaning in Daniel, Dan.
ii. 11,
of taking away the Daily.

I shall now proceed to Explain, what is the Abomination of Desolation, or
Transgression of Desolation, meant in the XII. and VIII. Chapters of Daniel;
and here we have the Assistance of the Interpretation given in the XI. Chapter,
in which mention is made of Polluting the Sanctuary of Strength, XI. 31.
where the Golden Altar of Incense stood, and not the Brazen Altar for burnt
Offerings, as I have already observed; and where it is said, They shall take
away the daily, 31.
and place the Abomination that makes Desolate; And such as do Wickedly shall
He Corrupt by Flatteries. 32.


Who this He is, is described in a few Verses after,

And the King shall do according to his Will, and He shall exalt himself, 36.
and Magnify himself above every God, and shall speak mavelous Things
against the God of Gods, and shall Prosp^^^, till the Indignation be
Accomplished, for That that is determined shall be done.

This part of his Character shows He is the same Power that should be in the
Last End of the Indignation; Dan VIII. 19.
for at the Time Appointed the End should be. And just before this Character,
in the XI Chapter, we find, it is at the Time of the End; XI. 35.
for it is yet for a Time appointed: His Corrupting by Flatteries, 32.
answers also to His causing Craft to prosper in his Hand, VIII. 25.
through his Policy, and His Magnifying Himself above every God, XI. 36.
and speaking Mavelous Things against the God of Gods, is perfectly
conformable to His Magnifying Himself in His Heart, and standing up against the
Prince of Princes. VIII. 25.
And thus it is out of all question, that the Person taking away the Daily, and
setting up the Abomination, in the XI. Chapter is the same with the Person who
is said to do it in the VIII. And then it will follow, it must be still the
same mentioned in the XII. which is but a Continuation of the Vision of the XI.
But the greatest Confirmation of the meaning of this Character given in the XI.
Chapter, in this 36th Verse, is given by St. Paul;

Now we beseech you, Brethren, 2 Thessalonians. II. 1.
by the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto
him,

That ye be not soon shaken in Mind, 2.
or be Troubled, neither by Spirit not by Word, nor by Letter, as from us, as
that the Day of Christ is at Hand.

Let no Man deceive you by any means, 3.
for that day shall not come, except there come a Falling away first, and that
Man of Sin be Revealed, the Son of Perdition,

Who Opposes and Exalts Himself above all that is called God, or that is
Worshipped, 4.
so that He, as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing Himself that He is
God.

This is so much in the same Terms with Daniel, that it is not to be doubted,
Dan. XI. 36.
they mean the same, 2 These. II 1, 3.
especially since our Savior after having given the like cautions with St.
Paul.

And ye shall hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars, Matthew. XXIV 6.
see that ye be not Troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the
End is not yet, adds the particular sign which agrees with the Falling away,
mentioned by St. Paul, and expresses it thus,

When ye therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, 15.
stand in the Holy Place, or Mark XIII. 14.
where t^ought not, as St. Mark expresses it. By which Words of our Savic^^ we
may see, that then would come that ^riv^^ation of which I have given a
particular Explanation already.

St. Mark gives the same account, ^ers. 7.
almost in the same Words, and St. Luke is yet stronger in his Caution against
any that should say, Luke xxi. 8, 9
The Time draws near, for the End was not by and by.

There is nothing gives any difficulty in these Gospels, Matthew. xxiv. 16.
but these expressions, Then let them which be in Judea, flee to the Mountains,
in St. Matthew and St. Mark, Mark XIII. 14
and, When ye shall see Jerusalem Compassed with Armies, then know that the
^^^solation thereof is nigh, Luke x^^ ^0, ^4.
in St. Luke.

But when we consider the meaning of Jerusalem being tradden down by the
Gentiles; as explained by St. John's Revelations, Rev. xi. 2.
that the Gen^^les should tread down the Holy City Forty and Two Months, and
that St. John gives the Christians no other Name in his Revelations but Jews,
Rev. II. 9.
and calls the Church and Christian World Jerusalem, III 9, 12,
and that the One Hundred and Forty Four Thousand, VII. 4.
are out of all the Tribes of Israel; and when we consider that the Question in
St. Matthew is mixed, when shall these things be, M^^^th. xxiv.
and what shall be the sign of thy coming, Mark xiii 4.
and of the End of the World? and that St. Mark and St. Like certainly meant
the same Things, by the Question, Luk^ xxi 7.
What should be the Sign when these Things should be fulfilled, or come to
pass? Which may and ought, in order to Reconci^e these two Evangelists with St.
Matthew, to be taken in this Sense, When these Things come to pass, what Sign
will they be to us who expect a Sign of thy Coming, and of the End of the
World? I say, if we consider, that these Questions are thus mixed, we may
certainly c^^clude, that our Savior's Answer is also mixed, and that he speaks
of the Destruction of the T^^ple and literal J^r^^^alem, as a Sign of the Fates
of His own Church, which were not so very near, but of which other Events, that
were very near, would be a Sign and a Parable for their Instruction. And in
fact, as for the Sins of the Jews, Jerusalem was Compassed with Armies, and
laid Waste, so for the Sins of the Christians, after the beginning of Sorrows,
Matthew. XXIV. ^.
that is, the Heathen Persecutions ceased, and they were ^asters of the World,
under Constantine, a Christian Emperor, and his Followers, God in his
Providence ordered it so, that the Barbarons Nations compassed them with
Armies, and laid the Western Roman Empire Waste, 2 Thessalonians. II. 6.
and so took away Him that withholds, of whom St. Paul also says, He that
lets will Let, 7.
till He be taken out of the way: And then shall that Wicked be Revealed.

And thus we see, that when the Western Empire fell, 3, 4, 8.
which was in the Year 455. that the Period of this Man of Sin was to Commence.
Then many were Offended, Matthew. xxiv. 10, 11, 12.
and Betrayed one another, and false Prophets arose, and the Love of many wa^ed
Cold, and Iniquity abounded, which St. Paul said, only Works till the Man of
Sin should be Revealed. 2 These. II 7.
And the Sign of this Time was to b^, Matthew. xxiv. 15.
When they should see the Abomination of ^esolation, spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, Mark XIII. 14.
stand in the Holy Place. And thus it was this Men of Sin that should set up
Idolatry in the Temple of God, by making himself be Worshipped, 2 These. II. 4.
where God only ought to be Adored, which is setting up an Abomination.

Why it is called of Desolation, or of the Desert or W^lderness, (for the
Original Word imports that) is fully Explained by St. John, when he gives an
account of the Angels Discourse, who said to him,

-- Come hither, Rev xvii 1.
I will show unto thee the Ju^g^^^ of the great Whore that sits upon many
Waters.

With whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, 2.
and the Inhabiters of the Earth have been made Drunk with the Win^ of her
Fornication.

So he carried me away in the Spirit into the Wilderness, 3.
and I saw a Woman sit upon a S^a^l^t Col^u^^d Beast full of Names of ^^^phemy,
having Se^^n Heads and Ten Horns.

And the Woman was arrayed in Frr^^^ and Senlet C^l^^r, Re^ xvii. 2,
and decked with Gold and Tr^^^s ^^^w, and T^arls, having a Golden C^p in her
Hand, full of Abominations, and ^^^ness of her ^^^cation.

And upon her Forehead was a name written, 3,
Mystery Babylon the great the Mo^her of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth.

And I saw the Woman Drunken with the Blood of the Saints, Rev. XIV. 6.
and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her, I Wondered with
great Admiration.

H^re is then that Abomination of the Wilderness or Desolation spoken of by
Daniel; Matthew x^^i^ 15
and by this we may see, M^^^ xiii. 4.
how strange and inconsistent it is to apply D^^iels Prophecy of the VIII.
Chapter, on this Subject, to Antiochus Epiphanes upon no other Authority than
that of the first Book of Maccabees, in Contradiction to the Words of our
Savior, who speaks of it as a future Event, and Contrary to all the concurring
Descriptions by which it plainly did not belong to the Interruption of Burn^
Offerings on the Brazen Al^ar, which expired with the Jewish Temple among the
Jews, and with Christ's Death, who offered Himself Once for All, in the
Spiritual Sense among the Christians. But it belonged to a Spiritual Service,
on the Golden Altar with the Prayers of the Saints, where Christ is High Prist,
and which Sanctuary is his Church, which the Pa^ests have Polluted, by setting
up a Man to be Worshipped, and to be a Vicar of God, with Power to Dispense
even with Gods Laws.

But the rest of Daniel's Description in the XI. Chapter is too material to be
omitted in Confirmation of all this.

Neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers, Dan. XI. 37,
nor the desire of Women, (that is Marriage) nor regard any God, for he shall
Magnify himself above All.

But in his Estate shall he honor the God of Forces, 38.
(That is, the Dii Tutelares of the Romans, who are exactly Revived in the
Images of Saints and Angels, set up in Houses) and a God, whom his Fathers knew
not, shall he honor with Gold and Silver, and with Precious Stones and
Pleasant Things.

Thus shall he do in the most strong Holds, Dan XI. 39.
with a strange God, whom he shall acknowledge, and increase with Glory; and he
shall cause them to Rule over many, and shall divide the Land for Gain.

It is very Obvious how well this agrees with the Description of the XIII. and
XVII. of the Revelations, already cited, in what goes before.

I will only add a few other places where St. Paul and St. Peter allude plainly
to the same Thing, and which indeed need no Commentary. St. Paul says to the
Th^ssalonians,

The Mystery of Iniquity does already work, 2 Thessalonians. II. 7.
only he who now Lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way;

And Then shall that Wicked be Revealed, 8.
whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his Coming;

Even Him whose Coming is after the working of Satan, with all Power, and
Signs, 2 Thessalonians. II. 9.
and Lying Wonders,

And with all Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness in them that Perish, 10.
because they receive not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved.

And for this cause God shall send them strong Delnsion, that they should
believe a Lie. 11.


And again, St. Paul warns Timothy,

Now the Spirit speaks expressly, 1 Timothy IV. 1.
that in the Latter Times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to
Seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, (or Demons)

"Speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, 2.
having their "Conscience scared with a hot Iron,

Forbidding to Marry, 3.
and Commanding To abstain from Meats which God has created to be received
with Thanksgiving of them which believe and know the Truth.

These, he says again, 2 Timothy III. 1.
are to be In the Last Days, when Perillors Times shall come, Men shall be
Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, etc. And at last, 2 Timothy iii 5.
Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; from such turn away;

For of this sort are they which creep into Houses, 6.
and lead away Captive silly Women, laden with sins, led away with diverse
Lusts;

Ever Learning, 7.
and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth.

And then he adds, 9.
But they shall proceed no further, for their Folly shall be made manifest unto
all Men.

Of the same St. Peter says, 2 Pet. II. 1.
But there were False Prophets also among the People, even as there shall be
false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in Damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift Destruction.

And many shall follow their Pernicious Ways, 2.
by means of whom the Way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

And through Covetousness shall they with feigned Words make Merchandise of you,
3.
whose Judgment now of a long time ling^reth not, and their Damnation
slumbereth not.

And afterward, 2 Pet II. 14.
Having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, Beguiling
Unstable Souls; an heart they have exercised with Covetous Practices, Cursed
Children.

And he closes thus,

For when they speak great Swelling Words of Vanity, 18.
they allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, those that
were clean escaped from them who live in Error.

While they promise them Liberty, 19.
they themselves are the Servants of Corruption; for of whom a Man is Overcome,
of the same is he brought in Bondage:

For if after they have Escaped the Pollutions of the World, 20.
through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
Entangled therein and Overcome, the latter End is worse with them than the
beginning.

For it had been better for them Not to have known the Way of Righteousness, 21.
than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered
unto them.

There is little Occasion to show how well all these Passages of Scripture
agree with one another, and with Daniel's and St. John's Descriptions of Popery.

It remains now to Determine What is meant by this Period in the XII. Chapter
of Daniel, more particularly, Dan. xii. 11.
From the Time that the Daily shall be taken away, and the Abomination that
makes Desolate set up, there shall be One Thousand Two Hundred and Ninety Days.

It has been shown, That He that Withholds was Taken out of the way, when
the Western Empire ended with Valentinian the III. in 4.55. from whence
counting 1290 years, it will reach to 1745.

Now let us Examine the Period in the VIII. Chapter, in answer to the Question,
VIII. 13.
How long shall be the Vision concerning the Daily, and the Transgression of
Desolation, to give both the Sanctuary and Host to be trodden under Foot?

And he said unto me, ^4.
Unto Two Thousand and Three Hundred ( Evening Mornings, for so is the Original
rendered) Days, Then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed.

Moses speaks in the same Style, Genesis I. 5, 8, 13.19.23.31.
putting the Evening first, when he says, an Evening and a Morning were a Day;
but Daniel's employing that Expression here, and no where else, served to make
this Calculation still the more obscure, or Shut up till the many Days were
near their End, Dan. viii 26.
to which this Vision of the Evening and the Morning belonged.

Now reckoning from the third of Belshazzar when Daniel had this Vision, the
whole Period of Two Thousand and Three Hundred Prophetical Days, which were
Years, we shall find they began, by the common Account, 553 years before
Christ. But if with Petavius, in order to make up the Seventy Years of the
Babylonish Captivity, we begin Nebuchadnezzar's Reign two years sooner than the
common Account, in his Fathers Life time, and yet allow Nebuchadnezzar but
forty three years Reign, according to Ptolomy's Canon, and Berosus, Then these
Two Thousand three hundred years will begin just 555. before Christ, and
consequently will end in 1745.

By which we see the complete Agreement of those two different Accounts, which
is the strongest Proof that they are both Right

And since I have had occasion to mention the Babylonish Captivity of 70 Years,
2 Kings X^IV X^V.
I must observe that the beginning of it was not a Total Captivity, but for the
first 18 Years Jerusalem st^ll Subsisted with her own Government, though many
were lead away Captives from her. And this resembles the Rise of the Papacy,
and the beginning of the Captivity in Spiritual Babylon, which was far from
Total or Severe. In Zedekiah's Time the Old Captivity became Total; And this
resembles the Greatness of the Papacy, and the Severity of the Mystical
Captivity. And as before that Old Captivity ended, Jehoiakin was taken out of
Prison and treated as a King, this perhaps may allude to the deliverance of
some of the People and Kindreds, etc. at the Reformation, out of Persecution in
Spiritual Babylon, long before its fall.

Before I close what I have to say on this Second Period, which seems to me to
carry the strongest Evidence for fixing the Time of the ^^^inning of all the
Three, I must not omit the Opinion St. Jerome (...) That Beginning, when he saw
in the fifth Century, the Barbarous Nations invading the Roman Empire, whom he
reckons up to the Number of Ten, and when he saw Gaul and Spain already
Conquered, and Rome it self the Scene of War, Struggling, Hie^on. Open. 1 Tom.
page 10^. Paris 1609.
not for Glory, but for Safety, and not even Struggling, but forced to Buy her
Life with her Gold and other Treasures. Upon this Occasion he thus breaks out,
We see him that lets, ready to be taken out of the Way, 2 These. II. 6.
and don't we plainly see, that Antichrist is Coming? St. Jerome understood the
VVestern Empire to be him that Lets, and as he Writes about Thirty Years
before its Ruin in Valentinian the III. he sees it already so far gone, as to
have no hope of its Escaping. And for this Reason he immediately adds, Mark
XIII. 17.
VVo to them that are with Child, and is them that give Suck in those Days.

By which it is plain, that St. Jerome applies these Threatenings to the
Destruction of the Roman Empire, as I have done in the foregoing Parts of this
Discourse. And all these Arguments he uses in an Epistle to Ageruchia, to
dissuade her from a second Marriage in such miserabse Times.

And thus have I endeavored to explain the Second Period, contained in these
Words of Daniel,

And from the time that the Daily shall be taken away, Dan. XII 11.
and the Abomination that makes Desolate, set up, there shall be a Thousand
Two Hundred and Ninety Days.

SECT. XI. Of the Third Period.
I Will now proceed to explain the Third and last Period of One Thousand Three
Hundred and Thirty Five Days, and then show that these three distinct Periods
are not only distinguished in this XII. Chapter of Daniel, but likewise in the
VII. and very particularly in the History, as it is contained in the
Revelations of St. John.

Daniel ends his Prophecy with this comfortable Warning from the Lord,

Blessed is he that waits and comes to The Thousand Three Hundred and Thirty
Five Days; Dan. xii. 12.


But go thou thy Way till the end be, 13.
for thou shall rest, and stand in thy Lot at the End of the Days.

^^^e is a Blessed Time Prophesied of at the very End. We have already
observed, that Time of the End to be the One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty
Years, but then when that Time is out, the End takes first Thirty Years to set
up the Daily again, and take away the Abomination that makes ^esolate, and now
Forty Five Years more, before all is quite finished. It is natural that the End
should thus consist of several Years, since most of the great Transactions of
the World ha^^ done the same.

The J^wish Captivity ended in the first of Cyrus, Ezra. I. 1.
but they Labored under such Dfficulties that they could not Rebuild the
Temple till the VI year of Darins, Exra VI. 15. Nehem. II. 1. V. 14. VI. 15.
XII. 27. XIII. 6.
nor was the Wall of their City finished, (which alone secured them from the
Insults of their Neighbors) till the XX of Artaxerxes, at the soonest, or as
seems most probable, till the XXXII Year of that Kings Reign.

The Overturning the Heathen Roman Empire by Constantine, is the Period whence
we reckon its End, and yet it had a Revival, in Julian, several years after,
which lasted till, on Julian's Death, it finally Perished.

The Power of the Popes in England was taken away by Henry the VIII. and thence
we reckon its Fall, though it had a dangerous Revival in Queen Mary's Reign, but
was quite Extirpated upon her Death.

And in Germany, when the Reformation first began, and the Smalkaldick League
was at its height, we reckon the Papal Power received its Decisive Stroke among
those Princes and Cities who embraced the Reformation; though afterward Charles
the V. had Imprisoned some, Deprived others, and well nigh Extinguished the
Party, till Affairs took a new Turn, by the Policy of Manrice Elector of
Saxony; and then the Reformation was firmly Established by the Treaty of Passan.

Just so We are to consider the Fate of the Church of Rome, that it has
received its Stunning Blow, when it lost that Most Christian King, as they
might well call Lewis the XIV. whose chief Ambition was to Extirpate Heresy,
in which Attempt he ventured his Kingdom, at the Persuasion of the Jesuits, who
flattered him with a better Crown in Heaven, for his Service done to the Church
on Earth.

We are yet to expect the Fall of the Court of Rome, by its being totally
Deserted and Neglected by the Princes who still depend on it. And when that is
over, the Orders of Monks and Friars, and particularly the Jesuits, are very
likely to take several years more before they are wholly stripped and rooted out
of the Kingdoms and Countries, where they now enjoy so large Possessions, and
have so much Sway with the Ignorant People, and then every thing that is to be
done, during the End, will be prepared for the Period when, Dan xii. 12.
Blessed is he that waits and comes to the Thousand Three Hundred and Thirty
Five Days: which agrees perfectly with St. John's Declaration,

Blessed and Holy is he that has Part in the first Resurrection, Rev xx. 6.
on such the second Death has no Power, but they shall be Priests of God and
of Christ, and shall Reign with him a Thousand Years.

As the next Verse of Daniel, does with the rest of St. John's Description of
the same Reign of a Thousand Years.

Daniel ends thus, Dan. ^ii. 13.
But go thou thy way till the End be, for thou shall rest; and stand in thy ^ot
at the End of the Days.

And St. John says, Rev. xx. 4.
And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto them,
and I saw the Souls of them that were Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and
for the Word of God, and which had not Worshipped the Beast, neither his Image,
neither had received his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in their Hands; and
they Lived and Reigned with Christ a Thousand Years.

But the rest of the Dead Lived not again, Rev. xx. 5.
until the Thousand Years were finished, this is the first Resurrection.

This is the Lot that Daniel is promised to stand in, at the End of the Days.

And this is agreeable to St. Paul's Description, to the Thessalonians.

But I would not have you to be Ignorant, 1 These. IV. 1^.
Brethren, concerning them which are a Sleep, that ye Sorrow not, even as
others which have no Hope (that is, no Revealed Religion, which intitles them
to the Promise of a Resurrection;) He goes on,

For if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, 14.
even so them also which Sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive, 15.
and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep;

For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. IV. 16.
with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and
the Dead in Christ shall rise first.

This Trump of God is the same with The Voice of the Seventh Angel, Rev. x. 7.
which, when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God should be finished, as
he has declared to his Servants the Prophets.

And when the Seventh Angel Sounded, Rev. XI. 15.
there were great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdons of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever
and ever.

And the Four and Twenty Elders which sat before God on their Seats, 16.
fell upon their Faces and Worshipped God.

Saying, We give thee Thanks, O Lord God Almighty, 17.
which art, and wast, and art to come, because Thou have taken to Thee Thy
great Power, and have Reigned.

And the Nations were Angry, and Thy Wrath is come, 18.
and the Time of the Dead, that they should be Judged, and that Thou should
give Reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that
fear Thy Name, small and great, and should Destroy them which Destroy the
Earth.

Here is an abstract of many of Gods past Judgments, and a View of what was yet
to come, and there the Prophets are mentioned as the first that are to be
Rewarded, Rev. xx. 4.
and then the Saints, and last of all, the Small and Great, 12.
who do not stand before God till the Thousand Years are expired; 7.
and then all that have Destroyed the Earth, first the Beast and False
Prophets, 10.
then Satan, and last Death and Hell will be destroyed, 14.
as St. Paul expresses it to the same effect, when he says.

"For as in Adam all dye, 1 Cor. XV. 22.
even so in Christ "shall all be made alive.

"But every Man in his own Order, 23.
Christ "the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.

Then comes the End, 24.
when he shall have delivered up the Kighdom to God, even the Father, when he
shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power.

"For he must Reign till he has put all "Enemies under his Feet. 1. Cor. XXV.
25


The last Enemy that shall be Destroyed, 26.
Death.

Thus we see in the order of Events, that the Prophets are part of those that
are to be Rewarded first, and are Christ's at his Coming; and surely Daniel
among them, at the end of the 1335 Days, which if they begin with the Year 455
will end in the Year 1790.

SECT. XII. A Review of the Three Periods.
AND now that I have endearoured to explain the Three Per^^^s of 1260.1290. and
1335. Days, I will only Observe, That in those Places where they might be
expected Principally to be mentioned, they are sufficiently distinguished.

The First Period is described in the XII. Dan xii. 7.
Chapter of Daniel, by Scattering the Holy People for a Time, Times and a Half,
in the VII. VII. 25.
of Daniel in the Vision of the Four Beasts, by thinking to Change Times and
Laws, which shall be given into his Hand, for a Time, Rev. xi. 2. XIII. 5.
Times and Dividing of Time; and by St. John, by Treading down the Holy City
Forty Two Months, and by the Mouth speaking Blasphemies, having Power given him
to con^^^nue Torty Two Mouths. Dan. xii. 11.


The Second Period is described to last from the taking away the Daily
Sacrifice, and setting up the Abomination that makes Desolate One Thousand Two
Hundred and Ninety Days, VII. 26.
in the XII. of Daniel, and in the VII. that Period is describ^d by The
Judgment sitting to take away his Dominion. Rev. xiv. 7.8.


Which is exactly agreeable to St. John's Denunciation, That the Hour of Gods
Judgment is come. Just before the Angel says, XVI. 18.19.
B^^^^n is fallen, is fallen, which Babylon was only said to have Come in
Remembrance before God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness
of his Wrath, at the Time of the Earthquake. And that Earthquake, in another
place, follows the Witnesses standing on their feet, Rev. XI. 3, 7, 13.
and great Fear falling on them which saw them, after they had finished their
Testimony, which was to be performed in Sackcloth, during the One Thousand two
hundred and sixty Years. From all which it appears, that the 1260 Years were
finished some Time before Babylon's fall.

And again, when Babylon is described as Fallen, in another Chapter, it is said,

Alas! alas! that great City, xviii. 10.
Babylon, that mighty City! for in one H^^r is thy Judgment come. Which suits
exactly Daniel's d^scription, in the VII. Chapter and 26th Verse, and is the
Woman in the Wild^^^ss with a Cup fall of Abominations; XVII. 10.
which answers to the Abomination that makes desolate, in the XII. Chapter of
Daniel, at the 11th Verse.

The Third and Last Period is described in the XII. Chapter of Daniel, Dan.
xii. 12.
by Blessed is he that waits and comes to the One Thousand three Hundred and
Thirty Five Days. In the VII Chapter, VII. 26.
by Consuming and Destroying unto the End.

And the Kingdom and Dominion, 27.
and the Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, being given to the
People of the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

And in St. John, this final Destroying of the Little Horn, and setting up the
Kingdom of the Saints, is thus described at the close of the Vision of the
Trumpets, after the account of Babylons fall, Rev. xiv. 8.11.
and the Smoke of her Torments ascending up for ever and ever.

And I looked, and behold, a White Cloud, 14.
and upon the Cloud sat one like unto the Son of Man, having on his Head a
Golden Crown, and in his Hand a sharp Sickle,

And another Angel came out of the Temple, 15.
crying with a loud Voice to him that sat on the Cl^^d, Th^^st in thy Sickle,
and Reap, for the Time is come for thee to Reap, for the Harvest of the Earth
is Ripe.

And he that sat on he Cloud, Rev. xiv. 16.
thrust in his Sickle on the Earth, and the Earth was Reaped.

And another Angel came out of the Temple, which is in Heaven, 17.
he also having a sharp Sickle.

And another Angel came out from the Altar, which had Power over Fire, 18.
and cried with a loud Cry to him that had the sharp Sickle, saying, Thrust in
thy sharp Sickle, and gather the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth, for her
Grapes are fully Ripe.

And the Angel thrust in his Sickle into the Earth, 19.
and gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it into the great Wine Press of
the Wrath of God.

And the Wine Press was trodden without the City, 20.
and Blood came out of the Winepress even unto the Horse Bridles, by the space
of a Thousand and Six Hundred Furlongs.

Here is the Coming of Christ to his Harvest, with his Crown of Gold, to set up
his Reign, which was fixed by the complete Destruction of the Antichristian
Power.

The like Description is at the End of the Vision of the Seven Vials, which are
exactly parallel both as to their Matter, and their Time, to that of the
Trumpets, both in their Introduction, their Continuance and their Close.

After that, in this Vision of the Vials, the Angel had cried mightily, Babylon
is fallen, Rev. x^iii. 2. XIX. 3.
upon which Destruction her Smoke rose up for ever and ever, it is soon after
said by St. John,

And I saw Heaven opened, 11.
and behold a White Horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and
True, and in Righteousness he does Judge and make War.

His Eyes were as a Flame of Fire, 12.
and on his Head were many Crowns, and he had a Name written that no Man knew
but he himself.

And he was Clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, 13.
and his Name is called the Word of God.

And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him upon White Horses, Rev. xix.
14.
Clothed in Fin^, Linen, White and Clean.

And out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword, 15.
that with it he should Smite the Nations, a^^^ he shall Rule them with a Rod
of Iron, and he treads the Wine Press of the Fierceness and Wrath of Almighty
God.

And he has on his Vesture, and on his Thing a Name written, 16.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud Voice, 17,
saying to all the Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, Come and gather your
selves together unto the Supper of the great God.

That ye may eat the Flesh of Kings and the Flesh of Captains, 18.
and the Flesh of Mighty Men, and the Flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on
them, and the Flesh of all Men, both Free and Bond, both Small and Great.

And I saw the Beast and the Kings of the Earth, 19.
and their Armies gathered together to make War against Him that sat on the
Horse, and against his Army.

And the Beast was taken, Rev. xix. 20.
and with him the false Prophet that wrought Miracles before him, with which he
Deceived them that had received the Mark of the Beast, and them that Worshipped
his Image; these both were cast alive into a I ache of Fire Burning with
Brimstone.

And the Remnant were Slain with the Sword of him that sat upon the Horse, 21.
which Sword proceeded out of his Mouth, and all the Fowls were filled with
their Flesh.

Where it ends as the Description in the XIV. Chap. and just after he sees the
Millenium begin,

And I saw a great Angel come down from Heaven, Rev. xx. 1.
having the Key of the Bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his Hand.

And he laid hold on the Dragon, 2.
that Old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a Thousand
Years.

And cast him into the Bottomless Pit, 3.
and shut him up, and set a Seal upon him, that he should deceive the Nations
no more, till the Thousand Years should be fullfilled, and after that he must
be loosed a little Season.

And I saw Thrones, Rev xx. 4.
and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto them, etc.

Here St. John brings it to the Thousand Years, of which he says, Blessed and
Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection. 6.
Which I observed before, Dan. xii. 12.
agreed with Daniel's, Blessed is he that waits and comes to the One
Thousand Three Hundred Thirty Five Days, in the XII. and to the Kingdom of the
Saints, VII. 26.27.
in the VII. Chapter.

And thus I have gone through the Three Periods, and given my Reasons Why the
First may be reckoned to have expired in the Year 1715. The Second to be
expected to expire in 1745, and the Last in 1790.

And that this may not seem Presumptuous, though in General it is not safe to
Guess at what is yet to come, We may remember that our Savior allows and
commands us, in St. Luke, When these things begin to come to pass, Luke XXI. 28.
then look up, and lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. If
therefore I have made it Probable, that the First Period is come to pass, Luke
xxi. 31. Matthew. xxiv. 33. Mark XIII. 29.
we may be justly entitled to Hope that the Rest which end in The Kingdom of
God, are nigh at Hand, even at the Doors.

FINIS.

