Historical Memoirs OF THE BATTLE AT Piggwacket.

Lovewell Lamented. OR, A SERMON Occasioned by the Fall Of the Brave Capt. John
Lovewell And Several of his Valiant COMPANY, In the late Heroic Action at
Piggwacket.

Pronounced at Bradford, May 16 1725

By Thomas Symmes, V.D.M.

Isa. 3.25. Thy Men shall fall by the Sword, and thy Mighty in the War.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green Junr. for S. Gerrish, near the
Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1725.

AN Historical PREFACE, OR Memoirs of the BATTLE, at Piggwacket.
WHEN Joshua with his chosen Soldiers, had Discomfited Amalek, and his People,
with the Edge of the Sword; (while Moses with the Rod of GOD in his up-lifted
hands, supported by Aaron (...) Hur, made Intercession to the GOD of Arm^es, on
the Top of the Hill) the Lord said to Moses, Write THIS for a Memorial in a
Book, and rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua, Exodus XVII.14. For this would be
an unspeakable Encouragement to that Renowned General, in his Wars with the
Aborigines of Canaan.

NOW from this Story we learn, not only, That if Israel would prevail against
their Enemies, they should all, but their Magistrates and Ministers especially,
lift up and keep up, the hand of Prayer: But also, That the Remarkable
Preservation and Success of Soldiers in Fighting the Lords Battles, are very
proper to be Commemorated, for the Honor of GOD, and Encouragement of his
Servants, in future Expeditions, and Military Actions.

IN Consideration hereof, I Have the more easily complied with the Request of
some of the Publishers of the Ensuing Sermon* that it might be accompanied with
a Narrative of the Memorable Occasion of it.

AND though I at first proposed only to Reprint the Relation of this Action,
given us in the Public News Papers; yet having been favored with a more
particular account from the Valorous Capt. Wyman, and some others of good
Credit, that were in the Engagement; I hope it will not be unacceptable to any,
and am sure it will be very grateful to some; to have the Story Published with
some Enlargments. And particularly to make a Public Record of the Names of
those Courageous Soldiers, who have so nobly played the man for their Country;
several of whom have been grievously Wounded, and others have Died in the Field
of Battle, or of the Wounds they there Received: All of whose Names I am
persuaded the greatest part of the Country will allow, deserve to be
Transmitted unenvi'd to Posterity, with very bright Encomiums.

'TWAS then, about the 16 th of April, 1725, that the Brave LOVEWELL began his
March from Dunstable for Piggwacket, with Forty-Six Men under his Command.

WHEN they would Traveled a little way, Toby, an Indian falling Lame, was obliged
to return, with great Reluctance.

WHEN they came as far as Contoocook, one Wm. Cummins of Dunstable was so
disabl'd by a Wound he would Received from the Enemy some time before, that the
Capt. dismissed him, with a Kinsman of his to accompany him.

THEN they Traveled as far as Ossipy, and there one Benjamin Kidder of
Nutfield falling Sick; the Capt. made a Halt, and tarried while they built a
small Fortification, for a place of Refuge to repair too, if there should be
Occasion. Here he left his Doctor, a Serjent and Seven other Men, to take care
of Kidder, and of a Considerable Quantity of Provision, here left to lighten
the Men, and facilitate their March; and for a Recruit upon their Return.

WITH his Company now reduced to Thirty-Four Men with himself, the Capt.
Traveled to Pigwacket, which is about Forty Miles from said Fort.

THEIR Names that made up this Company (excepting his that started from them in
the beginning of the Battle, and ran back to the Fort, which I Would be excused
from mentioning) were as follow.

Capt. John Lovewell, of Dunstable. Lieut. Josiah Farewell, of Dunstable. Lieut.
Jonathan Robbins, of Dunstable. Ensign John Harwood, of Dunstable. Serjent Noah
Johnson, of Dunstable. Robert Usher, of Dunstable. Samuel Whiting* of
Dunstable. Ensign Seth Wyman, of Woborn. Corpo. Thomas Richardson, of Woborn.
Timothy Richardson, of Woborn. Ichabod Johnson, of Woborn. Josiah Johnson, of
Woborn. Eleazar Davis, of Concord. Josiah Davis, of Concord. Josiah Jones, of
Concord. David Melvin, of Concord. Eleazar Melvin, of Concord. Jacob Farrah, of
Concord. Joseph Farrah, of Concord. Mr. Jonathan Fry, Chaplin, of Andover.
Serjent Jacob Fullam, of Weston, Corporal Edward Lingfield, of Nutfield,
Jonathan Kittridge, of Billerica. Solomon Kies, of Billerica. John Iefts, of
Groton. Daniel Woods, of Groton. Thomas Woods, of Groton. John Chamberlain, of
Groton. Elias Barron, of Groton. John Gilson, of Groton. Joseph Gilson, of
Groton. Ebenezer Air, of Haverhill. Abiel Astin of Haverhill.

FROM the Thursday before the Battle, the Company were apprehensive they were
Discovered and Dogged by the Enemy: And on Friday Night, the Watch heard the
Indians about the Camp and Alarmed the Company, but it being very Dark, they
could make no further Discovery.

SATURDAY the Eighth of May, while they were at Prayers, very Early in the
Morning, they heard a Gun; and sometime after spied an Indian on a Point, that
ran into Saco Pond.

THEY now concluded that the design of the Gu^, and of the Indian's Discovering
himself, was to draw them that way: And expecting without fail to be Attacked;
It was now proposed, whether it were Prudent to venture an Engagement with the
Enemy, (who they perceived were now sufficiently Alarmed*) or, endeavor a
speedy Retreat. The Men Generally and Boldly Answered, We came out to meet the
Enemy; we have all along Prayed GOD we might find 'em; and we had rather trust
Providence with our Lives, yea Die for our Country, than try to Return without
seeing them, if we may, and be called Cowards for our Pains.

THE Captain readily complied to lead them on, though not without Manifesting
some Apprehensions; -- And (supposing the Enemy were a Head of 'em, when as it
proved, they were in the Rear) Ordered the Men to lay down their Packs, and
March with greatest Caution, and in utmost readiness.

WHEN they would Marched about a Mile and Half, or two Miles, Ensign Wyman spied an
Indian coming toward them, whereupon he gave a Sign, and they all squat, and
let him come on: presently several Guns were Fired at him; upon which the
Indian Fired upon Captain Lovewell with Bever-Shot and Wounded him Mortally (as
is supposed) though he made little Complaint, and was still able to Travel, and
at the same time Wounded Mr. Samuel Whiting: Immediately Wyman Fired at the
Indian and Killed him; and Mr. Fry and another Scalp'd him.

THEY then Marched back toward their Packs, (which the Enemy in the mean while
had seized) and about Ten a Clock, when they came pretty near where they would laid
'em, on the North East and of Saco Pond, in a plain Place, where there were few
Trees and scarce any Brush; The Indians rose up in Front and Rear, in two
Parties, and ran toward the English Three or Four Deep, with their Guns
Presented: And the English also Presented in a Moment and ran to meet them; and
when they came within a few Yards, they Fired on both sides, and the Indians
fell amain, but the English (most, if not all) 'scap'd the first Shot, and
drove the Indians several Rods, both sides Firing three or four Rounds. But the
Indians being more than double in Number to our Men, and having soon Killed
Captain Lovewell, Mr. Fullam, (only Son of Major Fullam of Weston,) Ensign
Harwood, John Iefts, Jonathan Kittridge, Daniel Woods, Ichabod Johnson, Thomas
Woods and Josiah Davis; and wounded Lieutenant Farewell, Lieutenant Robbins and
Robert Usher, in the place where the Fight began, and striving to Surround the
rest; The Word was given, to Retreat to the Pond, which was done with a great
deal of good Conduct, and proved a vast service to the English (in Covering
their Rear,) though the Indians got the Ground where our Dead lay.

THE Fight continued very Furious and Obstinate, till toward Night. The
Indians Roaring and Yelling and Howling like Wolves, Barking like Dogs, and
making all Sorts of Hideous Noises: The English Frequently Shouting and
Huzza'ing, as they did after the first Round. At one time, Captain Wyman is
Confident, they were got to Powawing, by their striking on the Ground, and
other odd Motions, but at length Wyman crept up toward 'em and Firing among
'em, shot the Chief Powaw and brake up their Meeting.

SOME of the Indians holding up Ropes, asked the English if they would take
Quarter, but were Answered Briskly, they would have none but at the Muzzle of their
Guns.

ABOUT the middle of the Afternoon, the Ingenious Mr. Jonathan ^rie, only Son
of Captain James Fry of Andover, a Young Gentleman of a Liberal Education* and
who was Chaplain to the Company, and greatly Beloved by them, for his Excellent
Performances and good Behavior, and who fought with Undaunted Courage till
that time of Day, was Mortally Wounded. But when he could Fight no longer, He
Prayed Audibly several times, for the Preservation and Success of the Residue
of the Company.

'TWAS after Sun set when the Enemy drew off, and left our Men the Field* And
its supposed not above Twenty of the Enemy went off well. About Midnight the
English got together, and found Jacob Farrah, just expiring by the Pond, and
Lieutenant Robbins and Usher unable to travel. Lieutenant Robbins desired
they would Charge his Gun and leave it with him, (which they did) for says he, The
Indians will come in the Morning to Scalp me, and I Will kill one more of 'em if
I can. Eleven more that were Wounded, who were Lieut. Farewell, Mr. Fry,
Serjent Johnson, Timothy Richardson, Josiah Johnson, Samuel Whiting, Elias
Barron, John Chamberlain, John Gilson, Eleazar Davis, and Josiah Jones, Marched
off the Ground, with the Nine that received no considerable Wound, who were
Ensign Wyman, Edward Lingfield, Thomas Richardson, Two Melvins, Ebenezar Air,
Abiel Astin, Joseph Farrah, and Joseph Gilson, who did not perceive they were
waylaid, or pursued by the Enemy, though they knew our Men had no Provision, and
must needs be very faint. Four of the Wounded Men, viz. Farewell, Fry, Davis
and Jones, after they would Traveled about a Mile and Half, found themselves
unable to go any further, and with their free Consent, the rest, hoping for a
Recruit at the Fort, and to come back with Fresh Hands to relieve them, kept on
their March. But one Morning as they were passing a thick Wood, they Divided
into Three Companies for fear of making a Track, by which the Enemy might
follow them. One of the Companies came upon Three Indians, who pursued 'em
sometime; And Elias Barron one of that Party strayed from the rest, and got
over Ossipy River, by the side of which, his Gun Case was found, and he has
never been heard (...) since.

ELEVEN in another Party recovered the Fort, and to their great surprise, found
it Deserted. For in the beginning of the Battle, the man that I Promised not to
Name, ran directly to the Fort, and gave the Men Posted there, such an account
of what had happened, that they all made the best of their way Home. There came
in also to the Fort, One Solomon Kies, who having fought till he would received
three Wounds, and lost so much Blood he could not stand, He crawled to Ensign
Wyman in the heat of the Battle, and told him He was a Dead Man; But (says he)
if it be possible, I Will get out of the way of the Indians, that they may not get
my Scalp. This Kies Providentially found a Canoe in the Pond, and rolled
himself into it, and was driven by the Wind some Miles toward the Fort; when
being Wonderfully Strengthened, he got to the Fort, as soon as the Eleven
aforesaid: and they all came in to Dunstable, May 13th. at Night. O ^ at Men
would Praise the Lord for His Goodness, and for His Wonderful Works toward the
Children of Men.

May 15th. came in at Dunstable four more of our Soldiers, whereof Ensign Wyman
was one; who says, He Would no sort of Food from Saturday Morning till Wednesday
following, and yet scarce felt at all Hunger bitten. They then caught two
Mouse-Squirrels, which they roasted whole, and found them a sweet Morsel.
Afterward they Killed some Partridges and other Game, and were Comfortably
Supplied, till they got home.

Eleazar Davis came in at Berwick, and reports, (as I Am Informed) that He and
the other Three left with him, when they would waited some Days for the Return of
the Men from the Fort, and at length despaired of their coming, though their
Wounds Stank and were Corrupt, and they were ready to Die with Famine; yet they
all Traveled several Miles together, till Mr. Fry desired Davis and Farewell
not to hinder themselves any longer for his sake, for that he found himself
Dying, and so lay down, telling them He should never rise more: Charging Davis,
if it should Please GOD to bring him home, to go to his Father, and tell him,
that he expected in a few Hours to be in Eternity; and that He was not afraid
to Die. Whereupon they left him; and this Hopeful Gentleman Mr. Fry, who had
the Journal of the March in his Pocket, has not been heard of since.

Lieutenant Farewell, who has been very much and no doubt Deservedly Applauded,
was also left by Davis at a few Miles distance from the Fort and not heard of
since. But Davis getting to the Fort and finding Provision there, tarried and
Refreshed himself and recovered strength to Travel to the place mentioned.
Josiah Jones another of the Four, came in at Saco.

Since the Action, Col Tyng with a Company, have been on the spot, and found
and Buried Twelve of our Men. They also found where the Indians had Buried
Three of their Men, and when they were dug up, One of them was known to be the
Bold Paugus* who has been such a Scourge to Dunstable; but if he be gone to his
own place, He Will cease from Troubling.

HIS Honor, Our Excellent Lieutenant Governor has been Pleased to give Ensign
Seth Wyman, a Captains Commission, since his Return, as a Reward of His Valor.
And it is much to be Desired, that He, and all that are Returned from
Piggwacket, to their own Houses, will consider and show what Great Things GOD
has done for them. And that they and all our Brave Soldiers, will still take
for their Motto, when going forth to War, the Inscription made by Moses on his
Altar of Gratitude, after the Defeat of Amelek, JEHOVAH-NISSI, The Lord is my
Banner.

BUT thus I Have related the Story of the Action at Piggwacket, according to the
best Information I could obtain; and hope there are no Material, I Am sure,
there are no Willing or Careless Mistakes in it.

AND I Have only to add,

THAT whoever Considers the Distance our People were at from any English
Settlement, in a Howling Wilderness, and very far in the Enemies Country, who
were at Home, and more than double the Number of our Men; Their Fighting from
Morning to Night in a Long, Hot Day, without any Refreshment; The Number Killed
and Wounded, amongst whom were some, that were Persons of Distinction on both
sides; will doubtless grant that this Action Merits a Room in the History of
our New-English Wars, whenever a Continuance of it shall be Published If any
judge, I Have observed some Circumstances in this Action too Minute, I Have only to
say, if some such Persons or their Relations had been in the Action, it is
possible they would not have been of this Opinion. However, those who I am
firstly Obliged to Gratify, wont easily come into their Sentiments in this
matter. And I must beg of the others to forgive me this Wrong, and that they would
only consider, the Different Taste of Readers, and consequently the extreme
Difficulty, if not Impossibility of pleasing every Body, in a Performance of
this Nature. And yet none would be more willing to do it, than the Unworthy
Author, who is a Hearty Lover of His Country, and of all Good Men of every
Denomination.

T. SYMMES.

An ATTESTATION.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, having had the Preceding Narrative
carefully Read to us (though we cannot each of us, indeed, Attest to every
particular Article and Circumstance in it,) yet we can and do Aver that the
Substance of it is True; and are well Satisfied in the Truth of the whole.

SETH WYMAN.
EBENEZER AIR.
ABIEL ASTEN.

The Names of the Men Killed at the Fight at Piggwacket, and of the Wounded
Lost by the way Returning Homewards.
I. Killed and left on the Spot. These 12 found and Buried by Col. Tyng in the
Field of Battle.
1. Capt. John Lovewell, of Dunstable. 2. Ensign Jonathan Robbins, Ditto 3.
Ensign John Harwood, Ditto 4. Mr. Robert Usher, Ditto 5. Mr. Jacob Fullam,
Weston. 6. Mr. Jacob Farrah, Concord. 7. Mr. Josiah Davis, Ditto 8. Mr. Thomas
Woods, Groton. 9. Mr. Daniel Woods, Ditto 10. Mr. John Iefts, Ditto 11. Mr.
Ichabod Johnson, Woborn. 12. Mr. Jonathan Kitteridge, Billerica.
II. Wounded, and Lost by the way. 1. Lieut. Josiah Farewell, of Dunstable^ 2.
Mr. Jonathan Fry, Chaplain, Andover. 3. Mr. Elias Barron, Groton.

The Brave Lovewell, And several of his Company, LAMENTED.
II. Sam. I.27. How are the Mighty fallen, and the Weapons of War perished!


THE Book before us is Entitled The Second of Samuel, not, that it was written
by the Famous Prophet of that Name; (for it contains an History of what came to
pass, after his Death; of which we have an account in the beginning of the XXV.
Chap. of the former Book) but the latter part of the former, with the whole of
this Book, is supposed to be written by Nathan or God; or by Hezekiah or Ezra.
And probably it is called, The Second of Samuel, by the Hebrews, because It Is a
Continuation of the History began by him; and so, being a Supplement to the
History of Samuel, it goes under his Name; as is usual in such cases now a days.

IN the Chapter before us, we have a very Celebrated Elegy; of which our Text is
the Conclusion. And here we may observe. (1) WHO was the Author of this Elegy,
or Funeral Poem; Namely, David. Agreably it is termed in our Psalm-Book, David's
Elegy. The Sweet Psalmist of Israel was a Poet, as well as Musician; and has
given us a noble Specimen of his admirable Poetic Genius, in the Mournful Poem
before us. But we are to consider Him here, not only as a finished Poet, but as
an Eminent Servant of GOD, even the Man after GOD's own heart: who duly
considering the works of the Lord, and regarding the operations of His hands,
has set us a very bright Example, how to behave upon, and what Improvement to
make of, the Death of Useful Men; especially of such, as not only have
Jeoparded their Lives unto the Death, but nobly laid down their Lives, in the
high places of the Field, in the Service of their King and Country: David
Lamented with this Lamentation. --

(2) OBSERVE the Subject and Occasion of this Elegy; viz. The Death of Saul and
Jonathan; who with many of their Army fell down slain upon Mount Gilboa, 1 Samuel
31.1, 2, 3. Tidings of this Slaughter being bro't to David, he was greatly
affected therewith, and (as was customary amongst the Hebrews on such sorrowful
occasions) David, took hold on his clothes and rent them, and likewise all the
men that were with him. And they mourned and wept and fasted until Even, for
Saul and for Jonathan his Son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the
house of Israel; because they were fallen by the Sword. Context 11, 12. ver.
And having done Justice on the young Amalekite, that brot' the News, who by his
own Confession had stretched forth his hand to slay the Lord's anointed; He
further gave vent to his Grief, in the Elegant Composition before us.

(3) OBSERVE the Matter and Substance of this Elegy: or, what David said on
this great Occasion. And First, He utters this mournful assertion, The Beauty
of Israel is Slain upon thy high places! ver. 19. Expert Soldiers are no
inconsiderable part of the beauty of Israel. Then follows a very pathetical
Exclamation, which is thrice repeated, v. 19.25, 27. and is the burden of the
Song, How are the Mighty fallen! We have then his Poetical Wish, with the
Reason of it, That the Tragical News might not be published, v. 20. Tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon: lest the Daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, lest the Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. The
Imperative Mood is used in the beginning of the verse for the Optative, after
the manner of passionate Mourners, who often wish for things impossible. And by
this form of Speech David rather expresses his Detestatation of what was done,
then forbids the doing of it: q. d. O that this Doleful Story had never been
told in Gath! for so it surely was, 1 Samuel 31.8, 9, 10. And it came to pass on
the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the Slain, that they found Saul
and his three Sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. And they cut off his head, and
stripped off his Armor, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about,
to publish it in the house of their Idols, and among the people. And they put
his Armor in the house of Ashtaroth: and they sostened his Body to the Wall of
Beth-shan. We have next David's Imprecation, on the place of the defeat, with
the Reason of it. v. 21. Ye Mountains of Gilboa, (...) there be no Dew, neither
let there be Rain upon you, nor fields of offerings* for there the shield of
the Mighty is vilely cast away. -- Some think this only a Figurative Speech,
supposing the very Heavens and Earth had a kind of sense and feeling of this
Calamity: Others think it a Prophetical Curse, that took effect accordingly,
even as our Savior's, denounced on the Barren Fig Tree, Dr. Willet in loc and
Peter Martyr, quoted by him, Poli Critica*
But this is confuted by Brochard and others, that have been upon the place. We
may therefore look upon it, as only an Hyperbolical Poetical Imprecation.

DAVID then goes on to commend Saul and Jonathan, for their wonderful Success
at Arms, v. 22. From the Blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the
bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. They
were wont to be Victorious over their stoutest Enemies. And that it is otherwise
now, and that these Valiant Men are fallen, argues that GOD is angry; which
should awaken his people to Repentance. He further celebrates (as, their
affection to one another and Union in Death, v. 23. so,) their Agility and
Courage. They were swifter than Eagles, they were bolder than Lions. They were
Swift and Nimble to pursue their Enemies, and to avoid danger; and Strong and
Valiant to resist and overcome such as dare oppose them. Briefly, he commends
Sau for his Royal Bounty to the Daughters of Israel, whom he calls upon to
Lament him, v. 24. Ye Daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in
scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your Apparel.
Even the Daughters of Israel had been wont to bear their part in Saul's
Triumphs, and now it became them to mourn his Fall. As all share in common
Calamities; so all should be suitably affected therewith.

Finally, DAVID particularly Laments over Jonathan, professing his deep
Distress for him: the dear affection between them, and the pleasure he took in
his Conversation, v 25, 26. O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thy high places. I
am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been unto
me: thy love to me was wonderful, possing the love of Women, who are commonly
most affectionate.

(4) OBSERVE some of the Properties of this Elegy. And, First, It is extremely
fine and elegant. The Ideas are very bright, and well adapted: the Phrases are
very Expressive and Emphatical, and hence the whole Poem is very moving and
pathetical. And particularly, where he speaks of his Friend Jonathan, nothing
can be more soft and tender, and expressed with a greater Pathos. And what more
passionate, than his Repeated Exclamation? How are the Mighty fallen! Those
Valiant and Renowned Commanders, Saul and Jonathan, with their brave and
undaunted Soldiers, that fell with them. So that the Weapons of War are
perished i. e. those that wielded them are dead. And what will Weapons do,
without Men of Skill and Courage to handle them, for their Countrie's
Preservation and Defense, and the Suppression and Extirpation of their Enemies!

Again, THE whole Poem is sufficiently Brave and Manly. David shows himself a
Man of a great Soul, now, that Readiness day was come to die, and GOD had
delivered him out of his hands; and Saul could now no longer persecute and hunt
him as a Partridge on the Mountains, as he would a long while done (for as in the
Grave the weary Servants of GOD, are at rest, so, Blessed be GOD! when the
Wicked are lodged there, they cease from troubling) I say though David was now
delivered, he scorns to trample with insulting feet on the Monument of the
Dead, and crow over a Breathless Corpse; But buries all the faults of Saul in
perpetual oblivion, in the land of forgetfulness, lays aside all Spleen, and
heartily mourns his Countrie's Reproach and Loss, though the very means of his
own deliverance and advancement, (a Noble instance of Public Spiritedness) and
commemorates what was commendable, even in Saul. For, De mortuis, nil nisi
bonum. None that are Men after GOD's own heart, will unnecessarily rip up the
faults of others; and speak evil of those that cannot speak for themselves.
Those that are not thus tender of the Reputation of others, may justly fear
that others will be as free with them, when they are silent in the Grave.

BUT then, it is also a Martial Poem, it is written with a Martial Air. The
Subject is entirely Military. He Laments his Heroes, considered in their
Military Character. He Celebrates their Military Accomplishments and
Atchievments. And he Dedicates it to the Militia of Judah, as in the
Parenthesis in the Preface, 18. v. also he bade them teach the Children of
Judah the use of the Bow: Whence it is evident, That David in the midst of his
mourning, is not unmindful of what was necessary for the good of the Common
Wealth: Teaching us, not to be so overcome with Grief, on such sorrowful
occasions, as to forget our Duty and neglect means for our own or our Countries
safety.

Furthermore, THIS Elegy is very Ancient. 'Twas written about Eight and Twenty
Hundred Years ago. And according to some Chronologies, before the Famous Iliads
of Homer, who was the very Father of all the Heathen Poets, and said to be born
in the Reign of Solomon the Son of David. Ductor H^.
It is then one of the firstborn of Elegies, and venerable for it is Antiquity.
It Is said to be Recorded in the Book of Iasher* which is though it to be a General
Chronicle of the Acts of the Jewish Nation: Dr. Willet in loc. and alii.
and called Iesher, i. e. the Just or Upright. We read of it Josh. 10.13. It Is
supposed this Book was continued from Age to Age, as a Collection of State
Poems, (say some) or of the Memorable Acts of GODs Worthies, and though laid up
at length in the Temple (as Josephus reports) yet being not Canonical, is now
lost.

Finally, TO remark no more Characters of this Poem, It Is a Scripture-Elegy,
for though we don't suppose it at first written by inspiration; yet being
agreeable to the Will of GOD, was adopted (if I may so express it) by the Holy
Spirit, who inspired those that inserted it in the Sacred Pages, so that it is
now a part of Canonical Scripture. And thus it is probable the Penman of the
Chronicles collected many things out of the Book of Iasher, being guided
therein by the unerring Spirit of GOD. And though the Name of GOD is not to be
found in this Elegy, yet it is consonant to Religion, and approved by GOD; and
we hence learn, that what is spoken or written by the Servants of GOD, may be
very agreeable to the Will of GOD and for his Glory, though the Name of GOD or
CHRIST is not to be found therein. Thus the Book of Esther wherein are no less
than Ten Chapters, has not the Name of GOD in it.

(5) OBSERVE the main Scope and Design of this Elegy And there are two things
more especially that David had in view, after the Glory of GOD, his Ultimate
End. First, to perpetuate the Memory of Saul, and his Dearly Beloved Jonathan,
his Bosom Friend. Great indeed was the Love between Damon and Pythias; for when
Dionysius the Tyrant, had on some occasion, signified his Resolution, that one
of them should Die; and permitted Damon to go home and settle his Affairs
before his Death, provided he could find one to be Surety for his return;
Pythias forthwith offered voluntarily, and put himself in the Tyrants power.
Damon coming back precisely at the time appointed, Dionysius did so much admire
their mutual Fidelity, that he Pardoned both, and prayed that he might be
admitted the Third into their Friendship. Collier's Dictionary.
But the Love of David and Jonathan was more Divine and Excellent, than that of
these brave Heathen Philosophers. We Have the account of it is Commencement, 1 Samuel 18. begin. And it came to pass when he [David] had made an end of speaking
to Saul, that the Soul of Jonathan was knit with the Soul of David, and
Jonathan loved him, as his own Soul. And Saul took him that day, and would let
him go no more home to his Fathers house. Then Jonathan and David made a
Covenant, because he loved him as his own Soul. And Jonathan stripped himself of
the Robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments even to his
Sword and to his Bow, and to his Girdle. For such a Friend one would even dare
to die. To be sure, David would have the Memory of this Just Man Blessed. He
would have him had, in Everlasting Remembrance. And he here does his part, that
it might be so, and the event was agreeable to his pious desire, for wherever
the BIBLE is enjoyed, this Elegy is still to be found on Record for a Memorial
of him.

BUT then David had a further reach than barely to Embalm the Name of his
Friend, and perpetuate the Remembrance of Saul, for his Relation to Jonathan
and to his Country: For, by this Elegy, or Funeral Song, David designed to fire
the ambition of his Contemporaries and Successors, to seek to excel in
Chivalry; and to fire them also with Zeal to prosecute the War against the
Barbarous Philistines, and to avenge the Death of their Sovereign, and several
of the Royal Family, and many other Gallant Soldiers; and to defend themselves,
against their Insults and Depredations. Agreably in the Parenthesis before
mentioned, v. 18. He bade them teach the Children of Judah the use of the Bow.
-- The best Interpretation of which Passage (says Iunius) is, That it expresses
the design of David, that this Song, being put into the hands of Judah, it
might serve to excite and provoke them to addict themselves to Martial
Exercises, and to acquire Skill in the use of the Bow, which is here put for
all Warlike Weapons then in fashion. And may the same use be made of the
Discourse, you are now Reading, to provoke all among us, of a Military
Character, to inure themselves to the use of the GUN, and all such Exercises as
may accomplish them for Service in the Doleful War, we are unhappily involved in.

Having, Observed these things in General in this Elegy, I come now to remark
from the Conclusion of it.

THAT the Full of Brave and Successful Warriors in the Field of Battle; is
very much to be Lamented by the People of GOD, in whose immediate Service they
Lost their Lives. We should Lament over them with this Lamentation, How are the
Mighty fallen, and the Weapons of War perished!

First, IT is sometimes the Lot of the Bravest Warriors, and of such as have
been very Successful, to fall at last, or be slain in the Field of Battle* Saul
had been a Brave Warrior and did worthily in the beginning of his Reign. The
History of his deliverance of Iabesh-Giliad when Nahash the Ammonite came up
and Encamped against it, is very noble and brave, 1 Samuel 11. begin. He
discovered both Great Courage and Conduct, in that whole action, at the 11 th.
we read, Saul put the people in three Companies, and they came into the midst
of the Host in the morning watch, and slew the Ammonites, until the heat of the
day: and it came to pass that they which remained were scattered, so that two
of them were not left together. Thus he effectually raised the Seige of poor
Iabesh-Giliad, and delivered the City. And then some Hotheaded people,
proposed to Samuel, that the Malcontents should be put to Death, who had
said, shall SAUL reign over us? Saul very Generously suppressed the Motion, and
snub'd those that too officiously proposed it; saying, There shall not a man be
put to Death this day! And as he was once returning from the slaughter of the
Philistines, the Women came out of all the Cities of Israel, singing and
dancing, to meet King Saul, with Tabrets, with Joy and with Instruments of
Music: and the Women answered one to another as they played, and said, Saul
has slain his thousands. We read also of Jonathan, that he smote the Garrison
of the Philistines that was in Geba, 1 Samuel 13.3. And in the beginning of the
14 Chapter, wer'e informed how Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, did miraculously
smite the Philistines. And in the Context, ver. 22. David gives 'em this
encomium, From the Blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the Bow of
Jonathan turned not back, and the Sword of Saul returned not empty. And he
calls them, the Mighty, and the Flower or Beauty of Israel Now these Brave,
Successful Soldiers, were Slain in Battle at last, upon mount Gilboa.

AND (not to mention any other instance) Thus Gustavus Adolphus, Styled the
Great King of Sweden, who took for his Motto, If GOD be for us, who can be
against us -- And who was an incomparable Warrior, (...) sometimes even
without (...) and especially in War, would neglect his Life and perform rather
the Duty of a Soldier than of a General; and to excuse himself would say, That
Armies slight the Danger they share in with their King; and that if Generals
don't act in Person they can never atchieve a Glittering Reputation: And that
such as shun Death, meet it oftener, than they that seek it: That Julius Caesar
was never wounded in Battle, though he ever fought in the foremost Ranks of his
Troops: and that Alexander the Great marked out the way with his own Blood,
that led him to the Empire of the East; and that to be as Famous as these Great
Men, he ought to be no more timorous than they: this Great Man, after he would
obtained diverse Victories over the Danes and Poles and Muscovites, and received
Thirteen Wounds before those of which he died, was at length Slain in a Battle
with the Germans, having first almost got the Victory, which his Army
completed after his Death. And thus the Great Gustavus Died, in the 38 th.
Year of his Age, Anno Domi. 1632. whilst Victory (as one expresses it) lay a
bleeding by his side. Colliers Dict. Clarks Lives.


Secondly, THE Fall of Brave and Successful Soldiers is very much to be
Lamented by the People of GOD, especially by those in whose immediate Service
they Sacrificed their Lives. For,

First, THIS is very Decent and Becoming the People of GOD. There Is a time to
weep, as well as a time to laugh. And every thing is beautiful in it is season.
Now when Brave and Seuccessful Soldiers are Slain in Battle, who have been
improved by Providence as Instruments of Checking the Pride and Insolence, and
Weakening the Force, and Thinning the Number, and Discouraging the Hearts of the
Enemies of GOD's People; and of preserving the Lives, Liberties and Properties
of the Israel of GOD: and might if GOD had spared them, been a further Scourge
to the Enemy, and Defense to the People of GOD, by contending with the Enemy in
Battle. It Is very proper and highly reasonable, such especially in whose
immediate Service they have Courageously ventured and undauntedly laid down their
Lives, should Lament their Death. And the Contrary, is, how indecent? how
Sottish? how Stupid and Unreasonable? Now whatsoever things are lovely,
decorus, and of good report, Christians should love and practice these things,
Phil. 4.8. The Civilized Heathen will rise up in Judgment against Christians,
yea and the Barbarians also, if they don't do such deserving Persons the Honor
of Lamenting their untimely Death. It Is Humane and Manly to do so: but the
contrary is indeed, inhumane, and worse than Heathenish.

Secondly, IT is Just and Equal, for the People of GOD to Lament the Death of
Brave and Successful Soldiers Slain by the Enemies, and in their Service. Tears
and proper Lamentations are a Debt we owe them. They Have dearly merited this
piece of Respect from their People. It Is but just, to shed Tears for them that
have shed their Hearts Blood for us.
And surely if they deserved the Applause and Commendation of all while they
Lived; they ought to be Honored with the Lamentations of all when they are
Slain in the high places of the Field. And the Law of Equity calls for it.
Surely it is to do as we would be done by; or, as we should desire any of our
Dear Relatives should be treated, in like circumstances. If it had been the Lot
of any very nearly Related to us (and it has been so Capt Ave^^ of H^ve^hill;
and Mr. Edward Car^eton of (...). Aug. ^9 1708. and the Authors Grandfather,
and (...) Graves in the Dutch War.
) to be Slain in Battle, or Sea Fight, playing the Man for their People, and
for the Cities of their GOD; surely a due notice taken of their Death, by the
People of GOD, would be what we should expect and be pleased with. Now
whatsoever we would that men should do to us, we should do the same to them,
or, we transgress a Golden Rule. But if this Rule be out of fashion with any;
yet

Thirdly, AGREEABLE Lamentations for Expert and Successful Soldiers Slain in
War, are very useful and advantageous. It Is a Comfort to their Bereaved
Relatives, when they observe that the People of GOD, do greatly bewail the
Death of their Friends, and heartily Sympathize with them, though their Loss may
possibly be in some respects Irreparable; yet this should and will contribute
not a little, to alleviate their sorrow, ease their distressed minds, and dry
up their Tears.

AND then, its a Spur to Virtue. When Surviving Soldiers (and particularly such
as have been Eyewitnesses of the Fall of their Brethren, and fought with
uncommon Bravery, and were either Wounded, or, Equally Exposed in the same
Battle, with those that are Slain) take Notice that the Death of their Officers
or Fellow Soldiers, is deeply resented by the People of GOD, that they still
speak of them with great Honor in their Lamentations, this will Animate them,
we hope, to do Worthily, and rather Die with Honor, if called to Battle, than
live with Disgrace; and for their Cowardice, have the offer of a Wooden Sword,
and be Branded with the Infamous Character of a Coward, even by the Weaker Sex.

WEHREAS, on the other hand, it is a great Aggravation of the Affliction of
destressed Mourners, when they observe that the Generality, only give the News
of their Friends Death, the hearing, but seem as Stoical and unconcerned about
it, as if their Lives were of no value, and their Death what does no way
concern them. Such Ingratitude and Inhumanity is very Exercising to Ingenious
minds and such as have any sense of Honor. Besides such a Sordid
Insensibleness, is very Discouraging to our Brave Soldiers. Who would be
willing to venture their Lives for such ungreatful People!

Finally, It Is Pious and Scriptural to bewail the Death of such Brave and
Successful Soldiers, whose Lot it is, to be Slain at last in the Field of
Battle. GOD expects we should lay to heart the Death of all our fellow
Creatures, That is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart,
Eccl. 7.2. And particularly, we are obliged to Lament the Death of Eminently
useful Men, though they Die quietly in their Beds; and come to their Graves in a
good Old Age, like as a shock of Corn comes in, in it is season. How much more
should we mourn their loss, when Slain in Battle, in the midst of their Days,
or in the very Flower of their Age, while their Breasts were full of milk, and
their Bones were moistened with marrow. It Is a sore Judgment when GOD suffers
such to fall by, and into the hand of the Enemy; and does not cover their heads
in the day of Battle. This is an aweful Frown and argues the great displeasure
of GOD. Hence He threatened the men of Anathoth, that said to the Prophet
Jeremy, Prophesy not in the Name of the Lord, that their Young men should die
by the Sword, Jer. 11.21, 22. and a like threatening he denounced against Moab,
Jer. 48.15. -- His chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, says the
King, whose Name is the LORD OF HOST. And when the Wrath of the LORD was risen
against Israel, for their measure-filling Sin, in mocking the LORD's
Messengers, despising his words and misusing his Prophets, it is said, 2 Chronicles.
36.17. Therefore he brought upon them, the King of the Chaldees, who slew their
young men with the Sword. Now what greater cause of Mourning and Lamentation
than the Manifestations of GOD's displeasure? If the Lion roar who will not
tremble? but alas, who can stand when GOD is angry! And he highly resents it,
when his people are insensible under the Tokens of his holy anger: if they cry
not, when he corrects them. He says to such, why should ye be stricken any
more? ye will revolt more and more, Isa. 1.5. and again, they are not humbled
unto this day, Jer. 44.10.

BESIDES, We Have many Scripture Precepts and Examples, that teach us to Lament,
on the occasion under consideration. When GOD threatened Israel, by the weeping
Prophet, that a People should come from the North Country, that should lay hold
on Bow and Spear, being Cruel, and having no Mercy: Jer. 6.22, 23. It Is added,
ver. 26. O Dau'ter of my People gird thee with Sackcloth, and wallow thy self
in ashes: make thee Mourning as for an ONLY SON most bitter Lamentation; --
Surely then, there should be a proportionable Lamentation, when several chosen
Young Men, and some very promising and hopeful, are actually Slain by Men of
the Chaldean Character. Another instance we have, Jer. 9.17. -- Consider ye,
and call for the mourning women. -- Let them make have -- that our eyes may run
down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters -- And teach your
Dau'ters wailing and every one her neighbors lamentation. For Death is come
up, -- to cut off the Young Men from the streets* And even the Carcases of men
shall fall as dung upon the open field -- and none shall gather, or, BURY them.
This Evinces, that GOD calls to mourning when Young Men fall by the Sword, and
the Mighty in the Battle. And then to mention no other Scriptures, our Text and
Context is a full and direct proof of our Doctrine. For, as was observed
before, this Mournful Song was David's Lamentation over those that were slain by
the Philistines on Mount Gilboa.

BUT I proceed to the APPLICATION. And,

First, IF it is sometimes the Lot of the most Valiant and Successful Soldiers,
to be Slain at last in Battle; Then they that Gild on the Harness should nor
boast as they that put it off. This was well observed by Ahab to Benhadad King
of Syria, 1 Kings 20.11. All such Preposterous Boasting is evil; very foolish
and ominous, and commonly followed with fatal consequents. Boasting Benhadad
had cause and leisure in his inner Chamber to think of this wise caution, when
he had seen his Army miserably broken a first time, and slain with a great
slaughter, by a Company of Striplings, under the Command of Ahab their King:
and a second time totally routed; an Hundred Thousand Footmen being slain in
one Day by the Israelites; and Twenty Seven Thousand more by the falling of a
Wall upon them; and he reduced to such abject circumstances, as to beg Quarter
by his Ambassadors with Sackcloth on their Loins and Ropes on their Heads. How
was the Scene now changed, and his Tune turned, 1 Kin. 20. And thus we find the
Swaggering Goliath, who defied the Arms of the Living GOD, one Minute Cursing
David by his Gods, and disdainfully saying, Come to me and I will give thy
flesh to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field; and the next
Minute tumbling headlong with his Face upon the Earth: and the Beauty of Israel
cutting off his Head with his own Sword, 1 Samuel 17.1, -- 51.

GOD allows us indeed, in our Spiritual Warfare, (and in extraordinary cases,
as, in David's, answering the Challenge of the Giant, in a Carnal Warfare also)
to Triumph before the Battle and to say, Thanks be unto GOD, that gives us the
Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. For, in all these things we are more than
Conquerors, through the Captain of our Salvation, whose is the Victory, and who
has loved us, and will give it to us!

BUT without particular Revelation, not now to be expected, none can tell,
whither the many, or the few; the strong or the weak; the Righteous or the
Wicked; the Friend or Enemy will get the Day in the Field of Battle. Boasting
then, upon the going forth of Armies, is to be Condemned; both in such as go
forth to War, and in such as tarry at home, on their Account.

Secondly, THE most Skilful, Dextrous, Courageous and Successful Soldiers, had
need to be truly Religious and well prepared for Death; seeing they are not
Invulnerable, but as liable to Die as others. An Indian Bullet will kill a
Hero, a Champion, as easily as a Faint-Hearted Coward: a Captain, or Chaplain,
as soon as a Bringer-up of the Front half-Files; or the most inferior Private
Soldier. There must indeed be the Swiftness of the Eagle, the Subtilty of the
Fox, the Strength and Boldness of the Lion, as well as the Grace of the
Christian, to constitute a Brave Soldier; and every devout Christian, that is
fit for Heaven, is not most fit to go forth to War. But, though such as are
destitute of Grace may possibly be Stout Soldiers and Noble Commanders, and
deserve well of their Prince and Country* and in answer to the Prayers of GOD's
People, in whose cause they are Employed, they may fight valiantly, and play the
man for their People, and tread down the Enemy; yet if they are Slain, they
cannot groundedly expect Salvation. Seeing then our Soldiers carry their Lives
in their Hands, when they go forth to War, and are still liable to be Ambush'd,
wher'er they Travel in the vast Howling Wilderness, and, killed unexpectedly,
as well as Slain in a pitched Battle; they would need be always ready not only to
Fight, but to Die, and make their Appearance before GOD. And in order thereto,
they should now Believe in CHRIST and Repent of all their Sins, and so get
into, and keep in good terms with GOD, who can easily preserve them, though a
thousand fall at their side, and ten thousand at their right hand: and can
cause one of them to chase a thousand, and two, to put ten thousand (...)
flight.

THE Wretched Jesuits or Friars, are will not ('it is said) to absolve their
deluded Proselytes, the Barbarous Indians, when they come forth to War against
Us: and flatter 'em with the Promise of an immediate passage to Paradise,
without any stop at Purgatory, if they fall in Battle: And these delusive Hopes
may possibly animate them, to fight with great Fury in their Engagements with
us. And many private Soldiers and Inferior Officers in the Campaigns in
Christendom, merely from the prospect of Applause, Promotion, or filthy Lucre;
or, from Thrift after Revenge, and a vain opinion that Fighting in a good
cause, and on the right side, they shall surely be happy in the next World, if
they are killed in Battle, have possibly been led on to sight with undaunted
Resolution, and the utmost Intrepidity. Surely then the Motives of pure
Religion, such as serving GOD and their Country; having GOD to go before them,
and fight for them, and either to cover their Heads, or, receive their
departing Souls to the Blessed Mansions above where there is no Adversary nor
Evil occurrent, where they shall rest from their labors and their works shall
follow them, must needs be sufficient, by the Influence of the Holy Spirit that
dwells in all real Christians, to cause them to wax Valiant in Fight, and to
raise them above the fear of what Earth or Hell can do unto them.

SO then, A well grounded Persuasion of a Part in Christ, and an Interest in
the favor of GOD, is what all that go forth to War, would do wisely to give
all Diligence to obtain.

Thirdly, SINCE the Best of Soldiers are liable to be overcome and Slain in
War, It ill becomes the People of GOD to put their trust in Man. Though it is
their Duty and Wisdom to Employ and Encourage Expert Soldiers: yet it is their
Sin and Folly to trust in them. As it is Idolatry for Soldiers to trust in their
Arms, or in their Dexterity and Courage to handle them; or in one another: so
it is Idolatry for the People of GOD, in whose Service they go forth to trust in
them. For alas! What is man whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and wherein is he
to be accounted off? His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Dust; in that
very Day, all his Projections and Resolutions and Accomplishments for War,
perish!

SURELY then, It Is the greatest folly, for a People to trust in their Forces,
how well soever Qualified, Spirited and Equipped: and how Successful soever
they have been. For, Every Creature is that to us that GOD makes it to be; and
unless GOD give Help, vain is the Help of Man, Jer. 3 23. Truly in vain is
Salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains; truly
in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel. And we know who has said,
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm -- But Blessed
is the man, that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, Jer. 17.5,
-- 7. Agreably we find the People of GOD, resolving, in the Name of our GOD we
will set up our Banners. And whilst some trust in Chariots and some in Horses,
we will remember the Name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20.5, -- 7. And again,
Through thee we will push down our Enemies: Through thy Name we will tread them
under that rise up against us, Psalm. 40.5. and Psalm. 60.12. Through God we shall
do valiantly, for He it is, that shall tread down our Enemies.

MEN may fail us, be overcome, and utterly frustrate our expectations: But, if
we trust in GOD, we may pray with Asa, when Zerah the Ethiopian came against
him, with an Host of a Thousand Thousand, and three Hundred Chariots; LORD,
(said he) It is nothing with thee to help, whither with many, or with them that
have no power: help us O LORD our GOD, for we REST on thee, and in thy Name we
go against this Multitude. O LORD thou art our GOD, let not Man Prevail against
thee. The Lord of Hosts is Immortal, and Invincible; He has all Creatures at
His Command, and can cause the Stars in their Courses to fight against the
Enemies of his People; and sell Sisera into the hand of a Woman. In a word,
whatsoever the Lord pleases that he does; It is therefore better to trust in
him, than to put Confidence in man, Psalm. 118.8.

Fourthly, ARE the Bravest and most Successful Soldiers, liable to fall in
Battle, Such then as are Preserved in Military Expeditions and Engagements, and
Safely Returned to their Families and Friends, are obliged to Study what they
shall render to the Lord, and take heed, they don't forget his Benefits, but
that all their days they perform their Vows. It is the LORD that has covered
their heads in the Battle; It is the Lord that Redeemed their Lives from
Destruction, when those, no more exposed than they, are fallen, and gone down
to the Grave and shall come up no more, and return to their Houses no more. O
that all such as have Experienced the Destinguishing Favor of Heaven, would
Praise Him for his Goodness, and not content themselves to desire thanks to be
returned for them in the Public Assemblies of GODs People, though that is
commenable, but that they would endeavor to Live the Praises of GOD. It Is very
Displeasing to GOD, when his People don't render to him according to his
Benifits, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. David Celebrates the Praises of GOD, for Preservation
and Success in War, Psalm. 18. and Psalm. 144. begin.

Fifthly, HENCE the People of GOD ought to ascribe to Him the Glory of all
their Success in War. His is the Victory and he gives it to whomsoever he will.
He furnishes Men with Military Skill and Courage: Teaches their hands to War
and their fingers to fight. He finds out the Enemy for his People, and gives a
Presence of mind to their Forces; and if they are not swallowed up quick, when
men, vastly superior in Number, and other advantages rise up against them,
it is because the Lord is on their side, Psalm. 124. Again, we find Deborah and
Barak giving Glory to GOD, for avenging his People in the defeat of Sisera and
his Host, Judge. 5. and how often is David the Famous Warrior of Israel;
Harping on this string, as we noted before.

GOD highly resents it, when his People Sacifice to their own Net, and burn
incense to their own Drag: when they ascribe that to Instruments that is due to
GOD alone. This no doubt often provokes GOD, to deprive a People of their
Chosen Soldiers. For he is a very Jealous GOD, and will not give his Glory to
another. And, as the former Pastor of this Church would say of Ministers, we
may say of Soldiers, People kill them two ways: either, by ascribing too much,
or too little to them: Idolizeing of them, or Detracting from them, and
Despiing of them.

Finally, LET us all Religiously Lament the Fall of the Brave LOVEWELL, and
several of his Gallant Company, that offered themselves willingly among the
People. Let us take up this Lamentation over them, How are the Mighty fallen!
And if we would herein approve our selves to GOD, let us consider that these
Brave Men (though I hope, we have many left as capable of serving their Country,
yet they) were no inconsiderable part of the Beauty and strength of
New England. Indeed, being wholly a Stranger to most of them, I cannot pretend
to give their Character; yet its evident to the Country, they were Men formed
and raised up by Providence to serve us in pursuing an Enemy, of whom we may
say as of the wild Ass, The Wilderness yeildeth food for them and for their
Children, Job 24.5.

THESE our Worthy Friends could endure Hardness as good Soldiers: And were well
able to Encounter the Fatigues of Long Marches, both in Winter and Summer. Some
of them were well acquainted with the Woods, and with the Customs and Lurking
Places of the Enemy, and were mightily Spirited to pursue them, and GOD did
graciously preserve and prosper them this Last Winter in Two Expeditions,
First, Delivering Two Indians into their Hands, and then Ten Stout Fellows as
you all Remember, whom they killed, without receiving any harm from them. This
was the Lords doings and mavelous in our eyes! And in this Last Engagement,
they were inspired with a great deal of Bravery and good Conduct, and their
Company Crowned with Wonderful Success. Now to lose such Experienced Soldiers,
and Men so respected in the Country, is a great Loss.

Again, LET us consider, that this is the Finger of GOD. Let not any Say
Profanely and Atheistically, It Is the Fortune of War* or, as a good Man said
on a bad occasion, The Sword devoureth one as well as another, 2 Samuel 11.25.
For tho it is true the Battle is not to the strong, and time and chance happens
to all men, yet the hand of the Lord, is herein gone out against us, and
therefore (...) of his Displeasure to be seen in this Affair. That this Brave
Company, should be so weakened by leaving so great a Number with one that fall
Ill* and that at so great a distance from them. That one of the Company should
so unhappily leave them in the Beginning of the Fight, and bring such News to
those left behind, that occasioned their immediate Return; when their
Continuance there, might have been such an unspeakable Advantage to those that
Survived the Battle. And (...) appears a Frown* that they should venture so far
with so small a Number at that Season of the Year, when the Enemy are capable
of better Subsisting in Bodies, than in the Winter Season. I say, the hand of
the LORD appears in all this, that so many Brave Men should Descend into Battle
and Perish.

BUT then, We Are also to consider. Why the Lords Anger against us is not turned
away; but his hand is stretched out still. Have not our Sins as really Slain
our Magnanimous Soldiers, as ever, David slew Uriah the Hittite by the Sword of
the Children of Ammon? And should we not hear the Rod, and Him that has
appointed it: And consider in this Day of Adversity, what We have done; and
humble our selves and Pray and seek GOD's Face? Thus did David and his Men, as
in the Context. And the Men of Iab^sh Gilead, 1 Samuel ult.

SHOULD we not Endeavor to find out and put away the Accursed thing from the
midst of us? and turn to him that smites us? Should we not be awakn'd by such
Providence to get our Peace made with GOD, and engage and secure his Gracious
Presence with us, under our present dark views?

HOW many calls have NEW ENGLAND had, from the Pulpit, and by the Press also,
from Year to Year; To Remember whence we are fallen and Repent and do our First
Works! How many Election-Sermons have been Published amongst us, filled with
Solemn Warnings, most Earnest Exhortations and Ample Testimonies for GOD, and
against the Provoking Evils of the Land! But alas, How many are still acting
the part of the Deaf Adder, or as the Prophet expresses it, They refuse to
hearken, they pull away the shoulder and stop the ear that they should not
hear, Zech. 7.11. How many hate to be Reformed? Yea hate to be told by those
that have good right, full power, and lawful Authority to do it, wherein We
should be, and what is to be done that We may be, a Reformed People. How sad is
it, if all the Notice taken by the Generality of People, of the Solemn Messages
sent to them from the LORD GOD of their Fathers, is only to give them the
hearing, and either Humm or Hiss the Preacher and his Performance, pretty much
as they stand affected to him; and it may be, with some considerable Formality,
give him thanks for his Sermon (and then he comes off mighty well!) However if
they carry the Matter so far as to Print the Sermon, yet perhaps they don't put
it in Practice! But now, don't they deceive themselves that hear, and read GODs
Word, but do it nor? Or, what means that saying, Jam. 1.22.

FURTHERMORE, By the sore Judgment of War, and Particularly by the Fall of our
Brethren, we are now Weeping over, GOD is loudly calling upon us, to amend our
ways and doings. And GOD expects we should all in our places endeavor a
Reformation, that we should do Our part in this Work: and if we do so, whatever
be the Event, GOD will set a Mark upon us, and our labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord. Let not any then be Discouraged, because some proper Essays and
Noble Efforts have Miscarried and proved Abortive. Necessity is laid upon us:
NEW ENGLAND must Reform, or without a Spirit of Prophecy, any one that observes
the Signs of the times, may I think, Evidently foresee, that in one Twenty
Years more, the Glory of New England as New England, will be much more than
hitherto, if not TOTALLY Eclipsed. GOD in his Infinite, Sovereign Mercy prevent
it!

BUT then, our Soldiers that are fit to go forth to War, and may probably be
called forth, You my Brethren in an especial manner are obliged to take the
Alarm given you by the late Intelligence. Be prevailed with if you have not yet
done so, to cast away the Weapons of your Rebellion against Heaven, (for
there is no making peace Sword in hand) and come as with Ropes about your Necks,
and lie in the dust, if there may be hope; and there is hope in Israel
concerning you. Now Is your time to make ready for Death. You Will have other work
to do, when Engaged in Battle. And besides, Every Battle of the Warrior is
with confused Noise, and Garments rol'd in Blood: hearing the hideous Yellings
and Ejulations of the Enemy, and the Groanings of Deadly wounded Men, and
seeing them lie all bathed in their Gore, may awaken you to cry to GOD and make
your Vows: But alas, that is no time for Consideration, and Confession, and
Deliberate Resolution to forsake Sin and return to GOD. This should be done
Now! And then as you should be excited by this Awakning Providence to yield
your selves to the Lord* To make have and not delay to Believe in Christ, and
secure an Interest in Him: So, you should be prevailed with to see that you have
good Arms and kept in good order, with good store of Ammunition, and inure your
selves to Military Exercises, especilly to the Art of Shooting* and be always
ready, that you may Issue out at an Hours Warning, if Occasion be: and not live
careless and secure, after the manner of the Zidonians.

AND if you are truly Religious, and thus Equipped for, and trained to War, and
GOD call you forth, He can easily, and we hope will, preserve and prosper you.
He can make you swifter than Eagles, stronger and more courageous than Lions,
as David elegantly describes his Heroes, and you need not fear all the Indians
in America. For if you Fall in Battle, your Death is Brave, you Die in the Bed
of Honor, and your Rest will be Glorious. It well becomes a Soldier to Die
fighting, a Minister Preaching, and an Emperor standing. But commonly such
Soldiers may take Caesar Motto, Veni, Vidi, Vici, I came, I saw, I overcame,

Again, IF we'd Religiously Lament on this occasion, we must not be Disheartened
and cast down, because a Crew of Salvages have killed a few Brave Men. No
verily! it is beneath a Man, much more a Christan, whose heart is fixed trusting
in the Lord, to be thus affected with such Evil Tidings. Such News should not
daunt and terrify a Soldier, but whet his Courage, and make his Blood boil in
his Veins, and Especially, it should rouse 'em on such occasions, to Rally
forthwith and come to March with utmost Expedition, to Recover if possible, our
Dear Brethren that lie Wounded, and without Relief in a Howling Wilderness.
That they may not Perish with Famine, or fall into the hands of a Barbarous
Enemy, to be killed over again, and Tortured with Indian Cruelty. And also to
give Christian Burial to the Remains of our Departed Heroes. How brave was it
in the Men of Iabesh-Gilead, what an Instance of Gratitude and true Valor that
we find recorded to their Immortal Honor and our Instruction, 1 Samuel 31.11, --
And when the* Inhabitants of Iabesh-Gilead heard of that which the Philistines
had done to Saul: All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the
body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethshan, and came to
Iabesh, and burnt them there. And they took their bones and buried them under a
tree at Iabesh, -- Methinks the reading those words without a Comment, would
fill a Soldier with Zeal sufficient to carry him with a sufficient Number, as
far as Pigwacket, only to cover the Dust, the Valuaable Dust, of our Gallant
Soldiers, that there kept the Field; lest the Dau'ters of the uncircumcised
rejoice.

Again, WE should amidst our Lamentations, be much in Prayer to GOD. If we
would have Israel prevail, we must keep up, as well as lift up the hand of
Prayer. If our Soldiers would constitute, a Thundering, they must be a Praying
Legion. And we that tarry at home must get into the Mount and Pray for 'em. A
Good Woman in her Closet, (though she is afraid to take a Gun in her hand) may
serve her Country to very good purpose, even in respect of the War; as really,
as the Magistrate at the Council Board; or the most daring and well advised
Commander in the open Field in a through Engagement. For Prayer and Faith, always
were, are, and will be the Churches Best Weapons.

Once more, WHILE we Lament our own and Countries Loss, we should not forget to
Sympathize with the Distressed Relatives: The Widow and the Orphan, and such as
mourn for an Only Son, or other near Relations. They are greatly to be pitied,
and their case remembered in our Devotions. We should Pray for them, that GOD
would give them Songs in the Night, and say unto them weep not! That he would
comfort those that are cast down, would afford 'em those Divine Consolations
that are not small, and refresh their Spirits, in the multitude of their
perplexed tho'ts within them. That he would give them Patience to submit to his
Holy Will, to bear his Indignation, to hold their peace and be still, knowing
that he is GOD, who gives none account of his matters. -- And that he would be
a GOD to the Widow, a Father to the poor Fatherless Children: And better than
Ten Sons to Disconsolate Parents.

Briefly, WHILE we Lament our Case is so Sad, let us be very thankful it is no
worse, that it is so well. That we have such abundant cause to Sing of Mercy as
well as Judgment. For though we have lost some Brave Men, (and have cause to mourn
on that score) yet, it is probable the Enemy have lost more than Treble the
Number, and amongst them some of their Chiefs, and particularly their Bold
Paugus, and a Remarkable Chec^ ^s given to their Insolence, and many Lives may
be saved by this means. While therefore we cry out, How are the mighty fallen!
Let us admire the Divine Goodness, that under all their Hazards, Hardships and
Disadvantages, so many are Returned. That our Friends cannot say as Job's
Messengers, I only am escaped alone to tell thee: But that so many are well,
and give us the Joyful Account that our Little Army behaved Bravely, Fought
Manfully, and very Successfully; so that though our Loss is Great, yet our
Enemies have no cause to Triumph* O let us magnify the Lord, and exalt his Name
together, that the Enemy did not swallow them up quick, that in Wrath GOD has
Remembered Mercy, and has not dealt with us after our Sins.

To have done, LET us yet Encourage our selves in the LORD our GOD. Let us
return to the Almighty and he will build us up. He will soon subdue our
Enemies, and give us Peace in our Borders His hand can find out our Enemies,
and he that made 'em can make his Sword to approach unto them. Is the Brave
Lovewell and other Brave Men Dead! who made them what they were? who Spirited
and Enabled 'em to do what they did? It was the Lord of Hosts, who lives still,
who has the Residue of the Spirit, and can easily raise up others and will do
so, if there be occasion, and we answer his Expectation, and turn to him with
all our Hearts.

WE may then Sing the CXXI, and CXXV, and XLVI Psalms, and say, GOD is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not
fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains are carried into the
midst of the Sea: though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, and the
Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the
God of Jacob is our Refuge. Selah.

Tri-Uni Deo Gloria!

