Mr. MATHER's Election-SERMON,

1725.

At a General Assembly held at Hartford, May 13th. 1725.
Ordered by this Assembly,
THAT James Wadsworth and John Hooker, Esqrs. Return the Thanks of this
Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. Azariah Mather of Saybrook for his Sermon
Preached before this Assembly at Hartford, on the 13th of May Instant; and
Desire that he give a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

Hez. Wyllys Secr.

Good Rulers A CHOICE BLESSING.

A Sermon Preached before the Great and General Assembly of the Colony of
Connecticut, at Hartford in NEW ENGLAND, May 13th 1725

The Day for the Election of the Honorable the GOVERNOR and DEPUTY GOVERNOR,
and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS there.

By Azariah Mather, A. M. Pastor of CHRIST's Church in Saybrook.

Published (with the Addition of some things either not Delivered at the
Preaching, though Written; or but hinted) by Order of AUTHORITY.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, Printer to the GOVERNOR and
COMPANY. 1725.

An Election-SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES X. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of
Nobles, and the Princes Eat in due Season, for Strength, and not for
Drunkenness.
SOLOMON the Wise (as the Learned well observe) in the former part of our
Context, is instructing Subjects with their Duty toward Rulers, Which Duty he
urges upon them with many excellent Motives and Arguments to enforce their
Loyalty and Obedience; and left Rulers from what he had said concerning the
Obedience of the Subject, should take occasion to abuse their Power, lest they
should think themselves Privileged ones to do as they list, and become
Arbitrary and Despotick: He therefore brings in a Caveat, and inserts an
Admonition and puts them in mind that as Subjects may not Rebel against lawful
Authority (and indeed there is no other Authority but such; there is great
difference between Potentia and Potestas, Dunam^s and Exousia) so neither may
Rulers bec^me Licentious, Unjust, and Tyrannize over the Subject: Which Caution
and Admonition is included in a declaration of that Dependence which is mutual
between Subjects and Rulers, in regard of the good or ill State of the Common
Wealth. Rulers cannot be either good or bad to themselves, but the Subjects must
share in either Felicity or Misery, under them in their Administrations.

1. The Miseries of a People is briefly hinted in ver. 16. Woe to thee, ^ Land
Woe is the^e denounced in general terms; for who, alas, can give a detail of the
Mischiefs that attend a bad Government? Ill Government arising from ill
Governors and Rulers, Supreme and Subordinate.

(1) Supreme; in that Clause, When thy King is a Child; Not so much in Years
and Age, as Virtue, Wisdom and Understanding, Goodness and Ability.

(2) Subordinate Rulers, called Princes; a Second degree, including all lower
and inferior Ranks and Orders: whose fault as a ground of the Subjects Misery
is mentioned, where one or two instances implies many: Intemperance, a careless
Negligence and Slothfulness, ver. 16. Spending their time in Feasting and
Carowzing; indulging the Flesh when they should be Sitting in the Gates and
upon the Service of the Subject, or preparing therefore, or in other necessary
Business

2. We have intimation of the Happiness of a People under the Regimen and
Government of good Rulers. Blessed art thou, O Land, etc. And here the goodness
of such Rulers is mentioned; and one particular is Synecdochally put for many,
as Pemble observes.

(1) When the Supreme Ruler the King, Rules well; is the Son of Nobles: The
meaning an't of Nobility of Birth and Extract, or Nobility in Blood mainly and
principally, at least, 1 King. 3. 7. But it is meant of Policy, Piety and
Prudence

(2) As to Inferior Rulers, their goodness is set forth by their Prudence,
Temperance, Care and Caution; who are men governed in all their Actions,
Conversations and Administrations, by good and right Ends. That Is the scope and
meaning of that Phrase, of their Eating in due season, for strength and not for
drunkenness; i. e. to fit and prepare them for the discharge of their Duty:
Which makes way for this Doctrine or Proposition.

DOCT. Good Rulers in a Commonwealth, will be a great Blessing to a People.

This Truth contains the Sum and Substance of our Text; and shall be Prosecuted
in this Method, We shall Essay to show; 1. What are the Qualifications of these
Rulers who are like to prove Blessings to a People, and styled Good Rulers. 2.
The Reasons and Evidences of the Truth. 3. The Use and Improvement.


As for the Character, Properties and Qualifications of such a Ruler,

1. A good Ruler must be a good man. Such is the Connection between Piety and
Christian Policy, that a man must be a GOOD man, in order to his being a Good
Ruler; a Conscientious man, one that fears God, that walks with the fear of God
before his Eyes. This is agreeable to what we have in God's Word; Exodus 18. 21.
Thou shall provide such as fear God, and place such to be Rulers. So Deuteronomy. 17.
14, 15. particularly ver. 19. which though spoken with express reference to
Supreme Rulers, yet not exclusive of Inferior and Subordinate Officers. We read
2 Samuel 23. 3* He that rules over men must be Just, Ruling in the fear of God,
Civil Rulers are to be Custodes V^ri^s^ue Tabulae, Keepers of both Tables of
the Law. Rulers in a Christian-Common-wealth have a Sacred Dep^situm put into
their hands. And as we have all reason in the world to fear, that men whose
Biass is not Grace, will do no great Service for God and Religion, so likewise
that they will do a great deal of Mischief. If great men be good men, their
goodness makes their greatness Honorable* but if they are bad men, their
greatness makes their badness but the more Shameful and Dangerous. And Famous
Bolton writing to a great man, tells him out of Nazianzen That never any man
void of the true fear of God, can possibly be cordially and conscionably
Serviceable to men on Earth; and much more to the same purpose says that Man.
Such men are acted by Self-love, and governed by Self-interest at best: Seek to
serve themselves, and often want nothing but an Opportunity and Temptation to
throw off the Mask; as is too often seen in Magistrates and Ministers of the
Gospel too. Such men are unfit and unworthy to Rule over the Lord's People, who
are unwilling to be Ruled by God himself. We read, Psalm. 82.6. Civil Rulers are
styled Gods. They are so by Deputation; they are GOD's Representatives,
Clothed with his Image, Adorned with Majesty and Power by him* and shine with
his Rays: But he who is not partaker of the Divine Nature and vested with the
Moral Beatifying Communicable Attributes of God, an't fit to bear the Scepter
of Rule and Government over a Christian Commonwealth. Shall it be said by
Zenophon, That such was the Court of Cirus, That if a man blindfold should seek
he could not miss of a good man? And shall a Christian People think Moral
goodness no necessary Qualification for Rulers? The Father of Constantine the
Great, is said to have turned off some of his Courtiers and Councillors,
saying, He cannot be faithful to me, who is unfaithful to God. Pietate sublata
tellitur Fides. I have often with wonderment thought of Frederick a Gothic King
and an Arian, who having a Servant that was near and dear to him, and of the
Orthodox Faith; but turned Arian, hoping thereby to please his Master and
recommend himself to his more peculiar Favor; the King his Master coming to
understand it, most severely Punished him; commanding suddenly, Capite multari,
giving this for his Reason (as he abovesaid) Qui non, etc. He that will not be
faithful to his God, I cannot expect will be so to me. And to talk of men's being
good Commonwealths men and fit to bear Rule over Religious People, and yet
they not be men of Religion, is to talk at Random, without Reason or Religion.
He that is not a good man or but only so, can never be a good Ruler, says
Fuller. But this an't the only necessary Qualification.

2. Knowledge and good Understanding is another Qualification that fits men for
Rule. And indeed without this, men will be but Ciphers. They who Rule should be
Knowing men in the nature and end of Government, and the Laws which ought to be
the measure and boundaries of their Rule and Government. An Ignorant man may
chance to do Justice, but much as the Blind man hits the mark: There is great
hazard that either he prove rash and precipitant and go beyond the Line, or
else through fear or cowardice he fall miserably short; and so the best of Causes
may be miserably betrayed It Is especially dangerous when Un-skilful men sit
Judges in heavy and weighty Cases. Many times through the cunning Craft and
Subtlety of learned and studied Lawyers, Judgment fails and falls in the Gate,
and poor People ly under the weight of Oppression and Injustice; and all under
the pretense and color of Law (would to God it be never the miserable state of
this Land) I shall not pretend to tell you the minimum quod sic, of Knowledge
necessary; but it is certain that the lower degrees will not make men Strong
Rods to Rule. There will be Seasons which call for good Hearts and the best
Heads; and a strong head and good heart together, make a good Ruler: And this
head p^ece seems to be what God expects. See Exodus 18 21, 25 Able men. Ver. 20.
Men of Study, men Taught and Learned. In Deuteronomy. 1. 12 it is said, Take wise and
understanding men. And without this, however honest and well-meaning, 'tan't at
all probable they will do much to promote the welfare of a People.

3. Prudence and Discretion is another necessary Qualification. Good Rulers
will be discreet in their Administrations and Government. Wisdom will guide
their Tongues Heads and Hands too. Men who in the Executions of their Powers,
will distinguish between Cause and Cause, Men and Men, Times and Seasons. Such
we read of, in that 1 Chronicles 12.32* Men that had understanding of the times, and
know what they and Israel ought to do. Those, it is said, mere the Heads and
Rulers of the People. Prudent men who consult the State and Condition of the
People. What Laws to make what Penalties to affix, what Severity to use, when
to brandish the Sword of Justice, and when to sheath it in the bowels of
Offenders; they distinguish between such Thick S^^ll'd Transgressors, whose
hardiness make it necessary to brighten and sharpen the Sword, and to smite
with redoubled force, and such upon whom a Frown will make due impression. They
know how to distinguish between the Letter and the Meaning of the Law Men's,
ratio or finis Legis est Lex, not Litera. Rulers ought to suffer their Zeal to
rise and to assert the Dignity of their Post; but this Zeal is to rise or fall
as occasion serves: They are Discreet men, Genesis 41. 3^ Such guide their Affairs
with discretion. David one of the best of Rulers was such, Psalm. 101. So 112 5.
They Will be men not heady and giddy, self-confident and conceited, but men
willing to take the best Advice and Counsel in matters of Weight and
Consequence: Prove. 1. 7. It Is a part of Folly to despise Counsel and
Instruction. A Prudent Ruler will endeavor to intermix Judgment with Mercy.
It Is observed, in Prove 16. 12. It Is said, that the throne is Established by
Righteousness. Yet Chap. 20. 28. It Is said that Mercy and Truth preserve the
King, and that his (...) is Upholden by Mercy. He that is a Mortal God, should
remember when he sits upon the Seat of Judgment, that he Represents that GOD
who in Judgment remembers Mercy. I remember I have read of a King, sitting out
upon rule and Government, asked a Counselor how he should do to best manage
the Affairs of his Government? He took a piece of Paper and wrote on the top
middle and bottom, M^de-ratio; Prudence and Wisdom carries Rulers between the
Two Extremes, Indulgence and Severity, which is the best, if not the only way
to Rule quietly, safely and successively. The old rule is, Legis Extremitas est
Severitas.

4. Courage and Resolution is another Article. Good Rulers must be bold and
resolute men, whose Front is well-steeled. Such who fear not the face of Man in
a good Cause: Such men having forementioned Qualifications, will be Strong Rods
indeed. Judgment and Justice shall run down like Waters, and Righteousness as
mighty Streams. They Will break in upon the lines of strong and heady Opposers,
and will not be beat out of Countenance, or removed from the Seat of Justice by
Vice however rampant. They fear not to sit in the Gate, though confronted by bold
and daring Sinners: Nor can they be baffled and run down by barefaced
Impudence. Their Iron Sinew must either bend or break. Joshua was once and
again bid to approve himself such an one; to be Bold and of good Courage and
not Fear See Josh. 1. 6, 9, 18. Men of a cowardly truckling and mean Spirit,
will do but little Service; but will often be out-faced in the Execution of
Justice, Clear Heads and stout Hearts, says Henry, make good Rulers and Judges.

5. Another Qualification is an Anti-worldly Spirit. They should be such by
rights: Men that hate Covetousness. Genesis 18. 21. Men of a Generous and Noble
Contempt of Worldly Wealth: Not only such who seek not Bribes, but such who
Abhor even the very thoughts of it. That man an't fit to Rule, who don't
despise the gain of Oppression and shake his hands from holding Bribes, Isa.
33. 15. God complained of such of old, who Judged for a Reward, Mic. 3. 11.
Chap. 7.3. The Reward which a Jealous God will give such is very sad. It Is
verily a sad time, when a poor injured People cannot have Justice done them,
without an extravagant Feeing and Bribing the more principal Judges, Lawyers
and Attorneys. Shall such Represent that GOD who tells us, He Judges not for a
Reward Deuteronomy. 10. 17. It brings to mind a bold, yet deserved stroke of Catulus,
meeting the Roman Judges returning home, after they had Acquitted Clodius a
great Malefactor; You, said he, do well to be well Guarded for the Safety and
Security of the Money you took for Bribes. A good Ruler will not only hate such
Practices in himself, but will be careful to have no hand in Advancing others
of such rottenness to Places of Honor and Dignity. They look on such Gain, but
as a Cankering Rust; and esteem a Little well-gotten, better than Treasures
gotten by Iniquity and Oppression. They are such who admire the Life of Famous
Judge Hale.

6. A Public Spirit is an Excellent Qualification in a Candidate for Rule:
Such I mean, who have the Public Interest lying near to their heart; that bear
the Burden of it about with them from Day to Day. Such men the Interest of the
People, is the greatest thing in the world with them. We read, when Samuel made
a Feast for Saul, 1 Samuel 9.24. The portion he sent him, was the Shoulder: If
there is in it any Allegorical sense, as some acute Schoolmen imagine, it may
intimate the Weight of Government; and that a People's Interest should ly near
to a Ruler's Heart; and the need that Rulers have of strong Shoulders, a
Generous Noble Spirit. A Narrow* Contracted, Selfish Spirit, is unbecoming men
in Public Capacity.

7. If a good measure of Activity and Zeal may be but added, we shall have a
Ruler of Consummate Excellency indeed. And verily without this, he will be but
too heavy molded to move regularly in this Orb and Sphere. Civil Rulers should
be made of the best Metal: Not Tin nor Lead, the one is too Flex-able, the
other too Fragil* Rulers should be men of Sense and Feeling; that can be red
hot when there is occasion for it, as the word signifies, Romans 12. 11. Fervent.
It Is true, Men that will appear in a declining day with a distinguishing Zeal
for Justice and Piety, shall be stigmatized and reproached, as hot Headed and
Rash men: but this should not abate their Zeal, but rather increase it. They
should be Clothed with Zeal, as the Phrase is, Isa 59*17 Phineas was Commended
for his Zeal, and highly Rewarded too, Numb. 25. 11, 13 Natural Temper may be a
great help to a man, but when Nature and Grace concur, a man may do great
things I forbear adding, and proceed to the Reasons.

1. The First Reason and Evidence, Such Rulers are like to answer, in some good
measure, the Ends of Civil Rule and Government. A good Ruler, says Fuller, is
one that looks on Salus Populi, to be Maxima Charta He owns what Cicero said,
that Salus Populi est Finis imperii; The great subordinate End is the Public
good; the Means and Laws of Government must be calculated to work and bring
about that End and Effect. And a good Ruler knows these Maxims are not only
founded in Nature, but expressly asserted in God's Word: Romans 13.4. He is the
minister of God for good. A Peoples good is the End. A good Ruler will study
the Interest of the Commonwealth, and will not suffer any Private Views to
come in Competition therewith: All shall be Sacrificed to subserve the Public.
He Is one that has a Compassionate Regard for those of his Charge. Hence they
are compared to Fathers and Nursing Mothers, Isa. 49. 23. In the Book of Judges
we find when Barak was ordered by Deborah the Prophetess, to Levy Forces and
Oppose Siserah, Barak refuses ^nless she will go with him, though he knew her
Presence would bear away the Trophies of Honor and Eclipse his Glory, when he
should be crowned with Success, One makes this Observation upon it, that Barak
was one that valued more the Success of the Enterprise, than his own Honor;
having more at Heart the Public Good than his own Honor. And it is observed,
That a Saul before the Spirit of God departed from him, will be in distress for
his People, 1 Samuel 11. 5. Henry's Note upon it is, That good Rulers will be in
Pain, when their Subjects are in Tears. There will be a readiness in such
Rulers to do even the best and all they can for the Subject. It Is an Ahasuerus
and an Haman, that can sit down to Eat and Drink when the City Shushan is
Perplexed. A good Ruler cannot look on himself Happy, unless the Subject be so
too. Good Rulers consider well that their Peace, Prosperity and Success, much
depends on their interest in the hearts of the People: Therefore they will
endeavor to suit and please the People what they may and can A Condescending
Spirit is no unbecoming Qualification in a Ruler. It Is taken Notice of by the
Historian, to the honor of Trajon the Emperor, That once when mounted for
Battle, he dismounted his Horse to hear the Complaint of a Poor Woman, that
Cried to him for Justice. It Is Chronicled of our Edward the VI th. That he
would appoint certain Hours to set with the Master of Requests, to see a
Dispatch given to the Causes of the Poor. They that can pass by the repeated
Cries and Complaints of the Subject and not take Notice thereof, han't the good
Nature of the Unjust Judge. Good Rulers in their Exalted Station, think it not
too low a stoop to do Service for God and their Country. It Is no ways inferior
for a Governor to step into Inferior Courts, or into the Place of a Justice of
Peace, to take care that Justice be done, and the Laws Executed, when Necessity
calls therefore. Dignity of Place Excuses not from Extensiveness of Service.
Excellent Mr. Henry Observes, That when the Holy Ghost is about to give an
Instance of Solomon' s Wisdom, a Proof is not fetched from the Mysteries of
State, or the Policies of the Council Board; but from the Trial and
Determination of a Cause between Party and Party. And observes, That though
Princes devolve such Business upon their Judges, yet they ought not to think it
a matter below Themselves to take Cognizance of Solomon the King patiently
hears what the Parties had to say, the Case Opened, not by Lawyers, says he,
but the Parties themselves, and then gives Judgment He did not divolve the
Cause upon Inferior Officers; He himself will see Justice done, though a great
King.

2. Such Rulers will have the Presence of God with them As good Rulers will be
in a good measure Faithful to their Trust, so God will be with them to Guide,
Prosper and Succeed them; and may if they will, many times, do a great deal of
Service. The Promise made to Saints, in Psalm. 1. 3. Whatsoever he does shall
Prosper, Extends to the Civil Ruler in the faithful Endeavor to discharge his
Duty, as well as to men in a Private Capacity; 2 Chronicles. 15. ^ So in that 1 Samuel
18. 14. It Is said, David behaved himself wisely in his ways, and the Lord was
with him* In 2 Samuel 8. 14. 15 It Is said, That David Executed Judgment and
Justice to Israel, and the Lord Preserved or Prospered him whither soever he
went* 1 King. 2. 1, 23. Although Civil Rulers may sink far below what they could
wish or desire, yet their Labors shall be Rewarded, and oftentimes with good
Success. It Is observable at how low an Ebb Religion, good Order run of old in he
Days of Bad Kings, and how they revived in the Reign of Good Kings.

3. The very Examples of such Rulers will do much good, many times, among a
People. Examples are very taking: They are often more Influential than Precepts.
The Heathen Seneca was wont to say, ^^us Exemplis quam P^^aeceptis Vivimus. But
it is especially true of the Examples of great Men, Magnates magnetes. It Is true
the III Examples of such will have most Followers: Many will be exceeding ready
to take Advantage of any thing that looks like Ill in such men, to the hardening
themselves in their Sin; and so greedy are many of such Advantages, that they
censure the more innocent Practices of great Men, and put an ill Face on
Innocence to justify themselves in what is real Vice. If Ministers and
Magistrates do now and then make an innocent Visit to the Tavern, some men will
look on themselves Excused, if they sit and Tipple, and spend a great part of
their Time there. It Is lamentably true. That ill Examples of such men will
Corrupt not a few. We read of Manasseh, that he made Judah to Sin, 2 Chronicles.
32.9. Which as Divines observe, was done much if (...) more by his Example than
by his Commands. I say that good Examples and bad will have their Influence.
The Maxim of old Claudianus has truth in it, Regis ad Exemplum totus Componitur
Orbis. The Historian observes to the Reproach of this Nation, That It changed
her Religion Four times in Twelve Years. Great Men, says Trap, are the Country
Peoples Looking-glasses, by which they Dress themselves. Both the Fashions and
Religion of the Court will have their Influence. One observes, that when
Crispus the Chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed, many of the Corinthians
believed also, Act. 18.8

4. Good Rulers will prove Gap-men. They will be a good Defense many times to a
People, and a Means to keep off heavy and awful Judgments. It may be said of
them as of him, 2 King. 2. 12. They are as the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel.
True, it may come to that, That God may say as of old, Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, yet my Face cannot be toward this People, Jer.15. 1* And, Woe
to such a People. Yet it is often better times with a People and a very few may
prevail with the Lord to spare and turn away from the fierceness of His Anger.
It Is agreeable with God's wonted manner of the Government with a People, when
good Rulers stand up Zealously in Pleading the Cause of God, God regards the
People for their Sakes One Zealous Justice in a Place, may do a great deal to
avert awful impending Judgments. One Phinehas of old turned away the Wrath of
God from the Lord's Professing People. See Numb. 25. 11. So it was in the case
of Achan, so soon as Joshua does Justice upon Achan, God's Anger ceases toward
the People The Prayers and Intercessions of men in Public Capacity, are very
Prevalent with God: God often hears the Prayers and Cries of such on the behalf
of a poor People, and spares them for the sake of Pious Rulers. If Pious men in
a Private Capacity may do much to Save a People, much more may men in Exalted
Stations, if good, do to Save a people from Public Calamities.

The APPLICATION follows.

USE, I. Of Information and Instruction, in sundry Branches.

1. Learn hence the great Privilege of People in an Elective Government: A
Government where People have the Liberty of Choosing their Rulers, such a
Government as this Colony is Favored with. It Is much to be feared, we have many
who are weary of their Privileges, and are willing to part with them, yea to
cast them away. Some who are men of restless Spirits and hanker after
Novelties, Nova Placent. Some of an haughty, self-conceited, aspiring Humor,
that long for Advancement. Some again are Crossed in their pretended Interest,
and upon a Revolution, hope for a Reparation. Others again of a mean low Spirit
who Cry out of heavy Taxes. Were we under Oppression, what Government under
better Advantages to Redress its Grievances, than where they choose their own
Governors and Rulers, and from among themselves? It Is well known that our
Privileges are of great Value and Worth in the Eyes of other Governments, and
we Envied on the account of them, by Men and Places not now to be mentioned.
It Is pity that CONNECTICUT who Enjoy them, should Undervalue them. It Is our Abuse
that gives all the reasonable grounds of Uneasiness. It was of old accounted a
great Privilege, not to have Strangers set over a People, but such as were of
their Brethren, Deuteronomy. 1^. 15. It Is one of the Privileges spoken of, Jer. 30.
20, 21. That their Governors and their Nobles should proceed from the midst of
them. And where so likely as in a Government which may choose their own Rulers?

2. Then it is a Calamitous Time and a Dark Day with a People, who are Governed
by Bad Rulers. If it be an Happy Time with a People under good Rulers, it must
then be the Reverse under bad Governors. Such will become Grins, Traps and
Snares, and bring a great deal of Mischief upon a People. Little good can be
Expected from them, but a deal of ill. It was a sad time with them of old,
under such Rulers, mentioned, Isa. 59. 14, 15. Judgment is turned away
backward, Justice stands as far off; Truth fails in the streets, and Equity
cannot enter; when he that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey. It Is a sad
time with a Land, when wicked men are Exalted, Psalm. 12. 8. Sin will in a
little time (without a glorious Revolution) walk barefaced through the Streets
and ride in the black Chariot of Insolence, and the Land shall Mourn; the
Sparks of God's anger will be enkindled to a Flame that will not soon and easily
be Quenched: Yea there is great hazard lest the Sluices and Flood-g^^^^ be
plucked up and an Inundation of Mi^^^y break in. It Is a dreadful sign of God*
Anger, when he gives over a People to be Ruled by such Men. Rulers have many
times by their Maladministration, a great hand in pulling down the Judgments
of Heaven upon a People. A People may be punished for their Rulers Sins. There
are many signal Instances and Examples of it on Scripture Record: Particularly
that of David, whose Sin in Numbering the People, brought down Mischief upon the
Head of the People. Some indeed suppose David's Sin but the Occasion and their
own the procuring Cause; but Famous and Acute Alsop, somewhere smiles at such
an Opinion. Civil Rulers are Representatives and Common Parents, and their Sin
may many ways redound to the hurt of the People. Families are ruined by Sin and
Kingdoms too, ruined by the Heads of them. If great Men do wickedly, they
involve many others both in the Guilt and in the Smart: They go to hell with a
large Train. See Henry on 1 King. XIV. Chap.

3. Then it must follow, that the Removal of Good, Able, Faithful Rulers,
brings matter of Lamentation to a Bereaved People. It Is a dark Day with such a
People; Especilly so, when there is little prospect of a Reparation of
Breaches. It was a sad time with them of old, when it was said, Though she had
had strong Rods to Rule, and her Stature was Exalted, yet it came to that, She
was plucked up in fury, Ezekiel. 19. 11, -- Such Cases can scarce be too much
Bewailed. It Is a Day in which an Angry God is calling us in this Government to
Lamentation and Mourning. What shall we say? We are come a'most to a stand. The
Lord has been writing bitter things against us and has given us wormwood and
gall to drink The Roll that God has written, has been full of Lamentation and
Mourning and Woe, Ezekiel. 2. 10. None of the least of the Frowns that appear in
the face of God's awful Providence, is that of his plucking up our Stakes and
pulling down our Pillars. Many of the Stars which not long since shined bright
and with great luster in their Orb, are either Removed or Eclipsed, and our
Hemisphere is darkened. Among others that are Removed, our SALTON-STALL is one,
a Man TRULY Great. In the Day of his Removal, it might be said, as in the fall
of Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 38. This day is a Prince and a great Man fallen. A Man who
shined with distinguishing Excellencies in every Station. All Strangers to him
at their trials found him a man of unexpected Affability, and every way a
Gentleman. View him where you will! Walking in his House and when under the
greatest Trials, in Patience and self-Command, Uncommon. Eye him at the head of
his Troops, and you will see Mars shining in his Luster and Glory. When on his
little Throne surrounded with his Councillors, he was their Oracle; and his
word gave Law to most. His Countenance intermixed with Gravity and Complacency,
which Charmed and Commanded the Admiration of Beholders. His Frowns were more
than a match for the daring and impudent. Some have though it him Comparable to
Argus King of Peloponesus, for his singular Sagacity and Circumspection; to
Berianeus, for his Dexterity and Prowess; to Bringarius, for Knowledge, of whom
it is said, He knew all things Knowable. His Death carries one thing Remarkable
in it, which I'v though it much of; the Deaths and Mortality which preceded and
followed it, which made us call to mind, what is Recorded of King James I. viz.
As if a King should not want his Train, some to usher on before, and others to
follow after. Such a Mortality of Nobility and Commonalty attended, the like
was scarce ever known in this Kingdom. If any were ready to Magnify his
Imperfections, let 'em know, that the greatest and best of Men have their
Butt's. As for his Superior Excellencies, what are imitable let us follow, what
above our reach, let us admire; and as becomes, let supposed Infirmities be
covered with the mantle of Charity and a most candid Interpretation. Elias
himself was a man of like Passion, etc. The greatest of Men are but men, and he
that looks for more of any, abuses both him and others too.

4. Then let this teach a People privileged with good Rulers, the deep
Obligations and Engagements they are under to Gratitude and Respect. It becomes
them upon their bended Knees to acknowledge God's Favor and distinguishing
Benovelence to them-ward. It Is owing to Him that such Rulers are set up among a
People, Prove. 8. 16. He it is that sets up one and pulls down another, Psalm. 75.
7. And God might have set up such as would have been a provocation to Him,
stirred up his Anger and Displeasure. God sometimes gives Governors and Rulers
in Anger, Hos. 13. 11. God should be Acknowleged when he gives them Rulers
after his own Heart.

There Is an Obligation of Respect due to good Rulers themselves too, from a
People. A People are bound to reverence and obey such. To do all they can to
strengthen their hands and encourage their hearts. Men should not indulge
themselves in mean and low tho'ts of Rulers, or their Office-work. They should
likewise cheerfully and liberally Support them in their several Relations, and
Reward them for their good Services. To do otherwise is base Ingratitude both
to God and Man. A base and niggardly Spirit is far from an Honor to a People
so privileged. A good Governor should eat the Bread of a Governor, Neh. V
th. Chapt.

I shall take leave in the Next Place, to Address my self to those in Highest
Station and Relation, the GOVERNOR and DEPUTY GOVERNOR, Honorable and much
Honored.

Sirs, It must be owned to be a dark and gloomy Day, in the which a glorious
and merciful God, is Advancing You to the Head of Rule and Government among us.
It cannot be denied, the holy God has many ways weakened our hands, and has made
breach upon breach, as was said, Job. 16. 14. And we have been ready to say,
Our breaches are wide even as the Sea, who can heal us, Lam. 2. 16. And that
our wounds were even incurable.

The People over whom you Rule, are many of them Giddy and Headstrong, and a
Levelling Spirit prevails among us. Therefore your Province will be difficult,
your Work and Business great, which will be enough to fill Heart, Head and
Hands too. This will be discouraging; let it not be sinking. Your Honors know
the near affinity between Honos and Onus. Honor has its burden. Antonius would
say, Imperium est Oceanum malorum, He that Rules is in a Sea of Evils. But we
trust you will never have reason to say, as one did, Foelix si non
imperitassem, Happy had I been had I never been a Ruler. Be on the side of God,
and He will be with you, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. And he can make Mountains to become
Plains before you. And suffer us, much Honored, to tell you, that we cannot
but conceive Light arising out of thick Darkness, and that our joy must
supersede our well nigh overwhelming Sorrow and Fear, when we see your Honors
at Helm in our lacerated and distracted Government, and in the midst of our
intricate Affairs. We come not to Salute your Honors, Dictis Phe^eratis, etc.
and with gaudy Elecutions and fulsome Hyperbolies and Flatteries; remembering
what is written* Joh 17. 5. and 22, 21, 22. But with all Plainness and no less
heartiness and integrity, we congratulate your Honors, (we'll adventure to
say) Happy Advancement: And we are big with hopes of seeing you, in a
comfortable measure, the Repairers of our Breaches, and trust that under the
conduct of your Wisdom, we shall ^ear no complaint of Arbitrary Power and
Desp^^ick Proceedings among us. Sirs, You are under great and deep Obligations
to Faithfulness. The Eyes of God and man are upon you. Suffer not your Friends
of raised Expectations, to be shamed. There Is a Day of Account for the God's of
the Earth; a Day when the Highest, must stand upon a Level with the meanest*
Page, the Prince on the (...) with a Beggar on the Dunghil^: The King must be
divested of his Royal Robe^* (...) by his distinguishing Characters, and stand
at the Bar with the meanest Beggar, Psalm. 82. 6, 7. Death i^ a great Leveller.
If, much Honored, you are found Faithful to God and man, a massy Crown will
make you forget all your Pains here. And it is what we humbly bow before our
LORD and JUDGE for, and beg that though our Gold be changed, it may not become
Dim, nor our Salt loose its savor. Amen.

The Exhortation follows to such as shall be our Rulers in Civil Place, the
Year ensuing; particularly, the Members of our Great and General Assembly,
Honorable, Worthy and highly Respected, Suffer the Exhortation which firstly
appertains to you, Labor to approve yourselves good Rulers over this the Lords
Heritage in your respective Places and Capacities: Such as shall be Blessings
to them; such who shall give them abundant cause to Bless God for you. And
here, though much has been handed down from this awful Desk, by better heads and
hands, on like Opportunities, yet I may not be wholly Silent, and beg leave
with freedom and Liberty, to offer a few things.

1. Let Reformation-work be one of the main Articles in your Consultations.
(And, Oh! that it might ly with due weight upon you) It Is, I hope, beyond
Controversy, to many, (would to God, I might say, to all) that the Holy and
Jealous God has a Controversy with this Land; God is writing bitter things
against us in such fiery Characters, as methinks, should make them Legible and
Obvious to all. Our Righteous God is many ways testifying his Displeasure
against us and we cannot expect the removal of Gods Anger without Repentance and
Reformation. see Josh. 7. 12. Hos. 5. 12, 14, 15. And it is the important Duty
and Interest of every one to say as they, Lam. ^. 40. Let us search our ways
and turn to the Lord our God. But no small Article in our Malady, is a Spirit
of Insensibility. Some are so Sottish as to own no great reason for
Reformation: They think it fares as well with us now, as Forty or Fifty Years
ago; and that there is as much Religion now as then, in Proportion to the Number
of the People. They are ignorant men and objects of Pity. But among such as own
the great need of Reformation, there is a great deal of Division: They are not
agreed what it is that is the Achan and Troubler of our Peace, or what Sins are
the incendiaries, and that blow up the sparks of Gods Anger into so high a
Flame. Sirs, It Is by so much the more your Work and Business, to study and
consult where and how to begin and push forward a Reformation. It Is the
important Duty of Magistrates and Ministers jointly to Engage themselves in
this important Affair. And, Oh! That our Civil Rulers would in their respective
Capacities, seriously and solemnly Consider what might and ought be done in
this our Day^* I am persuaded great things might be done. Good Rulers when in
good earnest, have often done great and good Services. Hezekiah, Josiah and
others are Instances of it. Though they cannot change the Heart, yet they may and
can reform the Life. They cannot Mortify, yet they can Curb and Restrain the
Corruption and ill-manners of a People in good measure and degree. Sirs, Your
Cries to God for us and a distinguishing Zeal, becoming your Character, might
have glorious Effects. If the People Perish, let not the fault ly at your
Doors. And know that God looks on you as Guardians to His and his Peoples
interest, and expects much from you.

2. Let us have Laws Necessary, well Explained and Enforced.

(1.) Sharpen the Sword of Justice as there shall be occasion. Let Penalties
affixed be proportioned to the Offense and the Aggravations thereof. It Is a
great blemish to a Christian Commonwealth, when lesser Crimes are more
severely Punished, than higher and greater Offenses. I fear, that in some cases
wherein the Name of God and the Interest of Religion are more especially
concerned, there wants greater acumen and keeness: The penalty which may be
Sufficient to restrain a Vice in one Age, may be much too Low in another.

(2.) It might be well if some especially, of our Laws were mended and
Explicated, and it might hopefully be done to good Purpose in many Instances.
It Is much to be feared that many Officers, Grand-jurors and Justices too, are
many times wretchedly short in their Duty. And when we Consider the Solemn Ty's
of the Oath of God upon them, we are Loath to account for their gross Defects in
any other way than this, of assigning for the grand Cause thereof, their
Unacquaintedness with the Nature, Sense and Meaning of the Laws. It Is pity but
that they might be helped.

(3.) Let me humbly recommend to your Serious Consideration, whether some more
Effectual method ought not to be taken to give Force to the Laws and invigorate
the just Execution of them, at Least, in many Instances. May not a Severer
Penalty for the Neglect of Inferior Officers be of great Service? It Is beyond
Contradiction, that Vice grows, notwithstanding our good and wholesome Laws;
the Laws Slighted, Baffled and Neglected. Intemperance, Tavern-haunting,
Sabbath-breaking and Uncleanness are very Common. Sailing and Traveling upon
the Lord's Day, too much connived and winked at, which Crimes are worthy your
Notice, and if not obviated and reformed, it is more than feared a Fire will be
enkindled that will not be quenched, as we may see by Jeremiah 17. ult.

3. Then let me entreat that Care be Conscientiously taken, that such and only
such be Invested with the Executive Power, who are most likely well and
vigorously to put the just Laws in Execution, according to the true intent and
meaning of them. Suffer not such to be Commissionated and Betrusted with a
Business of such importance, who have shown themselves but as Ciphers, or who
have been Unskilful, or proved themselves as Unfaithful in times past, till
amended. It Is a great and unknown Injury when men Unqualified are Exalted. A
Secular Ruler (says How) in his Living Temple, page mihi, 262, 3. is set up and
established purposely for the Good of the Community, as the more Principal End
of his Constitution. The People are not formed for him, but he for them. And
the Administration of Justice is a Public and Common Right wherewith he is
entrusted. And his Neglect is a Violation of Public Justice. It Is a wrong done
to the Community and will be of ill-Consequence. Let such as are likely to
answer the End of such a Post be Advanced, and always Encouraged.

3. Study Unity and Peace. Let there be Peace, as much as Possible, among your
selves. Good Agreement in the Court is a good Sign, and the contrary bad. I
remember Excellent Mr Henry says, Ill Practices in the Country, will never be
Suppressed there, while they are Supported in the Court. Study Peace at home
and then endeavor it, what you may among your People. Divisions, Animosities
in Courts, Prove costly to them and the People too: A Kingdom divided, etc.
cannot stand. Mat. 12. 25.

4. Let me humbly Pray that due Care be taken of the Gospel Ministry. When I
came to this Topic, I was bro't to a stand, and Considering how invidious a
Theme it is to many, and how Neglected and Censured Discourses of this Nature
have been before, Little good Notice taken, but many Malignant Reflections
made. I was at a Loss, whether it would not be for Edification wholly to pass
it by: But Considering that I Suffer less, than it may be, some of my Reverend
Fathers and Brethren do, and that I may never have the Honor of such Like
Opportunity of putting in a Plea for the Gospel Ministry, I shall therefore
take the greater freedom and adventure, Sirs, We Look to you as Guarantees for
the Ministers Maintenance, entreating you to take Care that they be duly
Encouraged and Supported. Verily, it will not in the Eyes of JESUS CHRIST, be
too low a stoop for you, or beyond the Line of your Business to make Enquiry
into the Circumstances of our Ministers* Say not, Honored and Respected, That
it will be time enough to take Cognizance of their Low and mean State, when
Complaint is made to you by them. It Is out of tender regard to Souls; And fear
lest such Applications to you, should disaffect many of their Hearers and so
render their Ministry among them in vain, that many suffer greatly; rather than
adventure. Surely, our Leaders, cannot be such Strangers in our Israel, as not
to know there is in many Places too great a Neglect as to the Maintenance and
Support of such as Represent Jesus Christ and are Ambassadors of Peace. Their
Work is great, Honorable and Laborious, their Encouragement ignoble slender
and much too short. I must take leave to say, There are few and but few if any
that can live upon their Salaries. The Credit of that Little Paper they come
at, is sunk wretchedly Low and is now of little Value: Their Wages not paid in
due season; and it is easy for the Fathers of our Commonwealth to remedy the
latter Effectually, and in some Measure the former inconvenience, and why may
we not humbly Expect it? Neh. 13. 10, 11, 12. 2 Chronicles 30. 22. And even in many
Places where there are the most bright and acceptable Preachers, there the love
of many waxes Cold; and there an't such frequent Gratuities given as in former
Days, which were wont to be a great help for the Support of the Ministry. And
there will be such a Neglect in a declining Time, when the sword of the Spirit,
is sheathed in the bowels of men's beloved Lusts and the line of Discipline duly
drawn over them, many will soon become Disaffected and abate in their
Ministerial Zeal and Charity. The great Apostle Paul, complains of it, Gal. 4.
11, 15, 16. It was a say of an Eminent, Reverend, I earned and Faithful
Minister of Jesus Christ, That let a Minister approve himself Faithful but
Eight or Ten Years, and he shall loose the hearts of many of his Hearers, if
not the most of them; and that it will be time for him to remove. May we not
fear that it is too lamentably true? Consider, Sirs, The Care and Charge of
Gospel Ministers is solemn and awful. 1 Timothy 4. 15. Give thy self Wholly to thy
work. And how is it possible for some to devote themselves to the care of poor
Souls? And how can they expect success, when they are forced out of their
Studies into the Fields or Shops, for the necessary Support of themselves and
Families. There is no need of a spirit of Prophecy to (...) that little of
(...) like to ^^rive in such Cases and Places.

Learning will fail and sink in that Order of man in an Age or two at most,
here and there one excepted. And Ministers will not be able to Vindicate the
Truth and convince Gainsayers, as they should. Tit. 1, 9. How shall they be
able to save their Flocks from the Cunning Craft and Subtilty of Learned
Seducers? Verily, Luther was in the right, when he said, That the Flourishing
of a Christian Commonwealth depended much upon it is being Furnished with
worthy, Able and Learned Men, particularly in the Ministry. Religion never did
nor can Flourish Long in a Land without a Learned Ministry. It Is sad that there
should be any amongst us (who yet are loath to be though it tinged with Enthusiasm
or Quakei^m) decry Learning in the Ministry. But, Honored and Respected, may
we not hope for better Principles in you?

Error and Ignorance will prevail in a Neglected Ministry. Ignorance is said to
be the Mother of Devotion, but it may with greater verity be said to be the
Mother of Error and Superstition. Many an honest and well-meaning man will
imbibe gross and dangerous Errors, even ere he is aware; Not being able to
distinguish between Truth and Error; and like them, Isa. 5. 20. Will take Evil
for Good, or Good for Evil, and put Darkness for Light, (...)

The People will be trained up in Error, and be in great Hazard of starving for
lack of Knowledge and Understanding. The Blind will Lead the Blind. It was a sad
time with them of old, when their Leaders and Teachers caused them to Err. Isa.
3. 12. C^^p. 9. 16. Jer. 23. 13, 3^ Mic. 3, 5,

Starving of the Ministry, will at best bring in Hierarchy into the Church, as
might easily be made to appear, had we a ^it Place and Season for it. In a
word, Religion will die, and little of the Life and Power of Godliness, be
maintained and kept up in the midst of such a People.

Let a good Understanding be Cultivated between Moses and Aaron. This is
requisite in order to a mutual Servicableness in the Support of each others
Dignity and Honor. It Is no way so likely that their Honors should be
maintained, agreeable to their Character, by any means whatsoever, without this.
One observes, that when Saul fends to the People, 2 Samuel 11. 7. He joins Samuel
with him; and notes, That in the Execution of the Office of a King, he would
not do it without due Regard to the Prophet of the Lord; and while Saul kept in
with Samuel, things went pretty well in Israel.

I have often thought of what is storied of Famous Queen Elisabeth, who was said
to be a great Favourer of the Clergy; That when at a (...) Visiting the County
of Suffolk, where all the Justices of the Peace met Her Majesty, each one
having his Minister to attend him, and next to his Body; the Queen taking
notice of it, I have often, said She, demanded of my privy Council, why this
County is better Governed than other Places but never understood the Sea on
till now; but it must be so, replied the Queen, Where the Word and the Sword go
together. These two Orders of Dignified and Privileged men, conjoint in Zeal,
may do great things. Amen.

Let me once more proceed and earnestly Solicit your Serious Consideration
whether the multiplying Societies for Pretended Conveniences o^ attending God's
Public Worship, an't of dark Aspect and likely to prove baneful to Religion
among us. I know the great Plea made for it, is Religion; the Plea is
plausible: Would to God, we had no reason to fear that many times, some of the
Principal Promoters of Divisions are acted by nothing less than such a
Principle: They have other things in view and we cannot find, but many of them,
are as seldom at Church, as when Living at a greater distance. Nor was the old
Proverb altogether without ground, The nearer the Church, the farther from
Heaven. We shall find these very men that Complain most of the Burden of
Maintaining the Ministry, where their Tax a mounted, it may be, but to
Twopence on the Pound, are the most Zealous Sticklers for Separate Societies,
where their Charge must be greatly inhansed and increased. This will be the
fruit, Young, Raw, Unqualified men will be Employed in the most Sacred Work;
and it will be as in Jer^b^^^'s Days. 1 King 12. 31. The meaner of the People
will become Priests, and then farewell Religion. It Is well known, that too too
many their Enquiry ^an't concerning a man whether he be an Able, Learned Man,
an holy Spiritual Preacher* But what his Demands are. A cheap Minister is the
great Article in desire of too many. In a word, Were there more of Zeal for God
and Love to his Ordinances, there would be a great deal less of a restless
Spirit after Divisions and crumbling into small Societies.

The next Branch of Exhortation, has a particular Reference to the Freemen of
this Corporation. See to it that in the improvement of the Privileges you are
indulged the Enjoyment of, you Faithfully Endeavor the choice of such for
Rulers, as shall approve themselves Faithful and good Rulers. To Enforce this,
Brethren and Respected, let me Beseech you,

1. To Consider the Oath of God is upon you: And you are therefore under Awful,
Sacred and Solemn Bonds to Faithfulness and Conscientiousness; And yet it is
much to be feared, many don't keep their Oath* It Is hard to imagine how they
can be Conscientious, and do as many do; when many are governed by unreasonable
Fear, guided by Affection, Party, Interest or Envy. When men in Choosing Rulers
regard not those Qualifications necessary to their answering the End of their
Office and the main Duties of that Relation. Such cannot be justified and
esteemed Conscientious and Faithful to God and Man, who by a careless or worse
Violation of the Bonds of a Sacred Oath, they lay themselves under the Dreadful
Curse of Heaven, Neh. 10. 29.

2. When you thus neglect Duty, you make your Selves Partakers of their Sin,
and share in the Guilt of their Male-administrations. Therefore know assuredly,
that

3. If Mischief be bro't upon the Commonwealth by such, the Fault will be
Charged upon you, and God will require it at your Hands as well as the Rulers.
Let me beseech you to lay these things to heart, and the Lord give you Wisdom
and Understanding.

(1.) Beware of men of a Temporizing Spirit: Such as easily swim down the
Stream and Current of the Times and Places in which they live: Such who easily
Conform themselves to almost any thing, to serve a turn. Men who can shift
their Sails to suit the wind of Temptation of Self-interest. Rulers should be
men of steady Principles, and such as will not readily warp. I remember I have
read of my Lord Paulet, who under various changes of Government and Interest,
changed his Profession often, and being asked the reason of His unsteadiness,
Replied, Because, Ex Salice non ex quereu natus sum* That he was made of the
tender and pliable Willow; not of the sturdy and stiff Oak* Men of such
Reuben-like Tempers and Principles, an't fit to bear Rule.

(2.) I cannot Recommend to your Choice, men that are ambitious of Honor and
greedy of Preferment. Such men are seldom able to bear Sail* You may read their
Character and what they are like to prove in a day of Temptation, in that
Instance of Absalom, recorded in that 2 Samuel 15. chap. throughout. Such men are
prone to take ill-measures to ascend the stair of Preferment and gain the
Chair. Jehu-like, they can appear Zealous for God and Religion, when its in the
way to Honor; and as readily prove Lax and appear Lukewarm under the Plea of
Charity and Moderation and a Catholic Spirit, when it better serves their
turn. They Will be very slow in doing Justice or bearing Witness against
Transgressors, if they are those on whom they depend for Promotion. These are
dangerous men Humble and Meek spirited men, are more likely to do God and their
Country Service. Such are most worthy of Honor, who esteem that the greatest
Honor, viz. to deserve it in doing most Service.

(3.) Be not fond of men whose Zeal an't Uniform and of a piece; and such whose
Zeal an't proportionable to the Cause. Some men are great Sticklers in lesser
Matters, are cold or lukewarm a^ best, in matters of greater Weight and
Consequence. You read of such, Mat. 23. 23, 24. Men whose Zeal will rise high
in a breach of a mere penal Humane Law, yet will scarce be moved at the
Violation of God's Law. Little concerned in a case where the Honor of God and
the Interest of Religion lies a^ ^take* But red hot, if their own carnal
temporal Interest be touched. There are too many such, who can hear the Name of
the Poly God lacerated and torn, by the worse than iron Teeth of the proud
Swearer and profane Sinner: see their Neighbors wallowing in their Filth; the
Sabbath profaned, and yet make light of these things, and not look at
themselves concerned to take notice thereof; contrary to express charge, Lev.
19. 17. Such men are altogether unfit for Government and Places of Honor:
Notwithstanding they are of an ancient Family, and you may trace their Pedigree
up as high as Cain, of whom you read, Genesis 4 9.

To Conclude, in a word. Make not Choice of men in whom you have no good ground
to hope for Soundness in Religion. Men will not make Choice of Timber for Props
and Pillars in Edifices, if they Suspect it to be rotten at heart. It Is the
greatest Solecism in Christian Politics and Absurdity, to make Choice of such
men to become Pillars in a Christian Commonwealth* Put Honor upon such men
whom God will Honor, and they are such who Honor God, 1 Samuel, 2. 20: You may
oftentimes discover men's Unsoundness, by their partial Obedience, or observance
of the law of God. Some men are careful of the External Duties of the First
Table but regard little Second Table Duties. They can Cheat and Cousen, Over
reach and Defraud their Neighbors, make no Conscience of speaking the Truth,
etc. Others are Moral Honest Men, Just in their Dealings, and no man can Charge
them with Fraud or Deceit. But their rottenness, is discovered in their Laxness
wi^h Reference to the First Table; they slight the Name and Worship of God,
have little regard for the Sanctification of the Lord's Day. They are
Anti-ministerial men, that beg^utch duly to Support and Honorably Maintain the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ. By these and such like Marks you may sometimes
discover the false Pretender. Some men prove themselves Hypocrites, in the
First Table by being wicked in the Second Table, says Dr Tilli^son* and by
their Unrighteousness, discover their Ungodliness.

Let me Conclude, with a word to this August and great Assembly, the Body of
the People here present in common Capacity.

Sirs, It may be there are many of you Present that look on your selves little
Concerned in what you have this ^ay heard: And how many there are of you of
whose Presence in God's House no Religious Reason can be assigned, the Lord
knows.

Suffer me a word to you; it may be, One that was then an Hearer and well in
Health, died the next day.
you may never Live to another such like Opportunity, as many have Died since
the (...) so may you ere an other Annual Revolution.

Are good Rulers a great Blessing? etc. Then take heed, Sirs, that you have no
hand in bringing in Rulers of another stamp. See to it, you don't provoke an
Holy and a Jealous God to Set over you such whose Character will be Reverse to
that of a good Ruler; and give you cause to Lament and Complain of Oppression,
and the whole Land to Mourn.

1. Beware of a Discontented Murmuring Spirit under such a Government, for
which you have great reason to Bless God. Remember such a Spirit was highly
Displeasing and Provoking to God in his Professing People of old, and cost that
People dear. See Numb. 14.11, 27. Chap. 16 21,- In case of Oppression, it is
sometimes not only lawful but a duty to Complain; but a Sin to Murmur. And is
highly Unreasonable, especially among a People who have the liberty and
Privilege of choosing their own Rulers. Take heed, lest a wicked Spirit make
you restless after Changes and Novelty's, lest you and yours Repent it too
late. Let not a spirit of Error intoxicate you and make you Dream of that which
will never come to pass. The little Finger of such a Governor and Government,
as some hanker after, will prove thicker than the Loins of that more easy
Government, you now Enjoy.

2. Don't Rebel against the good and wholesome Laws of the Government, made to
Curb and Restrain men's Exorbitances and Excentrick Motions. Take heed lest you
give the Fathers of our Commonwealth reason, and constrain them to complain of
you to God, that you are a Rebellious People, that your Necks are as lion
sinews, and B^ows as Brass, Isa. 48 4. And to say as Moses of them of old,
We Are not able to bear this People; 'Twill be sad when it comes to that: And
that they can say they have done all they can, yet you prove an Unreformed and
Rebellious People.

3. Be much upon your Knees, Seeking to that* God by whom Princes Rule, and
Plead hard for our Rulers, that God would set up and Continue such to Rule over
us, that shall be rich Blessings to our Land. It Is a Duty so to do See 1 Timothy 2
1, 2. God looks that you Pray for your Rulers. If some would do less at
Complaining and Repining, and more at Praying, it might be better. Pray for the
fulfillment of that, Isa. 60. 17. That for Brass, God would bring Gold, and for
Iron, Silver, for wood, Brass, for Stones, Iron: Especially the latter part of
the words which runs thus, I will make thy Officer^ Peace and thy Exactors
Righteousness.

4. Bow to the Scepter of Jesus Christ; that King of Glory, as he is styled, in
Psalm. XXIV. You Will never be good Subjects, till then. Take heed lest by
standing out and Rebelling against His Kingly Government, you provoke the Lord
to forsake you. It Is much to be feared, there are many of you here present,
that have not yet Cordially yielded up to CHRIST in His Kingly Office and
Government.

Let me add two or three Words here.

(1.) If you will not Submit to the Laws, the mild and gracious Government of
this Gracious and Glorious King, it will be just with God, to Punish you in
Leaving and giving you over into the hands of wicked and ungodly Rulers, and
such who shall Rule you with a Rod of Iron. Read and T^emble at what you Read:
1 Samuel 8. 7. They have not (so much) rejected thee as Me, that I should not
Rule over them. Oh! Sinners, you have some of you Rejected Jesus Christ and his
Government, Thousands of times, and practically said as they, Luk* 19 14. We
will not have this Man to Rule over us. What if God should deal with you
somewhat after the manner he dealt with them of old, in the above cited, 1 Samuel
8 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And it is added, Ye shall Cry in that Day. God can
give you over into the hands of Rulers of a Sauline and Reh^^oam-like Spirit. A
People is often times Punished with having bad Rulers, for not improving the
Advantages and Blessings of good Ones. After Jehoshaphat came Jehoram.

(2.) Your Submission is of absolute Necessity, in order to your Salvation.
There Is no way possible for poor sinners to escape the Damnation of Hell, but
this of Submission to Christ as their King to Rule and Govern them. Sinners
must bow to his Golden Scepter, or be broken to pieces by his Iron Rod, Psalm.
2. 9, 12, Obey CHRIST in the Government of His Grace, or you will be found at
Last among the Number of those you Read of, in that Awful Place, 2 These. 1. 7,
8 9. For,

Finally. Unfaithfulness in Relative Duties, is an Evidence of an Unsound Heart
and a Graceless state; no less than Unfaithfulness in Personal Duties. Grace
disposes men for a discharge of both; it inclines men to keep all God's
Commands, bows the Heart to the Yoke of Jesus Christ. A man's state may often
times be known by his deportment in Relative Capacities: And he an't a good
Magistrate, a good Minister, good Parent, a good Subject, sustaining such a
Cap^ci^y, if not a good Man; however he may Flatter himself, and his End will
be sad.

The higher his Hopes and Expectations of future Felicity rise and prevail, the
lower and deeper shall he sink in amazing Disappointment and Confusion at the
Last.

You must answer for Sins of Omission, as well as Commission, and Omissions in
Relative Duties in particular. It Is observed, that in the heavy Charge and
Indictment which shall be drawn up against Sinners at the Great Day of Assize,
Omissions of Relative Duties are particularly mentioned, Mat. 25. from v. 41,
to the end ver. 42, 34. 5 Their Sin, ver 41, The Heart-rending,
Soul-confounding Sentence. In ver 46. The Dreadful Execution, They shall go
away into everlasting Punishment.

Oh! my Hearers, as ever you will be Comfortable in the World to come, see to
it that in every Station and Capacity, you approve your selves unto God as
Faithful, 2 Timothy 2. 15. begin. Study to approve your selves unto GOD, then you
are sure at the Last Day to have that Heart-chearing and Reviving, Blessed and
Beatifying Welcome, mentioned, Mat. 25. 34. Then shall the King say unto them
on His Right Hand, Come Ye Blessed of My Father, Inherit the Kingdom Prepared
for You from the Foundation of the World. AMEN.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by T. GREEN at N. LONDON.
THE several Annual Election-SERMONS, since the Year 1712, Exclusively, till
this present Year 1725, Inclusively, being all Printed alike as to the bigness
of the Page, are to be Sold either Singly by themselves, or Collectively
together. ALSO the Body of LAWS of this Government, Printed in the Year 1715,
(with the Royal CHARTER) having all the several Additions (in Nineteen
Sessions) since the Book was Printed. THERE is now in the Press, and will
speedily be Published, A Discourse on 1 JOHN 2.26, 27. Entitled, The only
Effectual Remedy against Mortal Errors. Showing the Cause of all the Heresies,
Apostasies, Soul-murdering Errors, and contrary Articles of Faith among
Christians.
LATELY Printed.
(1) A Discourse, Entitled* The Work of Ministers, rightly to divide the Word
of Truth (2) THE Gospel-Minister described, by the Important Duty of his
Office, and directed in the Faithful Discharge of it. (3) THE Defects of
Preachers Reproved, (4) THE Obligations which the Profession of the Christian
Religion, lays Men under to depart from Iniquity. (5) THE Case of a Soul
Walking in Darkness awfully and suitably Considered. (6) THE Duty, and a Mark
of Zions Children. (7) THE Prey taken from the Strong. An Account of one
Recovered from the Errors of Quakerism (8) A Letter to the Authors of a
Discourse, Entitled, Some short Observations made on the Presbyterian Doctrine
of Election and Reprobation (9) THE School of Good Manners. 3d* Edition (10)
POETICAL Meditations on diverse Subjects Particularly, on several Texts of
Scripture; but more largely on CONNECTICUTT's Agency in the Court of
GREAT BRITAIN, when their CHARTER was Granted by King CHARLES the Second

