Dr. Mather's Commemoration OF Mr. THO. WALTER, At the Lecture in Boston, Jan.
21.1724-5,

Christodulus.

A Good REWARD OF A Good SERVANT. Or, The SERVICE of a Glorious CHRIST, Justly
Demanded and Commended, from a View of the GLORY with which it shall be
Recempensed.

With some Commemoration of Mr. Thomas Walter, Lately a Pastor to a Church in
Roxbury: Who had an Early Dismission from what of that SERVICE was to be done
in THIS WORLD. Jan. 10.1724-5.

By Cotton Mather, D.D. and F.R.S.

Non quicquam Sanctius habet Reverentia Superstitum, quam ut Amissos
Venerabiliter recordetur.

Auson. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for S. Gerrish, near the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill, 1725.

To my dear Brother, Mr. NEHEMIAH WALTER, Pastor of the first Church in Roxbury.
SIR,
IT is mentioned among the Occurrences of a very sorrowful Time, A Man's Uncle
shall take him up. It seems, upon a Young Man's Dying, it is looked for, that
his Uncle should perform the part of a Father to him. I am now to do it, on the
behalf of a desirable Young Man, who was to me not unlike what a Sisters Son
was to Paul; and whose Death makes a sorrowful Time for us: Herein also an
Uncle attempts to abate the Sorrows of a Father. And though no Word in any other
Language can express, what the Hebrew has in its CHESED, for our Duty to the
Dead; yet the Thing I am now in my poor way endeavoring.

When the lovely Young Caesarius, the Son of the blessed Old Gregorius, died
before his Father, Nazianzen in his Funeral Oration upon him, compared his
Father unto an Aaron in the House of his GOD. I am sure, there is One thing in
an Aaron, which is not unworthy of Your Imitation on this Occasion; As he was a
great Sacrificer, so when a sad Thing befell his Family, He held his peace. And
if Nonna wisely bear her part also in the Sacrifices, upon the offering whereof
with an holy Silence and Patience and Resignation, it will be said, Now I know
that thou fear GOD; what was Good will still be Better.

Your Excellent Predecessor, the Venerable and Memorable ELIOT, burying a
valuable Son, soon after the Young Man's entrance upon the Work of the
Evangelical Work of the Ministry, the brave old Man said upon it, My Desire
was, that my Son should have served CHRIST on Earth; but if GOD will choose to
have him serve Him in Heaven, I have nothing to object against it; But His Will
be done.

The Son, in whom You have had the uncommon Satisfaction of having him joined
with you, in the Pastoral Care of the Church, wherein you had proof of him,
that as a Son with a Father, he served with you in the Gospel, must now go from
Earth to serve CHRIST in Heaven before You. But as Piety teaches you to be
satisfied in this Translation, so you are aware that he goes but a very Little
before you: It Is much beyond you Expectation, that it is at all before you.

His rare Accomplishments, his acute Penetration, his copious Erudition, with
his right Principles, render his Death an unknown Loss to our Churches, as well
as to his Parents. His obliging Disposition, and ingenious Conversation,
rendered him, the Delicium Humani Generis; Beloved unto the Degree, that Seneca
affirms of his charming Brother Gallio: But singularly so unto his Parents.

This was he of whom you said, This same shall Comfort us. But our Glorious
Lord, by withering such Comforts, effectually leads you to the Only Comforter
that can relieve your Soul. May He be Nigh unto you; And unto a Mother, who has
a Sword piercing through her Soul also, and calls herself Marah in the bitter
Bereavement -- Complexa sui Corpus miserabile Nati. And may He spare you still
some Years to a dear Flock; whose importunate Prayers have remarkably kept you
out of your Grave; and whose exemplary Bounties have prepared them for such a
Mercy as the further Continuance of you to be a Blessing unto them.

I am, Sir, Your affectionate Brother, Co. Mather.

THE Most Honorable Service.
Joh. XII. 26. If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor.


THE Design at this Time is, to press as many as will be persuaded, into the
Service of a great King, whose Name is Venerable. And that we may all now
become the willing People of a Lord, who will accept of none but such, Behold,
what that Service will bring us to. I show unto you the Encouragement, which
the King of Glory gives unto all His faithful Servants. You are now informed
and assured from the Glorious Lord, That you shall be with Him; which is to
say, That you shall be in a state of Blessedness: Yea, and in that state, there
will be astonishing Honors, which the FATHER of our SAVIOR shall concur with
Him, in bestowing upon you.

Our SAVIOR was told by some of His Disciples, That there were some Gentiles
desirous of a private Admission unto Him. Upon this Occasion our SAVIOR
foresees the speedy Approach of the Hour, when he should be glorified among the
Gentiles; and see a surrogate Israel. But at the same Time, He declares the
unexpected way, in which He must arrive to this Glorification; the strange and
black Preliminary that must lead unto it. It must be, by Death; even by Death;
As a Grain of Corn must lie for Dead in the Earth, before it fructifies. Our
SAVIOR having foretold what was to be His own Condition, He foretells, what
must also be the Condition of them that will serve Him; He forewarns them to
expect a Conformity to Him, in Sufferings, preparatory to the Bessedness
wherein He will have them to be associated with Him. Hard Lines! Dark Strokes!
No Man serve our Lord JESUS CHRIST, or hope to be with Him, unless he be
willing to Die like Him, to Die for Him! Flesh and Blood; What will thou say to
This! -- To fortify His Followers, our SAVIOR now tells them, what will be the
Consequence, and what will be done for them. This particularly, That His Father
will put wonderful Honors upon them. And this is the DOCTRINE which is now to
animate us in the ways of our GOD.

Wonderful, wonderful, will be the Honors, which the True Servants of our
SAVIOR, will find His Eternal FATHER to bestow upon them.

The Glorious FATHER of our Great Savior, will honor them, who faithfully
serve the Son of His Love.

I. You shall have set before you, in the first place, the Character of those
who stand Candidates for Happiness. They are the True SERVANTS of our SAVIOR.
They must serve me, says our SAVIOR.

But let us enquire, Who are the True Servants of our SAVIOR? And let us
attempt a Description of them: For, Happy are thy Men, Happy are thy Servants,
that stand continually before thee, O our SAVIOR. It may in general be said,
All the Servants of our SAVIOR, are to be known by that Motto, Phil. I. 21. To
me to live is CHRIST. CHRIST is He whom they live unto. CHRIST is He whom they
live upon. A CHRIST is the Fountain of Life unto them all.

But we must' be more particular.

Now, First; You may be sure, The Servants of our SAVIOR must be such as
Believe on Him. It Is the Term for a Believer, 1 Cor. VII. 22. He is the Servant
of CHRIST. A Faith in our SAVIOR is a Necessary Introduction unto the serving
of Him. No Man can become a Servant of our SAVIOR, without believing Him to
be, what His Gospel has revealed Him to be, and without believing on him for
all the Good which His Gospel has promised unto His People. Every Servant of
our SAVIOR, is inexpressibly affected with the Glory of His Person, and with
the Truth of His exceeding great and precious Promises; and accordingly closes
with Him. The very first Thing in becoming a Servant of our SAVIOR is, to see
and say, O my SAVIOR, Thou art no less than the CHRIST, the Son of the Living
GOD; and all the Blessings of Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctifying and
Redemption are to be expected from thee alone; And for all these I come unto
thee, as unto my only SAVIOR: With a perishing and a distressed Soul, I come
unto thee.

We will go on to say, Secondly; The Servants of our SAVIOR, are such as
attend upon Him, for all that must bring them to live unto God. Our SAVIOR has
no Servants, but those Regenerate ones, who have a new Biass upon their Minds,
disposing them to live not unto Themselves but unto GOD; and find that in GOD,
which they have heretofore, sought in Idols. Now the Servants of our SAVIOR,
have their Eyes unto Him, that He may do all that is needful for their living
unto GOD. Their Address to Him is that; Psalm. CXXIII. 2. Behold, As the Eyes of
Servants look to the Hand of their Masters, so our Eyes are upon the Lord our
God, until that He have mercy on us. That we may live unto GOD it is required,
that we be Reconciled unto Him, and that the Sentence of Death, which His
violated Law has passed upon us, may be taken off. The Servants of our SAVIOR
look to Him for this; and thus hope in Him; O my SAVIOR, Let thy SACRIFICE be
the Expiation of my Sin, and my Reconciliation to GOD, whom I have offended by
my Sin. That we may live unto GOD, it is requisite, that we be directed from
above. The Servants of our SAVIOR look to Him for this Direction, and so call
on Him, O Lord, show me thy Ways, teach me thy Paths. That we may live unto
GOD, it is requisite, that we be assisted from above. The Servants of our
SAVIOR look to Him for this Assistance; and so lean on Him, I can do all
things through CHRIST who strengthens me.

Thirdly. The Servants of our SAVIOR, are such as make it their Study to yield
an universal and perpetual Obedience unto Him. Our SAVIOR demands it of all
that would serve Him; Matthew. XI. 29. Take my Yoke upon you. The Golden Yoke
which our SAVIOR will have all that serve Him, to take upon them, is that
Moral Law, the Sum whereof is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy
Heart, and, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Our SAVIOR having
delivered us from the Curse, to which the Law condemns us for our Breaches of
it, now requires us to make this Law the Rule of our Life, and endeavor the
most exact Obedience to it, and Condemn, and Humble and Abase our selves, when
we fall short of Exactness in our Obedience. This endeavor after the most
consummate Obedience to the Law, is to be our Expression of our Thankfulness to
our SAVIOR, for His Redeeming us from the Curse of the Law, and Rescuing us
into a better Covenant. The Ten Commandments are now the Commandments of our
SAVIOR; and by becoming His, we Establish the Law. Accordingly, if we would
approve our selves the Servants of our SAVIOR, we must sincerely intend and
pursue, a full Obedience to all of His Commandments. The Servants of our
SAVIOR, labor to know the Duty, which He demands from them; and they say,
Lord, What will thou have me to do? They labor to do all that they know to be
their Duty; and they say, Lord, I count all thy Precepts concerning all things
to be right, and I hate every false way. They lament it as their Misery,
whenever they Sin against the Law of CHRIST. They can say, His Commandments are
not grievous. But it is their Grief, that His Commandments are no better obeyed
with them. In the whole Course of their Life, they aim at Obedience unto their
SAVIOR. Yea, in all the Work of their Life, this is their Aim. Even the Work
of their Temporal Calling, the Work of their Secular Business, is done upon
this Intention; It Is the Work which my SAVIOR has assigned unto me! Their
SAVIOR is obeyed, in the most common Actions, which their Hand finds to do.
Obedience to Him, is the Life of their Hand, in the doing of them.

Fourthly. The Servants of our SAVIOR, are such as choose it, and make it,
their Main Concern, to bear Testimonies unto His Truths, and His Ways, and
therein to Glorify Him. We have the Servants of our SAVIOR, so spoken of, and
spoken to; Isa. XLIII. 10. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, and my Servants
whom I have chosen. The Thing whereto these Witnesses of the Lord are called,
is that which is called, A confessing of our SAVIOR, and, A showing forth of
His Praises. The Servants of our SAVIOR, have their Souls enamoured on this
Employment, this rare Employment, this high Employment; and they most heartily
say upon it, This is all my Salvation, and all my Desire. They would in all
possible Methods Testify, That their SAVIOR is the Lord of Glory; That His
Truths are Faithful Sayings, and worthy of all Acceptance; That His Ways are
pleasant ones, and all His Paths are Peace. Yea, they would fill their Lives
with such Testimonies. And they would make it the chief End of their Life to
bear such Testimonies. The Breathings of their very Souls within them, are, O
that I may cause the Name of my dear SAVIOR, to be honorably thought of! To
this End, their Souls do exceedingly breath after this; O that I may evermore
set my Seal, unto all the Truths which my SAVIOR has betrusted and enriched
His Church withal. Their Souls do vehemently breathe after this; O that I may
evermore give and show my Approbation of the Ways which my SAVIOR has
prescribed as Holy and Just and Good. They would Live, yea, they would also Die
for the bearing of such Testimonies to the Cause of our SAVIOR.

Fifthly. The Servants of our SAVIOR, are such as make a free, a full, an
everlasting Resignation of themselves and their All, unto Him. Concerning the
Servants of our SAVIOR, there has been this Account given; 2 Cor. VIII. 5.
They have given themselves unto the Lord. Ask them, Whose are you? Every one of
them will reply with all the Alacrity imaginable, I am the Lord's! The Servants
of our SAVIOR, do in the most Voluntary manner, consent and resolve to be His,
and make a Dedication of themselves unto Him, for all that Service, which it
may please Him to use them in. Coming into the Covenant of GOD, they then sign
Indentures for the Service of their SAVIOR. Upon this, they become desirous,
to be entirely the Lord's, and have their All used in what Service He will have
it put unto; and they comply with that Call; Ye are bought with a Price;
therefore Glorify GOD in your Body, and in your Spirit, which belong to GOD.
Yea, not only for the Application of their Bodies, and of their Spirits, to the
Service of their SAVIOR, but in applying their Possessions also unto it, they
become, A People of Free Will offerings. As their Voice is, CHRIST is my All,
so their Voice is, CHRIST shall have my All. But will they ever grow weary of
the Service? No; They all say, I love my Master, and I will not go out from
him; so they have their Ears bored for a Service, which is all Delight unto
them; All, a Delight in GOD.

Sixthly. the Servants of our SAVIOR are such as appear in His Cause, and for
the Defense of His Kingdom, in the World. It was of old cried out; Exodus XXXII.
26. Who is on the Lords side? And it is a Distinction to be made, in every
Generation. Upon this, the Servants of our SAVIOR, gather themselves unto Him;
and say unto their Father, and unto their Mother, I have not seen them; neither
do they acknowledge their Brethren, nor know their own Children. The Cause of
PIETY, is the Cause of our SAVIOR; so far as PIETY prevails, the Kingdom of
our SAVIOR advances, and flourishes. The Servants of our SAVIOR will still
appear in the Defense of PIETY Our SAVIOR has His Enemies in the World. The
Enemies of PIETY are the Enemies of our SAVIOR. They make Hostile Invasions on
His Kingdom; which lies in Righteousness. The Servants of our SAVIOR will
still appear against these Enemies. They are Soldiers for Him; Listed under
His Banners; having His Marh on their Foreheads. They will openly assert His
Interest, and oppose the Adversaries thereof, and venture there All in doing so:
Not love their Lives unto the Death.

Seventhly. The Servants of our SAVIOR are such as have no Will of their own;
such as are entirely governed by the Will of their SAVIOR; entirely at His
Dispose. This is what Servants must come to! This is the Language always heard
from the Servants of our SAVIOR; Act. XXI. 14. The Will of the Lord be done.
The Servants of our SAVIOR, are willing to Do, all those things, whereof it
may be said, This is the Will of God in CHRIST Jesus concerning you. The Things
may be Hard Sayings, and their carnal Mind rise up in Rebellion against the
Things, and they feel a rebellious Will stirring in themselves; yet they
conform to the Will of their SAVIOR, and mortify and extinguish their own.
Yea, If it be the Will of their SAVIOR, that they should suffer uncomfortable
Things, here they yield a profound Submission to His Will. They have learned in
whatever state they are, to be content, with the Will of their SAVIOR; content
with what state the Will of their SAVIOR shall order for them. They Sacrifice
All to the Will of their SAVIOR; All their Enjoyments are bound unto the Horns
of the Altar, standing ready to be sacrificed. They still say, O my SAVIOR,
Not my Will, but thy Will be done! And this compliance with the Will of their
SAVIOR, is very particularly conspicuous, in their submitting to Death, in the
Time and in the Way, which our SAVIOR shall appoint, when He will have no
further Service from them. When the Servants of our SAVIOR have that Order
from Him, Go up, and die! -- it is without much Reluctance complied withal: They
say, O Thou Lord of my Life, if I have no more to do for thee, I am willing to
die, and with a Love strong as Death, go through the dark valley of the shadow of
Death, to come unto thee! These, these are the Servants of the Lord.

Oh! That you would Examine your selves; Am I one of these? How far do I answer
this Character? This I will say; Behold, Are ye the Servants of the Lord, O you
who this Day stand in the House of the Lord? Then, Bless the Lord. For, The
Lord who made Heaven and Earth will bless you out of Zion, and bring you into
Zion, and nothing in Heaven or Earth proper for you, shall be denied unto you.

II. But this is what is in the second place to be set before you; even the
Happiness of those who come up to this Character. Wonderful, wonderful the
Honors, which the true Servants of our SAVIOR shall receive of His Eternal
FATHER. My Father will honor them, says our SAVIOR.

But let us Enquire, What are the HONORS, which GOD will bestow upon the
Servants of our SAVIOR?

Now, We might supersede all further Answer, with such a general one as that; 1
Cor. II. 9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has entered into the
Heart of Man, the things which GOD has prepared for them that love Him. The
Honors prepared for them that serve our SAVIOR; O unutterable Honors! O
inconceivable Honors! O Things far beyond all that we can ask or think!

We will make one prefatory Remark on the Honors, which GOD will bestow upon
the Servants of our SAVIOR; They will be such Honors, and so bestowed, that
the Glorious GOD Himself shall be honored in them. There is a Difference
between those two; Joh. XII. 43. The praise of Men, and, The praise of GOD. The
most of Men, if they honor us, and admire us, and applaud us, they terminate
in the Creature; they look no further than us; GOD has not His Praises on the
Occasion; GOD, without whom, and before whom, we are Nothing, is not Remembered.
All comes to Nothing, in Remembrances of none but Ashes! A sacrilegious
Idolatry is committed. A true Servant of our SAVIOR, even deprecates it as an
Infelicity, to be made the Object in this Idolatry. He had rather be left
unconsidered, in the World. Yea, when he meets with Indignities from an ungodly
Generation, it sweetens them unto him, to think, I am delivered from the Danger
of being made an Idol among the Robbers of GOD. Yea, Oh! why should we not
press after the high Flight of Nierembergius, who writes at this rate; Lord, I
had rather, could it be without Sin, that all should hate me, than that they
should love me for my self. If all the World hate me, I should have but what is
Mine. If they should love me for my self, they would usurp what is Thine. This
I will say, A true Servant of CHRIST will be loathe to receive any Honors, of
which he cannot see, that GOD and His CHRIST is honored in them. Such
Dispositions may be derided as fanciful and whimsical Ecstasies, But, O my Soul,
do thou press after them, and rest not until thou arrive to more Perfection in
them!

But, the Honors to be bestowed on the Servants of our SAVIOR, are such as
come from GOD. Surely then, they will also lead to GOD. GOD will have His
Honors wondrously secured, expressed, observed in them. In short therefore;
The Honors will be Blessings wherein the Love of GOD unto the Servants of our
SAVIOR will be manifested. The Glorious GOD says unto the Servants of our
SAVIOR, as in Rev. III. 9. I will make them to know, that I have loved thee.
The Honors to be bestowed on them, will be in the Tokens of His Love, which a
Gracious GOD will comfort them, and enrich them, and adorn them withal.

But let the matter extend into a little more of Particularity. We shall be
told, what shall be done to the Man, whom the FATHER of our SAVIOR delights to
Honor.

First; O ye Servants of an incomparable SAVIOR; I am sure, you count it the
greatest of Honors, to be the Servants of such a SAVIOR. No Dignity, No
Preferment, on Earth, to be compared unto this! Will the Glorious GOD accept
you to serve the King whom He has placed on His Throne; and employ you in the
Service of Him, that is the King of Kings and the Lord of all? I am sure, you
will say, This is Honor enough! My Ambition cannot soar higher than such an
Honor as this! How can you judge otherwise, when you call to mind, who are
your Fellow Servants? I will not mention such Worms of the Dust, as the Roman
Emperors, who have subscribed themselves, The Vassals of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. They shall vanish before the Princes whom I am going to speak of. The
Bright Angels in the Heavenly World, all count it their Honor, to be the
Servants of our JESUS on the Throne of GOD, and with Triumphs in it, become
your Fellow Servants. The least of those Mighty Ones, is greater than the
greatest Monarchs on our little Globe; And of these Mighty Ones how many
Myriads are there, to whom you make those Acclamations in your serving of your
SAVIOR! Psalm. CIII. 20, 21. O ye His Angels, vast in strength, Bless ye the
ETERNAL God; who do His Word, that so the Voice of His Word may be heard. O
Bless ye the ETERNAL God, All ye His Marshalled Hosts; Ye Ministers who Execute
His Will made known to you! Oh! How honored the Men, who have Angels for their
Companions! Ye Servants of our SAVIOR, Ye are come, Oh! how welcome! -- to the
Myriads of Angels, that fly about the City of God!

Pertinently upon this, will come in a second Satisfaction; While you are the
Servants of your SAVIOR, the Angels of your SAVIOR will be your Guardians.
You no sooner come into the Service of your SAVIOR, but, Lo, The Morning Stars
do sing together, and the Sons of God shout for Joy. They are glad of your
coming be be so associated with them; and they gladly come into a Ministry for
you. To all the Servants of our SAVIOR, there belongs that Privilege; Psalm.
XCI. 11. He shall give His Angels charge over thee. O Transcendent Honor! The
meanest among the Servants of our SAVIOR, has this Honor; An Angel of GOD
attends him, and befriends him; does unknown good Offices for him. This Honor
have all the Saints.

If this ben't enough, take a Third Satisfaction. The FATHER of our SAVIOR
bestows this Honor on them that serve Him; He will be their Father too. The
Servants of our SAVIOR, are all of them, the Children of GOD. Ye are my Sons
and my Daughters, faith the Lord Almighty! And now, seems it a light thing
unto you, to be the Children of that Infinite GOD who is the most high
Possessor of Heaven and Earth! Children, who shall be Heirs of an Infinite GOD,
and therefore shall inherit all things! O ye Servants of our SAVIOR, Fall into
that agreeable Rapture; 1 John III. 1. Behold, what manner of Love, the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Children of God! Will GOD
the FATHER put Honor upon them that serve our SAVIOR? GOD the SPIRIT will do
so too; and this Honor does also proceed from the FATHER.

Behold, a Fourth Satisfaction! The Servants of our SAVIOR, are all of them,
the Temples of the Holy SPIRIT. Unto such it is said, 1 Cor. III. 16. Know ye
not that ye are the Temple of GOD, and the Spirit of GOD dwells in you? Oh!
What an Honor have you now a prospect of! This Honor, Know ye not, that that
if you are the Servants of our SAVIOR, you are the Temples of GOD? His Holy
SPIRIT will say, Here will I dwell, for I have desired it! The Holy SPIRIT will
make you the Excellent in the Earth; more Excellent than the most Illustrious
Temples of a Solomon or a Justinian; The Houses of His Glory, and glorified in
being filled with His Glory.

The Articles of Honor will keep growing on our Hands. Let this go for a Fifth
of them. A precious Esteem with the Best of Men, is an Honor which they that
serve the Best of Lords, are no strangers to. A Good Name does belong to them;
A Good Name, which is better than precious Ointment; A Good Name, which is
rather to be chosen than great Riches. He was not in the wrong, who gave this
Definition of Honor; It Is a good Esteem with good Men for good Things. The
Servants of our SAVIOR, take the right Path to this Honor; and it may be said
of them, as in Heb. XI. 2. They obtain a good Report. It was by David thought
an Honor; Let those that fear thee, turn to me. It was by Paul thought an
Honor; That my Service may be accepted of the Saints. This Honor is granted
unto the Servants of our SAVIOR; They are, as we read Mordecai was, Accepted
of the Multitude of their Brethren. And, if they are Persons of greater
Eminency for their Diligence, their Faithfulness, their Usefulness, the more
Eminent often does GOD make them in their Esteem among His People. If through the
Displeasure of GOD against a People that must be denied the Benefit of their
Talents; or if through Folly and Faction and Envy prevailing in those who should
be wiser, they may at any time want Acceptance; This will be no Real Diminution
of their true Honor, or a just Esteem among those who are most capable to put
Honor upon Goodness. And therewithal, they have the Honor of having may
Prayers made for them, among the People of GOD. Yea, They may come to have a
Great Name, as well as a Good Name: It may be, A Name among the Great Men of
the Earth, is granted unto them. And as they Live Desired, so they Die
Lamented. We read of one, All did him Honor at his Death. We read of another;
They buried him honorably, because he had done good in Israel. We read of a
Third, They Lamented him, and continued long to speak of him in their
Lamentations. The Memory of these Just Ones, GOD makes it better than what has
been often called by flattering Survivers, A blessed Memory.

Thus Honored are the ^^^^ants of our SAVIOR, among the true Citizens of
Zion, who Honor them that fear the Lord. But what if among Vile Persons they
are Contemned? Even this also shall go among the Articles of their Honor.

I will say, Sixthly; The Servants of our SAVIOR, often have the Honor to be
vilified by the vilest of Men; and by those who exalt none so much as the
vilest of Men. Enquire of your Athanasius's and your Luthers and your Calvin's,
and all great Reformers, if it be not so. There is a sort of People, whose Ill
Will, and Ill Word, is an Honor to those whom it falls upon; It Is a Disgrace
unto a Man, and it brings a Suspicion upon his Innocence [ Quid mali feci?] to
be in the good Graces of such evil Men. We read concerning some Servants of our
SAVIOR; Act. V. 41. They rejoiced, that they were counted worthy of the
Honor, to suffer Shame for His Name. The Servants of our SAVIOR, shall have
the Honor of Reproaches, and Calumnies, and Obloquies, from those wretched
People, who have that Brand upon them, The Haters of GOD. And some Servants of
our SAVIOR, who are in Labors more abundant, often have a notable Experiment
of it, That when they have been upon some special Service of the Lord, the
Devil (who has a most inveterate Hatred, where he sees a CHRIST most Honored,
and studied and resembled; and who has a mavelous Energy on the Minds of a
multitude; I say, To give him his Due, -- the Devil) in some odd and strange
Occurrences, that one could hardly have dreamt of, raises a Storm of Obloquies
upon them; a Storm of silly, senseless, wretched Slanders upon them; diffused
it may be all a foolish Country over. The Men of GOD, are but Honored, in all
the Venom, that Satan and his Instruments may spit upon them.

All this while, I feel my self still in this World. The last Article is enough
to render the proof of that very sensible! But then, lastly, Let us get
forwards, into the World to come. There, there, will be Honors indeed; Oh!
what Honors! -- bestowed on the Servants of our SAVIOR; Eternal Honors
bestowed by His Eternal FATHER! The Honors wherein that Promise will be
accomplished; Rev. II. 10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life. O unfainting Servants of your SAVIOR; Was there ever any Honor
upon Earth, to be compared unto what you shall receive, when you shall at your
Departure, find a kind Reception with your Almighty SAVIOR, and being by His
Angels, presented Faultless before the presence of His Glory with exceeding
Joy, hear Him saying to you, Well done, good and faithful Servant; enter into
thy Masters Joy! But then, can you comprehend, what will be your Honors, when
your SAVIOR shall come, to be Glorified in His Saints, and to be admired in
all them that believe! What your Honors, when the Day of Judgment shall
arrive, wherein the Book of Remembrance will be opened, and all the Service you
have done for your SAVIOR will be Remembered and Rewarded! What your Honors,
when you shall be Kings and Priests unto GOD, and have Power over Nations given
you! What your Honors, when you shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of
your Father, and you shall be filled with all the fullness of GOD! -- All Words
are here swallowed up! O Incomprehensible Happiness; O Honors, infinitely
beyond every Thing here below! Honors, wherewith Batoons, and Sceptres
themselves laid in the Balance, are but Baubles, and Lighter than Vanity.

III. But methinks, There should be made a brief Touch upon one Enquiry more;
Who is the Fountain of these Honors? It Is the FATHER of our SAVIOR. And why
does our SAVIOR speak of His FATHER, as concerned in the Honors bestowed upon
them that serve Him? Truly, The Love of the FATHER to our SAVIOR, it is
Infinite, Infinite! He has once and again proclaimed it, This is my beloved
SON. He is called, Col. I. 13. The Son of His Love. Such, I tell you truly,
such is the Love of the Almighty FATHER to the Person, who is the Brightness of
His Glory, and the express Image of His Person, that He will infinitely plague
them that hate Him. And when they that are Baptized into His Name, shall be in
a Conspiracy, to Dethrone Him, Degrade Him, Ungod Him, it is impossible to give
a more Bitter Provocation to His Majesty. Verily, It provokes a Wrath unto the
uttermost. O our unhappy Mother, we are Mourning, we are Trembling for thee! --
On the other hand, What will He do for them whom His Love does constrain to
serve Him? O become the Servants of your SAVIOR; It Is to serve the SON of GOD,
and a SON Infinitely Dear unto Him; Infinitely more Dear than all other Beings.
What a Recompense will His FATHER give to them that serve Him? To do Service
for your SAVIOR, is to put Honor on Him. Honor, Honor, shall be the
Recompense. With Honor from His FATHER, shall it be Retaliated. If you will
serve Him, you must undergo much Dishonor among His Adversaries: They shall
say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake, faith our SAVIOR. An
Honor from His FATHER will be your Compensation. It Is what His Dear SON, has
desired for you; His Intercession has demanded it; FATHER, I will that they
have Glory, says our SAVIOR. And, Him the FATHER hears always.

And now comes the Conclusion of the Matter.

But what can this be any other, than an Irresistible Demand upon the whole
Auditory? Oh! Become the true Servants of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; Come
Immediately into the Service of your SAVIOR. Despise not, Refuse not, the
Honors, which the FATHER of your SAVIOR has to bestow upon them that serve
Him. Don't bespeak for your selves that Shame and Everlasting Contempt, which
is to be the Portion of the Wicked.

The Proposal is now made; Josh. XXIV. 15. Choose you this Day, whom you will
serve. But, Oh! Make a wise Choice; A Choice which a Dying Man would abide by.
As for the other Lords, which have had Dominion over you, Abhor their Sorvice,
Renounce their Service, Abandon their cursed Service. But, O Embrace the
Service of your Lovely SAVIOR; And Bind your selves unto it; Bind your selves
as fast as ever you can; and with the Firmest, but yet the Humblest Purposes.
Bind your selves in those Terms; Psalm. CXVI. 16. Truly, O Lord, I am thy
Servant, I am thy Servant.

Having done this, Then contrive what you can, how to make your All Serviceable
unto the Interests of your SAVIOR. And often ponder on that Noble Question,
What Service may I do for my Admirable SAVIOR?

Thus Engage, Embark in a Service, which never yet any one Repented of!

But then, If such as These may be judged, [And most certainly, a Good
Judgment will pronounce them so!] The Words of the Wise, May they be as Goads,
and come with a singular Pungency and Cogenoy unto the Candidates of the
Ministry rising as the Hopes of the Flocks among us!

O you whose Friends have set you apart for the Service of your SAVIOR in the
Work of the Gospel; Be persuaded Betimes to Consecrate your selves unto it; and
come into this Resolution; O my SAVIOR, To serve Thee, shall be the Chief End,
and the Grand Work of my Life! Come into this Disposition; To be a Servant of a
Glorious CHRIST, shall be the very Top of my Ambition! This Disposition; If a
Glorious CHRIST will please to accept of Service from me, This is the highest
Advancement that I can be Ambitious of! Be continually full of Projections,
what Service you can do for a Glorious LORD. If any Thing appear to you a
Service for that Glorious LORD, and for His Kingdom, wait not for any further
Motive, to bespeak your Industrious and Courageous coming into it. Be armed
against all the Discouragements, and all the Difficulties, and all the
Temptations, which Fidelity in that Service will certainly expose you to. Th^^
you are certain, That whenever you attempt any signal Service for your LORD,
you shall presently find some notable Humiliation ordered for you, yet with a
true Spirit of Martyrdom go valiantly thorough all, that you have before you. [
The Lord is with thee, thou mighty Man of Valor!] Be armed in a View of the
Honors, which the FATHER of your SAVIOR will one Day bring you to! If any
have been Ordained, before they have had this PIETY flaming in them, let it at
least follow, what it should precede: And let them Read, what Bernard writes
unto Ardutius!

If the Glorious GOD of your Life shall order it, that a Premature Death, shall
prevent the Service you intend for Him, He will accept your willing Mind; and
reserve Inexpressible Opportunities for you in that Heavenly World, where though
the Saints rest from their Labors, yet we read, They rest not from the Praises
of the Lord. It is not a place or state of Idleness; every one has his Work
there assigned unto him.

A promising STEVENS, and HOLBROKE, and PIERPONT, and THOMPSON, and some
others, may thus take the Wings of the Morning, and in the Morning of their
Youth, take their Flight unto the Blissful Regions. But if they and their
short-lived Brethren might speak from thence, they would certainly say unto us,
O serve the Glorious LORD, and never count any Service too much to be done for
Him. No Man shall be a Loser by any Service he does for Him! It Is impossible
for any one to make too early a Dedication of himself unto the Service of this
Glorious LORD. All the Labors, and all the Sorrows, and all the sad Things,
which must be undergone in the Service, are abundantly Recompensed in this
Glorious World. One Hour here makes amends for all.

In the mean time, we will greatly Lament the Loss therein sustained by our
Churches, and the Dark Signs of the Times, in such Eclipses. Yea, we will speak
of them in our Lamentations. It would be a worse than a Stoical Apathy to do
otherwise.

Among those who have begun to do some Service for our Glorious LORD, and have
been singularly Furnished for it, but might not be suffered to continue in it
by reason of Death, I know not why a Modest Commemoration may not be allowed
unto Mr. THOMAS WALTER; Who had not passed Four times Seven Years of a
Pilgrimage, before a Period unto all Prospect of any further Service from him
here, is hastened upon him.

I am not without Apprehension, that it may be some small Service unto the Best
Interests, for me to take a brief Notice of something that may render his
Memory Valuable, and something that may render it Profitable, to us.

The former part of his Life, -- I pass over in Silence: But something that
occurred in the Close of it, may be not altogether unworthy of some Notice with
us.

After such un Uncommon Symptom of Merit in him, as his being Ordained by his
Venerable Grandfather, and Installed a Colleague with his Desirable Father, in
the Pastoral Care of a precious Flock, who for their Generous Love unto their
Ministers, have set an Example to all the Churches in the Country; he soon gave
Demonstrations of those Rare Abilities, which exceedingly Distinguished him.
[So Young Austin becomes a Colleague to Old Valerius in his Bishopric!]

But that which makes him deserve to be remembered with the more Honor among
us, is, That his Heart was fixed in his Purposes and Endeavors to employ all
those Bright Abilities in the Service of CHRIST and for the Churches of This
Country.

He was a strong Champion for those Doctrines of Grace, in which those Churches
have been established; And a great Reader of the Books which assert those
Doctrines; among which those of a Judicious OWEN had a special Relish with him;
ever Lamenting, ever Confuting, the Things which he saw tending to Corrupt the
young Minds of those that are under a Designation to feed the Flocks in the
high Mountains of Israel.

To which I must add, That his faithful and steady Adherence to the Puritan
Principles of Instituted Worship, and -- What says the Scripture? -- was very
considerable; when Temptations of, I know not what Glory, to desert them, could
not seduce him to an Infamous Apostasy.

His Ministry was notably calculated for THIS, above all Intentions; That a
Glorious CHRIT may in the whole System and Business of the Christian Religion,
be duly Acknowledged, and have a due Homage paid unto Him. And he pressed this
Advice upon some Candidates of the Ministry, with whom he was acquainted;
Preach CHRIST, my Friend, Preach CHRIST, as much as ever you can. And the
FATHER of our Glorious LORD, has put this Honor upon Him, that many of His
People have expressed an Extraordinany Esteem for him; And more than Two or
Three of his Acute Composures have been published. On the Last of these, I may
make this Remark; That though it be composed with a great strength of
Ratiocination, and be embellished with more than a little Erudition, yet he
wrote with his own Hand, in a manner nothing of it: But Languishing under much
Pain, and such Weakness as kept him on his Bed continually, it was all written
from his Mouth, by the Pen of a beloved Friend, unto whom he dictated. A
Specimen This, of those Intellectual Powers in him, which if he had lived,
would have anon brought him into the Number of the famous Gualterus's and
Waltherus's, that make a Figure in the Catalogue of Literators. And yet, these
Powers were always beautified and varnished with a conspicuous Modesty in him,
which caused him to assume unto himself no more, than if he had been, as
Tertullian of old, (in imitation of the Apostles Elegancy, in his
Elachistoteros) elegantly called himself, Omnium Postremissimus.

But that wherein I most propose the Edification of the Survivors, is a short
Account of the LAST HOURS that passed over him.

The Thomas Gualterus Tabifico Morbo extinctus, mentioned by Bartholinus, he
must now be a Companion to. He lay many Months Languishing of that English
Disease, a Consumption: Wherein he over and over again went thorough that
Process of Repentance, in which he made his just Reflections on all the Errors
of a Vain Youth, which a disadvantageously Good Temper might have betrayed him
to: Often saying, I have been a wretched Fool; the greatest Fool in the World!
And he underwent the saving Work of the Holy SPIRIT in Repetitions of it; First
exceedingly Convincing and Abasing of him; then showing him the Remedy provided
for him in a SAVIOR, and helping him to make his Flight unto it; and causing
him thereupon to grow in his confirmed Resolutions to live unto GOD.

The Repetitions of these Operations, did not hinder it, but that on the Day
before he died, he had a Soul wonderfully distressed with Fears of his
Miscarrying at the last: Saying, Oh! It Is a great Thing to Die! -- Under these
Distresses he importunately called for the Instructions and Assistances of One
for whom he had some Deference; Who, in Conjunction with his Father, again set
before him the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed GOD, which he had himself
preached unto others. What passed shall not be now related; only one or two
Passages it may not be amiss to mention. When it was urged upon him; You have
been a notable Disputant in your Time; what they call a Logician: you have
understood an Argument. I pray, what will you make of this Argument? The
Proposition is; Our Glorious LORD, the true Witness, who delivers Souls, has
solemnly declared, HIM THAT COMES UNTO ME, I WILL IN NO WISE CAST OUT. Your
Assumption is; But I come unto Him; and heartily and earnestly Beg of Him, and
would Hope in Him, to do for me and on me, every thing that He does to them
that come unto Him. Now the Conclusion; -- Therefore I fear that He will not
Receive me, but cast me off! Is this a Right Conclusion? Did you use to Argue
so? His Answer was, I find I have a Busy Adversary; And he would make this
perverse Conclusion for me! --

His Father then came upon his Unbelief with such victorious and overwhelming
Remonstrances; My dear Son, Were our SAVIOR visibly here, as once in the Days
of His Humiliation, and should you go prostrate your self before Him, and
beseech of Him to have Compassion on you, and give you an Heart to Love Him,
can you imagine, that He would Reject you? Now, what a strange thing is this
Unbelief: to be discouraged from That which carries an infinite Encouragement
in it! As if His Power and Goodness, or our Access to Him were the less for His
being on the Throne of His Glory. This also removed not the Despondencies. But
the Servants of GOD, (whereof there were more than Two or Three) in the
Chamber, then joined in pouring out Supplications for him, That the Comforter
who should relieve his Soul, might not be far from him; and that he might be
filled with Peace and Joy in Believing; and that he might finish well, and with
such Triumphs over the Last Enemy, as might Revive those who were now praying
for him, and entertain the People of GOD.

From This Hour (It was now Saturday-noon) Satisfactions and Consolations
continually grew upon him. He said, when some of us parted with him, If I
perish, I will perish in the Hands of my SAVIOR: And, though He slay me, I will
trust in Him! His Fears were anon swallowed up in the Hopes, of a Glory now
prepared for him: Yea, in the Joys of a Salvation which he had after a suitable
Agony, gained the Assurance of. He now longed for his Departure, to be with
CHRIST. He kept saying, (as his admired Calvin before him) How long, Lord, How
long? Oh! Come quickly! And, Why is His Chariot so long a coming; Why tarry the
Wheels of His Chariot? But then, he asked, whether he did well, in longing so
much to be gone?

He said, I shall be the most Glorious Instance of Sovereign Grace in all
Heaven! And he added, I have no more to do here; but I shall Serve and Glorify
CHRIST to all Eternity! And then, Lord, Now let thou thy Servant depart in
Peace.

He laid mighty Charges on some Young Persons that were near him; To fear GOD,
and prize His CHRIST Betimes; and by no means to delay Repentance one Day
longer: For the longer they delayed it, the more Backward they would find
themselves unto it. He said; They might think, that for them to engage in the
Ways of PIETY, would be to abandon all Joy and Pleasure; but this is a great
Mistake: Let them try the Practice of it, and it will never be Repented of.

When the Morning of the Lords Day [Jan. 10.] arrived, he expressed an
Expectation, that He should be That Day in Paradise. His Father told him, I am
going to the House of GOD, which is the Gate of Heaven; but I hope, You are
going to Heaven it self, to join with the Assembly Above. He replied, O! I love
that Glorious Church! His Father added, I am going also to the Table of the
Lord; but I hope, You are going to Drink of the Fruit of the Vine New with
CHRIST in the Kingdom of his Father. He replied, O! And without Price! At Noon,
his Father going to the Afternoon Service, and supposing that he should not (as
he did not) see him any more, took his Farewell of him, in those Words; My
Child, The Lord JESUS receive thy Spirit. The Echo from him to it was, -- And
the Lord fit it for His Reception! He continued in Heavenward Aspirations,
till toward the close of the AfternoonService, when he fell a smiling: And one
asking him the Reason of it, he only made an Unintelligible Answer, which
intimated as if an admirable Consort, in Singing the Praises of his Redeemer
now entertained him. So he expired; which I doubt not at all to express in the
Terms I find in the Epitaph of a noted Person, Anima CHRISTI appetentissima, in
CHRISTI Gremium evolavit.

Having made this brief Report, not without some View, that it may do something
of that Good, which if he had lived, he would have done more Abundantly, I
shall now add no more but This; GOD will Honor the YOUNG MEN, whom the Service
of His CHRIST shall be dear unto!

Appendix.
IT will be no disagreeable Digression from the Subject we have been upon, but
be as well a Direction to the Candidates of the Ministry, as in some degree a
Description of him whom we have been speaking of; to recite some excellent and
expressive Words, of that Great and Good Man, the admirable WITSIUS, in his
Noble Oration, De Theologo Modesto.

Monstra mihi Hominem, qui sui neque Contemptor neque Admirator fit; qui
Divinae munificentiae Dona, procul Invidia, aeque pretio in aliis aestimet; qui
Affectus in Ordinem cogere, et Animum, Linguam, stylum Moderari didicit; qui
res quasque suis prudenter Momentis Librat; Easque ita prosequitar uti
Singularum genio convenit; qui neque Rigidus neque Mollis est, sed tractabilis:
Sine Pusillanimitate Lenis, sine Lentitudine Patiens, sine Tetricitate Gravis.
-- Sine Jactantia Fortis, sine Contumacia Constans: Talem, inquam, mihi
monstrato hominem, et eum ego vere MODESTUAI VIRUM appellabo. Qui idem si omnes
hasce Virtutes ad verum Divinarum tractationem conferet, iisque Reverentiam
addet que tremendis Religionis nostrae Mysterijs debetur, eundem ego MODESTUM
Salutabo THEOLOGUM; Ill^ assurgam, in Illius amplexus ruam, Illum Exosculabor,
Illius pectori admovebo meum, arctoque amoris nexu comprimam, donec Venerabilem
istum Characterem menti meae impressero. The Young Ministers who have this
lovely Pourtraiture of a St. Modestus thus before them, do not want, that it
should be Translated into their Mother Tongue for their understanding of it.
And if they are so Wise, as to maintain a Low but Just Opinion of Themselves;
with not a base Envy at, but a due Value for, the Worth to be owned in Others:
If they Govern their Passions with Moderation; and manage their Sentiments of
Things according to the real Importance of them: If they are discreetly
Treatable; with Discretion Gentle and Patient; Grave but not Sour; Stout but
not Vain; Constant without Obstinacy: And if having such Good Qualities
beautifying of them, they treat the Mysteries of our Holy Religion with the
Reverence which is due unto them; They will then give such a Translation of it,
as will be not only Intelligible to all People whatsoever, but also render
themselves Amiable to all the People of GOD, among whom they are to Shine as
Lights in the World.

FINIS.

