POETICAL Meditations, BEING THE IMPROVEMENT OF SOME Vacant Hours, By ROGER
WOLCOTT, Esquire WITH A PREFACE By the REVEREND Mr. Bulkley of Colchester. NEW
LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, 1725.

THE PREFACE.
1. THE buisy and restless Soul of Man which in all Ages has been Fruitful in
Many Inventions, as it has been greatly Disserviceable to the Good and Comfort
of Humane Life by the Discovery of things Prejudicial to it; so at the same
time may we not say, has made some Compensation by the Invention of others of a
Proportionable Advantage and Benefit. It were easy by a detail of some of the
many Useful Arts found out by Man to give Evidence of this, but it must Suffice
at Present, to Instance in one only, viz. That Art of Writing, or Expressing
all Sounds, and Consequently the Conceptions of our Minds, by a Few Letters
Variously Disposed or Placed, the Commodity or Profit of which to Mankin'd is
so Various and Extensive as not to be easily accounted for. This Art is styled
by One Ga^leo.
Admi^andar^ Omnium inventionum humanarum Signaculum. i. e. The Wonder or
Masterpiece of all Humane Inventions: And how deservedly is it so, whether we
Speak with Reference to the Strangeness or the Benefit of it^? How Strange is
it that by the Various Disposition of so Few Letters as Our Alphabet contains,
all Sounds should be expressed, and thereby all the Conceptions or Ideas of our
Minds! And as for the Commodity of it; not to mention others, from hence it
comes to pass that we are Furnished with so much Useful History, which bringing
into our View both Persons and Things most distant from us in time and place,
does greatly delight and entertain us, and at the same time Instruct or Teach
and Furnish us with a main part of our most useful Knowledge.

2 In the Early Ages of the World, before this most certain way of
Communicating the Knowledge of things was found out; other Mediums were made use
of for that end, the Principa of which seems to have been Representative
Symbol, or Hieroglyphics, which way or Method of Communication every one knows
still Obtains among many Vnletter'd Nations in the World. But this as its very
uncertain on the Account of that great Variety of Interpretations such Symbols
are liable to, and as the Misconstruction o^ them, its reasonable to think, has
been none of the least Prolisick Fountains of the Heathen Mthology, by which
the Ancient and True Tradition of the First Ages of the World has been so much
Corrupted and Altered, so is now out of use with such Nations, as among whom
the Use of Letters has been Introduced. I said above that to this we are
Debtors for the useful History we are Furnished with: and I must observe on
this Occasion that there are two ways in which those who have Obliged us with
it, according to their different Genius and Humors, have Improved this Noble
Invention in Composing the Historys they have put into our Hands; that some
therein have Confined themselves to Poetical Numbers and Measures, others not
so restricting themselves, have Written in Prose, which last in latter Ages has
been the more common way. That a considerable part, especially of our more
Ancient History, is delivered to us in the former of these ways, is known to
most that are not Strangers to Books, a considerable part of the Writings both
of the Latin and Greek Poets what are they but Poemata Historica? Among the
former, Ovid assures us his Bo^k METAMORPHOSEON, in part, at least is no other;
when in the beginning of it he Invokes the Gods in these Words, viz.

-- Dij Caeptis ( --)
Adspirate meis, Pri^aque ab Origin Mundi
Ad mea Perpetuum deducite Tempora carmen,
In English thus rendered by one,
Ye Gods Vouchsafe ( --)
To further this mine Enterprise;
and from the World begun,
Grant that my Verse may to my time
his Course directly run.
And whoever has read it with understanding cannot but see its so.

3. I cannot forbear Observing here with what Pleasure I have taken notice of
the great Harmony or Agreement there is in the Account he there gives of the
most Ancient Things with that of the Sacred History: And that we have in that
Composure of his a Lively Specimen of the Truth of what the Learned Observe
concerning the Writings of the Heathen, viz That they frequently give in
Testimony to the Truth of the Sacred History, particularly in its Account of
the Eldest Times. With what Accuracy has he given us the History of the
Creatson? It looks rather like the Narrative of a Learned Jew or Christian than
an Heathen; for besides the Philosophy of it, it so well Harmonises with that
of Moses, that one would be Tempted to think that either he had Conversed with
his Writings, or had the Knowledge of it conveyed to him by some Secret Cabbala,
as its Affirmed by some of Pythaegoras and Plato; or which is more probable
that the general Tradition of it Preserved in the World, though in many Places it
was grossly disguised and corrupted, yet in others retained much of its
Primitive Purity. For not so much as mentioning the Absurd Hypothesis of the
Aristotelian and Epicurean Philosophers concerning the Origin of the World,
like the Inspired Historian, he Ascribes it to the Divine Efficiency. Having
spoken of the Chaos (differing from him in Words, not in sense) wherein the
contrary, jarring Principles of all Bodies lay without Form or Order, He thus
goes on -- Hanc Deus and Melior litem Natura diremit,
Nam Caelo terras, and terris abscidit Undas,
Et liquidum spisso secrevit ab Aere Caelum,
Quae postquam evolvit, Caecoque exemit Acervo,
Dissociata locis concordi pace ligavit.


Thus rendered by the forementioned Author, This Strife did God and Nature break
and set in Order straight,
The Earth from Heaven, the Sea from Earth, He parted orderly,
And from the thick and foggy Air, He took the lightsom Sky:
Which when He once unfolded had, and severed from the Blind,
And clodded heap: He setting each from other did them bind --
In endless Friendship to Agree.


And further, Having showed what places the several parts of matter in that
Confused Mass, on their Separation took, according to their respective
Gravitations, as also how the terrene and more gross parts of it were formed
into a Globe, furnished with Bays, Fountains, Pools, Lakes, Rivers, Valleys,
Mountains, and various sorts of Living Creatures; as if the Inspired History
had been before him.

He goes on; Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae.
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset
Natus homo est: Sive hunc divino semine fecit,
Ille Opi^ex rerum, Mundi melioris Origo:
Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuter ab alto
Aethere, cognati rettuebat semina caeli:
Quam Satus Japeto mistam fluvialibus undis
Tinxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta deorum.


Thus rendered Howbeit yet of all this while, the Creature wanting was,
Far more Divine, of nobler Mind, which should the res'due pass
In depth of Knowledge, Reason, Wit and high Capacity
And which of all the residue should Lord and Ruler be.
Then either he that made the World, and things in Order set
Of Heavenly Seed engendered Man; or else the Earth as yet
Young, Lusty, Fresh and in her Flowers, and parted from the Sky
But late before, the Seed thereof as yet held Inwardly
The which Prometheus tempering strait with water of the Spring
Did make in likeness to the Gods that Govern every thing.


The like Agreement with the Sacred History, I might remark in the Account he
gives us of the State of Innocence, styled by him the Golden Age, the Flood,
etc How well does his Character of the former agree with that Idea of it Divine
Revelation has Imprinted on our Minds? And the latter he Ascribes to a
Concurrence and Cooperation of the same causes in Nature that Moses does. Its
true he Writer in the Strain and Manner of others of his Tribe, who are wont
generally to mingle a great deal of Mythology with the Truth; yet
notwithstanding how easy is it for every Intelligent Reader to trace in him the
Footsteps of the Sacred History, particularly in its accounts of the most Early
Times?

4. And may we not with equal Truth say the same of Virgils Aeneids? which seem
to be no other than a Mythological History of the Affairs of Aeneas, or the
Various Occurrences of his Life; to which Homer his ^^ads with others from the
Greeks might be added. Its Observed by some Learned Men, that this was the most
Ancient way of Writing, and that Prose is only an Imitation of Poetry, and that
the Grecians in particular at their first delivery from Barbarism, had all
their Philosophy and Instruction from the Peets, such as Orpheus, Hesiod,
Parmenides, Xenophanes, etc. -- which seems to have Occasioned those Lines of
Horace, Cap. de Art Poetica -- Fuit haec sapientia quonda^
Publica privatis Sacernere, sacra Prosunis:
Concubitu Prohibere Vago; dare jura Maritis:
Oppida moliri: leges incidere ligno.
Sic honor and nomen Divinis Vatibus atque
Carminibus venit.


The sum of which is this, viz.

That in Old Time Poets were the Lights and Instructors of the World, and gave
Laws to Men for their Conduct in their several Relations and Affairs of Life.

And Finally, To this seems to agree that of Cato in his Distichs, Si Deus est
Animus nobis ut carmina dic^,
If God a Spirit be as Po^ts Teach, etc.


5. I have premised this in way of Apology for the manner in which this Worthy
Person has given us the Ensuing History, in Composing which he has Diverted
some of his Leisure Hours. And from hence it is evident he has for a Precedent
some of the most Ancient History, and has trod in the steps of many of the most
Eminent Sages and earliest Writers History gives us any Knowledge of, who have
taken that same way to raise up Monuments to, and eternize the Names and
Actions of their Admired Heroes.

6. Its undoubtedly true that as the Minds of Men have a very different Cast,
Disposition or Genius leading to and accomplishing for very differing
Improvements, so generally speaking, those are the most Accomplished to make a
Judgment on any Performance that have by Nature a Genius Leading to and
Accomplishing for the same: And it being so, and withal there being none among
the whole number of Mortals less furnished for a Performance of this Nature
than my self, I may well be excused in Omitting the part of a Censor or Judge
upon it, further than to say that the Intelligent Reader will herein discern an
uncommon Vigor of Mind, considerable Reading, and see reason to say, that
herein we have a Specimen what good parts cultivated with a laudable Ambition
to Improve in Knowledge will do, though not Assisted with those Advantages of
Education which some are favored withal.

7. Some there are that have remark't, That the Accomplished Poet and the Great
Man are (...) seldom meeting together in one Person, Or that its rare those
Powers of Mind that make the one, are found United with those that Constitute
the other. And perhaps it may be a Truth which for the main holds true. For
whereas what is properly called Wit, (which is no other than a ready Assemblage
of Ideas, or a putting those together with quickness and variety wherein there
can be found any Congruity or Resemblance; or to speak more plain, an aptness
at Metaphor and Allusion) is what, as I take it, makes the Accomplished Poet;
exactness of Judgment, or Clearness of reason (which we commonly and truly say
makes the Great Man) on the other hand lies in an Ability of Mind nicely to
distinguish its Ideas the one from the other, where there is but the least
difference thereby avoiding being misled by Similitude, and by Affinity to take
one thing from another. And the process of the Mind in these two things being
so contrary the one to the other, it is not strange if they are Powers not ever
United in the same Subject, yet this notwithstanding, all must say, this is not
a Remark that universally and without exception will hold true; but that how
contrary and inconsistent soever the process of the mind in the exercise of
these two Powers may seem to be, yet there are Instances wherein they are U^^^
in a Wonderful Measure: And many Men in whom we find a great deal of Pleasantry
or Wit, are notwithstanding very Judicious and Rational. And though Modesty
forbids me to say this of the Author, yet this I shall venture to say, viz.
That whatever may be said in Commendation of this Performance by the
Accomplished for a Judgment upon it; yet that there will not that Honor be
done him thereby, as I conceive may with a great deal of Truth and Justice
otherwise.

But however it be as to that, and whatever the Sentiments of the Judicious in
affairs of this Nature, may be of this Composure, yet I presume all will
approve of the design of it, which (as to the main of it at least,) being no
other than to pay a just debt to the Memory and procure due Regards to the
Family of one, who not only being viewed in his own Personal Accomplishments
was a Person of distinguishing Worth, but many ways Highly Deserved of the
Public, every one must Confess is Laudable, it being very Consonant to the
Natural Notice of what is Good and Excellent Engraven on the Minds of all Men,
as appears by the Honors done, even by (...) Nations to their admired Heroes,
be (...) every one not Insensible of our Valuable (...) so far forth continued
and secured to us under the Present Constitution Obtained by the Agency and
Influence of this Noble Person whose Name and Praise are here Celebrated, as
they will ^^y he was a Public Benefactor, highly Deserved of (...), and though
Dead justly Challenges a better Regard to his Surviving Posterity than by some
at least, has been paid to them, and that his Name is not to be mentioned
without a Blessing on his Memory, so that this is but a just Tribute to it.

8. For my own part whatever Opinion some may have of me as to my Principles in
Politics, and though perhaps our Present Frame or Model of Government is not the
best that might be, but capable of a change in some points to the better, yet
can freely confess that I look upon it as an Indulgence and Favor of Heaven, a
just ground of Gratitude; and that as its a Constitution capable of rendering us
a People more Happy than we are, so that the Infelicities we Labor under in
the Present Day, which truly are not few or small, are rather owing to the want
of a due Use, or rather an Abuse of it, than the Constitution it self.

9. I am no Admirer of those Despotick Forms of Government which as they Obtain
in some places, so are not without their Advocates in others, where the
Blessings they enjoy under the good and gentle Administrations of better Forms
might convince them of their Folly and Teach them better. I firmly Believe that
the Law of Nature knows no difference or Subordination among Men besides those
of Children to their Parents and Wives to their Husbands, and that these
Relations only excepted, all Men are otherwise Equal, Free and Independent and
remain so till by Contracts, Provisions and Laws of their own they divest
themselves of those Prerogatives: Nor is it I conceive in the Power of any
Person or Persons to transfer or vest that Despotick Arbitrary Power in any
other Person or Persons, which some in Authority Exercise over the Lives and
Fortunes of their Subjects: for no Person can Transfer to another more Power
than he has in himself, and such an ARBITRARY Power over himself or any other
to Destroy his own or the Life and Property of another, is what none on Earth
can lay Claim to. Worthy to be Inserted here are the Words of that Great Man
Mr. Lock, who well understood the true Origin of all Lawful Authority, and
what Powers over themselves or others, Persons by the Law of Nature and
Antecedent to their Entering into Society are Vested with; This i e Arbitrary,
Despotick Power, says he, is a Power which neither Nature gives (for it has
made no such distinction between one man and another) nor Compact can convey:
For man not having such an Arbitrary Power over his own Life, cannot give to
another such a Power over it, but its the effect of Forfeiture only, which the
Aggressor makes of his own life when he puts himself into a state of War with
another. -- And a little after, And thus, says he, Captives taken in a Just and
Lawful War, and such only, are subject to a despotick power which as it arises
not from compact, so neither is it capable of any, but is the state of War
continued. Thus that man of deep Tho'ts Page 320, 321. And it is not to be
doubted but that whatever some men (may I not say foolishly eno') have advanced
for the support of the Absolute power of Supreme Rulers (taking their Notions
of Civil Power probably from some mistaken texts of Scripture, and general
Speculations founded on some Equivocal terms, such as King, Sovereign, Supreme,
etc Yet the true Measures of all lawful Authority, be it Supreme or
Subordinate, are to be taken from the nature of that Compact or Contract that
is the true Origin of it, and Vests it in those that wear it^: Nor is this
Doctrine I think in the least Inconsistent with that that asserts the Jus
Divinum of Civil Power; or that the Powers that be are Ordained of God, and
therefore Challenges Obedience to them not for Wrath merely, but for Conscience
sake.

10. I presume there are not many in this Popular, Levelling Day who will not
readily Subscribe this Doctrine, and more than that, who will not say that in
Lawful Governments that are founded in Compact, the more general Error is that
too much Power is given up by the Community, and Vested in their Rulers; I am
very sure among us at least, there are not many, who (Pardon me if what I say
be amiss) generally speaking are a People Trained up, but too much, in
Principles of Rebellion and Opposition to Government; and who as to the
Constitution Obtaining among us, as Popular as it is, yet think it Defective by
Error on the other Extreme? Yet all this notwithstanding, certain it is
Despotick Forms are not the only that are Prejudicial to the ends of
Government, but those Erring on the other Extreme are perhaps as Inconsistent
with them, and of this, besides their but too often Exemplifying the Condition
of Ephesus at a certain time when Paul was there, Act. 19. We need not go far
from Home for Evidence. Our English Constitution at Home seems to be an Happy
mean between these two Extremes, Wisely contrived to secure from the ill
Consequents of either of them. A Constitution it is wherein as one says, Though
the Executive Power be Lodged solely in the King, yet the Legislative is
divided between him and his People, by which as the King has Bounds set to his
Prerogative, so the People have their Privileges which Assert their Liberty.
Such a Constitution it is as allows enough to a King of no Tyrannical Temper,
and what is Sufficient to secure the Ends of Government, and enough to the
People to Preserve them from Slavery. There is Monarchy without Slavery, a
Great King, and yet a Free People; such a Monarchy as has the main Advantages
of an Aristocracy in the Lords, and of a Democracy in the Commons, without the
Inconveniences of either. In a Word, a Model of Government so Perfect and well
Adapted to the Ends of Government does it seem to be, that as the things
wherein other Constitutions, (and in particular Ours in this Colony) Harmonizes
with it, seem to be its great Perfects, and those wherein it differs its great
Imperfections, though by many Cried up for our Glorious Privileges.

11. Perhaps what I have already Written, may have given some Exercise to the
Patience of the Reader, however having put Pen to Paper, I shall Presume to
detain him a little longer on a matter which as it has been the Occasion of
much Debate and Contention as well as many other Evils among us, so my Tho'ts
are here led to it by some Passages in the Ensuing Muse. It Is the matter of
Native Right as its commonly called, or the Right the Aborigines of this
Country (all or any of them) had or have to Lands in it. An Interest this is
which every one knows has not wanted many Advocates among us, especially of
late Years, who have endeavored to Advance or set it up as our only Valuable
Title to whatever Lands are in the Country, some perhaps Acting in what they
have done with a real Persuasion of this, but far the most no doubt on other
Considerations.

12. For my own part, I have ever thought this a matter more Talked of than
Understood, and am ready to think of those who are of the abovementioned
Opinion in this matter, that they have Drank in this Article of their Faith as
perhaps they have many of the rest, without due Examination or Search into the
matter.

13. I Presume we are generally Agreed there is such a thing as Native Right,
to speak in the Vulgar Phraise; or a Right which the Aborigines of any Country
and Consequently of this, (or some of them at least) have or had to Lands in
it, I mean to particular Tract, or Parcels of it: I suppose there are few that
in this Point bring them down to a Level with the Bruital Race, how Barbarous
or Uncultivated soever they were: And sure I am that none will Deny it that
considers that as there never was any among Mankind, even the most Barbarous
but what were Capable of Impropriating Lands as well as other things, so that
among the Aborigines of this Country there was that found that was Sufficient
for that end. Yet notwithstanding to Assert their Right in that Extent that
many do, and suppose it, without excepting any, to extend to all Lands in the
Country, whether Cultivated by them or not; is what I never could, nor yet can
see any Sufficient reason for. And though I know to countenance and give a
currency to this Opinion the Authority of those Truly Worthy Men that were the
first Settlers of English Colonys here, as well as that of the several
Governments in the Country from the beginning to this Day, is wont frequently to
be alleged in Discourse by our Bigots to this Principle, who would bear us in
Hand they were one and all of the same Persuasion, and accordingly accounted no
Lands in the Country their own till Obtained of the Natives by Compact or
otherwise, yet for my own part I could never think so Dimunitively of them, or
at least many of them as to Believe they Acted on this Principle in the Regard
they showed the Natives and their Pretended Claim to the Country, by entering
into Treaties with and allowing them Gratuities for the Lands, but rather that
they Acted on Prudential Considerations taken from their own and the Natives
Circumstances.

14. And as it is an undoubted Truth, that the Aborigines of this Country, some
or all of them had Right to Lands in it, so is it equally certain that of what
Extent soever it was it arose from one of these Two Things, viz. Either the Law
of Nature, or Positive Laws or Constitutions of their own (Tacit or Express)
Regulating or Determining the matter of Property, one or other of these must
give them what they had. And by Consequence nothing with any certainty can be
Determined upon the extent of the Claims or Properties of any Single Person or
Number of them, i^ first it be determined what their Condition was, whether
they were a People in the State of Nature, and so had only what the Law of
Nature gave them, or had q^t^ed that State, entered into Communities, and by
Compact one with another, and Positive Constitutions of their own (Tacit or
Express) had fixed the Bounds of each Community respectively and Settled or
Determined the matter of Property in Land within themselves severally: and in
case this last be found, viz. that they had entered into Communities and
Performed those Consequent Acts, further it must be Detertermin'd where the
Bounds of each Community respectively were, and what Disposition or Settlement
the Laws of each Society or Community made of the Lands within their Limits
severally. These are things which perhaps few of those who have appeared with
such Heat and Zeal for the forementioned Principle, ever thought of, yet I am
well assured there is no Intelligent Person but will readily grant that till
these things are Determined nothing with any certainty can be Known or Resolved
upon the extent of the Claim or Property of any among them, whether Single
Person or Community.

And because diverse Persons are of Different Sentiments in this matter, viz.
What the Condition of the Persons I am now speaking of was as to this, at the
time of the first Access of the English to the Country when such Large Tracts
of Land are supposed by some to be Obtained of them; some being of Opinion they
were a People in the State of Nature, others that they had quitted that State,
entered into Communities and put on some Form of Civil Policy, etc -- and
because as I said nothing can be Determined as to the extent of the Right or
Property of any of them without a Determination of this matter, Although I shall
not Presume upon an Umpirage of it, yet ^^all examine each of these Hypothesis
and on a Supposition of the Truth of both of them severally, shall show what
can be Determined upon the extent of the Rights or Properties of any of them:
Which when I have done I am prone to think, that those who with such
Confidence, and to the no small Harm and Injury of their Country have Appeared
on the side of the forementioned Extravagant Principle, will see they have not
such Evidence of the Truth of it, as perhaps now they think they have.

15. I take it for granted and think it needs no Proof, that as all men are and
ever were Born Free, Equal and Independent as to Civil Subjection or
Subordination, so there was a time when the State of Nature obtained in the
World. As there is a wide difference between Paternal Authority or Power and
Civil or Political, so though the first has been from the Beginning and is as old
as the Relation between Father and Son; yet the other is not so: But as in the
beginning of the World men were few in Number, wanted not Room, having the wide
World before them, had not the like Temptations to Contention and Strife, nor
were exposed and in danger of Enemies, as since (...) so did not presently find
a necessity of entering into Society, but continued for some time in that Free
Equal, Independent State wherein they were Born, having no other Law than that
of Nature, and not knowing what Political Power or Authority was. And this is
what is Intended by the state of Nature. How long it was in the Beginning that
men continued in this state, before there were any instances of their Embodying
into any form of Civil Policy is uncertain; Nor is it strange we are left so
much in the dark, and History is so silent in this matter, since the time was
so long before the use of Letters obtained in any parts of the World: yet that
such a state as this did precede that of Civil Society as the Sacred History it
self seems to intimate to us in those words of Cain (Genesis 4.12. And it shall
come to pass that every one that finds me shall s^y me Which seem evidently
to imply this state of Nature then obtaining, and that every man then looked on
himself as having in himself right to punish the Transgressi^ns of the Law of
Nature) so I presume is not doubted of by many in this day, wherein I suppose
it is generally received for good Doctrine, that Compact is the Origin of
Government, at least as far forth, or wheresoever it was begun in Peace. Yea if
we may believe Josephus ^costa, and I know no reason why we may not, even these
latter Ages of the World have afforded instances of this nature, I mean of
persons in the state of nature, or without any form of Civil Policy among them.
His words are these, viz. There are great and apparent Conjectures that these
men, speaking of the Aborigines of Peru, for a long time had neither Kings nor
Common Wealths, but lived in Troops as they do this day in Florida, the
Cheriq^anaes, those of Brasil and many other Nations, which have no certain
Kings, but as Occasion is offered in Peace or War, they choose their Captains as
they Please. Lib 1. Cap 25: Nor is it unlikely there may be Multitudes in the
World, who even to this day remain in this state as perhaps may appear more
probable by and by, when something further has been added Descriptive of it;
which that so I may be the better understood in what follows, I shall do in
this place.

16. This State of Nature then is a state wherein men not having any Common,
Established, Positive Law (Tacit or Express) or Judicature to appeal to, with
Authority to decide Controversies between them, and punish Offenders, Every man
is Judge for himself, and Executioner.

Those says that Worthy Person Mr. Lock.
before mentioned, who are United into one Body, and have a Common, Established
Law and Judicature to Appeal to, with Authority to Decide Controversies arising
between them, and Punish Offenders, are in Civil Society one with another, but
those w^o have no such Common Appeal, I mean on Earth, are still in the State
of Nature, each being (where there is no other) Judge for Himself and
Executioner.

Treatise of Government, p. 247. and afterward p. 280. accounting for the
Defects of this State, he says,

1 There Wants in it an Established Settled, known Law Received and Allowed by
common Consent to be the Standard of Right and Wrong, and the common Measure to
Decide all Controversies arising between Men. For though the Law of Nature be
Plain and Intelligible to all Rational Creatures, yet Men being byas'd by their
Interest, as well as Ignorant for want of Study of it, are not apt to allow of
it as a Law binding to them in the Application of it to their particular Cases.

2. In the State of Nature there wants a Known, Indifferent Judge with
Authority to Determine all Differences according to the Established Law, for
every one in that State being both Judge and Executioner of the Law of Nature,
Men being partial to themselves, Passion and Revenge are very apt to carry them
too far, and with too much Heat in their own Cases, as well as Negligence, and
Vnconcernedness to make them too Remiss in other Men's.

3. ^n the State of Nature there often wants Power to Back and Support the
Sentence when Right; and to give it due Execution, they who by any Injustice
Offen'd will seldom fail where they are Able, by Force to m^e good their
Injustice. And such Resistance man times makes the Punishment Dangerous, and
Frequently Destructive to those who Attempt it.

Thus that great Man

In a Word, In this State as Men have no other Law than that of Nature or
Reason to be the Measure or Standard of Right and Wrong, and are without any
Common Superior on Earth, with Authority to decide Controversi^s and a Force or
Power to Execute his Sentences, to whom they might Appeal when Disputes arise,
so every Man has right in himself both to Judge of the Transgressions of that
Law, and Punish them as far as he is Able. And from this short account of this
State it is easy to see both what it is, and wherein it differs from a State of
Civil Society, for whereas in this State men have no other Law than that of
Nature, and every man has in himself right to Judge of and Punish the
Transgressions of that Law; in that of Civil Society there are other Laws for a
Measure or Standard of Right and Wrong, and this Right of Judging and
Executing, is given up by every Individual into the hands of the Community: For
which reason in this State all Private Judgment in any matters ceases, and the
Community is Vmpire, and by settled standing Laws made by themselves,
indifferent and the same to all Parties, and by men having Authority from the
Community to Execute those Laws, decides all Differences that happen between
any particular Members, concerning any matter of Right, and punishes all
Offenses with such Penalties as the Law has Established.

17. Now on the Supposition that the Aborigines of this Country, before and at
the time of the First Discovery and Planting of it by the English, were in this
State, and not to be considered as having put on any Form of Civil Policy, let
us enquire what can be Determined concerning the Extent of their Rights to
Lands in it: And here it must be considered that during the continuance of this
State with any Persons, though all have a Right or Claim to the Earth, as well
as all other things made for the Use and Comfort of Man, by Virtue of the Grant
of the most High, the Great Proprietor of the World, whereby as the Psalmist
says, He has Given the Earth to the Children of Men; Yet as by that they are
made but Commoners in them, and can Claim only as such, so there is I suppose
but one way whereby any particular Person can begin a Property in any thing, be
it Land or any thing else, exclusive of the rest of Mankind, and this is by
adding to it something which is his own, for Instance his Labor, which is his
alone, and no one else has any Right to. Thus in this State the Law of Nature
or Reason to which alone Men are Subject, and which gives them what ever they
have, this Law I say makes and allows the Land a Man Tills and Subdues to be
his Peculiar Property: by his Labor, which is h^s own, (and no m^n else has
any Right to) bestowed upon it, he does as it were Enclose it from the Common;
and that Deer, or Hare, or Fruit a Man spends his ^^me and Strength in the
Chase and Gathering of, it allows to be his Property: he does the by take them
out of that Common State when in Nature had made them. (...) Worthy to be
Inserted here are the Words of that great Man Mr. Lock.
before mentioned, Thus says he, this Law of Reason makes the Deer the Indians
who has Killed it, it is allowed to be his Goods, who has bestowed ^is Labor
upon it, though before it was the Common Right of every one -- He adds, And
amongst those who are Counted the Civilized Part of Mankind, who have Made and
Multiplied Pos^^ive Laws to Determine properly, this Original Law of Nature for
the beginning of Property in what was before Common still takes place, and by
Virtue thereof, what Fish any one Catches in the Ocean, (that great and still
remaining Common of Mankind) or what Ambergrease any one takes up here, is by
the Labor that removes it out of the Common State Nature lest it in made his
Property who takes that Pains about it. Thus he, --

Indeed after any Portion of the Earth, or any thing else is by this means
taken out of the Common State it was in before, and a Property is begun in it,
this State of Nature seems to Admit of other ways of fixing a Property in the
same thing or things by others; Thus in this State, that Land or other thing I
began a Property in by my Labor, may become the Property of another Man, b^
Gift or Purchase as well as in a State of Civil Society: but Labor only seems
to be the thing that begins Property, and first takes things out of their
Common State. As in the beginning before Men entered into Society, this was the
beginning of it ( Cain and Abel had their Right of Property, the one in the
Lands he Cultivated, the other in the Flocks he kept; from their Labor spent
on them) so it is ever since where the same State of Nature Obtains, nor can it
be begun that I can see otherwise.

18. And to this voice of the Law of Nature, viz. that Labor in this State
shall be the beginning of Property, seems well to agree the voice of God
Himself in the Gift or Grant he made of the Earth, the Creatures and
Productions of it to Mankind, Genesis 1.28. -- Where we find that Cultivating and
Subduing the Earth, and having Dominion are joined together: Thereby assuring
us that as in that Gift he then made of it in common to men, he did not design
it should serve to their benefit and comfort only by its Spontaneous
Productions, but that it was his will that by Art and Industry in Subduing and
Cultivating of it they should draw still more from it, so that this should be
their Title to it at least during the continuance of that State of Nature, and
till by positive Constitutions of their own, the matter of property should be
otherwise Determined and Settled.

19. And if this be true, as I think it is, viz. That in the beginning of the
World before men entered into Society, (...) in all Ages and Places since where
the State of Nature obtains, and there are no Positive Constitutions (^acit or
Express) Regulating the matter of Property, this is the only Way of beginning a
Property in things, be it Land or what else you please, it seems no way
Difficult to Determine upon the extent of men's Properties during the
continuance of this state of things among them, for this being the Cause and
Original of all Property, must be the Measure of it too, whatever ways of
fixing a Property in things thus firstly impropriated, may be consequent upon
it: As far as Labor extends, and things by that are taken out of the common
state Nature left them in, so far the Right of Property must extend and no
further, what is beyond this must remain still in the same Common State it was
made in. And further, at the same time Reason forces us to conclude that as to
a Right of Property in Land particularly, it cannot be of great Extent during
men's continuance in this State, at least so long as they continue their Simple,
Mean, Inartful way of Living, are mainly fed and clothed with Roots, Fish,
Fowl, Deer, Skins, etc. The Spontaneous productions of Nature, and have those
provisions of it in such plenty that want does not oblige them to Cultivate or
Till the Earth. While things continue thus among them, what Temptation can they
have to Impropriate much, especially if at the some time the necessary
Utensils, such as Ploughs, Hoes, Axes, etc. are wanting, as we all know was the
case with the Aborigines of this Country before the arrival of the English to
it.

20. And now from what I have thus said concerning the way of Original or
Primary Impropriation in the state of Nature, it cannot be difficult to
determine of the Extent of the properties of the Aborigines of this Country, or
any of them in I and at the time of the Access of the English to it, on the
Supposition of their being in this State; Inasmuch as it assures us their
Labor or Improvement was the measure of it. And to instance in the Moheags in
particular, or any of them, concerning whose Pretended Claims there has been so
much Noise and Strife in the Country, which even to this Day is not ended, what
has been said assures us that on the Supposition of their being in this state
at that time, instead of such large Territories they have been ignorantly (as
well as knavishly enough no doubt) though it by some to have, they had really good
Right or Title, but to here and there a few spots of it, viz only to so much as
by the means abovementioned they had separated and enclosed from the rest of
the Country I shall not presume upon an Vmpirage in this matter, by saying they
were doubtless at that time in the State of nature. I Remember what the
Judicious Mr. Hooker in his Learned treatise of Ecclesiastical Policy, Lib. 1.
Sect. 10. Suggests concerning the defects of Polities civil in their beginnings
in the more early Ages of the World, and perhaps it is a difficult thing to fix
the bounds between the State of Nature and that of Civil Policy, or say how far
the Rights of the Law of Nature must be given up or Retained by persons in
order to their belonging to the one or the other: yet thus far I shall venture
to say, viz. That if what has been said Descriptive of this State of Nature be
true, as I think it is, and if withal we may make a Judgment of the Customs and
Way of Living of the Persons I am now speaking of, at that time, by the Customs
and Manners of the more Unciviliz'd part of their Survivors at this day, who ^m
g^ne may reasonably be thought the Liveliest Images of their Ancestors, and
most to retain their Customs; if we may do so I say, the Probability seems to
lie on the Affirmative side, viz. That they were with their Brethren in Peru,
Florida, Brasil, etc. before mentioned from Ac^sta, to be rank't with those in
a State of Nature.

21. Who that is not a Stranger to them will say the forementioned Essentials
of a state of Civil Policy are to be found among them? that they have any
Established, Settled, common Law received and allowed so much as by a Tacit
Consent to be the Standard of Right and Wrong and the Common Measure to decide
Controversies arising among them? And herewith a known, Indifferent Judge with
Authority to determine differences according to this Established Received Law?
Who knows not that an Attempt to find these things among them is like a search
for the Living among the Dead? And that when Controversies arise among them,
without a reference of the matter to the decision of any Common Vmpire or Judge
every one looks on himself as Vested with the Rights of the Law of Nature, and
accordingly is Judge for himself and Executioner! This every one knows is the
common, uninterrupted Practice of those of whom I am now speaking of, and what
is accounted Reputable and Laudable among them in all Disputes where the
Contending Parties are capable of it, and in such as issue in the Death of
either of them, consonant to the same Law the nearest Relative or Relatives of
the Slain, look on themselves as the Persons concerned to do Justice on the
Murderer, and accordingly fail not to watch all opportunities, till at length
by Surprise or Violence they compass it, and by the Gun, Hatchet or Knise, end
the Controversy.

22. I think I am not Injurious in this Account of the Present State of things
among those of Our Natives as we call them, I am now speaking of, nor can I so
much as Suspect a Censure for it, since it is no more than what most that are
not Strangers to them know. The Tragical end of Mahomet Eldest Son, as I take
it, to Owaneco, with the like Tragical Occasion of it, is yet Fresh in our
Memories, and its needless for me to Relate: and who knows not that That was
but one Instance of that Justice, which is as Frequent among them as there is
the like Occasion? This every one I think must say looks very much like the
State of Nature, (if the forementioned Account of it be true) and if it be not
an Evidence of its Obtaining among a People, is at least an Evidence of such an
Imperfect State of Civil Policy as borders very near upon it. And if it be so
with these now, we have I believe reason to Conclude the Condition of their
Ancestors Living at the Time of the Access of the English to the Country, and
before, was not better; for who can think that these their Present Survivors
are more degenerate and farther removed from a State of Civil Policy than they
were? For my own part, I have ever though it on the other hand that even the main
of that Shadow of it which is now among them is of later Da^e, ^ff^med by them
partly from an Humor of Conformity to us their New Neighbors, and partly for
other Reasons and nor a continuance of Ancient, Immemorial Customs among them.

23. Nor is it as I conceive any Conclusive Evidence of the contrary that they
Lived in some sort of Society or Neighborhood and had their Chiefs or
Superiors among them, whether they were such as were so by Nature and Age, or
by Election: Since the State of Nature, though it Banish or Implys an Absence of
all Inequality among Men as to Civil Authority or Jurisdiction, yet does not
exclude all Inequallity whatsoever. The State of Nature is a State of
Subjection to the Dictates and Direction of the Law of Nature, which Law is so
far from Banishing all Inequality or Subordination among Men, that it Ordains
it in diverse Instances of it, particularly in the Relations of Parents and
Children, Husband and Wise, Captain and Soldiers, right reason which is this
Law says there shall be Subjection and Subordination. These Inequalities
therefore are no ways Inconsistent with this State, nor of themselves Evidences
it does not obtain among any. And these I think it not Improbable, were the
only Inequalities or Subordinations among the Persons I am now speaking of at
this time and perhaps ever before. Their Chiefs or Superiors seem to have been
either such as were so by Nature or Age, Ancient Fathers, or Military Heads
chosen by them to lead them out against their Enemies. Thus where Families
among them happened to be Numerous, continued entire together, and though it
themselves Sufficient to Subsist by themselves without Uniting with others, (as
was often the case no doubt, in that Day when there was no want of Land, all the
Country, excepting here and there a Spot, was an Uncultivated Wilderness, all
Provisions of Nature Accommodate to their Plain, Mean, Inartful Way of Living
were in great Plenty, and nothing found to give Price to them farther than this
did, and Consequently Temptations and Occasions of Strife or Contention among
them were few and rare, during this Day or Time I say) the Fathers of such
Families in Succession seem to have been their only Superiors or Chiefs, and by
the exercise of their Paternal Authority, (to which such Families had been
Accustomed) maintained the little Order was among them: They seem to have been
their Captains or Leaders too when Occasion required, unless by reason of some
Defect of Body or Mind they were Incapable of it. But when the case happened to
be otherwise, as no doubt it often did, and diverse Families saw a necessity of
Uniting together for their better Security against Foreign Force, their
Superiors or Chiefs were by Election, and seem to have been chosen by them for
no other end than to be Generals of their Armies, as among their Brethren in
Peru, etc. before mentioned. Nor do they seem to have had but little, if any
Dominion at Home in times of Peace. In this Respect they seem (if the
Comparison may be allowed) to be like the Judges in Israel of Old, who
certainly were little, if any thing, more than Generals of their Armies.

24. These I am much inclined to think were the only Superiors or Chiefs they
had among them, and which perhaps by an Abuse or Misapplication of the Term,
Sachem (which probably in its Original sense intends no more than a Chief
Father or Captain) have in later times gone by the N^me of Kings or Civil
H^ads. And though perhaps some will say this is all but Conjecture or Chimaera,
and as such only to be regarded; yet I must tell them I cannot but much incline
to this Opinion, and think I shall do so till I can see some further evidence
of the Essentials of Kings in them than ever yet I did, and can believe that
there is so much of Spell in that Title or Epithet that the bare Application of
it to a Person is Sufficient without any thing else, to make him in fact so.
But whatever may be the Truth as to this, and on which side soever those who
are Judicious, and more Learned in these things than I, may resolve the matter,
yet supposing what I have Discovered as my Prevailing Opinion in the case, to
be Truth and that after all the Honors done their Chiefs by the Glorious
Titles of Kings, Emperors, Allies, etc. they were but Chief Fathers or Captains
and really in the State of Nature with the rest of their Brethren, I think its
pretty clear the Properties of any or all of them in Lands were of no greater
extent than has been above expressed, and Consequently vastly short of what by
many wanting Probity and Sense we have been born in hand they were.

25. I come now to consider the Second Hypothesis, viz. That how Defective or
Wanting soever their State might be as to the forementioned requisites of a
State of Civil Society, and though Judging by what was generally Practiced
among them, (every one retaining in his own Hands the Rights of the Law of
Nature) they seem to have been in that State, Yet that they had really quitted
it, entered into Communities, and by Compact, and at least Tacit Constitutions
of their own, settled the matter of Property, both with their Neighbors
respectively, and severally among themselves; and that these forementioned
Customs, with others of the like Nature arguing the State of Nature obtaining
among them, were rather from a Defect in Establishing proper Methods for the
Execution of their Laws, than Evidences that they had none.

26. I have already expressed my Sentiment in this matter, which whether it be
right or wrong, matters not as to what is now before me, which is to Consider
this Opinion and see what (upon a Supposition of the truth of it) can be
determined upon the Claims or Pretensions of any of them to Lands in the
Country. And I am pretty well assured this Opinion, (how fond so ever our
Bigots to Native Right are of it, yet will less serve that Interest, at least
in the Present Day, than the former; in as much as on a Supposition of it; though
it must be allowed they had a Common Property considered as Communities or
Politic Bodies, and besides this that some or all the Members of each
Community respectively had severally particular Properties of their own
Exclusive of the rest of Mankind, yet) all becomes so Perplexed and in the
Dark, and so many Difficulties inextricable, at least in the Present Day,
unavoidably attend all, that nothing certain can be determined upon the
Properties of any of them, whether Communities or Particular Persons; I shall
give some Evidence of this, when I have Premised this, viz.

27. That allowing it to be true that they had quitted the state of Nature, and
put on some Form of civil Policy, yet it does not from thence necessarily
follow that Lands were brought under the Regulation of Compact, or any Positive
Constitutions of their own, (tacit or express:) O^ that they were held by them
any otherwise than as in the State and by the Law of Nature. Certain it is
there is no necessary Connection between those things, the For^ner does not
infer the Latter; A People may put on some Form of Policy without any
Determination of the matter of Property in Lands whether by ^ompact with
Neighboring Polities or any Positive Constitutions of their own. And for my
own part I never yet saw any sufficient Reason to conclude there was any thing
of this nature done by them before the Arrival of the English here: Nor do I
think it will seem probable there was, to any that considers their poor, mean,
barbarous way of Living, the ^rear Plenty of all the Provisions of Nature that
req^r'd, the very little use they made of the Earth further than to walk upon
it, together with their want not only of that Communication with other parts of
the World, but of any thing among themselves that might g^ve a Value to the
Provisions of Nature over and above what their own Necessities did. Their way
of Living the Poet well describes when accounting for the Golden Age, he tells
us of Men then, Contentique cibis nus^o eagento Creatic,
Arbuteos faetus, montanaque sraga legebant;
Cornaque and in duris haeremia mora rabetis,
Et quae deciderant patvla Jet is ^rbore glandes.
And men themselves contented were with plain and simple Food,
That on the Earth of natures gift, without their Travel stood'
Did live by Respis, (...) and Ha^^, by Cornets, Plums and Cherries
By ^oes and Apples, No^ (...) and loathsome Bramble-berries,
And by the Acorns dropped (...) from joves broad tree in field


Certain it is Nature (...) the main Materials of their Subsistence without any
Art or Labor of theirs; they had but little more to do than to Catch or Gather
what ^ey had provided for them. And during this Sta^ of things among any
Societies of Men, of wh^ Consideration or Value can Land be to them, especially
when these spontan^^^s Provisions of Nature in all Places are in such Abundance
that there is no danger of Want, and all means of Communication or Trade with
other parts of the World, together with the Use of Money, among themselves,
(which things might impair their Stock of Provisions and give a Value to them
over and above what their own Necessities did) are wholly wanting, as we all
know was the case with the ^borigines of the Country? Surely it could not be of
such Value to them as to put them upon a Partage or Impropriation of it farther
than was done before by the Law of Nature. Let us suppose an Island so
Separated from the rest of the World as to be under an utter Impossibility of
any Commerce with it; wherein there were Inhabitants embodied together in Civil
Societies, yet Living almost entirely on what Nature prepared to their Hands,
and so disproportioned in number to the quantity of their Provisions that after
their Consumption of what was needful for them, there remained enough for
perhaps Ten times the Number, and at the same time nothing in the Island either
because of its Commonnes^ or Perishableness fi^ to supply the place of Money;
what Inducement could such Societies have by any Compact either with one
another, or among themselves respectively, to fix a Property in Lands, beyond
what was done in the way before mentioned by the Law of Nature, for my own part
I cannot Excogitate any. And who knows not that this was the very Case with the
Persons I am speaking of, before the Arrival of the English here. For this
reason I think it highly Probable, yea next to a Certainty that such Lands only
as their Poor way of Living rendered their Tillage of necessary (and how small a
part was this compared with the rest of the Country?) they put any Value upon:
the rest they looked upon as of no more Price, nor Advantage to be Impropriated
than the Air they Breathed in: and therefore like other things of the like
Nature in all Communities) lay Neglected in that Common State wherein Nature
left it^ Nor let this be thought strange, since from Divine Revelation itself
we have pretty good assurance that it is no more than was Common in the more
Early Times of the World: There we find that in those Days men did not always
immediately upon their Entering into Society, set out the Bounds of their
distinct Territories, and by Laws within themselves respectively Settle the
matter of Property; but suffered a great, may I not say the greatest part of
the Land? to lie in the same Common State it was in before. Even in Abraham's
time we find men wandered up and down with their Flocks and Herds freely and
without Molestation, seeking Pasture where they liked best; and that Abraham
himself did this in a Country where he was a Stranger, and there were many
Kingdoms or Communitie^ of Men, and they not newly formed neither. Which to me
seems a pretty good Evidence that at least a great part, yea Probably the
greatest part of the Land lay in Common, that the Inhabitants Valued it not, at
least so far as to think it worth their while to come to a Partage of it, and
fix their respective Properties in it: The reasons of which no doubt were their
Rude, Mean, Inartful Way of Living, Feeding and Clothing themselves mainly with
what Nature Prepared, in which Preparations as they were in great Plenty, so
Probably they had no Money or any Equivalent of it that might give a Value to
any thing above what their way of Living did.

28. I make no doubt there are those who will not Scruple to say the contrary
to this is Evident in the Aborigines of this Country, and that in Fact they had
by Compact and Constitutions Positive (Tac^ or Express,) Settled the matter of
Property in Lands, each Society with its Neighbors, and among themselves
severally: But be it so, I think its Probable, if not more than so, from what I
have said, that they had not, and though I suppose I know the reasons on which
they may so assert, as well as they, yet as I think they will scarcely weigh in
the Balance with the Evidence to the contrary given above, so desire to see
some further and better reason for it before I believe it. Its very true that
when after the Arrival of the English here, by Conversation and Co^erce with
them they were made Sensible of the Value of the Money they brought with them
and made tender of for Land, they could not then but see that the Lands beyond,
what they Improved, and so held by the Law of Nature, might be very Profitable
to them, and on this I doubt not they were full enough in their Assertions of
this Nature, viz. that by Compact and Constitutions of their own, they were
entitled to such and such Limits respectively; but this I think can carry with
it little Evidence of the thing to one who knows what they were, and withal
considers what is universally observable in their Posterity at this Day, when
such a Temptation is laid before them. To all which I may add what I suppose
comes pretty near a Demonstration in the case, viz their Palpable
Contradictions one of the other in their Pretensions, or the Accounts they
gave, on this Occasion, of their Respective Claims or Properties, One Sachem or
Community often Claiming what another did. This who knows not to be fact as to
Lands in this part of the Country, where the Claims of Hiums, Uncass, and
Sannup are found to interfere, the Consequence of which has been that Persons
Claiming under them, have endeavored each one to set up his Title in
Opposition to the other, to the no small Expense of Time and Money, as well as
Hurt of the Public.

29 Now supposing this to be so, it is Evident the Hypothesis or Opinion o^
their having quitted the State of Nature and put on some Form of Policy,
merely, does no Service to the Interest the Zealous Assertors of it endeavor
to Advance by it, does not extend Native Right one Inch farther than the former
Opinion did: for the Unavoidable Consequence of it is this, viz that as no
Societies of them had any common Right or Property, as such, (...) neither any
Particular Member of those Societies, any by virtue of any Positive
Constitutions or otherwise than by the Law of Nature: and that setting aside
here and there a Spot this or the other Person or Persons Improved and so
Impropriated and Held by the Law of Nature, all the rest of the Country
Remained in the same Common State wherein it was made, as much the Property of
the Kings of the Indies on the Opposite side of the Globe as Theirs. Now, in
order to the rendering this Opinion of any Service to the end for which its so
Zealously Avouch'd and Advanced by Many, its not enough to assert, yea and make
evident too that Our Aborigines had quitted the State of Nature and put on some
form of Policy, but further, as I before observed, that they had by Compact one
with another, and Positive Constitutions (Tacit or Express) Determined and
Settled their Bounds and the terms of each Community respectively, and after
this is done it will be of no advantage still to the pretensions of any
Particular Community, or any Member or Members of it, till we are assured what
bounds by Compact with its Neighbors it had, and what Settlement its
Constitutions made of the Lands within it: which I conjecture none can do
without the help of Divination.

30. Which brings me to what I proposed, which was to show that on a
Supposition of the Truth of this ( viz. that Our Aborigines were to be
considered as in a State of Society Civil, and had by these consequent Acts
Determined and Regulated the matter of Property) all their Rights or Properties
instantly become so Perplexed and in the Dark that nothing can be Known or
Determined upon them, and consequently no good Title possibly founded on them.
And in pursuance of this, and at the same time to convince the bold Avouchers
of this Opinion, I would Demand of them in a few things;

1. On a Supposition of the truth of this, Who can account for the true extent
of the common Properties of their Respective Communities, or any one of them?
If I have not been Misinformed some pains was formerly taken both in this and
some Neighboring Governments for a Resolution in this point: and for that end
Persons were Deputed to Enquire and Obtain the best light they could of the
Natives. What success attended these endeavors in Other Governments I know
not, but in this I suppose none at all. Its true the Gentlemen ^eputed by this
Government to enquire into the Claim of the Moheags made return of somethin^ to
the Assembly which they called an Account or description of their Claim by
certain Abutments, and which the Assembly so far had regard to as, it I mistake
not; to allow of its Entry on record. But yet can any of those who would
persuade us to think that Native Right is our only Valuable Title, Acquiesce in
this or think it of any value, when at the same time their Neighbors, the
Pequots, Quinebaugs, Nahanticks, (all of them as worthy of Credit as the
Moheags,) give another Account, some of them claiming all the Lands within
those Limits, saying the Moheags had none, and others of them claiming at least
Large Tracts within them. I suppose none will deny this to be Fact, or if there
be that shall do so, that the Claimers under Hiums and Sannup will stand by me
in it. Now if Native Right be our only Valuable Title what shall be done in
this case to know where or in whom this Right to these Lands is? Certain it is
if they were Communities, or Bodies Politic properly so Called, they had a
Federative Power, and if in the Exercise of it, they made a Partage of the
Lands, in this part of the Country among them, their Title Respectively was
good, and as good in one Community as another; and what shall be done in this
Case? how shall we be satisfied which of them speaks Truth, and consequently
where the Right is and of whom to be obtained? Nor can it satisfy any but Fools
to be able in this case to say, they have Purchased of the Natives. Nor is
there any thing I know of can help in this case but a Supposal of the Falseness
of all their Pretensions to a Partage or Impropriation of the Lands to any
Limits: and that whatever Compacts they made Determining their Bounds
respectively, they had therein a Sole Reference to the Hunt or Game, and
Designed only an Impropriation of that; at the same time not having the least
Regard to the Lands, nor caring, excepting as above, who had it, it being a
thing of no Price to them. And this as it is Undoubtedly the Truth of the
matter, so reduces the Right or Property of such Lands to some Certainty, lets
us know where or in whom it is, and to whom w^ must Apply for the fixing a
Property in them. But supposing this Difficulty attending this Opinion were
removed and the common Right of each Community, set out by Monuments. Yet

2. Who could tell us what Disp^sition or Settlement the Constitutions (Tacit
or Express,) of each Society made of the Lands within their Limits
respectively? The Resolution of this is as necessary as the other in Order to a
Determination upon the extent of the Properties of any or all of them. I take
it for Granted and think it needs no Proof, that as all Men by V^^^ue of the
Grant of the Most High before men^^^ned, are not only Commoners of the Earth,
but ^ually so, none having a Right by that to Claim^ more or larger Portions of
it than others, so that when any numbers of them enter into Society, and by
Compact with Neighboring Societies Settle their Limits, the Lands within such
Limits are the common Right of the Community, and equally so; and that the
several Members remain Commoners in an equallity, till by Constitutions of
their own they make another Settlement of them; And because this is supposed
(by such as assert the Politic State of the Natives) to have been done by them
long before the Arrival of the English here, I therefore Demand what
Disposition or Settlement did their Const^tutions make of the Lands within
their respective Limits? When they came to a Partage or Impropriation, did they
Impropriate in an Equallity, or if not, what other Settlement did they make of
them? Or if this be thought an Unreasonable Demand, because of the generality
of it, I Demand what Settlement did the Constitutions of any one Community (to
Instance in the Moheags Our Neighbors) make of the Lands within their Limits?
To be more particular here,

(1.) Where or in whom did they place the Lands? I Observed but now they were
Originally or Firstly in the Community, and equally so, and must remain so till
by Acts of their own they make (...) Disposition of them into another Hand or
Hands (...) and reason will tell every Man it must be so^ Now if by Acts or L^s
of their own they Altered the Original or Primary State of the Lands, I Demand
what was the Alteration? Where o^ in whom did they Place or Settle them? Did
they Settle them in any One single Person or Relation, or in a Certain Number
of Men of any certain Order or Character? On the Supp^ (...) of the Truth of
the Opinion I am now co^^^ ing, nothing can be Determined of the Extent, no nor
the Reallity neither of the Property of any of them till this be Resolved. I
know very well Our Bigots say here, that their Constitutions vested all the
Lands in their Kings, or in the Crown, (to Use our English Phrase,) but besides
that that is spoken without any Proof, or any Possibility of it as I imagine,
besides this I say, allowing it be Truth, yet it brings not the State of the
Lands in any particular Community to any Certainty, nor Resolves us in whom the
Property of all or any Part of them is till we are also Resolved in the
following Particulars also, viz.

(1) What they intend by Sachems or Kings in whom their Constitutions vested
the Lands. Whether such as were so de jure or de facto, i. e. whether such as
were Rightfully or by the Laws and Constitutions of the Society so, or in Fact
only. And in order to this we must be Resolved of the particular Form of Policy
agreed upon in the several Societies, viz. Whether in case it was Monarchial,
that they were Hereditary or Elective M^^archies, and not only so, but moreover
whether Vncass, Sasacus, Aramamet or any other Chief among them, of whom we
would obtain Lands, be King or Monarch according to the Fundamental Laws or
Constitutions of the Society yea or not. For if not (the Lawful Kings Right of
Property being merely and altogether from the Concession or Grant of the
Community) they cannot have any pretense to it; nor possibly make out a Good
Title to any other.

(2.) We must be resolved how or in what sense they vested the Lands in them:
Whether so as to make them their Inalienable Right or Property, as the case
seems to be with Land in some Constitutions: Or Alienable: And if in this last
sense, whether they were so Absolutely put into their hands, that they had
Right of Disposal where and to whom they saw cause, or in Trust only for the
Use and Benefit of the Societies Respectively? In which sense, as I understand
it, all Lands in our English Dominions are by Our Constitution vested in the
King or Crown (...) and Lands in this Government are by the Charter Vested in
the Corporation, and for that Reason are Alienable from it, and may become the
Property of others. If their Constitutions Vested the Lands in their Kings in
the first sense, by what Right or Authority did they Alienate or Dispose of
them to others? All Alienations made by them must be ipso facto Void: For if
the Communities in Vesting the Lands in them ga^ them no power of Alienation
they could have none. If it be said they were Vested in them in the second
sense, viz. With an Unlimited Power of making Alienations of them to whom they
saw cause; I say this is Incredible; For if Lands were of such Value with them
that they saw it worth their while to bring them under the Regulation of
Positive Constitutions, its unreasonable to think they should in this sense put
them into the Hands of any Person or Persons whatever: and by Consequence
(supposing the Hypothesis I am now examining be true, and that Lands by their
Constitutions (Tacit or Express) were Vested in their Kings) it cannot be
imagined they had Right or ^ower to make a Partage or Division of their
Dominions among their own Children, to the Exclusion of the rest of the
Community. For which reason I have ever though it Allawanhoods, alias Joshua's
Right nothing worth, even upon the very Principles of the Advocates or
Assertors of it. And if the last sense be asserted (which indeed carries with
it the greatest Probability if any thing of this Nature was done among them)
then I Demand again by what Right or Authority did they Divide their Dominions
among their Children, (...) an instance of which was but now given) or make
Conveyances of them to the English? Such Alienations must be as Void as on the
Supposition, of the Truth of the first sense.

(3.) And in case their Constitutions Vested the Lands in their Kings in this
last sense, viz. In Trust, etc. before we can be Resolved of the State of the
Lands in any Society, and of the reallity and extent of the Right or Property
of any particular Member or Member of them, we must be resolved also whether
any Alienations were made by their Kings to their Subjects, and what they were,
together with the Tenures in or by which they were to be holden of the Grantees.

31. Its possible in what I have now said, I may not have expressed my self in
the most Proper Terms: It requires perhaps more Knowledge of the Law for a
Person to be Able in an Affair of this Nature, to do (...), than I may pretend
to. However I hope what I have said is Intelligible, and being so may Suffice
as to what I Scope at in it: which is to show what little Service this
Hypothesis concerning the Aborigines of this Country does to the Interest many
endeavor to Advance and Serve by it: and that a Supposition of its Truth
Inevitably Involves their Rights or Claims in so many Inextricable Difficulties
and renders them all (...) Uncertain, Perplex't and in the Dark that nothing
Certain can be Known or Determined upon them. And though perhaps some may think
what I have here Advanced as necessary on this Hypothesis to be Resolved, in
Order to a Determination upon their Rights, Absurd, Yet I can^ but think all
those that think of things, not with the Multitude, (who generally Speaking
have too much Rubbish in their Brains to think of any thing with distinctness)
but as they are in themselves, will say that without a Resolution of them
nothing can be Determined with any certainty upon this Matter.

To Conclude; The sum of what has been said is this, viz. Either they were a
People in the State of Nature or they were (...); this I suppose all must
allow, there being no Third State wherein any Persons either now (...) at any
time heretofore were. If they were in the State of Nature, they had then Right
of Property only in such Lands as they Impropriated (and held) by the Law of
Nature, which as we all know was only here and there a small spot in the
Country. If it be said they had Quitted that State and put on some form of
Policy, then I say either they had by Compact and Positive Constitutions of
their own (Tacit or Express) Settled the matter of Property, or they had not:
If it be said they had not, then it follows that the State of the Lands in the
Country was not altered from what it was before; but they all (excepting only
what was Impropriated by the Law of Nature) remained in the same Common State
and Equally the Right of every Man, a^ they were before, while the State of
Nature continue^: Nor was the Prince or the Peasant distinguished as to Right
of Property in them otherwise than (...) in the State of Nature. For as
Property in Lands is not included in the notion of a King, or the want of it in
that of a Subject; so the making one Person a King, and another a Subject
simply in it self, will not make a Right of Property, and give it to the One,
or Banish it from the Other, without some other Act or Acts concurrent with it.
If it be said they had brought the Lands in the Country under the regulation of
Compact and Constitutions of their own, then it will follow that they had given
up their Title by the Law of Nature, that what was before by the Law of Nature
the Title of any of them to ^ds, was not, at least, qua such, their Title now;
but that what Right or Title any or all of them had now was by their
Constitutions Positive the inevitable consequence of which must be that till
those Constitutions are declared, and we assured what they Determined upon this
matter of Property, nothing can be known or determined upon the Rights of any
of them, we cannot say where or in whom Right or Property was, whether in the
Prince or People, some or all of them. And this having never b^th done, it is
beyond me to see o^ what Advantage this Hypothesis can be to the End for which
i^ so Zealously Asserted by some.

But its time to haste^ to an End, and from the whole that has been said, I
cannot but think the following must be all^ed to have Considerable Evidence of
Truth in them, how contrary soever to Vulgar Sentiments in the Present Day, viz.

1. That such Lands only as any of our Aborigines Subdued and Improved, they
had a good Right or Title to. For although we are sure they had the Law of Nature
giving them a Right of Property by their Labor, in what before lay in Common
and was Equally the Right of every Man, yet we are not sure (nor indeed have we
so much Evidence as amounts to a Probabil^) of their having any other Law to
Entitle the to Lands or any thing else, on any Conditions whatsoever.

2. That Supposing their Chiefs to be Kings or Civil Heads Properly so called,
yet there is more Reason to suspect a Right of Property in them, than in any of
their Subjects. Yea the more reason to suspect it because of their Dignity.
Nothing ever did or can appear Evidencing so much as a Probability of such a
Right in them by the Positive Constitutions of their Communities; an^ ^as for
Acquiring it by Labor in Subduing and Cultivating, its reasonable to think
their Exaltation ^^dered that too great a Stoop for them.

3. That supposing the English to be the first (of Civilized Nations) in t^
Discovery of the Country, they had (the Roy^ Allowance and Favor Concurring)
an Vnda^ed Right to Enter upon and Impropriate all such parts of it as lay Wast
or Unimproved by the Natives and this without any consideration or allowance
made to them for it. Whatever ties Prudential Considerations might lay them
under to Acknowledge them, and present them with their Gratuities under the
Notion of their being a Price for Lands; yet all such Lands being like the
Ocean it self, Publici vel Communis juris, they could be under no Obligation
from the Head of Justice. We have as much Assurance of this as we have that
Lands were held by the Natives only by (...) Law of Nature, and of that I think
pretty go^^ Evidence has been given in what has been said on this Argument. And
by Consequence it follows also,

4. That a^ that Darling Principle of many, viz. That Native Right is the only
Valuable Title to any Lands in the Country is Absurd and Foolish and may with
Reason be look's upon as one of our Vulgar Errors; So that the Endeavors of
any, whether in more early or later Time^ to Maintain and Propagate it, (to the
Prejudice of New Settlements, and not only to the Disturbance of Honest Men in
their Possessions and Improvements, but Ejectment out of them, as well (...)
the Hurt of the Public, as they have been without any Justifying reasons, so)
must be loo^ upon as very Culpable. Its well known that not only in the more
Early Days of the Country, but (...) later Times there have been those, and
they not of the Plebs only, who with a great deal of Zeal and Application have
laid out themselves in this Affair: A Zeal and Application which, without a
Crime I think, I may say, would have been more Decorous in them had it been
otherwise Employed. Native Right they have told us is our only Title, if we
have not this, we have Nothing. Its not an easy thing to Account for the Train
of Evils that have ensued hereupon, not ^^^y to Particular Plantations and
Persons, but (...) the Public in the great Delay and Embarasm^^^ of Business
in Our Assembly's, as well as (...) Multiplication of Suits in the Law beyond
Account* But how unjustifyable must these things be when in all, the Persons I
am speaking of, have endeavored to impose upon us but a mere Chimara or
Fiction? I cannot forbear mentioning here that among other Methods improved by
them in the management of their Design, One is, They have Endeavored rather to
work on Our Passions than Our Reason, or (...) Fright us into a Belief of this
Doctrine and (...) Resolution to stand by it, than to gain us over to it by any
Evidence of its Truth. For whereas they have been very sparing of Demonstration
they have been as liberal in Assurances (or rather Asseverations) that it is the
Only Security of Our Interests against the Claim of One beyond the ^as; and
that if Native Right will not Invalidate the Duke's Pretensions, we have
nothing else that will. Such Nonsense as this were it found only in some of our
Homunculi, might be Easily Overlooked; but when Men of Education and Character
shall Talk at this rate its scarcely to be forgiven. Nor is this the worst
neither, but what deserves still a more severe Censure is their want of Truth
and Honesty in all, or that whereas in all they have acted under the specious
umbrage of serving the Public, it is notorious that Nothing less than t^ is has
been in design with them; but that on the other hand they have been under the
Governing Influence of those Corrupt Views which (Supposing or Allowing there
were Sufficient Reasons in the Nature of the thing, for what they have done)
could do no other than render them very Guilty therein. I think I am not too
severe in this Censure, nor in the least break in upon Charity by it, since
they themselves have given and daily give that Evidence of its Truth, which (as
the Blindest Eye cannot see, so) Amounts to a Demonstration in the Case.

FAREWELL. John Bulkley.
Colchester, December 24, 1724.
To the REVEREND Mr. Timothy Edwards.
SIR,
AT sight of this you scarcely will Excuse
My broken Numbers should affront your Muse,
Whose single Elegance outdoes the Nine;
And all their Offerings at Apollo's shrine.
But, Sir, they come not to Affront, but are
Trembling before your awful Seat to hear,
From you their Sentence that is definitive,
Whither they shall be killed, or saved alive.
Yet when you Censure, Sir, don't make the Verse
You pined to Glover's venerable Hearse,
The standard for their Trial: nor Enact
You never will acquit, what is Less Exact.
Sir, that will never do; Rules so severe
Would ever Leave Apollo's Altars bare,
His Priests no service: All must st^ ^^gether
And fair Parnassu^ Verdant tops must wither.
(...) not the purpose ^or design,
(...) ^rs when they did Combine
(...) Assistance: no their mind
(...) was otherwise Designed,
They having often to their Trouble seen
Many hold Poets Launch on Hipocrene;
Men that might have a handsome Voyage made
Had they but kept them to the Coasting Trade.
But Ranging far upon those swelling Seas,
Came home with broken Lines and Voyages:
Grieved at those Losses and Miscarriages,
A Council met at Hipocrenidees
They Vote a Remedy which to Effect
That their H^rculan Pillar did Erect,
And to advise Advanturers once for all,
Writ ne plus ultra on it is P^destal.
Since which there is none that dare presume to go
Beyond that wonder then set up by you,
No nor attain it in their Navigation,
That sacred work is not for Imitation!
Conscious of this, you see my Muse never soars
To Hiblas top nor the Aonian shoars,
Nor does pretend to Raptures that might suit,
Pindarus Muse or great Apollo's Lute.
Then weigh them Heartily, and if that you
Shall once pronounce a Longer Life their due:
And for their Patron will your self En^ (...)
They may perhaps Adventure on the (...)
But if denied, they blushing ^ack re^ (...)
To burn themselves in their own sur^ (...)
Windsor, January 4th. 1722, 3.
Some Improvement of vacant Hours, By Roger Wolcott, Esquire
MEDITATIONS on Man's First and Fallen Estate, and the Wonderful Love of GOD
Exhibited in a Redeemer.
ONCE did I view a fragrant Flower fair,
Till through the optic windows of mine Eye
The sweet discoveries of its beauties rare
Did much affect and Charm my fantasy,
To see (...) bright and sweetly it did shine
In ^ea ^ies that were purely Genuine.
But (...) the dire Effects of baneful Pride;
(...) whose favor was Pestiterous
(...) ^ith this fair flower Qualified
(...) Virtues Odoriferous.
(...) ^rant flower which to affect the sense
(...) ^ties, Grace, and Virtues Excellence.
Not being Content unworthily to stand
In the dark Corner of some mead obscure,
Or in some rough uncultivated Land
Which the painful Husbandman did never manure;
Or in some dismal wood where Mischief Lies
And Ravens croak their fatal Auguries.
But by a bold Insulting Disposition
Presumes into a famous Garden fair
And more to Manifest it is bold Ambition,
Vies with the fairest flowers that were there:
And by it is growth the flowers so overtops
That it bereaved them of Heavens drops.
Collecting of the Nutrimental juice
That Is of the Earth it did Monopolize
The same to it is own benefit and Use,
Also the benediction of the Skies.
Thus to it is Baseness makes subservient,
Earth's fruitfulness and Heaven's (...) descent.
The Flowers thus Injuriously ov'r-topt
Began to darken perish fade and dye,
Their beauty Lost and all their Grace was
Their Savor soon became unsavory
For having Lost the Suns sweet In^
They with it Lost their Grace and (...)
Nor were they in this Deplorable state
Able to work their Liberty and Ease
None but the Gardener can Extricate,
Them from their Bondage and give them release.
Many Instructions may from hence arise
If on this Emblem we do Moralize.
I Will take occasion hence to Contemplate
Fair Paradise in it is prime Excellence
But most of all the Glorious Estate,
Of our first Father in his Innocence.
Who was the flower of that Garden, and
A Garden in which many flowers did stand.
His body with such Comeliness was decked
As did declare this famous Faberick
Was of no ordinary Architect,
But the Almighties Glorious work-manship,
Being fearfully and wonderfully made,
By him that needed not a foreign aid.
His parts proportion and rare Simmetrie
Showed forth his Glorious uniformal Grace
His pleasant and yet awful Majesty,
Appeared in the figure of his face:
Where ruby ruddiness did beautify
The lily white with a Vermilion dye.
Behold him there made Misne Lord of all
The whole Creation that was sublunary
And all the Creatures made that so they shall
Unto his Comfort be Contributary,
He was to take their Tributes and again,
Offer them up unto his Sovereign.
His understanding was so Excellent
That he was able by his Knowledge Great
Names to all Creatures in his Government
To give: Even such as were most adequate,
Unto their Inclinations Natural,
O wondrous wisdom Philosophy call.
But was that Knowledge and discerning Skill
The Sole perfection of this noble Nature?
O no; he was possessed with a will,
Able to Love and serve his great Creator.
To apprehend him as his Chiefest Good,
And prize him more than his appointed food.
He was Commissionated to remain
In this Estate to perpetuity
Here might he Live rejoice in God and Reign
Throughout the Ages of Eternity.
And of all the Delights and fruits of Eden,
Only the Tree of Knowledge was forbidden.
But Lo, the dire Effects of baneful Pride
Man being made in Honor thus to flourish
Did not a night in that Estate abide
But soon became like to the beasts that perish.
Abusing of his Liberty of will
Against his Sovereign Lord he did rebel.
For casting off that Reverential awe
He owed unto God's Sacred Majesty
Against the Comminations of his Law,
He did rebel, and in rebellion he
The Sacramental Tree of Life neglected,
And eat of that which God had Interdicted.
And for endeavoring to Fqualize
The Lord's Omniscience: is quite ruinated
And has his Soul in all its Faculties
Strangely Besotted and Infatuated:
For having once rebelled against his duty,
Opacous Sin soon blasted all his beauty.
Now we have Lost Ability to Climb
The steps of Providence unto Gods Throne:
Our Souls (alas) are now to Insublime,
To Seat and Settle our Affections on
The Pinnacle of all Perfection,
Whose Vision Satisfys the Affection.
But through a Poisonous Impetuous Rage,
Our Minds we to these Earthly Objects glue:
And though we find they cannot our Thirst assuage,
The more we are Dis-appointed, we pursue.
Thus do we prostitute our vast affection,
To yield to our Inferiors subjection.
But when we sunk under this misery
And all help failed us on every side
No Creature could find out a way whereby,
Justice Offended might be Satisfied:
To do that work our Savior undertook
As it was writ in the Volumn of the book.
The Love that gave him, Oh! 'twas Infinite;
The Person suffering was most Excellent
The Pains he suffered were most Exquisite;
And Glorious was the blessed Consequent.
With wonderment and Ravishing surprise,
The Angels Contemplate these Mysteries.
AND
When I behold the Heavens wondrous frame
The Sun and Moon shining in Beauty bright
Which thou have made to Magnify thy Name
By thy Almighty power Infinite.
And View the Stars in their celestial ranging
Not Jostling in all their inter-changing.
Oh what is man that thou should allow
Him to Inherit thy divine compassion?
What is the sinful Son of man that thou
Should grant to him thy Spirits visitation?
And suffer thine Eternal SON to dye
To Reconcile thy stubborn Enemy.
Proverbs XVI. 18. Pride goes before Destruction.
PRide goes before Destruction
and haughtiness before a fall,
Whoever pores his Merits on
shall be Endangered there withal.
Whoever vaults himself on high
in Contemplating his own worth
Shall find his wings soon melt thereby
and down he will tumble to the Earth:
Have I got wit and memory
and can my tongue freely dispense,
To Charm the silent standers by
torrents of moving Eloquence.
Beauty sets Throned in my face
and my sweet Symmetry of parts
Yields such an uniformal Grace
as wins all Eyes and wounds all hearts.
And has my birth Ennobled
me of a noble Pedigree
From whence many fair Branches spread
more to adorn and cover me:
An Education Liberal
has been bestowed me upon,
Have I to Crown these Blessings all
an healthy Constitu^ion?
The Earth with her abundant store
yields me the greatest Confluence,
So that from her can be no more
to pamper and Indulge the sense.
Does pleasure with her balmy hand
proffer to flood me on her streams
And subject unto my Command
whatever carnal sense Esteems?
Does honor with her Courtly breath
invite me to her Turrets high
To rule and Govern on the Earth
whilst Thousands fore me prostrate^ly?
To what a pleasing topic now
think I my fortune has me raised,
It Is sweet to see whole Thousands bow
whilst by them every one I Am praised.
Now hard it is not to grow proud
and over others Tyranize
And think because I Am thus Endowed
my self I well may Idolize.
Or in a mirror when I look
or the sweet feature of my face
Narcissus like I soon am took,
a Captive and confined the place.
O me to see my youthful blood
now in its prime activity
Comes Rushing like a ruby Flood,
the Lily skin to beautify.
When tempted thus at any time
then O my Soul don't thou forget
That these Endowments are not mine,
but for them all I Am still in Debt.
These are but Talents in my hand
of which I only have the use
And he that gave them gave Command,
they should be used without abuse.
The Man that gave them is Austere
and Reapeth where he has not straw'd
That is, He Is dreadfully severe,
Exacting all he has bestowed.
My Talents all are Registered
in his book of Rememberance
And he has set a time to plead,
his book and take his recompense.
There Is no vain action, no vain word,
nor vain Imagination
That ever in my heart has stirred
since there the vital Spirits run.
Though unobserved, though multiplied
so that all numbers they surmount
The smallest of them shall not hide,
nor be forgot in that account.
And in that awful Reckoning Day
escape his Vengeance shall not I
Unless exactly I repay
each Talent down with usury.
If it be so: say how shall I
improve those gifts he has bestowed?
He says, with men deal equally,
and walk thou humbly with thy God^
Serve him with awful Reverence
it is thus thou must thy gifts Improve
And if I fail through Impotence,
the Law may be fulfilled by Love.
For though He Is Just, He Is good also
the one does not confound the other;
His Justice and his goodness too,
both set on equal Thrones together.
Proverbs XXXI. 10. Who can find a Virtuous Woman, for her Price is far above
Rubies.
Virtue's a Babe, first born in Paradise,
And has by birth priority of Vice.
Virtue is all that is good we brought from thence
The dear remains of our first Innocence.
Virtue still makes the Virtuous to shine,
Like those that Lived in the first week of time.
Virtue has force the vile to cleanse again,
So being like clear shining after Rain.
A Kind and Constant, Cheerful Virtuous Life,
Becomes each Man, and most Adorns a Wife.
But such a Virtue, ah, where shall we find,
That Is Bright, especially in Woman Kind?
If such an one had been on Earth, no doubt
Searching King Solomon had found her out.
But stay my Muse, nor may we thence Conclude,
There is not One in all their Multitude:
For though it be too True, that Solomon
Amongst a Thousand found not such an one;
^t follows not at all but such an one
amongst an Hundred Thousand may be shown;
which if she may, her Price beyond Compare,
^xcels the Price of Rubies very fair.
Psalm LXIV. 6. The Heart is Deep.
HE that can trace a Ship making her way,
Amidst the threatening Surges on the Sea;
Or track a Towering Eagle in the Air,
Or on a Rock find the Impressions there
Made by a Serpents Footsteps. Who Surveys
The Subtle Intreagues that a Young Man lays,
In his Sly Courtship of an harmless Maid,
Whereby his Wanton Amors are Conveyed
Into her Breast; It Is he alone that can
Find out the Cursed Policies of Man.
Proverbs XVIII. 14. A Wounded Spirit who can bear?
MOney answers every thing,
But a Guilty Conscience Sting,
Whose Immortal Torments are
Quite Insupportable to bear,
Nor the Silver of Peru,
Nor the Wealth the East do show,
Nor the softest Bed of Down,
Nor the Jewels of a Crown,
Can give unto the Mind a Power,
To bear its Twinges half an Hour.
When GOD's Iron Justice once
Seiseth on the Conscience,
And in fearful ample wise
Lays before the Sinners Eyes,
His Life's Horrible Transgressions,
In their dreadful Aggravations;
And then for his greater ^aw,
In most ample forms does draw
All the Curses of his Law;
Then the Worm begins to gnaw,
And although it every hour
Does the very Soul Devour,
Yet it nothing does Suffice;
Oh! this Worm that never Dies.
Oh! the Multitude of thought
Into which the Sinner's brought;
Looking up he sees GOD's Power
Through his Angry Face does Lour;
And has for his ruin Joined
Ten Thousand Chariots in the Wind:
All prepared to Glorify,
The Strong Arm of the most high.
By Inflicting Punishments
Equal to his Vengeance.
Looking Down he amply sees
Hell rolling in her Flames beneath;
Enlarged to take his Soul into
Its deep Caverns full of Woe:
Now the Sinners Apprehension
Stretches Large as Hells Dimensions,
And does Comprehensively
Fathom out Eternity.
The most extreme and Vexing Sense
Seiseth on the Conscience.
Filled with deepest Agony,
He makes this Soliloquy.
View those Torments most extreme
See this torrid Liquid Stream,
In the which my Soul must fry
Ever, and yet never Die.
When a Thousand Years are gone,
There Is ten Thousand coming on:
And when these are over worn,
There Is a Million to be born,
Yet they are not Comprehended,
For they Never shall be Ended.
Now Despair by Representing,
Eternity filled with Tormenting,
By Anticipation brings
All Eternal Sufferings,
Every Moment up at once
Into actual Sufferance,
Thus those Pains that are to come,
Ten Thousand Ages further down;
Every Moment must be born
Whilst Eternity is worn.
Every Moment that does come,
Such Torments brings; as if the sum
Of all God's anger now were pressing,
For all in which I lived transgressing.
Yet the next succeeding Hour,
Holds forth his Equal power;
And succeeding with it brings,
Up the sum of Sufferings.
Yet they are not Comprehended,
For they never shall be Ended.
For GOD Himself He is but One,
Without least Variation:
Just what He was; is, is to come
Always entirely the same.
Possessing his Eternity
Without succession instantly,
With whom the like proportion bears,
One Day as does a Thousand Years.
He makes the Prison and the Chain,
He is the Author of my pain.
'Twas unto Him I made Offense;
It Is He that takes the Recompense.
It Is His design my Misery
Himself alone shall Glorify;
Therefore must some proportion bear
With Him, whose Glory they declare.
And so they shall, being Day and Night,
Unchangeable and Infinite,
These very Meditations are,
Quite Insupportable to bear:
The fire within my Conscience,
Is Grown so fervent and intense,
I cannot long its force endure,
But rather shall my End procure.
Griefly Death's pale Image lies,
On my Ghastly piercing Eyes.
My hands made for my life's defense,
Are ready to do violence
Unto my life^ And send me hence,
Unto that awful residence.
There to be filled with that Despair,
Of which the Incipiations are,
A Wounded Spirit none can bear.
But, Oh! My Soul, think once again,
That there is for this burning Pain,
One only Medicine Sovereign.
CHRIST's Blood will fetch out all this Fi^
If that God's SPIRIT be the Applyer.
Oh! Then my Soul when Grief abounds,
Shroud thy self within these Wounds:
And that thou there may be Secure,
Be Purified as He is Pure.
And, Oh! my GOD, let me behold thy SON,
Impurpled in his Crucifixion,
With such an eye of Faith that may from thence
Derive from Him a Gracious Influence,
To cure my Sin and Wounded Conscience.
There, there alone is Healing to be had:
Oh! Let me have that Balm of Gile^d.
Matthew X. 28. And fear not them that can kill the body, but are not able to
kill the Soul: But rather fear Him, which is able to destroy both Soul and Body
in Hell.
AND is our Life, a life wherein we borrow
No not the smallest respite from our Sorrow?
^ur Profits are they but some Yellow Dust;
^bject to Loss, to Canker-eat and Rust:
Whose very Image breeds ceaseless Cares
In every Mind where it Dominion bears.
And are our Pleasures mainly in Excess?
Which genders Guilt, and ends in Bitterness.
Are Honors fickle and dependent Stuff?
Oft-times blown furthest from us by a Puff.
Does pale-faced Envy wait at every Stage,
To bite and wound us in our Pilgrimage?
Is all we have, or hope for, but Adventure?
Then here is naught worth our stay, let us encounter
The King of Terrors bravely, un-dismay'd,
As gallant Aria to her Paetus said.
And so might be my Choice, but that I see
Hells flashes folding through Eternity;
And hear damned Company, that there remain
For very Anguish gnaw their Tongues in twain.
Then him for Happy I will never Praise,
That Is filled with Honor, Wealth, or length of Days:
But Happy he, though in a Dying Hour,
Over whom the Second Death obtains no power.
A Brief ACCOUNT OF THE AGENCY Of the HONORABLE John Winthrop, Esquire in the
COURT of King CHARLES the Second, Anno Dom. 1662. When he Obtained for the
Colony of Connecticut His Majesty's Gracious CHARTER.
THE Night is Past, and Civil Wars o're-blown,
And the right Heir advanced to the Throne,
A general Joy runs through Great- Britanny,
At the apperance of His Majesty;
^ud Canons from the Ships upon the Thames,
and from the Batteries filled the Air with Flames:
^hilst from the Tower such mighty Thunders went
^hook the Islands Seas, and Continent.
The Rich, the Poor, the Old, the Young, agree,
To Celebrate a joyful Jubilee:
And to the utmost all themselves Employ,
To make free Demonstrations of their Joy.
Some quaff full Goblets of the Richest Wine;
And others make the blazing Boufires shine:
Whilst the Devout their Prayers to Heaven sent,
For Blessings on the King and Government.
These happy Tidings soon found out their way,
Unto the English in America;
Who join with Britain in the Celebration,
Of their just Princes happy Restoration.
The Sages of Connecticut do meet,
To pay their Homage at their Princes Feet;
To whom they seek to hasten an Address,
To show their Duty and their Joys Excess.
Learned WINTHROP then by general Consent,
Sat at the Helm to sway the Government;
Who prudently the People does Advise,
To ask the King for CHARTER Liberties.
All like his Counsel well; and all reply,
Sir, You must undertake our Agency
For there is none but You we may expect,
Can make the thing you Counsel take Effect:
Your Serving us in this Important Thing,
And Personating Us before the KING,
Will sure Endear a WINTHROP's Memory
To Us, and to our (...) Posterity.
His Mind, vast as the Heavenly Spheres above,
Was all bespangled with the Stars of Love;
And Zealous Care for their Posterity,
Of all his Acts the Primum Mobile;
Led on by these bright Stars kind Influence,
He hastens to the Palace of his Prince;
There waiting for an Opportunity, --
E're long, Great CHARLES was in his Council sat
With some Choice Nobles of his Cabinet:
His Royal Mind Intent on his Affairs,
He thus Unbosoms to his Counselors;
What News, My Lords? How go Affairs Abroad?
What more Remains to do for Englands Good?
Do distant Parts of our Dominion
Want farther Help or Favor from the Throne?
At this arose one of the Lords of Trade,
And to His Majesty this Answer made,
An Agent from Connecticut does wait,
With an Address before your Palace Gate.
Let him come in, says CHARLES, and let us ^^ar,
that has been done, and what is a doing there.
Winthrop brought in before his Princes Feet,
Prostrates himself with Reverence, the King to Greet;
And thanks His Majesty for his Access:
Then for his People offers this Address;
' GREAT SIR, Since Reconciled Heaven Restores
'YOU to the Throne of Your High Ancestors,
'See how each Subject Emulating tries,
'To Express our National Felicities:
'The Joy of Your Accession to the Throne,
'Is like the Luster of the Morning Sun;
'Which from the East Salutes the Western Shores,
'Still trampling under foot Nights horrid Powers:
'So the loud Accents of this boundless Joy,
'Ecchoing in our Ears from Britanny,
'Gave Light and Gladness where-so'ere it came,
'And filled our joyful Hearts with equal Flame.
'The sad Remembrance of those days of Woe,
'Which in Your Absence we did undergo,
'Transports our present Joys to that Excess,
'As passes all Expressions to express.
'May Heaven preserve Your Majesty, and Bless
'Your Reign with Honor, and with Length of Days;
'And in Your Line the Regal Power extend,
'Until the Suns last Revolution end.
'And since we are at mighty Caesar's Feet,
'O may He Pardon us, while we Entreat,
'Your Royal Favor in the thing we want;
'T' Incorporate us by Your CHARTER-Grant.
'The Land we have Purchased, or Subdued by Fight,
'And Bought of Fenwick what was Warwick's Right,
'And all at the Endeavor of our Own,
'Without the least Dis-bursment from the Throne.
Rise up, Quoth Charles; My Liberal Hand Supplies,
All needful Help to every One that Cries;
Nor shall I be Illiberal to You:
But, Prithee, Winthrop, Please to let me Know,
By whom it was your Place did first Commence,
Your Patriarchs that Led your Tribes from Hence?
'If to declare their Worth, is what You ask,
'Then I must beg Your Pardon. That Is a task,
'So Worthy-due Performance, and so Great,
'As goes beyond my Utterance and Conceit:
'But Virtue never fails, succeeding Days
'Shall much regard their Merits, and shall Raise
'Men of bright Parts and moving Oratory;
'Who shall Emblazon their immortal Glory.
But if You ask to gain Intelligence,
What were the Reasons, why they went from hence,
What Straits they met with in their Way, and There?
These Facts I think I Am able to declare.
' RELIGION was the Cause: Divinity
'Having declared the Gospel shine should be,
'Extensive as the Suns Diurnal Shine;
'This moved our Founders to this Great design.
'And sure the Holy Spirit from above,
'That first did Quickening on the Waters move,
'Inspir'd their Minds and filled them with Intents,
'To bring to pass such Glorious Events.
'And now they wholly to this Work devote,
'Mind not the Country they are going out:
'Their Ancient Homes they leave to come no more.
'Their Weeping Friends and Kindred on the shore
'They bid adieu, and with an aching Heart
' Shake Hands, it is hard when dearest ^ends must part.
'But here they part and leave their Parent Isle,
'Their whilome Happy Seat. The Winds a while
'Are Courteous and Conduct them on their way,
'To near the midst of the Atlantic Sea,
'When suddenly their Pleasant Gales they Change
'For dismal Storms that on the Ocean Range.
'For Faithless Aeolus Meditating Harms,
'Breaks up the Peace and Priding much in Arms,
'Unbars the great Artillery of Heaven
'And at the fatal Signal by him given,
'The Cloudy Chariots Threatening take the Plains;
'Drawn by winged Steeds, hard pressing on their reins,
'These Vast Battalions in dire Aspect raised,
'Start from the Barriers-night with Lightning blazed.
'Whil'st clashing Wheels refounding Thunder cracks,
'Struck Mortals deaf, and Heaven astonished shakes.
'Here the Ship Captain in the midnight Watch,
'Stamps on the Deck and thunders up the Hatch;
'And to the Mariners aloud he Cries,
'Now all from Safe-recumbency arise:
' All Hands aloft, and stand well to your Tack,
' Engendring Storms have clothed the Sky with black
'Big Tempests threaten to Undo the World:
' Down Top-sail, let the Main-sail soon be furled,
'Hast to the Fore-sail, there take up a Rief:
''Tis time, Boys, now if ever to be brief:
'Aloof for Life; lets try to stem the Tide,
'The Ship's much Water, thus we may not Ride:
'Stand roomer then, let us run before the Sea,
'That so the Ship may feel her Stearage-way:
' Steady at Helm! Swiftly along she Scuds,
'Before the Wind, and cuts the foaming Suds.
'Sometimes aloft she lifts her Prow so high,
'As if she would run her Bowsprit through the Ski^.
'Then from the summit Ebb; and hurries down,
'As if her way were to the Center shown.
'Mean while our Founders in the Cabin sat,
'Reflecting on their true and sad Estate.
'Whilst holy Warham's Sacred lips did treat,
'About GOD's Promises, and Mercies Great.
'Still more Gigantick Births spring from the Clouds,
'Which tore the tattered Canvis from the Shrouds,
'And dreadful Balls of Lightning fill the Air,
'Shot from the Hand of the Great Thunderer.
'And now a mighty Sea the Ship over rakes,
'Which falling on the Deck the Bulk-head breaks;
'The Sailors cling to Ropes and frighted Cry,
' The Ship is Foundered, We die! we die!
'Those in the Cabin heard the Sailors Screech,
'^ll rise and Reverend Warham do beseech,
'That he would now lift up to Heaven a Cry,
'For Preservation in Extremity.
'He with a Faith sure bottomed on the Word,
'Of Him that was of Sea and Winds the LORD.
'His Eyes lifts up to Heaven, his hands Extends,
'And fervent Prayers for deliverance sends.
'The Winds abate, the Threatening Waves appease,
'And a sweet Calm sits Regent on the Seas.
'They bless the Name of their Deliverer,
'Who now they found a God that hears Prayer.
'Still further Westward on they keep their way,
'Plowing the Pavement of the briny Sea.
'Till the vast Ocean they had overpast,
'And in Connecticut their Anchors cast.
'Here came Soheage and told the Company,
'The Garden of America did ^y,
'Further up Stream near Fifty Miles from hence,
'Part of which Country he himself was Prince.
'Much asked o'th Soil, much of the Government,
'What Kings were there? the Land of what Extent?
'All which by his free answers when they knew,
'They over his back a Scarlet Mantle threw.
'And now invited with fresh Southern Gales,
'They weigh their Anchors and they hoise their Sails,
'And Northward for The Expected Country stood,
'Upon the smiling Pavement of the Flood.
'At length they Entered those awful Streights,
'Where the Stream runs through Adamantine Gates.
''Twas strange to see the Banks advanced so high,
'As if with Atlas they bore up the Sky.
'But when those dismal Streights were passed through,
'A Glorious Country opens to their view,
'Cloath'd all in Green and to the Eye presents,
'Natures best Fruits and Richest Ornaments.
'Chear'd with the sight they set all Sails a-trip,
'And raised the English Ensign on their Ship.
'Brave Youths with eager Strokes bend knotty Ours,
'Glad shouts bring cheerful Eccho's from the Shores.
'As when the Wounded Amorous does spy,
'His Smiling Fortune in his Ladys Eye,
'O how his Veins and Breast swell with a Flood,
'Of pleasing Raptures that revive his Blood?
'And grown Impatient now of all Delays,
'No longer he Deliberating stays;
'But through the Force of her resistless Charms,
'He throws him Soul and Body in her Arms.
'So we amazed at these seen Delights,
'Which to fruition every sense Invites,
'Our eager Mind already Captive made,
'Grow most Impatient now to be delayed.
'This most Delightful Country to Possess,
'And forward with Industrious speed we press
'Upon the Virgin Stream who had as yet,
'Never been Violated with a Ship;
'Upon the Banks King Aramamet Stood,
'And round about his Wondering Multitude,
'Greatly Amazed at such an uncouth show,
'What is it they Cried? Some say, A great Canoe.
'Others, a Bird that in the Air does Fly,
'With her Long Bill, and Wings up to the Sky,
'But other some, whom Fear did Terrify
'Cry'd, it is some ^ll Presaging Prodigy.
'Nothing on Earth more Impetuous we find,
'Than Terror when it Seiseth on the Mind.
'Dreadful Effects of this did soon Appear,
'The Multitude Surpised with chilling Fear;
'With Looks Distracted and out-staring Eyes,
'Each Scare, himself and others Te^s;
'Only the King who had within his Breast,
'A Heart which foolish fear could not Infest;
'Perceiv'd the Matter, and the Ship he hails,
'Now drop your Anchors and unbend your Sails;
'And if for Peace and Friend (...) are come,
'And do Desire this Land (...) be your Home;
'Let some of your hief Leaders come to Land,
'And now with Me join their right Hand to Hand.
'Sails lower ^main, nor Oars now touch the Flood,
'Down drop the Anchors deep into the Mud,
'Their Chiefs Repair to ^and, and with them bring
'Obliging Presenes for the Indian King.
'Majestick Ara^^met with his Lords,
'Steps forth to meet those Guests without his Guard^
'Meeting he paused, as^oni^h'd at the sight,
'Such Men such Airs with Countenances bright,
'He never had seen, no^ now to see Expecting;
'Amaz'd he stood! a while, but recollecting,
'His Scattered Intellect, he cries. Who Is there?
'Whence come you? Seek you with us Peace or W^^?
' Brittons you see, say they, and we are come.
'From England happiest Seat in Ch^st^ndom,
'Where Mighty CHARLES Ob^igeth Sea and Land
'To yield Obedience to his Scept'red Hand,
'Nor came we here to Live with you in Wars,
'As He knows best that made Sun Moon and Stars,
'But rather here to ^ive with you in Peace,
'Till Day and Nights Succe^s^ve Changes cease.
'This we propose, and this it you approve
'And do Respect our Neighborhood and Love,
'Then Sell us Land, whe^eon we Towns may Plant,
'And join with us in Friendly Covenant.
'What you propose, (quoth he,) is Just and Good,
'And I shall e're Respect your Neighborhood;
'Land you may have, we Value not the Soil,
'Accounting Tillage too severe a Toil.
'Then he his own Right hand to theirs does join,
'O^ his sure Friendship the undoubted sign,
'Then brings them to his ^oase, and from his Boards
'Feasts them with what his Country best affords.
'Whilst here they stay at Aramamets Court,
'Hither the Neighboring Indian Kings resort,
'And join with them in Articles of Peace,
'And of their Lands make firm Conveyances,
'And being now by Deeds and Leagues Secure,
'Their Towns they Build, their Purchased Land Manur^
Thus far he said; Then said His, Majesty,
Methinks, I have a Curiosity,
To know this Country, that for Ages Past,
Lay hid and you have now found out at last;
This Newfound River, Is it Fresh and Fair?
What Land adjoins to it? Has't a Pleasant Air?
Learned Winthrop bowed with humble Reverence,
TO Express his Loyalty unto his Prince.
And then these His demands to Satisfy,
He with a Cheerful air made this reply;
'This Your Desire, Great SIR, bears me in mind,
'What in the Ancient Register we find.
'Of the first King in Jesurun from whose breast,
'Such vast and ample thoughts themselves expre^^.
'That they have by the World been held e're since,
'Of Truth and Wisdom clearest Evidence.
'This mighty Man desired of his GOD
'That he before his Life's last Period,
'Might be Permitted once to look upon
'The Land, that goodly Mount and Lebanon,
'Which his desire was thus Accomplished,
'After his Charge was done, then he was led
'Up to the top of Pisgah and his Eye,
'From thence was well enabled to Disery
'The Land of Promise in its full ex^^^^
'And all things in it that were Excellent.
'Long did he Feast his hungry Eyes and gazed
'Upon those Objects, until all amazed
'And Ravished with the sight thus to him given,
'His vast Capacious Soul flew up to Heaven.
'But thus to view fine Countries from a far
'Must still remain that Man's Peculia^;
'And though I think, our Land is near as Good
'As that which then was unto Moses showed,
'Yet may it not from me be now expected
'It's worth should be so amply Dissected,
'Yet will I do my best to satisfy
'What is Demanded by Your Majesty.
'This gallent Stream keeps running from the Head
'Four Hundred Miles ere it with Neptune bed,
'Passing along hundreds of Rivolets,
'From either bank its Christial waves besets,
'Freely to pay their Tributes to this Stream,
'As being Chief and Sovereign unto them,
'It bears no torrent nor Impetuous course
'As if 'twere driven to the Sea by force.
'But calmly on a gentle wave does move;
'As if 'twere drawn to Thetis house by love.
'The Waters Fresh and Sweet, and he that (...)
'In it, Recruits and Cures his Surfeit Limbs.
'The Fisherman the Fry with Pleasure gets,
'With Seins, Pots, Angles, and his Tramel-nets.
'In it Swim Salmon, Sturgion, Carp and Eels,
'Above fly Cranes, Geese, Duck, Herons and Tea^
'And Swans which take such Pleasure as they fly,
'They Sing their Hymus often long before they Die.
'The Grassy Banks are like a Verdant Bed,
'With Choicest Flowers all Enamcled,
'E're which the winged Choristers do fly,
'And Wound the Air with wondrous Melody.
'Here Philomel high Perch't upon a Thorn,
'Sings cheerful Hymus to the approaching Morn.
'The Song once set, each Bird Tunes up his Lyre,
'Responding Heavenly Music through the quire.
'Within these Fields, fair Banks of Violets grows;
'And near them stand the Air Perfuming Rose,
'And Yellow Lilies fair Enameled,
'With Ruddy Spots here Blushing hang the Head.
'These Meadows serve not only for the sight,
'To Charm the Eye with wonder and delight,
'But for their Excellent Fertility,
'Transcends each spot that ere beheld Sol's Eye,
'Here Lady Flora's richest Treasure grows,
'And here she bounteously her Gifts bestows.
'The Husbandman for all his Diligence,
'Receives an ample Liberal Recompense,
'And Feasting on the Kidneys of the Wheat,
'Doth soon his Labor and his Toil forget.
'After the Meadows thus have took their Place,
'The Champion Plains draw up to fill the space.
'Fair in their Prospect, Pleasant, Fruitful, Wide,
'Here Tellus may be seen in all his Pride.
'Cloud kissing Pines in stately Man groves stand,
'Firm Oaks fair Branches wide and large extend.
'The Fir, the Box, the Balm-Tree here stand mute,
'So do the Nut-Trees Laden down with Fruit.
'In shady Vales the Fruitful Vine over whelms,
'The Weaving Branches of the bending Elms.
'Within the Covert of these shady Boughs,
'The Loving Turtle and his Lovely Spouse.
'From Bough to Bough in deep Affection move,
'And with Chaste Joy reciprocate their Love.
'At the Cool Brooks, the Beavers and the Minks
'Keep House, and here the Heart and Panther Drinks.
'And Partridges here keep in Memory,
'How to their Loss they soared once too high.
'Within these Spacious Forests, Fresh and Green,
'No Monsters of Burn Africa may be seen.
'No hissing Bassalisk stands to affright.
'Nor Seps, nor Hemorhus with Mortal bite,
'The Lybian Lion never set Footing here,
'Nor Tigers of Numedia do appear.
'But here the Moose his spreading Antlers sways,
'And bears down Stubborn standels with their sprays
'These sport themselves within these Woods, and here
'The Fatted Roe-Buck and the Fallow Deer,
'Yield Venison as good as that which won
'The Partriarchial Benediction.
'Each Plain is bounded at its utmost Edge
'With a long Chain of Mountains in a ridge,
'Whose Azure tops advance themselves so high
'They seem like Pendants hanging in the Sky.
'Twenty Four Miles, Surveyers do account
'Between the Eastern and the Western Mount;
'In which vast Interspace, Pleasant and Fair,
' Zephirus Whispers a Delightful Air.
'These Mountains stand at Equi-distant space,
'From the fair Flood in such Majestic Grace.
'Their looks alone are able to Inspire
'An Active Brain with a Mercurial Fire.
'The Muses hence their ample Dews Distill,
'More than was Feigned from the twy topt Hill.
'And if those Witty Men that have us told
'Strange Tales of Mountains in the Days of Old,
'Had they but seen how these are Elevated,
'We should have sound them far more Celebrated,
'In the Fine Works that they have left to us,
'Than high Olimpus or long Cancassus;
'Or Latmos which Diana stops upon,
'There to Salute her dear Endimion.
'Hither the Eagles fly and lay their Eggs,
'Then bring their Young ones forth out of those Crags
'And force them to behold Sols Majesty,
'In mid-noon Glory with a steady Eye.
'Here the old Eagle his long beak belays,
'Upon a rock till he renews his days.
'And hence they from afar behold their Prey
'And with a steady pinion wing their way.
'But why so Excellent a Land should Lie,
'So many Ages in Obscurity,
'Unseen, Unheard of, or Unthought upon?
'I think there is no good reason can be shown.
'Unless 'twere as it seems the mind of Fate,
'Your Royal Name long to perpetuate,
'So ordered it that such a Land might own,
'Thanks for it is Liberty^ Great SIR, to You.
'The English Settlements when thus begun,
'Were blessed and prospered in their carrying on.
'Churches Embody, Heaven they address,
'For Preservation in the Wilderness.
'The Heathen they Invite unto the Lord,
'And teach them the good Knowledge of his word.
'Hea^'n heard their Prayers and their I abour Crowned,
'With Health and Peace with all their Nei'bors round.
'Thus all Succeeded well until the Sun,
'Had near one time his Annual Circle run,
'When Great Sasacus rose in Impious Arms,
'And sill'd the Land with Mischiefs and Alarms.
'But since I Have mentioned Great Sasacus Name,
'That Day so much a Terror where it came:
'Let me in Prosecuting of my Story,
'Say something of his Pride and Kingdoms Glory.
'Of the brave Peq^ot Nation he was Head,
'And with such Conduct had their Armies led,
'That by the Power of his Martial Bands,
'He had Subjected all the Neigbouring Lands.
'Upon the Vanquished he would Exercise
'The most Inhumane Acts of Cruelties.
'By which, and by his often Victories,
'He grew so dreadful to his Enemies
'That weaponless they fell before his Feet,
'For Pardon and Protection to Entreat.
'Great was his Glory, greater still his Pride,
'Much by himself and others Magnified.
'He hears the English in the Eastern Parts,
'Are of such Stoutness and Resolved Hearts,
'That they will do no Homage to the Throne
'Of any Sovereign Prince, except their own.
'This suiteth not with his Ambitious ^east,
'He'll have their Homage too amongst the rest.
'And Such of them as fall within his Power,
'He like an Hungry Lion does Devour.
'He Norton, Stone, and Oldham, does Surprise,
'Then Murders them and all their Companies;
'Seiseth their Goods, and them for Presents sends,
'At once to Comfort and Confirm his Friends.
'Their Death's the Massachusetts does Resent,
'And Endicort is with an Army sent;
'Who though he Wisely did the War Pursue,
'And did what a brave General could do:
'Yet he returned again without Success,
'And Pequots kept Insulting Ne'rtheless.
'So Great a Work, and Mighty was it found
'To fix Your English on that distant Ground.
'Mean while the English of that Colony,
'On whose account I Am here in Agency,
'Entred the River and Possessed the same,
'Paying no Defference to his dreadful Name.
'This high affront the Tyrant deep Resent^,
'And Vows to Ruinate their Settlements.
'His Priests, his Captains, and Great Men of War,
'He calls to Consult on this Affair,
'Who being met, the Case to them Relates,
'And thus the Wretch on us Recriminates.
'My Noble Captains and Wise Counselors,
'You know how that of Old our Ancestors.
'By their known Liberties and Ancient Laws,
'Were well allowed to Marry many Squaws.
'Their way of Worship was to Dance and Sing,
'By the Religious rules of Powawing.
'Their Gods always accepted their address,
'And Crowned their Arms with Glorious Success.
'Then was the Pequot name Greatly Renowned,
'And terrible to Neighboring Nations round.
'These Rules and their Estate so prosperous,
'They handed down unblemished to us:
'And we have been as prosperous in our days,
'In following their long approved ways.
'But there is of men a most Audacious Brood,
'Lately come hither from beyond the flood,
'Who teach us other Doctrines to believe,
'Than ever our Forefathers did receive.
'These tell the Indians they have got no Eyes,
'But as for they themselves are very Wise.
'They Preach there is no other God but One,
'Him whom your Fathers Worshipped, he is none.
'Their way of Worship was a Cursed way,
'They Served the Devil in their Antic Play.
''Tis very like they now are all in Hell,
'Where they in Fire and Brimstone Roar and Yell.
'And you for following the steps they tread,
'Are like enough so to be Punished.
'Unless for what is past you soon Repent,
'And turn you from those ways to full Intent.
'You most not have so many handsome Wives,
'That don't consist with Mortifyed lives.
'And we allow no such Pluralities,
'Therefore for sake them, ^ity not their Cries.
'The Sabbath you must keep, yea Fast and Pray,
'And watch your Wicked hearrs both Night and Day.
'And when all this is done you must complain,
'All stands for nothing till you are Born again.
'Now shall we all at once be ruled by them,
'And so our Fathers and our Gods Contemn?
'Shall we at once forsake our pleasant Wives,
'That so we may live Mortified lives?
'Shall we yield them the Empire we command,
'And humbly wait upon them Cap in hand?
'Or shall not we rather curb them now betimes,
'And make them feel the folly of their crimes?
' Speak freely. On the Honor of a Prince,
'I'll hear as freely and without Offense.
'Then an old Pani^e rose to ease his breast,
'And thus his deep resentments he Expressed;
'Such Horrid words such sayings Blasphemous,
'Comes from no Tongue but the most Impious.
'All Nations yet have ever Honored,
'The sacred Name and Memory of the dead.
'No men till these dare ever yet despise,
'And trample on Immortal Deities.
'No Strangers yet; Till conquest gave them cause,
'Dare once Prescribe to Native Princes Laws.
'Which shows their Blasphemy and Insolence,
'Is Great and does Surpass all Presidents.
'Our Laws, our Empire, and Religion too,
'Are safely, Sir, deposited with you.
'And you have kept them safely hitherto,
'As it is your duty and your praise to do.
'Suffer them not to keep Insulting thus,
'Nor put such Impositions upon us.
'But arm your Warriors, Let us try the odds,
''Twixt them and us, 'twixt theirs and our Gods.
'For much I fear Impending Vengeance,
'Will ruin us unless we drive them hence.
'This said, One of his Chiefest Warriors rose,
'And thus his Mind did to his Prince disclose;
'If they are so Audacious while a few,
'When grown a Multitude what will they Do?
'Therefore it is my advice to Arm and Try,
'The Quarrel with them in their Infancy.
'Sure now if ever we may well Succeed,
'Whilst Warlike Sasacus does us Lead:
'Whose very Name and Martial Policy,
'Has always Gained us half the Victory.
'To what he said they all agreed as one:
'Now is the Trumpet of Desiance blown
'War with the English Nation is Proclaimed.
'(Their Priests their Martial men greatly Enflamed)
'A Bloody Host is sent to Say-Brook Fort,
'To Plunder, Kill, and cut the English short.
'Where they Arrived and Diverse Murdered,
'Then round the English Fort Beleaguered.
'Another Army Cross the Land is sent,
'With Fire and Sword to kill the Innocent.
'At Wethersfield they lay an Ambuscade,
'And a sad Slaughter of the People made.
'Others they took and them in Captive Led,
'Unto their Forts there to be Tortured.
'Thus from our Peace most suddenly we are
'Wrapt up in the Calamities of War.
'So have I sometimes in the Summer seen,
'The Sun ascending and the Sky serene.
'Nor Wind nor 'Cloud in all the Hemisphere,
'All things in such a perfect Calmness were.
'At length a little Cloud does up arise,
'To which the nitrous sulphiry Vapor flys.
'Soon a dark mantle over Heaven spread,
'With which the Lamp of day was darkened.
'And now the Clouds in tempest loud contend,
'And rain and dreadful Lightning downward send.
'With which such loud and mighty Thunders broke
'As made Earth tremble and the Mountains smoke,
'And the Convulsive world seem dra^ng on,
'Apace to her own Dissolution.
'The awfulness of which amazing Sight,
'Greatly did Earths Inhabitants affright.
'Ev'n so those Halcyon days that were with us,
'Were soon turned into Times Tempestuous.
'Mischief on Mischief every day succeeds,
'And Every Mischief Greater Mischief breeds
'The Numerous Nations all the Country ore,
'Who had appeared Friendly heretofore,
'Seeing the Pequots had the W^^, begun,
'And well Succeeded in their carrying on.
'Calling to mind their former Victories,
'The English Men grew Abject in their Eyes.
'Some at the first the Pequot Armies joined
'And all the rest but of a Wavering mind.
'Waiting but for an opportunity,
'To Murder us by Force or Treachery.
'No Confidence in any we repose,
'Our seeming Friends we find our real Foes.
'Fears never to behold the morning Light,
'Encumbered our Natural rest each night.
'Nor had we place of Refuge to Repair,
'Only to the Most High in Heaven by Prayer.
'To whom was offered up the Sacrifice,
'Of Broken Hearts and Penitential Cries.
'A Council met at Hartford who Conclude,
'We must Subdue the Foe, or be Subdued.
'And that the Gangreen still would further stray,
''Till the Infected Limb be cut away.
'And thereupon they Ordered and Decreed,
'To raise our utmost Forces with all Speed.
'This Resolution published and declared,
' Ninety brave Combatants in Arms appeared.
'This was the Sum of all our Insantry,
'Yet scarce a Tithe unto the Enemy.
'But what they wanted in their Multitude,
''Twas hoped their Resolution would make Good.
'These were the Men, this was the little Band,
'That durst the force of the new World withstand.
'These were the m^hat by their Swords made way,
'For Peace and (...) in American
'And these are those whose Names fame has Enrol'd,
'Fairly in brightest Characters of Gold,
'The Army now drawn up. To be their Head
'Our Valiant Mason was Commissioned.
'(Whose Name is never mentioned by me,
'Without a special Note of Dignity.)
'The Leader Marched them to the River side,
'There to Embark his Army on the side;
'Where lay our little Fleet to Wait upon
'Our Army for them Transportation
'(Going on board Oracolous Hooker said,
'Fear not the Foe, they shall become your Bread.)
''Twas here that Uncass did the Army Meet,
'With many stout Mohegans at his Feet.
'He to the General goes, and does Declare,
'He came for our Assistance in the War.
'He was that Saggamore whom great Saf^cus's rage
'Had hitherto kept under Vassalage.
'But weary of his great Severity,
'He now Revolts, and to the English fly.
'With Cheerful Air our Captain ^im Embraces,
'And him and his Chief Men with Titles Graces;
'But over them Preserved a Jealous Eye,
'Lest ^ll this might be done in Treachery.
'Then down the River with their Fleet they stood
'But stranding often on the Flats and Mud.
' Uncass Impatient of such long delays,
'Stood forth and freely to the General says,
'Suffer me and my Men to go on shore,
'We are not used to Shipping, Sails and Oar.
'I'l Range the Woods to find the Enemy,
'Where they in their close Ambushments may lie.
'And unto you at Say-Brook will repair
'And so attend your further Orders there.
'Consented to, they Land Immediately,
'And Marching down soon met the Enemy:
'And Showers of Arrows on them he bestows,
'Swifter than ever flew from Parthian Bows.
'As length the Pequots left the Field and Fled,
'There Leaving many of their Fellows Dead.
'The News of this our Forces greatly Chears,
'And turned to Confidence our Jealous Fears.
'Coming to Say-Brook, Vnca's on them Waits,
'Whose good Success our Men Congratulates.
'Here Captain Underhill with our Army joined
'And being favored with a Lucky Wind,
'All have on Board, and soon forsake the Shore;
'With the rough Winds, both Sails and Tackle roar.
'Their Oaken Oars, they in the Ocean steep,
'And Cuff the foaming Billows of the Deep.
'Swiftly through Tides and threatening Waves they scud,
'Plowing the pavement of the briny Flood:
'So se^ch't about a Compass on the Sea,
'And Landed in the Narraghansetts-Bay
'And marching through that Country soon they met,
'The Narraghanjett Prince, proud Ninegrett.
'To whom the English says, We Lead these Band^*
'Arm'd in this manner thus into your Land,
'Without design to do you Injury,
'But only to Invade the Enemy,
'You who to the Expense of so much blood,
'Have long time born their evil Neighborhood,
'Will bid us welcome; and will well Excuse,
'That we this way have took our Rendezvouze.
'Quoth Ninegrett, Your War I well approve,
'And so your March Soldiers I always (...):
'But sure Sasacus is quite unknown to you,
'Else had you never hoped with so few,
'One of his smallest Captains to Suppress,
'Much less to ^orm him in his Fortresses.
'Never believe it: In these Castles are,
'Brave Captains and Courageous men of War.
'All men have found it so that yet have tried.
'To whom the English thus in short replied;
'Their Strength and Courage does not us ^ffright,
It Is with such men we use and choose to Fight.
'Our Army Marching unto Nayantick goes,
'Lying just in our Progress toward the Foes.
'The news of this our march Fame does transport,
'With speed to great Miaantinomohs Court.
'Nor had that pensive King forgot the Losses,
'He had sustained through Sasacus's Forces.
'Chear'd with the news, his Captains all as one,
'In humble manner do address the Throne,
'And press the King to give them his Commission
'To join the English in this Expedition.
'To their request the cheerful King assents,
'And now they fill and form their Regiments,
'To War: a Co-hort which came marching down
'To us who lay Encamped before the Town.
'Their Chiefs go to our General, and declare
'What's their Intention and whose men they are.
'We come, say they, with heart and hand to join,
'With English men upon this brave design;
'For Pequots pride allows them no Content
'Within the sphere of their own Government:
'Without Essays to wrong their Brethren
'And ravish Freedom from the Sons of men,
'Which makes this work most needful to be done,
'To stop their measureless Ambition.
'But sure the War that you intend to make
'And manage thus must come from your mistake
'Can these Un-arrowed White men, such a few,
'So much as hope the Pequots to Subdue?
'Yes hope you may while fatal Ignorance,
'Keeps back the knowledge of their Puissance.
'But if you come to be Engaged once,
'You'l Learn more wit by sad Experience.
'But happy you: who thus your selves-Expose,
'To be the Prey and Triumph of your Foes.
'Thrice happy you to be preserved thus,
'From your Destruction and such Deaths by us:
'And since our Numbers and our Features show,
'Us men, as well and better men than you,
'We hope it will offend not you nor yours,
'The chiefest Post of Honor should be ours.
' Mason Harrangues them with high Compliment.
'And to confirm them he to them C^asents.
'Hold on bold Men, says he as you (...) beg^n:
'I'm Free and Easy, you shall take the Van.
'And in this order Marching on they went
'Towards the Enemy till the day was Spent.
'And now Bright Phoebus had his Chariot driven,
'Down from the Lofty Battlements of Heaven,
'And weary put his tired steeds to rest,
'Chearing himself on blushing Thetis breast.
'But lest the ho^id Darkness of the Night,
'Should quite Eclipse the Glory of his light^
'Fair Cynthia towering up did well Embrace,
'Her Brothers light into her Orbed face.
'The Indians still kep^ up their boasted flame,
'Till near the Enemies Fortresses they came.
'But as we always by Experience find,
'Frost bitten Leaves will not abide the wind.
'Hang Trembling on the limbs a while they may,
'But when once Boreas roars they fly away,
'To hide themselves in the deep Vales below,
'And to his force leave the exposed bough.
'So these who had so often to their harms,
'Felt the great power of Sasacus's Arms,
'And now again just to Endure the same,
'The dreadful sound of great Sasacus's Name,
'Seem'd every Moment to attach their Ears
'And filled them with such heart amazing fears,
'That suddenly they run and seek to hide,
'Swifter than Leaves in the Autumnal Tide.
'The Narrhagansetts quite the Service Clear,
'But the Mohegan followed in the Rear.
'Our Men perceives the Allies all are gone,
'And scarce a Pilot left to lead them on:
'Caused an Alta, and then from the Rear,
'Summons's such Indians as were there.
'At last after long waiting for the same,
'Up Trusty Vncass and Stout Wequash came,
'Of whom the General in strict Terms demands,
'Where stands the Fort, and how their Judgment stands,
'About the Enter-prise? And what is the Cause,
'They left their Post against all Martial Laws?
'To which we had this Answer from a Prince,
'The Enemies Fort stands on yond Eminence;
'Whose steep Ascent is now before your Eyes:
'And for my Judgment in the enterprise,
'Fain would my willing Heart hope for Success,
'Fain would my eager Tongue such hopes express.
'But Knowledge of the Foe such hope deny's,
'And Sinks my Heart in deep Despondencies.
'You cannot know the Danger of your case,
'Not having yet beheld a Pequots Face.
'But sad Experience has Instructed me,
'How Dreadful and Invincible they be.
'What mighty Battles often have they won,
'And cut down Armies like the Grass that is Mown.
'And my Heart rues this day because I fear,
'Those Lions will your Lambs in pieces tear.
'When once they are Engaged, it is hard to get,
'A Dispensation from them to Retreat.
' Sir, Be Advised before it be too late,
'Trust not too far your Evil-bo^ing Fate,
'Great pity it is to lose so brave an Host;
'And more that such a General should be lost.
'Then steer another course: thrust not your selves
'To certain ruin on these dangerous shelves:
'Here stopped, and on the English fixed his Eye,
'With care Expecting what they would reply.
'Brave Mason who had in his breast Enshrined,
'A Prudent and Invulnerable mind;
'Weighing the case and ground whereon they stood,
'The Enemy how hard to be subdued:
'How if the Field should by the Foe be won,
'The English Settlements might be Undone.
'His little Army now was left alone,
'And all the Allies Hopes and Hearts were gone.
'These and all other things that might Dissuade,
'From an Engagement having fully weighed:
'But looking on his Cheerful Soldiery,
'True Sons of Mars, bred up in Brittanny;
'Each firmly bent to Glorify his Name
'By Dying bravely in the Bed of Fame,
'In his New Countries Just Defense, or else
'To Extirpate these Murtherous Infidels;
'This raised his Tho'ts his Vital Spirits Cleared,
'So that no Enemy on Earth he Feared.
'And now resolved the City to Invade;
'He to the tho't^ul Prince this Answer made;
'You say, My Men han't yet a Pequot seen;
It Is true yet they e're now in Wars have been,
'Where mighty Captains and brave Men have shed,
'Their Blood, while roaring Canons Ecchoed,
'Yet they Undaunted Resolute go on
'Where dying springs make Sanguine Rivers run
'Out-braving Danger mount the highest Wall,
'Yea Play with Death it self without appal
'Nor turn the Back till they have won the Day,
'And from the mighty torn the Spoils away
'And do you think that any Pequots face
'Shall daunt us much, or alter much the case?
'The Valor of our Foes we always prize,
'As that which most our Triumph Glori^
'Their Strength and Courage but allurements are,
'To make us more Ambitious of the War
'Then don't Despair, but turn you back again
'Encourag'd, and Confirm your Heartless Men,
'And hinder them in their Intended Flight;
'Only to see how English Men will Fight
'And let your Eyes themselves be Judges then
''Twixt Us and Pequots, which are better Men.
'Down bowed the Prince, down bowed this trembling 'Squire;
'Greatly the Generals Courage they Admire.
'Back to the Rear, with speedy have they went,
'And call the Captains of their Regiment;
'To whom the Prince does in short terms declare,
' English or Pequots must go hunt white Deer.
'No Counsel can the General's wrath assuage,
'Nor calm the fury of his Martial rage.
'His men are all resolved to go on,
'Unto the Pequots Ruin, or their own:
'Then we our selves will stand in sight and see
'The last Conclusion of this Tragedy.
'Mean while the General his Oration makes,
'And with his Army thus Expostulates;
'There's such a Crisis now in Providence,
'As scarce has been since time did first Commence
'Fate has determined that this very Day,
'Shall try the Title of America:
'And that these hands of ours shall be the hands,
'That shall subdue or forfeit all these Lands.
'If this days work by us be once well done,
' America is for the English won:
'But if we faint and fail in this design,
'The numerous Nations will as one combine
'Their Countries Forces and with Violence
'Destroy the English and their Settlements.
'Here we are Strangers, and if we are beat
'We have no Place for Safety or Retreat
'Therefore our Hands must be Preservatives,
'Of our Religion, Liberties and Lives.
'I urge not this as Motives from Despair,
'To which I know you utter Strangers are.
'Only to show what great Advantages,
'Attends your Valor urging the Success,
'Mov'd with Despair the coward Fights and Storms,
'But your brave Minds have more Angelick forms
'Your high born Souls in Brighter orbs do move
'And take in fair Ideas from Above.
'Minding the Laurels that the Victor wears,
'And great Example of your Ancestors
'I know you cannot their Mighty acts forget,
'And yet how often did they them repeat?
'What did that ever famous Black Prince do,
'At first at Cressey, after at Poictou?
'Bravely he led the English Squadrons on,
'Bravely they Fought till they had took King John.
'Bravely he did his Fathers Message bear,
'To save his Life and Honor in the War.
'For in that Fight he raised the English Fame,
'Above the Grecian or the Roman Name.
'And with what Force and Martial Puissance.
'Did great King Henry claim the Crown of France
'He like a Gamester played his tennis Balls,
'Like Bolts of Thunder over Paris Walls.
'How Lion-like he led his British Bands,
'Tho' few in number through the Ga^ick Lands.
'To Agin-Court, then Faced his mighty Foe,
'And gave his Multitude the Overthrow;
'Where e're his Generals came they did Advance
'The English Ensigns on the Towers of France:
'Until that Nation rendered up to him
'Their Heiress and Imperial Diadem.
'And when of late King Philip did Attempt,
'Quite to Subvert the British Government;
'And for that end sent out his mighty Fleet,
'Whom Howards, Seymore, and bold Drake did meet,
'And meeting took or sunk into the main
'The Wealth, the hope, the power and pride of Spain.
'By such Exploits, the English Glory went
'Throughout from Britain to the Orient:
'And there too soon 'twas bounded by the Seas
'And limited from the Antipodies.
'Nought of their worth in the new world was told,
'Nor more could be expressed in the Old.
'Then Fame it self dull and inactive grew
'For want of other Business to Pursue.
'But Fate which long has De^inated you,
'To prove the Stories of the old World t'th' New,
'Shipt you on Board and with full gales has sent
'You forth from Britain to this Continent;
'And by this Foe gives Opportunity
'Here to evince the English Bravery.
'And give the World Assurance that we be,
'Sons of those mighty Men of Britannie^
''Tis true, our Enemies are hard to same,
'The more the Danger is the more's the Fame,
'But they are Strong, Immured, a Multitude:
'The more's the Honor when they are Subdued.
'But they are Valiant, used to overthrow,
'What Glory it is to Conquer such a Foe?
'Their very Name has made our Allies run,
'Oh how will this adorn the Field when won!
'Leave the Success to Him whose boundless Powers
'Will doubtless bless so just a War as ours.
'Then let us not give the sense of Danger place,
'But Storm the Enemies Fortress in the face.
'So shall the Line of your high Praises run
'The same in time and Circle with the Sun:
'And Happy Alb^on shall for ever Glory,
'Her distant Sons did here make good her Story.
'No more he said, then through the Regiment
'Was heard a softly Murmur of Consent.
' Amen, Our Forces said, and then on high
'To the Worlds Arbiter, lift up their Eye,
'And with an Humble Air of ^arnestness
'Unto His Majesty made this Address,
'O Most Divine Eternal Majesty,
' Whose Thrones Exalted far above the Sky;
' Where thou by spotless Spirits art Adored,
' As their, and our and every things Great Lord.
' Yea so Exalted is thy Majesty,
' So Infinite is thy Divinity:
' That what the best and utmost Praise be,
' Once to behold is Humbleness in thee,
' Yet albeit thou art Exalt^.
' Thou have a kind Res^ect unto the Low:
' And from thy most Exalted Stations there,
' Viewest what is Acting on thy Footstool here.
' Thou in thy Word do often and often declare,
' Thy Peoples Good i^ thine Especial Care.
' And have more often in (...) Providence,
' Made good that Word in their Deliverance:
' So that their Motto hitherto has been,
' In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.
' Look down from thy Immense Sublimities,
' To view our Troubles and to hear our Cries.
' Our Eyes are unto thee who can Subdue
' A Multitude, and Victors make a few.
' Mind Lord, it was thy Power and Right Hand
' Has bro't us to and set us in this Land.
' 'Twas for thy Sake that we lest Britannie,
' And our Enjoyments there; Here to have thee.
' But how the Heathen Rage, and how their Kings
' Against thee, and thy Christ speak Evil things?
' For sure the Truth of their Intentions be,
' By Driving us from hence to Banish Thee.
' If thou axt Silent and allow'^ the same,
' What will thou do unto thy Dreadful Name^
' Thy Promise to thy Son have thou forgot,
' That thou will give the Heathen for his Lot:
' And of the Earth the utmost parts thereon
' To be to Him for His Possession.
' We hoped of this to have seen the Accomplishment,
' Yea and ourselves to help on the Event.
' Then Lord arise and to our help incline,
' And shout as mighty Men shout after Wine.
' Let the Proud Dwellers of the Nations see
' There Is none that is Invincible but thee.
' So shall the Wrath of Man Honor thy Name,
' And this shall their remaining Wrath restrain:
' And this thy Peoples Thankful Hearts shall raise
' To Celebrate thy Name with endless Praise.
'After Devotions thus to Heaven Paid,
'Up to the Enemy Our Armies led,
'Silent as the Riphean Snow does fall,
'Or Fishes walk in Neptunes spacious Hall.
'Now Lucifer had just put out his Head,
'To call Aurora from old Tithon's bed.
'Whereat the Troops of the Approaching light,
'Began to beat the Reg'ments of the Night.
'But Morpheus with his unperceived Bands,
'Had closed the Pequots Eyes and chained their Hands.
'All Slept secure save one Sagacious Wretch,
'Whose turn it was to stand upon the Watch.
'His weighty Charge with Diligence he applies,
'And Looking round with fierce, Lyncean Eyes.
'At Length our Avaunt Couriers he Espied,
'Straining his Lungs aloud, Auwunux Cried.
( Auwunux, said our King, What does that mean? It signifys, said Winthrop,
English Men)

'The startling News does every Soldier rouse,
'Each Arms and Hastens to his Rendezvouze.
'Mean time the English did the Fort Attach,
'And in the same had opened a Breach.
'Through which our brave Aleides Entered first,
'In after whom his valiant Soldiers thrust.
'Before the breach an Unappal^ed band,
'Of Warlike Pequots with Bow and Arrows stand.
'With Cheerful Accents these themselves Confirm
'To die like Men or to outface the Storm.
'Then Gallantly the English they assail,
'With winged Arrows like a shower of Hail
'These ours Endure; and with like Violence,
'Sent Lead and Sulphur back in Recompense,
'And now the fight grew more and more Intense,
'Each violent Death Enflames the Violence.
'Charge answered Charge, and shout replied to shout
'Both parties like Enraged fury's fought.
'Till Death in all its horrid Forms appears,
'And Dreadful Noise keeps Clamouring in our Ears.
'Now as some Spacious Rivers in their way,
'By which they Travel onwards to the Sea.
'Meet with some mighty Precipice from whence,
'Enrag'd they throw themselves with Violence.
'Upon the Stubborn Rocks that ly below,
'To make Disturbance in the way they go.
'Here though the Fury of the fray does make
'The near Adjacent Rocks and Mountains quake
'Still the Remorsless Stream keep on its course,
'Nor will abate a Moment of its force,
'But rather hastens by Impetuous Facts
'To throw itself into those Cat^^s.
'And so it happened with our Soldiers here,
'Whose Fortune 'twas to Travel in the rear.
'The Combatings of these within the Breaches,
'With Dreadful noise their listening Ears Attaches,
'And from their Foes and from their Brethren,
'Loud Cries of Fighting and of Dying Men.
'Sense of the Danger does not them Affright,
'But rather proves a Motive to excite,
'The Martial Flame in every Soldiers Breast,
'And on they like enraged Lions pressed.
'Determined upon the spot to Die,
'Or from the Foe obtain the Victory.
'Now Fortune shows to the beholders sight,
'A very Dreadful, yet a Doubtful Fight.
'Whilst Mighty Men born in far Distant Land,
'Stood Foot to Foot engaging Hand to Hand.
'As when some Mighty Tempest that arise,
'Meet with Imbattled Fury in the Skies:
'Fire balls of Lightnings and loud Thunders Rend,
'And Tear the Raging parly's that contend.
'So did the Fury of these mighty Foes,
'With which they did each others force oppose,
'Bring on su^^ ^uins as might daunt with fears,
'The Hearts of any Men; Excepting Theirs.
'Never did Pequots fight with greater Pride:
'Never was English Valor Better tried.
'Never was Ground soak't with more Gallant blood
'Than the Aceldama whereon we stood.
'Sometimes one Party Victory soon Expect,
'As soon their eager Hopes are Counterchect.
'And those that seemed as Conquered before,
'Repel with greater force the Conqueror.
'Three times the Pequots seemed to be beat:
'As many times they made their Foes retreat.
'And now our hope and help for Victory,
'Chiefly Depended from the Arm on High,
'As when Euroclydon the forest rends,
'The bigger Oaks fall down the Lesser bends;
'The beaten Limbs and Leaves before him scour,
'Affrighted and Enforced by his Power;
'To some huge Rock whose Adamantine brow,
'Out braves the Fury of all Winds that blow;
'There hoping to be hid from the high Charge,
'Of Fierce pursuers by his Mighty Verge.
'The Winds in pressing troops Demand Surrender,
'Of the pursued and boisterous Storm and Thunder:
'But he brow beats, and Masters all their pride,
'And sends them roaring to the Larbord side.
'So Mason here most strongly Dressed in arms,
'Re-animates his men, their Ranks Reforms,
'Then Leading on through Deaths and Dangers goes,
'And beats the thickest Squadrons of the foes.
'Prince Mononotto sees his Squadrons fly,
'And on our General having fixed his Eye.
'Rage and Revenge his Spirits quickening,
'He set a Mortal Arrow in the String.
'Then to his God and Fathers Ghosts he Prayed,
' Hear, O Immortal Powers, hear me, he said;
' And pity Mistick, Save the tottering Town,
' And on our Foes hurl dreadful Vengeance down.
' Will you forsake your Altars and abodes,
' To those Contemners of Immortal God's?
' Will those Pay Hecatombs unto your shrine,
' Who have denied your Powers to be Divine?
' O favor us; our hopes on you are Built.
' But if you are Mindful of our former Guilt,
' Determine final ruin ^n us all;
' Yet let us not quite ^unrevenged fall.
' Here I Devote this of our Enemies
' His precious Life to you a Sacrifice.
' Nor shall I Covet long to be Alive,
' If such a Mischief. I might once Survive.
' But O Indulgent, Hearken to my Prayer;
' Try us once more; this once the City spare:
' And take my Gift, Let your acceptance be
' An ^men we shall gain the Victory.
'That very Instant Mason did Advance,
'Whereat rage Interrupts his utterance;
'Nor could he add a Word to what was said.
'But drew the winged Arrow to the Head:
'And aiming right Discharged it, whereupon
'Its Fury made the Piercing Air to Groan.
'But wary Mason with his active Spear,
'Glanc'd the Princes Arrow in the Air:
'Whereat the Pequots quite Discouraged.
'Throw down the Gauntlet and from Battle fled.
' Mason swift as the chased Roe on Foot,
'Out strips the rest in making the Pursuit:
'Entring the Palace in a Hall he found,
'A Multitude of Foes, who gathering round
'This mighty Man on every side Engaged
'Like Bears bereaved of their Whelps enraged.
'One finding such Resistance where he came,
'His Mind, his Weapons and his Eves stroke Flame.
'Their Boldness much his martial sprite Provokes,
'And round he lays his deep inveterate strokes.
'Making his Sword at each enforced blow
'Send great Soul'd Heroes to the shades below.
'But as when Hercules did undertake,
'A doubtful C^mbate with the Lernian Snake;
'Fondly proposed if he cut off her Head,
'The Monster might with ease be Vanquished:
'But when he the Experiment did make,
'Soon to his hazard found his dear mistake;
'And that as often as he cut off one,
'Another Instantly sprang in its room.
'So here, though Mason laid so many Dead,
'Their Number seemed not Diminished;
'And Death the Umpire of this Martial Fray,
'Stood yet expecting Mason for his Prey.
'But Fate that does the rule of Actions know,
'Did this unequal Combat Disallow.
'As too severe to force one Man alone,
'To Beat an Army, take a Garrison:
'Or if he failed in the Enterprise,
'To fall a Victim to his Enemies;
'Sent Heydon in, who with his sure Steeled Blade,
'Joining the General such a Slaughter made,
'That ^oon the Pequots ceased to Oppose,
'The Matchless force of such Resistless Foes.
'After so many Deaths and Dangers past,
' Mason was thoroughly Enflamed at last:
'^e Snatched a blazing Bavin with his Hand,
'And Fired the stately Palace with the Brand.
'And soon the towering and Rapacious Flame,
'All hope of Opposition overcame.
' Eurus and Notus readily Subjom,
'Their best Assistance to this great Design;
'Drive Pitchy Flames in vast enfoldings down,
'And dreadful Globes of Fire along the Town.
'And now the English Army Marched out,
'To Hemn this Flaming City round about;
'That such as strived to escape the Fire,
'Might by the Fury of their Arms Expire.
'But O what Language or what Tongue can tell,
'This dreadful Emblem of the flames of Hell?
'No Fantasy sufficient is to Dream,
'A Faint Idea of their Woes Extreme.
'Some like unlucky Comets do appear,
'Rushing along the Streets with flagrant hair;
'Some seeking safety Clamber up the wall,
'Then down again with Blazing fingers Fall.
'In this last Hour of Extremity,
'Friends and Relations met in Company;
'But all in vain their tender Sympathy,
'Cannot allay but makes their Misery.
'The Paramour here met his amourous Dame,
'Whose eyes had often set his heart in flame:
'Urg'd with the Motives of her Love and Fear,
'She runs and Clasps her arms about her Dear:
'Where weeping on his bosom as she Lies,
'And Languisheth on him she sets her Eyes;
'Till those bright Lamps do with her life Expire,
'And Leave him Weltering in a double fire.
'The Fair and Beauteous Bride with all her Charms,
'This night lay Melting in her Bridegrooms arms.
'This Morning in his bosom yields her life,
'While he dies Sympathizing with his Wife.
'In Love relation and in Life the same,
'The same in Death, both die in the same Flame.
'Their Souls united both at once repair,
'Unto their place appointed through the air.
'The Gracious Father here stood looking on,
'His little Brood with deep affection,
'They round about him at each quarter stands,
'With piteous looks Each lifts his little Hands
'To him for shelter, and then nearer throng,
'Whilst piercing Cries for help flows from each Tongue,
'Fain would he give their miseries relief;
'Tho' with the forfeiture of his own life:
'But finds his power too short to shield off harms,
'The torturing flame Arrests them in his arms.
'The tender Mother with like Woes oppressed,
'Beholds her Infant frying at her breast;
'Crying and looking on her, as it fryes;
'Till Death shuts up its heart affecting Eyes.
'The Conquering flame long Sorrow^ does prevent,
'And Vanquished Life soon breaks Imprisonment
'Souls leave their Tenements gone to decay,
'And fly untouched through the flames away.
'Now all with speed to final ruin have,
'And soon this Tragic scene is overpast.
'The Town its Wealth high Battlements and Spires,
'Now Sinketh Weltring in conjoining Fires.
'The General Commands the Officers with speed,
'To see his Men drawn up and Martialed,
'Which being done, they Wheel the ranks,
'And Kneeling down to Heaven all gave Thanks.
'By this Aurora does with Gold adorn,
'The ever Beauteous Eylids of the Morn;
'And Burning Titan his Exhaustless rays,
'Bright in the Eastern Horrizon Displays:
'Then soon Appearing in Majestic Aw,
'Makes all the starry Deitys withdraw;
'Veiling their Faces in deep Reverence,
'Before the Throne of his Magnificence.
'And now the English their Red Cross Display,
'And under it march bravely toward the Sea;
'There hoping in this needful Hour to meet,
'Ample Provisions coming with the Fleet.
'Mean time came Tidings to great Sasacus's Ears,
that Mistick-Town was ^ken unawares.
^ree Hundred of his Able Men he sent.
^th utmost have its ruin to Prevent
(...) if for that they chance to come too late,
(...) Harms on us they should Retaliate.
'These with loud Out-crys met us coming down
'The Hill, about three furlongs from the Town;
'Gave us a Skirmish and then turned to gaze,
'Upon the ruined City yet on blaze.
'But when they saw this Doleful Tragedy,
'The Sorrow of their Hearts did close their Eye:
'Silent and Mute they stand yet breathe out Groans;
'Nor Gorgons Head like this transforms to Stones.
'Here lay the Numerous Body's of the Dead;
'Some Frying, others almost Calcined:
'All dolefully Imprisoned Underneath
'The Dark and Adamantine Bars of Death.
'But mighty Sorrows never are Content,
'Long to be kept in close Imprisonment,
'When once grown desperate will not keep under,
'But break all Bands of their restraint asunder.
'And now with Shrieks the Ecchoing Air they Wound,
'And Stamped and Tore and Cursed the Suffering Ground.
'Some with their hands tore off their Guiltless Hair,
'And throw up dust and cinder in the Air.
'Thus with strange Actions and Horrendous Cries
'They Celebrate these Doleful Obsequies.
'At length Revenge so Vehemently does Burn
'As caused all other Passions to Adjourn.
' Alecto raves and rates them in the ear,
'O Senseless Cowards to stand blubbering he
'Will Tears revive these Body's of the Slain,
'Or bring their Ashes Back to Life again?
'Will Tears Appease their mighty Ghosts that are,
'Hoping to be Revenged, hovering here?
'Surely expecting you will Sacrifice,
'To them the Lives of those their Enemies:
'And will you Baffle them thus by delay,
'Until the Enemy be gone away?
'O Cursed Negligence! And then she Strips,
'And Jerks and Stings them with her Scorpion Whips,
'Until with Anger and Revenge they Yell,
'As if the very Fiends had broke up Hell.
That we shall Die, they all Outragous Swear;
And Vomit Imprecations in the Air:
Then, full speed! with Fj^lations Loud,
They follow us like an Impetuous Cloud.
' Mason to stop their Violent Career,
Rally's his Company a New to War;
Who finding them within a little space,
Let fly his Blunder-busses in their Face
Thick Sulphurous Smoke makes the Sky look black,
An^ Heaven's high Galleries Thunder with the crack.
(...) Groans and Trembles and from under^eath,
(...) Vaulted Caverns horrid Eccho's Breath^.
The Volley that our Men First made,
^ok down their Stout File-leaders Dead.
'To see them fall a Stupifying Fear,
'Surpris'd and Stopped their Soldiers in the Rear:
'The numerous Natives stopped, and faced about;
'Whereat the Conquering English gave a shout.
'At which they start and through the Forest Scour,
'Like Trembling Hinds that hear the Lions roar.
'Back to great Sasacus they now return again;
'And of their Loss they thus aloud Complain,
' Sir, it is in Vain to Fight: The Fates Engage,
' Themselves for those with whom this War we Wage.
'We Mistick Burning saw, and 'twas an Awful Sight
'As Dreadful are our Enemies in Fight:
'And the loud Thunderings that their Arms did mak^
'Made Us, the Earth, yea Heaven itself to shake
'Very unwelcome to great Sasacus's Ears,
'Were these Misfortunes and his Subjects Fears
'Yet to his Men, the English he Contemns,
'And Threats to ruin us with Stratagems.
'And now his tho'ts Ten Thousand ways Divide,
'And swift through all Imaginations Glide.
'Endless Projections in his Head he lays,
'Deep Policies and Stratagems he Weigh^
'Sometimes he thinks, he will thus the War man
'Reviews the Scheme and throws it by again.
'Now thus, or thus, Concludes it is best to do
'But neither thus, nor thus, on the Review
'And thus his mind on endless Projects Wanders,
'Till he is lost in Intricate Meanders.
'At last gives up the Case as Desperate,
'And Sinks, Bewailing his Forlorn Estate.
'He and his People quite Discouraged,
'Now leave their Seats, and toward Monhattons fled.
'But in his way the English sword over takes
'His Camp, and in it sad Massakers makes.
'Yet he Escaped and to the Mohawks goes,
'Where he to them keeps Reckoning up his woes:
'And they to cure the Passions of his breast,
'Cut off his Head, and all his Cares released.
'Thus great Sasacus! and his Kingdom fell,
Who in their time so greatly did Excel.
'So frail and full of Mutabilities,
'Are all Times Adjuncts, underneath the Skies.
^ce this (...) Downs have spread the Country over,
(...) on the River and along the Shore:
^ich with English names Your Subjects style,
^ar remembrance of our Parent Isle.
^e Land thus either Purchased, or Subdued,
^s our Intent then Early to have sued,
(...) the Throne, where your Illustr'ous Father sat,
(...) he would Graciously Incorporate
'Us, by his Royal Charter, with such Liberty,
'As I Petition from Your Majesty.
'But soon those Cloudy Days came on,
'(Ripened for Ruin and Destruction)
'Wherein the Subjects in Rebe^ion rose,
'Drowning their Sovereign and Themselves in woes.
''Till nothing could Appease the Multitude,
'Less than that Blessed Martyrs Royal Blood.
'Nor yet Content; Their Rage Inveterate,
'Together with his Life Seize on the State.
'Neither could that Extinct the hateful Flame,
'Without Endeavors to destroy his name.
'And all his race to Ruin to Consigne,
'For being Branches of the Royal Line.
'But here my Tongue does falter, Spirits (...)
'And my Heart bursts asunder once to think,
'That such a King the Glory of (...) ^age,
'Should fall a victim to the Popular ^age.
'And that such Miserys should fall on (...)
'That were Descendants of the Royal S^
'But God who dwells in Approach (...)
'And whose wise counsel does surpass (...)
'As far as Heaven does the Faith in (...)
'(...) his Un^erring Counsel (...).
'Covers sometimes the Footstool of his Throne,
'And Makes thick Darkness his Pavilion.
'And as we fondly Guess by the Event,
'Laughs at the Trial of the Innocent.
'Yet He by Ways and Means that seem to us,
'The clean Contrary and Prep^erous.
'Bringeth about the Good He did Decree,
'In His wise Counsel from Eternity.
'He having set His Love Transcendantly,
'Upon your Father from Eternity.
'The Restless Motions of his constant Love,
'^e'er ceast to Act but in his Interest strove.
'^hat he should be Prepared to sit on High
(...) some Especial seat of Dignity.
'Surely 'twa^ (...)
^ong the (...)
^
'Acomplished your Happy Reslauration,
'And set you safely on your Fathers Throne.
'From whence your liberal Hand does freely pour,
'Most Loyal Bounty's like an Heavenly shower.
'Distilling on the Grass that is newly Mown,
'And we Your Supplyants before the Throne,
'Beg leave to hope while all your Favors Taste
' Connecticut will not be overpast:
Great CHARLES who gave attention all the whi^
^ooking on Winthrop with a Royal Smile,
(...) that of his Fathers woes he speaks,
(...) drew the Crystal Rivers down his Che.
(...) Winthrop his Address had closed,
(...) Count^nance Compo^
^
^
And for Chief Senators and Patentees,
Take Men of Wealth and known Abilities;
Men of Estates and men of Influence^
Friends to their Country and to US Their Prince.
And may the People of that Happy Place
whom thou have so Endeared to (...) Grace;
(...) times last Exit, through Succeeding Ages,
(...) Blessed with Happy English Privileges.
And that they may be so, bear thou from hence
To them these Premoniti^ (...) their Prince.
First, Let all Officers in Civil Trust,
^lways Espouse their Countries Interest.
^et Law and Right be Precious in their Eyes,
And hear the Poor Man's Cause when e're he Cries.
^reser^e Religion Pure and Understand,
that i^ the Firmest Pillar of a Land:
^et i^ be kept in Crodit in the Court,
and ^ever fail for want of due Support.
(...) let the Sacred Order of the Gown,
(...) Zeal apply the Business that is their own.
(...) may Spring from the Earth and Righteousness,
(...) ^own from Heaven, Truth and Judgment Kiss.
(...), Let the Freemen of your Corporation,
(...) wheware of the Ins^uation,
Of those which always Brood Complaint and Fear,
Such Plagues are Dangerous to (...) the (...)
Such Men are Over-Laden with Compassion,
Having Men's Freedom in such Admiration:
That every Act of Order or Restraint
They Will Represent as matter of Complaint.
And this is no New Doctrine, it is a Rule
Was taught in Satan's first Erected School.
It served his turn with wonderful Success,
And ever since has been his Masterpiece.
It Is true the slight by which that field he won,
Was argued from man's benefit alone.
But these outdo him in that way of Evil,
And will sometimes for God's sake play the Devi^
And Lastly, Let Your New English Mutitud^
Remember well a bond of Gratitude
Will Lie on them and their Posterity
To bear in mind their Freedom came by Tee
FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page 1. l. 12. for That read The page 5. l 5 read Hypothesis.
page 7. l. 1. (...) read in. l. 9 read account. page 8. l. 20. for that read
the (...) for with read by. page 11. l. 5. read Notices (...) read Honorable.
page 15. l. 13, 14. read Perfection (...) 11. page 16. l. 15. read Phrase. page
25. l. 22 read Pro^ (...) page 28. l. u^ after though it, add and said. page 32. l.
16 after ^ination, add here p. 33. l. 17 for often read sometime^ (...) 36. l.
20. read these page 37. l. 18. read Corns. l. 24. for they read that p. 40. l
7 dele in page 42, l, 15. for Now read No, l 24 for terms read Tenures page 47 l
17. dele also. p. 49. (...)

In the Dedication, Page 2. l. 8 for at read of.

In the Poetical Medications Page 21 l. 5 for Posterity, read Prosperity. page
^2. l 2. for the King to Greet, read, as 'twas (...) page 29. l. 20 for with
read such. page 36 (...) own read owe. page 42. l. 4. for Warlike read
Fortunate. page 45 l. 15 (...) that Saggamore, read a Prince, page 47 (...). 17.
dele (...) page 48. l. 13 for War read near page 49 l. 1. read (...) Can these
white liver'd men, and but a few, (...) bid. l. 12. for men read more. page 50
(...) after (...) nons's add up page 58 l. 3 for the read their. (...) 59. l 17
read As silent as page 60. l. 16. for Bow (...) ^orrows, read in bright Armor.
page 63 l ^lt. for in (...) on page 64 l 10 dele are. l. ult. read Pierced p.
61. 22. for Vanquished, read Bankrupt page 69 l 3 for (...) General, read MASON.
l. 5. read Wheel about. (...) ^anks. l 6 before Kneeling add ^umbly l. 19 dele
(...) page 71. 21 for makes read makes (...) read (...) Bolts that this first
clap of Thunder ^hed, (...) 72. l. 7, dele now. l 11, dele Burning. l. 15, dele
great (...) 74.1, dele Royal l 3, after Days, add of Woe(...) 76. l. ult. read
thus, And Valia^ MASON (...) thy Right Hand.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I The Sub^iber having these many Years, (even from my Youth) been Employed in
the Mak^ and Working of Cloth; and having se^ with Regret the Errors which some
People co^^it in their Preparations about so good and needful a Work, am
willing to offer a few Thoughts to Consideration; and having been something at
Charge in promoting the Publishing the foregoing Meditations, do her take the
Liberty to Advertise my Country People of some Rules which ought to be
observed, in doing their part, that so the Cloth^ might be assisted in the
better performance (...) what is expected of them, that the Cloth which is made
among us may both Wear and La^ better, than it can possibly do, Except the
following Directions are Observed by us.

1. Let your Wool be well Sorted, and to of your Longer and Coarser Wool for
your W^ and the Finer for your Woof, so your (...) will appear Beautiful and
Wear the better.

2. Cleanse and Die your W^ of such Colors (...) you think best, but beware
(...) Killing your ^ool by Biting Copperas or B^t, for it ^ves not Boiling;
therefore, let your Die stuff ^e Strong, so the less Heat will do, which in
^art is the reason that the Blue (...) the most Strong and Excellent.

3. Having well Washed it at of the Die, ^are not for Time and Pains in Picking
it, and let it be well Opened, so ^e less Carding ^ill do; for much Carding
Hills the Uniting ^ality, so that it will not Full well.

4. Mix your Wool as well as you can with our Hands before it comes to the
Cards, and ^n Carding put it on equally so that as little Carding as Possible
(but yet not so little as ^o have the Cloth Rowey) may do; and let ^our Wool be
both Broke and Carded with the best of Cards: Otherwise 'twill be destructive
to the Weaver, pose the Fuller, and is very ruinous to the Cloth it self; for
it steals off its smooth Beauty and leaves it very Rough, through much Carding,
or with bad Cards.

5. Your Kersey, plain Cloth, and Cloth Serge, should be alike (...) to
Colors, both Warp an^ Woo^; for (...) when it comes to be worn it will (...)
more Coarse and Thread bare.

6. B^e always (though it cost you half a Wheel ba^ for to Cross your Wheel-hand
in the Spinning the Warp of your Kersey, Cloth Serge. and (...) Cloth; so
'twill be much better both in its beauty and Wearing: But it Druggetts, let our
Woof or Filling be cross barided, so it ^ill be smoother and hold it Pressing
better.

7. Let your Weavers Observe, not to Sla^ your Cloth too high; but let them Use
more Filling than Chain; and beat it up well in the Weaving thereof.

THese are the Things which I humbly offe^ hoping they will be followed and not
Slighte by my Neighbors and Country-folks, whom wish well to and am ready to
Serve.

JOSEPH DEWEY.
Colchester 1725.

