Mr. Thacher's Election-SERMON, May 25. 1726.

Massachusetts. At a Council held in the Council Chamger in Boston, May 28th.
1726.
Ordered,
THAT the Honorable William Tail^r and Samuel Thaxter Esqrs; give the Thanks
of the Board to the Reverend Mr. Peter Thacher, for his SERMON Preached before
the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, and desire a Copy thereof in order to its being Printed.

Josiah Willard, Secr.

Wise and Good CIVIL RULERS, To be duly Acknowledged By GOD's People as a
great Favor.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE The Lieutenant GOVERNOR, the COUNCIL
and REPRESENTATIVES of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
May 25. 1726.

Being the Anniversary, for the Election of His Majesty's Council there.

By Peter Thacher, A. M. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop the lower end of
Cornhill. 1726.

AN Election-SERMON.
PSALM. LXXVII. 20. Thou leddest thy People like a Flock, by the hand of Moses
and Aaron.
CIVIL Government is the Life of Public Society; a Constitution of Government
formed to the just Liberties, and best Interests of human Nature, in Civil and
Religious Affairs; and animated by a wise and just Administration is the
Strength of that Life: And the Agency of Sovereign Divine Grace, in giving it
to his Own People, spreads an incomparable Glory upon the whole; and makes a
most powerful Motive of solemn Praise.

The latter part of this Psalm opens to us, with a Divine Eloquence, the Glory
and Majesty of the GOD of Israel, in that Series of Wonders; Israel's
Redemption out of Egypt: Verse 15th, Thou have with thine Arm redeemed thy
People --: And concludes with the Excellency of their Government, and Leaders,
Thou leddest thy People, etc.

In the Words observe the following things,

1. GOD Himself was Israel's Leader: Thou leddest thy People Their Civil
Constitution (as well as Ecclesiastical) was Extraordinary: There was a more
immediate Interposition of GOD himself; in their Laws and Administration:
therefore usually denominated a Theocrasy. GOD by Himself broke the Iron Yoke;
Formed their Government for them, Executed and Administered it when Formed.

2. The Manner of the Administration: Thy People, as a Flock. GOD the Shepherd;
Israel his Flock: This carrys an happy mixture of Tenderness and Authority;
Power and Care; Protection and Discipline: Acted by the nearest Relations,
special Propriety, and dearest Affection.

3. The illustrious Instruments used by Him; Moses and Aaron. Though their
Government was a Theocrasy: it did not exclude Instruments: But then the
Instruments first employed in this singular Government were agreeable to it:
Extraordinary and very Excellent Ones: Extraordinarily Called, Furnished
Assisted and Supported by GOD. Moses and Aaron were the Two first Instruments
used by GOD: the renowned Heads of the Two Orders, Civil and Religious. GOD
raised them, furnished them, vested them with Power; and by his special,
constant Presence with them, made them both, but Moses more remarkably, the
most signal Blessings to their People, and Examples to all future Rulers.

How properly soever my Text would lead to it* as one special Branch of GOD's
Government, to consider Israel's Constitution, and Rulers in Church, as well as
State, I pass it; and shall be governed by the occasion; and confine my self to
the Civil Constitution and Rulers, as a fruit of GOD's merciful Government, and
give you a few tho'ts upon the Blessing of that, when wisely and justly
managed. I will give you my Subject in the following

DOCTRINE. IT is to be Notic'd and Celebrated, as an high Favor of GOD to his
People; when He leads them like a Flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron; or
Wise and Good Civil Rulers.

Indeed the principal Blessing of GOD, and a People's most vital and
fundamental Distinction, Honor and Happiness consists in their Excellent
Constitution of Church Government formed upon the revealed Plan, the holy
Scriptures; and wise and faithful Guides to administer it: Churches formed by
CHRIST himself, with an exact agreableness to his own most wise and perfect
Rules, filled with Ordinances, and all Instituted Officers; and very
particularly a learned and faithful Mininistry: These are a People's Glory and
Safety, ( Psalm 147 20.) what they should especially value, be thankful for, be
concerned to secure and improve. But the Occasion leads me to the Civil; and
that too is a very illustrious Favor of GOD. I will give you my thot's upon
the important Things contained in this General Proposition; under the following
Heads.

PROP. I. GOD is in an appropriate manner the Leader of a Professing People.

PROP. II. He leads them like a Flock. PROP. III. He sometimes leads them by
the Hand of Moses and Aaron; or of Wise and Good Rulers. PROP. IV. This is to
be acknowledged and celebrated as an high Favor.
PROP. I. GOD is, in an appropriate manner, the Leader of a Professing People.
He was Israel's Leader; and he is the leader of every professing People. Every
professing People is his peculiar People; and he leads them as such. Indeed
they are not led by the same extraordinary, miraculous, immediate hand of GOD,
that Israel was in their Redemption from Egypt, Conduct through the Wilderness,
and their being put into Possession of Canaan. This is Celebrated, and Confined
to to them: Deuteronomy. 4. 32, 33, 34. Ask now of the Days, that are past, from the
Day that God created Man upon the earth -- Did ever People hear God speaking
out of the midst of Fire? Or has God essayed to take him a nation out of the
midst of a nation, by temptations, by signs, by wonders, and by a mighty hand,
etc. But yet in every other professing People, there is the same Relation of GOD
to them, as to Israel; the same Grounds and Principles of Acting toward and
for them: and they express themselves in the same happy Fruits; though working
after a diverse manner, viz. By second Causes. But here I will give you my
tho'ts under two Heads, distinctly. (1) GOD is the supreme, absolute Lord of
all Creatures. (2.) In a peculiar manner, he is the Leader of a professsing
People.

1. GOD is the supreme, absolute Lord of all Creatures. He is the universal
First Cause; infinitely and absolutely Perfect; and therefore must have an
unlimited, unalienable, perpetual and universal Dominion over all Creatures;
particularly over all his reasonable Creatures; Personally, or Relatively:
Singly, or in Society. No Authority can possibly be, but from GOD. All Power is
limited by his most perfect Will, duly notified. No Power can be against him.
These are all Truths most evident to Reason; and their Contraries draw after
them the most absurd Consequences; nay flat Contradictions. And the Scriptures
clearly exhibit them as such to us, Dan. 4. 24. Till thou know that the most
high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Psalm.
145. 13. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; and thy dominion through out all
generations. Psalm. 135. 5. I know, that the Lord is great above all gods;
whatsoever the Lord pleased; that did he, in heaven, earth, seas, etc. The
universal Influence and Agency of GOD, here affirmed, includes a Moral, as well
as a Natural or Physical Power; Right, as well as Strength. Once more, That
celebrated, but very much vexed and abused Text is very clear and full Proof
Romans 13. 1. -- No power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God.
It Is not possible there should be any, but what flows from this only Fountain
of Being and Power: And it is equally impossible for GOD to deny himself, and
give any Creature a Power against himself.

But I proceed,

2. GOD is in a peculiar manner the Leader of his Own People. Here I will
mention to you, some of the Distinctions and Characters of this peculiar
Government.

1. It Is founded in special Relations, and peculiar Works of GOD. Israel became
his Subjects, and he their Leader; by new, near and endearing Relations and
peculiar displays of his Wisdom, Power and sovereign Bounty. And thus it is in
a Degree with respect to every professing People.

They are formed, redeemed, separated to GOD, by special displays of Divine
Perfections: New and very near Relations between GOD and them arise from these
special Operations. His Providence works very gloriously and distinguishingly,
in preparing them for the honorable and happy Station: He so becomes their
Father; and they his Children, in an uncommon manner. They his Servants, and he
their Lord, by a new and most endearing Claim: Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite
The Lord; O foolish people and unwise? Is he not thy (...) that has bought
thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee? My narrow bounds will not allow
me to go into the delightful particulars.

But again, His Condescentions are very wonderful, in his most free and
gracious binding himself to them, by Word, Oath* most significant Covenant
Rites and Seals, which contain the most precious Good, made over to them upon
the best Te^ms. And they (...) deliberately bound themselves to a constant,
faithful Compliance with these Terms. Isa. 43. 21. This People have I formed
for my self. Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. Thou have avouched the Lord to be thy God, and
he has avouched thee to be his People. This Covenant is the special, formal
ground and reason of the special Relation, and that peculiar Government here
treated of. And this is discoursed of, and described under the Metaphor of the
martial Authority and Marriage Union; which is the closest of any we know of
among Men, between Two Persons. Jer. 2.2. Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, I remember thee the kindness of thy youth; the love of thine Espousals.

2. He leads such a People, by a special Providence, regulated by the Covenant
between GOD and them: In that they Promise to him an universal willing
Obedience, according to his own revealed Will; and he binds himself, to bestow
upon them, in that way, all the Blessings of the Covenant. He makes over
himself, and all his Stores and Riches; and they are as sure of them, as if
actually Possessed. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. I will dwell in them, and walk in them,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my People: and I will be a father
unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord. But he
threatens the contrary Evils, if they are false to him. Deuteronomy. 23. through out.
Now GOD's Providence, in all it is smiles and frowns, is regulated by this
Covenant: He dispenses to them, agreably to his Promises and Threatenings; with
due Reserves for the exercise of his Patience, Sovereignty and Grace; which
Reserves are fully provided for in this Covenant.

3. He feeds them by his Word and Ordinances. It was Israel's peculiar
Privilege, as GOD's People, That GOD committed his Oracles to them; gave them
his Statutes, Judgments and Ordinances, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Romans 3. 2.

And this Distinction and Privilege descends to every professing People. The
Word and Ordinances are the Instruments especially wherein, and whereby GOD
exhibits the Directions, Authority, Blessings and Advantages of that peculiar
Relation and Government, which he has taken upon himself, toward them.

4. He leads them by the Hand of a Mediator. The great Mediator between GOD and
Sinners, is the appointed, universal Lord over all things. Matthew. 28. 18. All
power is given unto me, in heaven, and in earth. And it is a most joyful and
endearing Character of this universal Empire, that it is given, received and
exercised in it is whole vast Extent with a special Eye to his Peoples
universal, and best Good, Ephesians.1.22. Put all things under him; and given him, to
be head, over all things to the Church.

But that which I am especially concerned here, to observe to you is this, viz.
That the Redeemer is in a most glorious and delightful manner his Father's King
in and over his Church, Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of
zion. All Government in and over the Church, whether Providential, formally and
properly Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, is Christ's Government: The Church is his
Seed, Family, Spouse, nay Body: And their whole Direction and Dispose belongs
to him. He is most authentickly, effectively and solemnly vested in it; Psalm.
2. 7. Thou art my son, this Day have I begotten thee. GOD is in the midst of
his Church, and his Rest there will be eternal and glorious: But he exercises
this Sovereignty by that most excellent and lovely Delegate his own only Son,
his own Image and Brightness, (and by his own free Consent) our Surety. This
most wonderful and glorious Person, assumed our Nature; and in this Nature
Traveled and Dyed in our stead, and for our highest Good: And in this Nature,
with all it is essential Affections, he Reigns in and over his Church. He, or
the Father by him, manageth the Kingdom of Providence and Grace to them. And
how many delightful things does this Contemplation suggest to us: Most
certainly, This Administrator makes it a peculiar Government, and exhibits it
such. GOD has peculiar Designs with regard to them: A peculiar Treasure in
them. He has put them into the wisest and kindest hand, to Protect, Order, and
to make them Happy; most safely to secure his Treasure, and exactly and fully
reach his designs.

Thus I have given you some Tho'ts on the First Proposition, and proceed to the
Second.

PROP. II. GOD leads his People like a Flock. This Proposition is but a farther
Prosecution of the foregoing; a going into a particular display of the
excellent Characters and Glories of God's appropriate Government. Here I shall
not oblige my self to the Metaphor, with any critical Solicitude; only keep
the general Idea, conveyed by it in sight, as I pass along.

This of a Shepherd, is an Allusion which ancient Writers, Sacred and Common,
have very much delighted in: They have set it in the most beautiful and
advantageous Lights, to represent a well-regulated, wise and happy Government
by; and to give the best Instructions to the Conduct of Rulers. It Is a very
lively and natural Emblem; and we find the supreme Ruler himself using it, to
give us the just and honorable Ideas of his own Government.

In general, I have already observed to you, That the Metaphor of a Shepherd
carrys an happy mixture of Tenderness and Authority, Power and Care, Protection
and Discipline.

GODs special Government includes all these, we are sure it must. We see all
these things in the brightest light, when we consider and contemplate it, in
what we have already heard of it under the First Proposition, viz. It Is special
Foundations; sublime Rules; peculiar Providence; and most glorious
Administrator: Where these meet, there must be Tenderness and Authority, Power
and Care, Protection and Discipline, most Perfect and Divine: There must be all
the Qualities and Affections of a Shepherd exercised in Perfection, in all the
proper Business, Offices and Work of a Shepherd.

And if we add to this, An Enquiry into Fact; as upon infallible Scripture
Record, we shall find GOD exercising this Tenderness and Authority all along,
in his Dealings with his People.

Here it may be proper to go a little into particulars.

1. GOD Directs and Prescribes to his People, in a very peculiar manner. He
shines to his own People, in the strongest Light, as absolutely Sovereign, and
infinitely Wise and Good; in the Perfection of his Laws, which in the best
manner possible, answer the great End of his Glory, and his People's Happiness.
Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, etc. Psalm. 19. 11.
Moreover by them is thy servant warned; and in keeping of them there is great
Reward.

2 He Corrects and Restores them, when they do amiss and wander. The Tenderness
and Wisdom of his Love will not suffer him to let their Sins pass, without proper
Frowns; but then they direct the Corrections to the fi^test Seasons; best
manner and measure. He adjusts all their Troubles in the best manner, to their
being humbled, purged, made wiser and better; and to their being restored to
their former Station with advantage. He Acts toward them, with the Temper and
Intentions of a Shepherd; and his ways are Analogous to the Shepherd's wisest
and kindest Actions toward this beloved Charge. GOD don't grieve and wound
willingly, and with Pleasure; but for necessary great and good Purposes, which
they themselves will be Thankful for, when GOD's Dispensations are opened fully
to them. Read, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord
thy God has led thee, to prove thee, etc.

3. GOD bears with them, with a sovereign, but wise, Patience. He don't
immediately strike upon every Offense. Involuntary Offenses, arising from I
firmity, are covered with the Tenderness of a Parent. GOD speaks, convinces,
warns, uses the most rational, gentle Applications, when these prevail, to
bring back his People to themselves and Duty: He repents, and forbears the
threatened and impending Evil. However, He glorifys his Patience, and proclaims
his Name, Longsuffering, before he proceeds to his heavier strokes: Especially,
before he puts the last hand of Vengeance to his strange Work. They are great
Sins, and obstinately continued in, that draw down Vengeance. The Public is
concerned by a Public and heavy Guilt, where the Punishment is public and
heavy. Romans 19. 21. But to Israel he says, All the day long have I stretched
out my hand unto a disobedient and gainsaying People. Hos. 11. 8. -- How shall
I give thee up, etc. Jer. 7. 13. I spoke unto thee, rising early.

4. He Protects from Evils and Enemies; with Infinite Concerns, Watchfulness,
Power and Goodness. GOD's People are extremely hated. In proportion to the
purity of their Principles, and excellency of their Manners, is the united Rage
of Earth and Hell set upon it, to do all they can to Vex and Destroy them. And
if the utmost stretch of their Wits and Powers, in the deepest Plots, and
strongest Combinations can undo them, they shall be undone. That Is the Cry of
the Churches Enemies. Psalm. 83 throughout, particularly, Ver. 4, 7, 8. * Come and
let us cut them off.

But their Designs and Attempts are entirely under the Government of Israel's
Shepherd; shall accomplish his Designs, and go no farther. He can by no means
leave the beloved of his Soul, to the blind Rage of their implacable Enemies.
He restrains and bounds the Enemies Rage, and secures His own; and so far, they
are entirely safe: No evil can possibly come without his Knowledge; none
possibly against his Will. Consider the following Texts, Psalm 2.1,2,3,4. Why do
the Heathen rage, the People imagine a vain thing? Psalm. 76. 10. Surely the
wrath of man shall praise thee, etc. Isai. 27 2, 3. -- A Vineyard of red Wine.
I the Lord do keep it, etc.

5. GOD as their special Governor Preserves and Feeds them. GOD Preserves and
Continues his Professing People, his Church, in that distinguished excellent
State of Being He gave them, when he made them his People. He maintains that
Life, and supplies them with all that Good, which that Life demands. The
Purchase of Christ, and the Promise of GOD, determines what that Good is: And
their most faithful Shepherd supplys and dispenses to them, agreably to that
Purchase and Promise. And this comprehends all the Good that Societies are
capable of; Spiritual and Outward, Civil and Religious. Read, Psalm. 23 d. and
you will see the proper Office of a Shepherd; and the Paternal Wisdom and
Authority, with which GOD exhibits; and in the present Instance particularly.

But I come to the Third Proposition.

PROP. III. GOD sometimes leads his People, by the hand of Moses and Aaron; or
of Wise and Good Civil Rulers. This Head is one very weighty Arti^le, wherein,
both the tender Care and sovereign Power of Isreal's good Shepherd discover
themselves.

Here I will observe the following Order; (1.) Offer some general Explanation
or Illustration. (2.) An Hint in Proof very briefly. (3.) Conclude it with the
Character of a good Ruler.

1 I will offer some general Explanation. Whenever a People enjoy an
excellent Form of Government and good Rulers, it is GOD's Gift. His Power and
Favor are very remarkable in it. The Agency of the Sovereign GOD in this
Affair, may be distinguished into Extraordinary and Ordinary. GOD gives as
really and truly, when a People are in Possession of these Blessings, in the
Ordinary Methods of Providence, as in the Extraordinary.

When the Understandings of a People are enlightened and directed to Contrive
such a Scheme of Government, as best answers all the great Ends of Society and
Government: And withal there is such a Concurrence of Circumstances and
Inclinations, as to bring it in, and establish it; GOD is as truly the Author
of that Scheme and Form, as if declared by a voice from Heaven, and received
and established by the most miraculous Operations and Appearances.

Again, When in the Ordinary ways of Education, Experience, etc. Men are
qualified for, spirited to, and introduced into the proper Stations and
Opportunities to employ them for the public Good; it is as really GOD's Work
as if they were Inspired, and called out extraordinarily, by Name, to the
honorable Business.

Once more, When the Designs of subtle and powerful Tyrants against a People's
just Liberties are dashed, and their valuable Rights are preserved or restored,
it^s GOD's glorious Work and precious Gifts when done by Ordinary, as well as
Extraordinary Methods.

In these mentioned Instances, there is GOD's stamp: they are established by his
Approbation and Authority, as well as bro't to pass by his Providence; not only
the Agency of the first universal Cause, but the Authority of the supreme Lord
and Lawgiver. The renowned David is an Instance of both the Ordinary and
Extraordinary manner of Introduction. GOD furnished and spirited him to
Government, by Extraordinary and Immediate Impressions; but withal he formed
him to it, by bringing him into the King's Service; and accustoming him to War,
and public Business. GOD appointed him King by an immediate Designation; but
yet the Tribes Chose him. This is the Excellent Man of whom GOD says, Psalm. 78.
71, 72. He chose David, etc. He bro't Jacob to feed his people.

2. I come in a word to the Proof. You observe I express my self in a
restrained manner; viz. GOD sometimes leads, etc. And I speak in this manner,
because there is the exercise of Sovereignty in this, as in all other temporal
and outward Blessings. But though I thus Guard; yet I suppose upon the strictest
search and the best Judgment, it will be found, that generally, and for the
most part, these Blessings are given, when a People in Covenant, are Upright
and Faithful in it. Were it at all needful here, I could for Proof draw
together very many Instances, from the most unquestionable Records, Sacred and
Common. Particularly, It would be easy to fill up the Proof from the holy
Scriptures; and mention to you Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Asa, Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah and Josiah; all illustrious Instruments in GOD's hands of very
peculiar Blessings. But there being no necessity at all to Labor this Point, I
come to the Third, which my Subject especially requires.

3. I come now to the Character of the Good R^^er. My Text offers a very just
and lively Pattern in Moses. Well then enquire into his Character; and by that,
Answer the Demands of this Head: And upon search we find Moses illustrious for
the following excellent Things, viz. (1.) His governing Wisdom and Skill. (2)
His Meekness and Patience. (3) His Justice. (4.) His Public Spirit and
Paternal Tenderness. (5) Steady Authority* and Courage. (6.) GOD's Image, in an
high and glorious Degree. (7.) Great Interest in GOD's Favor, and Power with
GOD by Prayer

1. The Ruler must like Moses, be furnished with Wisdom and Skill in
Government. Every Business has i^'s essential Qualifications, for the
effectual and sufficient management of it. Governing Wisdom and Prudence is
such, to the Conduct of Public Affairs. This Wisdom takes in a great Variety
of Things; and I don't pretend here to a perfect account of them I will only
hint in a word, That this Virtue is qualified for, conducted and actuated in
Government, by an extended Knowledge of Men and Things; and particularly, the
Methods of Government: And might I at all go into particulars, I would mention
the Advantage of the distinct Knowledge of the People to be Governed, in their
History, their Constitution in Church and State, their Laws, Customs,
Dispositions, Manners and Circumstances. And to add no more, There must be a
Dexterity in the Application of this Knowledge to it is End. If you Enquire, You
I find this one Remarkable in Moses's Character: There Is no question to be made
of it, but he had large measures of Prudence, by special Impressions from
above. But besides this, we find him trained to Government, by his Adoption and
Education, by Pharaoh's Daughter; and his intimate Acquaintance with the
Egyptian Learning. Read, Exodus 3. 11, 12. And he said, who am I. -- And be
said, Certainly, I will be with you. Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12. And Moses said, I am
not Eloquent. And the Lord said, Who has made man's mouth; now therefore go,
and I will be with thy Mouth. Once more, Acts 17. 21, 22. Pharaoh's Daughter
took him up, and nourished him for her own son, and Moses was learned, in all
the learning of the Egyptians.

2. He must like Moses, be remarkable, for Meekness and Patience. Meekness and
Patience are Qualifications essential to a wise and happy Administration. Among
the best People, there is always enough to exercise these, in the Ruler.

But there are high Degrees, and a constant Exercise, necessary in the
Government of some People, and in some Seasons and Circumstances. Moses was
bro't to the Government of an headstrong People; very fordid and untaught in
some regards: Accustomed to the Discipline of Slaves; who when bro't into the
Condition of a Free People, hardly knew how to use their Freedom with
moderation, and to bear the necessary Restraints. The wise Conduct of such a
People required an uncommon Meekness and Patience. Again, Moses was to lead
them through Wants and Difficulties, and innumerable Hazards. These to the low and
animal* but especially, the corrupt Inclinations, are strong temptations to
Discontents, Murmurings, Rebellions against Rulers; and must require an
invincible Patience, and steady Calm in Rulers, to Master them, and to prevent
the infinite Mischiefs that arise from them.

GOD made and sent them, a Moses, the most signal stroke, and special Glory of
whose Character, was his Meekness and Patience: Now the man Moses was very
meek, above all the men that were upon the face of the earth.

3. Like Moses, he must be very Just. Justice is certainly essential to the
grand Basis of Government; one of the grand Pillars upon which it rests;
without which, Power degenerates into Tyranny and Self-Interest. Prove. 14. 34.
Righteousness, very particularly in it is Rulers, exalts a Nation. Prove. 16.
4. The Throne is established by Righteousness. It Is given us therefore among
the most vital Parts of a Ruler's Duty, 2 Samuel 3* 23. The Rock of Israel spoke
to me; the God of Israel said, He that Rules over men must be Just. This
Virtue enobled and exalted by Grace, shone very bright among Moses's
Excellencies; and we find it very solemnly recommended in Jethro's Advice,
Exodus 18. 14, -- 21. Moreover, Thou shall provide Men of Truth.

4 Like Moses, of a Public Spirit and Paternal Tenderness The due and happy
Exercise of the Public Trust requires an uncommon Generosity and Largeness of
Soul. Nothing so proper, so lovely, so God like. It Is the Expectation both of
GOD and Man, that Rulers be Fathers and Benefactors to their People: put on the
Tenderness of Fathers; and express it, in their being governed by the Public
Good, in their whole Administration; and in their exquisite sense of the
Public Prosperity and Adversity. A Private, narrow selfish Spirit in a Public
Person, is most loathsome to GOD and Man; brings Infamy, and a Curse upon the
Guilty, and innumerable Oppressions and Mischiefs upon the People. GOD shows us
the Good Ruler, in (...) beautiful light, in those Two (...) Patriots Moses and
Nehemiah; the (...) Israel's Founder the other his Restorer. Nehemiahs
Tenderness to the Public was truly great; and his Story fully makes out that
Character, Neh. 2. 10. A man to seek the welfare of the Children of Israel. But
Moses was Extraordinary and Amazing: He entirely forgets himself and all his
own Interests for them, their Safety and Good. Read, Exodus 32. 32. If not, I
pray thee blot me out of thy book. And, Numb. 14. 12, 13, 14, 15.

5. Like Moses, of steady Authority and Courage. Authority in a Ruler's
management; I mean a due exerting the coercive Power lodged with him for the
Public Safety and Honor, is always necessary in some Degree, let the Times be
never so Calm. Resolution and Courage are the Guardians of this Authority and
it is Life and Spirit; and a degree of these is always requisite therefore in
the smoothest Time. But at sometimes, and in some Circumstances, which their
People may be thrown into, they become peculiarly Necessary; and they must
exert themselves with Vigor. Without very resolute Counsels and courageous
Executions of them, all would be lost in some Junctures. An happy Union, and
prudent Exercise of these, are then a People's very Life.

Let us enquire, and we shall find Moses the Meek and Tender Father of his
People; to whom his People was dearer than himself; yet when the Honor of GOD,
and the Public Good required it, we then find him a Man of Majesty, armed with
Terrors.

Government cannot be insulted, and so weakened, without inexpressible Damage and
Hazards to the People; (the great End of Government.) It Is for the People's
sake, not their own, that Rulers must exhibit this Coercive Power, and use the
Sword of the Revenger; and not willingly suffer the Lawless at home, or Enemies
abroad, to despise and trample on them. Look upon Moses in that most seasonable
and holy Transport, Exodus 32. 26. And Moses said, Who is on the Lord's side,
Who? And, Exodus 17. 9. And Moses said to Joshua, and go fight with Amaleck.

6. It Is very desirable, that like Moses, they have GOD's Image, and in it is
most high and eminent Degrees to Sanctify them. This will Exalt all their
Faculties and Qualifications for Government. This excellent Image crowns all
other Qualifications; infuseth an holy and excellent Ferment into all that
directs and stimulates them to their great End.

Moses was a renowned Man of GOD, for his uncommon measures of true sanctifying
Grace. And Rulers should so Excel, as to be Examples to all about them, of
every gracious Disposition and Action to GOD and Man. You see Moses's true
Temper and Spirit, in his deep Concern for GOD^s Honor; the surest Sign of
Grace that can be Numb. 14. 13, 14. And Moses said, The Egyptians will hear it
--.

7. Like him, Men of Prayer and Power with GOD. Moses was so, very gloriously;
and so should all Rulers. Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me.
Numb. 21. 7. And Moses Prayed for the People. Thus they may do more for the
Public Good, than by all their Wisdom, Authority, Courage, nay, than by the
united Strength and Riches of their whole Government.

Thus I have finished the Character; the thing principally in my Design, and
will go more briefly through what remains.

PROP. IV. It is to be Notic'd and Celebrated as an high Favor of GOD to his
People, when he leads them like a Flock, by the hand of Wise and Good Rulers
GOD's taking upon himself the Relation of their Leader, in so peculiar a manner
as you have heard; and his exercising that Government as a Shepherd, carrys
most admirable Grace in every Article of it, as might be shown, would my Bounds
allow it: But passing the Rest, I shall consider the peculiar Favor of His
Government, which appears in excellent Civil Privileges and Rulers; and this
under Two Heads. (1.) These Privileges and Government are a most free and great
Favor; even to the best People. (2) It is to be Noticed and Celebrated as such
by them.

1. It is a free and great Favor of GOD, even to the best People, to give them
such Privileges and Rulers. I must say a word or two to the Greatness, and then
to the Divine Freedom and Sovereignty in them.

(1.) Civil Privileges, and a good Government, are very great Benefits to a
People. These very nearly and vitally affect all the Particulars of a People's
Welfare. It might be Instanced at large, were it proper here; in their Religion
and Morals; and in their external Order, Peace, universal Prosperity. The happy
Fruits are Good Laws; prudent, steady, tender, but yet resolute Execution of
them: Learning and Arts flourish: Industry is encouraged: Trade, Husbandry,
Manufactures increase: The Public Prudentials and Exigencies faithfully and
wisely Conducted. All these have a most direct and natural Influence upon their
Honor and Safety. And to conclude, Such Rulers do abundance to engage the
Divine most gracious Presence with such a People. Indeed their Prudence and
Holiness, and fervent Supplications will not do alone, without agreeable
Dispositions and Department in the People; but they do a great deal with GOD,
to keep off Judgments, and to procure Public Blessings. They have great Power
with GOD by their Prayers, to open his Infinite Stores. Deuteronomy. 9. 18, 19. Let me
alone, that I may destroy them: -- But the Lord hearkened to me at that time
also. They do abundance by holy Examples, and powerful Influences, in their
eminent Stations* to prepare the People for a Covenant-Enjoyment of these
Blessings; as the History of the reforming Kings of Jud^^ assure us.

(2.) They are most Free and Sovereign Benefits, even to the best and purest
People. No People can have any Claim to these Benefits, but by GOD's most
sovereign Promise. 1 Samuel 12. 22. For the Lord will not forsake his People, for
his great Name sake; because it has pleased the Lord to make you his People.
And a People's Claim by a sincere Performance of the Covenant-Terms, is the
glorious work of sovereign, irresistible Grace. Jer. 31. 3. Yea. I have loved
thee, with an everlasting Love: Therefore with loving kindness have I drawn
thee.

2. These Free and Great (...) must be Noticed and Acknowledged. I only just
mention the Heads which might have been enlarged on, if the bounds of a single
Sermon would have allowed it. Duty, Gratitude, and Interest unite to press
their Obligations, and set them in the strongest Light.

A People's Notice and Acknowlegement is all the Return they can possibly make.
GOD the Giver being Infinitely above them: They being entirely dependent on
him: And He being absolutely incapable of any real Addition and Benefit. 1 Cor.
4. 7. Who makes thee to differ?

GOD will notwithstanding graciously Accept, through Christ, His People's sincere
Acknowlegements. He graciously lets us know, He accounts himself Honored by
them, and is highly pleased with them, Psalm 50. 23. Whosoever offers praise
glorisyeth me. And we are sure he will Reward our grateful Offerings, with the
Magnificence of the only and blessed Potentate* the King of Kings, in the most
illustrious Benefits.

And now I should have proceeded to have said what these Returns are, which a
People must make to GOD for these Benefits; and which must be agreeable to the
Perfection and Majesty of GOD; and therefore such as himself requires: And
these might have been Described at large under the following Heads.

1. A People must offer solemn and hearty Praise for them, Psalm. 50. 23.

2. They must be wisely improved to their Ends, viz GOD's Honor, the promoting
our own Spiritual and Outward Good.

3. All wise Endeavors must be used for their Continuance. Particularly, Those
Iniquities must be Mourned for, Reformed and Watched against, which dishonor
and provoke the Sovereign GOD to Frown upon a People, and Remove them: What
these are, it becomes all, both Rulers and People, diligently to search out,
and resolutely destroy.

APPLICATION.
All that I will say by way of Application shall be in Two Articles, (1.) A
Call to Thanksgiving. (2.) A word of Advice to the Rulers and People of
New England.

1. We see hence, what abundant reason of Thankfulness We, and the Nations we
derive from, have unto GOD. His Favor to them, and us, is very great; and
should be acknowleged with most humble, sincere, solemn and practical Returns
to him.

(1.) Our Nations have abundant reason to be very Thankful to GOD, and W^ in
and with them, for GOD's uncommon Favors to them; in the mentioned Instances
particularly. We see them, by a Series of Wonders, in Possession of the
Protestant Religion; of a most happy Civil Constitution, formed with great
Wisdom, to the just Liberties and best Interests of Society; an happy
Settlement of the Succession in the Protestant Line, and Illustrious House of
HANOVER: The Constitution animated by a KING renowned through Europe, for his
Wisdom, Justice, Courage, Paternal Disposition to his People, and all Royal
Virtues and Qualities; very glorious in a Circle of his own illustrious Issue;
giving a long, delightful Prospect to the Nations. This excellent KING, has
been remarkably continued to us, by GOD's wonderful Care. May the same Divine
Care be extended to him and his, for a long course of Years! Once more, We see
them flourish under a just liberty of Conscience to Protestant Dissenters.
These among many others, are the weightiest motives of Praise to us as well as
them.

(2.) We in New England have abundant Reason of Praise. By a train of uncommon
Providence, we enjoy a pure Religion and Ordinances; many signal Civil
Privileges; good Rulers, seeking our Welfare: These, with innumerable other
Smiles of GOD, are very delightful Reasons of Praise; and we shall be
inexcusably Ungrateful, if we don't suitably Praise GOD for them; Prize and
Improve them to his Glory.

And here, As an Expression of our Thankfulness to GOD, We take leave to
Address Your HONOR our Commander in Chief, in a very particular manner; and
the rest of our Honorable Fathers in the Government; with the public
Profession of our dutiful and grateful Sense of the Wisdom, Care and
Faithfulness of your Administration. We Bless GOD for that gracious Presence,
that has so remarkably assisted and succeeded your Endeavors for the Public;
and do, and shall constantly Pray, That he would continue and enlarge it to
you; make you more and more Blessings; and increase upon Us, (your Charge,)
abundantly the Motives of Joy and Praise.

2 I Conclude with a solemn word of Advice to all whom my Discourse especially
Concerns; (1.) To those concerned in the Choices of this Day. (2.) To those
vested with Public Trusts, of one kind or another. (3.) To the People.

1. To those in whom the Elections of the Day are vested: The Discourse gives
Direction to your Choice. It must not be Prejudice, and Party, and private
corrupt Affection, that determines you; but a sincere regard to the known worth
and fitness of the Persons Chosen. They must be such as you may reasonably
hope, GOD will be present with, and work by. GOD and your Country have put a
put a great Trust upon you; expect your wise and faithful Management of it, and
you must give an Account to GOD.

(2) To you who are put into Public Trusts. The Exhortation from GOD (your
Supreme) is, Endeavor to be, and manage in your several Trusts, as GOD would
have, and directs by the shining Pattern now exhibited. The Charge committed to
you is very weighty: Every public Care is so; but of GOD's peculiar People his
Treasure, especially. GOD expects it, that as Fathers, you be tender of their
Religion, their Morals, their Privileges, their universal Good. He demands it,
as a leading Article, That the Rulers of New England take a singular, tender
Care, of the Pure, Scriptural Religion of New England, that excellent, pure
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, which GOD has planted here, and which our
Fathers purchased this Land for; (and by infinite Labors, Hazards and Expenses
too;) that they might enjoy it themselves, and transmit, as an invaluable
Treasure to their Children. This will make you the delight of the present, and
the praise of future Generations; and which is infinitely better, will secure
the smiles of GOD. Again, That the Rulers, according to their Advantages for
it, smile upon Learning and the Ministry: These are very vitally linked with
Religion. Religion will soon decay without Learning; and even dye without a
learned and faithful Ministry; so that our All very much turns upon an
effectual wise Care to see them well supported.

GOD expects that you lead his and your People, by a bright Example, in his
ways. And particularly, That you exemplify the beauty and advantage of a wise
Union among your selves, upon the best Principles. That you exhibit with the
brightest Evidence, your generous, public Spirit and Principles. That you
unite with your spiritual Guides and godly People, in most fervent
Supplications, That you may like Moses and Samuel, stand in the Breach; and be
Princes with GOD. In a word, That you become the happy Promoters of their
leading peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty.

3. I Conclude, to the People* It Is of infinite Importance, that you come in
with your Part: That your Tempers and Carriages be agreeable. The public Good
cannot be attained without you. The Wisdom and Care of Rulers will be in vain,
without your compliance with their Endeavors.

Particularly,

1. Pray earnestly for them. Their Cares are great, their Qualifications high;
the Consequence of their Actions reaches great Numbers, and in their very
weighty Interests; their Temptations are very many. They entirely depend on
GOD, (with the meanest and weakest of their People,) for all they want. Never
forget them in Secret, Private or Public. Besiege Heaven for them, by
effectual, fervent Prayers constantly; That they may be Blessed, and made
Blessings, very signal ones: That they may be assisted, succeeded, rewarded by
infinite Grace in Christ. Join with them in Solomon's Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 1. 10.
Give me now wisdom and knowledge; that I may come in, and go out, before this
thy People. Jam. 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God. 1 Timothy 2. 3.
For Kings and all in Authority.

2. Carry it suitably to them. Love and Reverence them as Fathers; and let them
see and feel that you do so. Make the public Cares easy and delightful to
them, by an honorable Support, a proper Submission to their just Authority,
and a cheerful Union with them, in your Stations, for the Honor of GOD and the
public Welfare.

Thus, if Superiors and Subjects Unite, it will be for our unspeakable
Advantage; and it may be said of us, as in Psalm. 144. 15. Happy is the People,
that is in such a case: yea, Happy is that People, whose God is the Lord.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Pa. 7. l.7. For martial, r. Marital. P. 20. l. 25. add It.


