AN ANSWER To a BOOK lately put forth By Peter Pratt, Entitled, The Prey taken
from the Strong. Wherein by Mocks and Scoffs, together with a great number of
positive Falsehoods, the Author has greatly abused John Rogers, late of
New London, deceased, since his Death.

In which Answer there Is a true and impartial Relation of those Sufferings of
John Rogers, on which the Author has built his Abuses: As also many of the said
Scoffs, Falsehoods, blasphemous Expressions, great abuses of Scripture, together
with many gross Contradictions and ignorant Speeches contained in said Book;
all which are discovered and plainly proved,

By JOHN ROGERS.

Isai. 5.20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put Darkness
for light, and light for darkness. Job 11.3. Should thy lies make men hold
their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed? To the
Sober READER.
AS it has ever been allowed, that the defaming of the Dead is a mark of the
most unmanly and base Spirit of a Coward, and ought to be abhorred by all
Persons who bear the Image of Men; then how much more abominable is it of P. P.
to sport himself with his own Lies over a Man in his Grave? And I think no
Person of common Reason will expect any Apology from me on account of this my
Undertaking, since my Silence in this matter would have rendered me very
unmanly.

And therefore I shall proceed to inform the Reader what parts of his Book I
have undertaken to answer.

And first, As to his first Chap. where he pretends to give an account of his
being led into and recovered from Quakerism; I have remarked so much of his own
Relation of the matter, that I think will be sufficient to satisfy every Person
that knows any thing of the Work of God wrought upon their Hearts, that what he
calls his being led into Quakerism, was the Day of his Visitation, and a
gracious Call of God in Mercy to his Soul; and also what he calls his Recovery
from Quakerism, was nothing else but his Apostasy, being overcome by
Persecution, etc.

And as to his Songs which he adds to the Account of his Recovery from
Quakerism, wherein he pretends to praise God for his Recovery, etc. I have
briefly remarked some of the gross Blasphemies therein contained; as also
showed by Scripture, that it is no other than the practice of Hypocrites in
former Ages in their Hypocrisy, to imitate the Praises of God's People.

And as to what he says in his second Chap. wherein he pretends to give an
account of the principal Heads of Quakerism, I have only remarked some gross
Contradictions and ignorant Expressions in which he abuses J. R. and I have
refered the Reader to J. R's. Books, which will sufficient discover the
Author's Folly and Malice; and which Books I have sufficient by me to supply
any that desire Satisfaction in his Principles.

And as to his third Chap. wherein he pretends to give an Account of the
unreasonableness of J. R's. Boasting of his sufferings, and to offer some
advice to such as hold his Principles. I have particularly proved all his
Charges against J. R. to be notoriously false in every Article; and that the
advice which he gives to such as hold his Principles, is nothing else but his
own gross Darkness and Ignorance, by which he wrests the holy Scriptures and
abuses the Messengers of God.

Also I have given a true and impartial Relation of those sufferings of J. R.
on which the Author has built his abuses.

And as to what he has said concerning the Quaker's Principles, I have wholly
omitted, and that for these following Reasons.

First, Because I am not in fellowship with them, and therefore it is not my
Business to meddle in their Quarrel.

Secondly, Although I abhor the abusing of any Sect, yet because I know them to
be a numerous People, both wealthy and learned, and that they are in as good
Esteem in the highest Courts of England as any of the Dissenters in the
Kingdom, and therefore have no need of such mean Help as mine, but are well
able to defend themselves against far more wise and potent Enemies than P. P.
And I am well knowing that P. P. is a Man wholly ignorant concerning the
Principles of the Quakers, being brought up and always living in Connecticut
Colony, where he has never had the opportunity of acquainting himself with
either their Persons or Books. And for as much as I have been well knowing to
his management from a Child, I have sufficient grounds to be well satisfied
that he never had one Hours Discourse with a Quaker in his life, as to matters
of Religion, excepting a few Words formerly with one Chaddack, a young Man who
was then inclining to the Quakers, and since is joined in fellowship with them
at Rhoad-Island; which discouse he has often told me of: nor do I suppose that
he was ever at a Quakers Meeting in his Life, nor has ever seen any of their
Books, excepting only Robert Barkley's Apology, which he lately borrowed.

And as to the many Quotations out of the Quaker's Books, which he has made use
of against the Quakers, I do affirm they are every one taken out of one Sheet
of Paper, put forth by one George Keith, a Man which I well knew, and who was
as famous for changing his Religion, as P. P. himself. For first he was a
Presbyterian in Scotland, then turned Quaker, and so remained many years; after
which he turned Church man, and then bent his whole force to revile and
reproach the Quakers: and among other of his Writings against them, he put
forth this Sheet abovementioned, wherein he greatly abused their Books, by
taking and leaving such parts as might most destroy the sense. And one Daniel
Leeds an Almanack-maker, and a great Friend to the said Keith, Transcribed the
same Quotations out of the abovementioned Sheet of Paper, and put them into
his Almanac; and I do affirm, that every individual Quotation in P. P's. Book
which he brings against the Quakers, he has taken out of the abovenamed Sheet
or old Almanac; and I am ready to satisfy any Person of the truth of what I
here assert, that pleases to call at my House, for as much as I have one of the
same Sheets and Almanacks by me ready to compare with his Book, by which it is
manifest that he never saw those Books out of which these Quotations were taken.

And indeed it was great folly in him so to expose himself, as to pretend to
inform others in the Principles of the Quakers, when at the same time himself
knew not what a Quaker was, as appears by his calling J. R. a Quaker, who was
the greatest Writer against and public Opposer of the Quakers, in the chief
Principles wherein they differ from other Sects, that ever was in Connecticut
Colony, as his Books will largely make appear.

And it is mavelous that P. P. should be so prompt with only licking up some
of the Vomit of such an Apostate as G. Keith out of an old Almanac, as to
undertake to inform the World that he would show them the principal Heads of
Quakerism, in the first second and third steps of its Progress in the World, as
he promises in his 39th. page.

Also in the same page he promises to show J. R's. Opinions, without any
reference to his Books, for which he renders several reasons, (as he calls
them) First, says he, Because I don't need them.

To which I answer, That this is a very unintelligible and Childish Reason; for
we know that the Reason why Authors quote the Books of them they write against,
is not because they want them themselves, but because the Reader wants them,
that they may thereby be satisfied of the truth of what the Author charges them
with.

The second Reason he gives is, Because (says he) they contain but few of his
Principles.

To which Reason I quaery as follows, That if J. R's. Books contain but few of
his Principles, then how comes P. P. to know what his Principles are several
years after his Death? except the same Spirit which once deceived him in the
matter of Longitude, has again deceived him concerning J. R's. Principles; and
we have as much Reason to question the truth of what he tells us of J. R's.
Principles, (since he makes no better proof than his own bare Word) as the
General Assembly had to question the truth of his Longitude, which soon after
proved to be a Delusion of Satan.

Now by these foolish and vain pretended Reasons, the Reader may plainly see,
that he only wanted an excuse to evade J. R's. Books, that he might take his
full swing to belly and abuse him at his pleasure; because he well knew that if
he had Quoted his Books, they would have discovered his Lies and Falsehoods.

But I should not have enlarged so much upon this head, were it not that I am
sensible that there are many thousands of grown Persons in this Colony, that
for want of opportunity to be informed in the Principles of other Sects, remain
so ignorant, that they know no difference between the Church of England and the
Papists, nor between the Quakers and the Baptists, but esteem each couple to be
alike.

And how is it possible that such Persons should be able to discern the
Ignorance of P. P.?

In the next place I shall mind the Reader, that in all his charges against J.
R. (the dead Man with whom he has engaged War) he has not proved one Article of
his charges; excepting where he pretends to give an Account of his Principles,
at the end of every falsehood he adds the name Rogers, which if that may pass
for sufficient Proof, I must confess that he has found out a new Art, which may
be as helpful to the Historian as his Longitude might have been to the Mariner,
had it but fell with the right side up, for by this new way of proof, the
Historian may write what he pleases as P. P. has done, and at the end place but
the name Rogers, will be as good proof as any in P. P's. Book.

And whereas it has ever been allowed by the wise and learned, that the very
Marrow and Life of all Books consists in good proof, without which Books are no
better than idle Tales, and are but an abuse to the Reader.

Then how mavelous is it that P. P. who knew himself to be a Man so
unconstant and changable, not only in his worldly concerns from his very
Childhood, but also in matters of Religion since he has arrived to riper years,
should presume to put out a Book only on his bare Word, without any proof at
all.

Surely he might reasonably have thought that all who knew him, would expect
better Proof from such an unconstant Person, than from another Man.

However, since I have taken upon me the trouble of proving the main Articles
of his Book to be false, I hope it will be a good motive to convince him, that
his word is not a sufficient foundation to build any more of his Book on.

Yet if he should presume to do it, I think no solid Person who shall read and
consider this present Answer to his Book, will judge it worth my while to
follow him any farther.

And for as much as I abhor the publishing of such Romance Books as have no
Proof but the Author's bare Word, and so tend only to waste and consume the
precious time of the Reader, and leaves the Reader as Ignorant as it sound him;
so the Reader will find that I have been at considerable trouble and Charge in
procuring good Proof to all the main Articles that I have asserted throughout
this Treatise, by which the Readers will be assured of the Truth of what they
Read, which doubtless will be better satisfaction than the other.

In the last place I shall observe to the Reader, that throughout my whole
Treatise wheresoever I have had occasion to make use of Testimonies, I have
taken such Persons as the Reader may be sensible are most knowing to the matter
they testify to. (As for Instance)

In page 56th. P. P. affirms, that great part of J. R's. Imprisonment at
Hartford, was upon strong suspicion of his being accessory to the Burning of
New London Meeting House. Now though I might have had multitudes of Witnesses
that would have testified that this affirmation was false, yet I took the pains
of going more than fifty Miles to get the Jaylor's own Testimony, because every
one knows that he was well knowing to the matter. Also as to the great Horror
which P. P.'s Father fell into before his Death, on account of his Marrying J.
R's. Wife, though multitudes of People were knowing to it, it being the Public
Discourse of the Country in the time of it; yet I have taken both Witnesses out
of one Family of his near Neighbors, and a House which he was most Intimate at
of any House in the Town, as is well known to the ancient Neighbors
thereabouts; and so in many other cases I have done the like, as the Reader may
easily discern.

And although P. P. did sufficiently discover his unmanliness to the World, by
picking a Quarrel with a dead Man, as he himself is forced to confess in the
beginning of his Book; yet had he but used fair play in the time of his
Engagement, I should never have concerned my self in the Quarrel, being well
satisfied that he never could thereby have hurt his Antagonist. But when I saw
him begin to use such abominable soul play, I thought it proper to step between
them, and take his Weapon out of his hand, judging that a Wooden Sword might
better suit his Courage.

And whether any Person in the vindication of a dead Father would have done
less than I have done, I freely leave to the Judgment of all Mankind.

John Rogers.

A Poetical Enquiry what Advantage P. Pratt could promise himself by his late
Engagement with a Dead Man.
I Marvel that when Peter Pratt
in Armor did appear,
HE should engage in such a Rage
a Man that is dead three Year.
Could he suppose for to disclose
his Valor in the Field,
Or by his Word, or wooden Sword
to make his En'my yield?
Did he advance, thinking by chance
and taking so much pain,
To fright away a lump of Clay,
some Honor for to gain?
Was his intent, by Argument
some Honor for to have?
Or gain Repute, by making mute
a Man that is in his Grave?
Why did he strain his foolish Brain,
and muse upon his Bed,
To study Lies, for to despise
a Man when he is dead?
Why did he flout his Venom out
against the harmless Dirt?
Which when alive, did never strive
to do the Creature hurt.
No manly Face, or godly Grace
such Actions will uphold,
Yet it is not new, Apostates crew
did do the like of old.
When Cain let in that dreadful Sin,
which never could be pardoned,
He then did hate his loving Mate,
because he was so hardened.
Though Saul before, did much adore
his well-beloved David,
Yet in the state which I relate,
his Life he greatly craved.
In Judas we may also see
another strange Disaster,
Who for small gain, did take such pain
to sell his blessed Master.
Apostates then, the vilest Men
They Are always most forlorn;
Because such Deeds from them proceeds,
which other Men do scorn.
Such raging Waves Satan depraves
of all Humanity;
They can embrace no saving Grace,
nor yet Civility.
Had but this Strife been in the Life
of his supposed Foe,
Then Peter Pratt would like a Rat,
into a Corner go;
Or flee apace, or hide his Face,
Although that now he glories,
To trample on, one dead and gone,
with his debauched Stories.
An Answer to a Book, etc.
AND first, I shall begin with his Advertisement, which I shall have occasion
to speak to hereafter, which is as follows.

This Treatise was begun in the Lifetime of John Rogers, and by the best
Advice finished since his Death; though not without much Reluctance in the
Author, as Judging it less Manly to Write against One whom the Clods of the
Valley forbid to Answer for himself: Upon which Account John Rogers 's
Character, is used with as much Tenderness as the Subject will possibly allow
of.

In page 2d. of his Preface says he,

In the next Place, I have given you the main Heads of the New London
Quakerism, an Heresy Advanced and Maintained there by John Rogers, late of
that Town, Deceased, and to this Day adhered to by many Persons thereabout.

Reply, This short Paragraph is sufficient to satisfy all Persons who are
knowing to the Quakers Principles, that P. P. is wholly Ignorant as to the
Principles wherein the Quakers differ from other Sects, which appears by his
charging J. R. with advancing and maintaining Quakerism, who in his lifetime
was the only Man in Connecticut Colony (as I have ever heard of) that did
Publicly in Print oppose the Quakers, in those main Principles wherein they
differ from other Sects. And for the better satisfaction of such Persons who
have not had opportunity to be informed wherein the Quakers mainly differ from
other Sects, and thereby may be as ignorant as P. P. who I suppose never was at
a Quakers Meeting in his life; nor has he excepting very lately, had the
opportunity of seeing any of their Books.

I shall first mention what are the main Points wherein they differ from other
Sects.

And secondly I shall Quote out of J. R.'s Books, wherein he has confuted them
in those Points.

First, they deny Water Baptism.

Secondly, they deny the Bread and Wine called the Lord's Supper.

Thirdly, they hold that the Light which is in the Hearts of all Mankind by
which they discern Good and Evil, is Christ.

And Fourthly, many of them deny the Resurrection of the Body.

And these are the four main Points wherein they differ from other Sects, as
they themselves will grant if demanded; and that J. R. has largely vindicated
all these Principles against them, may be seen first in his Book entitled, A
Midnight Cry from the Temple of God, to the ten Virgins. Beginning at page 48
concerning Baptism, and in page 82 of the same Book, begins concerning the
Lord's Supper. And in the second part of the same Book, beginning at the first
page he largely proves that the Light within is not the Christ. To which
Discourse he adds an Exposition on most of those Scriptures which the Quakers
commonly make use of to prove their Assertion.

And lastly, in his Exposition on the Revelations, he largely proves the
Resurrection of the Body, beginning at page 232.

Thus it appears that it is nothing else but P.P.'s ignorance in charging J. R.
with advancing and maintaining Quakerism, since he was the most public opposer
of it in Connecticut Colony. And this I give as a general Answer throughout his
Book, wheresoever he shall ignorantly call J. R. a Quaker.

In Page 6th (says he) It remains that I speak of the third step in Quakerism,
taken by J. R. who received his first notions of Spirituality from Banks and
Case, a couple of lewd Men of that sort called singing Quakers, etc. These Men
as they danced through this Colony, etc. lit of J. R. and made a Quaker of him;
but neither they nor the Spirit could teach him to sing, etc. However, he
remained their Disciple for a while, and then being wiser than his Teachers,
made a transition to the Church of the seventh-day Baptists; but the same
Spirit not deserting him, but setting in with the disposition of his own
Spirit, to a vehement affectation of Precedence; he Resolved to reach it,
though it should happen to lead to singularity; whereupon after a few
Revelations, he resolved upon Quakerism again, though under a modification
somewhat new, I call it Quakerism, not but that he differed from them in many
things, yet holding with them in the main, being guided by the same Spirit,
acknowledging their Spirit, and they his, be must needs be called a Quaker.

Reply, That every Article of this whole Paragraph (so far as it relates to J.
R.) is notoriously false; for the proof of which I have taken these following
Testimonies from two of his ancient Neighbors, which though they have always
been Enemies to his Principles, yet have been very free in giving their
Testimonies to the Truth, signifying their abhorrence of such an abuse done to
a dead Man.

THE Testimony of Daniel Stubbins, aged about eighty Years Testifies, that
from a Lad I have been a near Nighhour and well acquainted with John Rogers,
late of New London, deceased, to his dying day, and do testify, that the time
that he first pretended to a spiritual Conversation, and declared himself to be
a Converted Man, upon which he broke off from the Presbyterian Church in
New London, and joined with the seventhday Baptists, and his Wife thereupon
left him and went to her Father Matthew Griswold of Lyme, was about the year
1674. and the time that Case and Banks, with a great Company of other Ranters
first came into this Colony, was about twelve years after; and I never heard or
understood that J. Rogers ever inclined to their way, or left any of his former
Principles on their account.

Dated in New London, June 27th. 1725. Daniel Stubbins, D his Mark.

THE Testimony of Mary Tubs, aged about seventy seven years, Testifies, that I
was a near Neighbor to John Rogers late of New London, deceased, at the time
when his Wife left him and went to her Father Matthew Griswold of Lyme, and I
had discourse with her the same day she went, and she informed me, that it was
because her Husband had renounced his Religion, and was joined with the
seventh-day Baptists, and this was about the year 1674. and it was many years
after that one Case and Banks, with a great Company of Ranters first came into
this Colony, and came to New London, and were some days at the House of James
Rogers, where John Rogers then dwelt; but I never understood that John Rogers
inclined to their way or Principles, or countenanced their Practices, but
continued in the Religion which he was in before. Dated in New London, June
29th. 1725.

Mary Tubs.

Now the first Falsehood which I shall observe in this place, is his asserting
that the first notions of Spirituality taken by J. R. was from Case and Banks,
etc. Whereas the above Witnesses Testily, that he had broke off from the Church
of New London, and joined with the Seventh-day Baptists; upon which account his
Wife had left him. And that all this was many years before Case and Banks first
came into this Colony.

The second Falsehood is his saying, These Men, etc. lit of J. R. and made a
Quaker of him; whereas these Witnesses Testify, that he never inclined to their
way, nor countenanced their Practices, but continued in the Religion which he
was in before.

The third Falsehood is his saying, He remained their Disciple for a while,
since it is fully proved that he never was their Disciple at all.

The fourth Falsehood is his saying, That after be had remained their Disciple a
while, be made a transition to the Church of the seventh-day Baptists.

Whereas it is fully proved, that his joining with the seventh-day Baptists was
many years before those People first came into this Colony.

Another positive Falsehood is his asserting, That the Quakers acknowledged his
Spirit, and be theirs.

For as much as they always denied him, and would not suffer him to Preach in
their Assemblies.

And although he did allow that the People called Quakers at their first coming
forth, and separating from the World, were the faithful Children of God, the
same also he confessed of Luther, and the Martyrs in Queen Mary's time; yet it
would be as weak an Argument as P. P.'s for any to say, that because J. R.
acknowledged the Spirit of Luther, that therefore he must needs be called a
Lutheran, or Church of England Man.

And we find both by the Old and New Testament, that the Church of God seldom
remained in a state of Purity so long as fifty years at any one time. Nay, some
of the Churches that were brought into the Faith by Paul, were so far subverted
before his Death, that they were turned from him, as is to be seen 1 Timothy 1.15.
This thou know, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me, etc.
We also find that the Church of Sardis, in the Apostle John's time was so
declined, that they had only a Name to live, and were dead. By which I
understand, that although they retained their outward form of Worship, yet had
lost the Spirit of God, and were got into the Spirit of the World, Rev. 3.1.

And that J. R. always Testified, that the Quakers were fallen from their first
love, is well known.

But now I would mind the Reader of his Consession and Promise in his
Advertisement. First, he confesses his unmanliness in writing aginst a dead
Man, which I doubt not but will be the Judgment of all sober Persons as well as
himself.

2dly. His Promise, upon which account (says he) J. R.'s Character is used with
as much tenderness as the subject will possibly allow of. From which it may
justly be supposed, that the subject of his Book is Envy and Malice against J.
R. the dead Man with whom he has proclaimed War; Since it will admit of no
tenderness at all, as appears by the five Falsehoods already proved, which by
the heat of his first Engagement, has caused him to vomit up. And I would
advise him not to make Lies his refuge, nor hide himself under Falsehoods, as
some have done, Isa. 28.15.

And whereas among his other Scoffs and Falsehoods, he asserts that J. R. often
changed his Principles. To which I answer, That upon condition that P. P. will
make it appear that J. R. ever altered or varied in any one Article of his
Religion, since his separating from the Presbyterians, and joining with the
seventh-day Baptists, which is more than fifty years past, (excepting only as
to the observation of the seventh day) I will reward him with the sum of twenty
Pounds for his labor. No verily, he mistakes the Man, it was not J. R. that
used to change his Religion, but it was P. P. himself.

In page 7th. he makes this observation, viz. that there are certain times
which pass over some Men, in which they are in more eminent danger of departing
from the Faith, and giving heed to seducing Spirits.

One (says he) is the time of sore Affliction etc.

We know (says he) the Jews under Dark and Afflictive Providence Murmured and
fell to Idolatry.

Reply. Here he greatly abuses the Scripture through his own ignorance; for the
Scripture abundantly informs us, that it was in Prosperity that the Jews fell
to Idolatry, and that God's usual way to bring them out of their Idolatry was,
by sending sore Afflictions on them.

Another time (says he) is when a Man has suffered very unjust Treatment from
Men, as he conceives, and having applied to the Authority for Relief, but not
obtaining it, he will be tempted to think uncharitably of and rail against them;
which if he allows himself to do, his next Temptation will be to fall away to
some party that opposes them; and this was the case of one Gates in New London
County.

Reply. If this was the case of Gates, viz. that he suffered very unjust
Treatment from Men as he conceived, and applying to the Authority for Relief,
but obtaining none; then it was very agreeable to Scripture, to withdraw from
such a corrupted People, where the common People were so corrupted as to treat
their Neighbors very unjustly; and the Authority whom God has set up to punish
evil doers so corrupted, as to grant no Relief in such cases; surely these were
great Disorders, and it was highly commendable in Gates to obey the command of
the holy Scripture, 2 These. 3.6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that
walks disorderly, etc.

In Page 8th he quaeries as follows; And what could I have done less than to
have displayed Signals of Danger over those fatal Rocks and Sands, on which I
had suffered Shipwreck?

Reply, I suppose he here intends a Spiritual Shipwreck, for that he never has
been a Man concerned in Sea Affairs: And for as much as I know of no Spiritual
Shipwreck mentioned in Scripture, but that of Faith and a good Conscience,
which I am sure he has suffered; and that he may stand for a Signal to be a
Warning to others, is my earnest desire: And if any Person should happen to
fall into the Longitude of those Rocks and Sands, I would advise them to look
out sharp, and they will see more signals than P. P. viz. Hymeneus and
Alexander, who are signals of the same Rocks and Sands. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.
Holding Faith and a good Conscience, which some having put away, concerning
Faith have made Shipwreck. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, etc. And also as
History informs us of Francis Spira, who like P. P. denied the Truth by Public
Recantation, and thereby was received into the favor of the World, and so
stands for a signal with the other three above mentioned.

And now we are come to his first Chap. which is as follows.

CHAP. 1st. Giving an Account of the Author's being led into, and his Recovery
from Quakerism.

My near alliance to John Rogers (then Junior) who is my Brother, (viz.) the
Son of my Mother, proved an unhappy Snare to me. He being naturally a Man as
Manly, Wise, Facetious and Generous, perhaps as one among a thousand, I was
exceedingly delighted in and with his Conversation. He also indeared himself to
me very much by his repeated Expressions of Complacency in me, by which I was
induced to be frequently in his company, and often at his House, where his
Father would be entertaining of me with Exhortations to a Religious life,
warning me of the danger of Sin, and certainty of that Wrath which shall come
on all that know not God, etc. I would some times for Curiosity be enquiring
into his Principles, and other times for Diversion be disputing a point with
him; but I knew not that the dead were there, Prove. 7.24. I was not Religious
enough to be much concerned about his Principles, but pitiful enough to be
extremely moved with the Story of his Sufferings, etc. I had also a reserve in
his favor, that it was possible he might be a good Man, (the strangeness of
his Doctrine notwithstanding) especially seeing all his Sufferings were not
able to shake his Constancy, or oblige him to recede from the least part of his
Religion.

Reply. Here I observe, that he owns that J. R. would be entertaining him with
Exhortations to a Religious life, warning him of the danger of Sin, and
certainty of that Wrath which shall come on all that know not God.

To which I answer, This was the same Doctrine which the Prophets and Apostles
taught their Hearers, as may be seen Mat. 3.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Verse 7. Who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come,
etc. To which he Replies, That he knew not that the dead were there; Prove.
7.24. And in the very next words adds, That he was not Religious enough to be
much concerned about his Principles. By which the Reader may easily discern
that the dead was there sure enough, that is P. P. was there, who was dead in
Sins and Trespasses, not being Religious enough to be concerned to live a
Righteous Life, or to take warning of the danger of Sin, and certainty of the
Wrath of God, which is Revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, etc. Romans 1.18. Now if he intends J. R's. Exhortation
by the dead being there, I think it is because he is in that state of darkness
spoken of, Isai. 5.20. Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil; that
put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, etc.

But he acknowledges that he was pitiful enough to be extremely moved with the
Story of his Sufferings.

To which I answer, That whoever should be made sensible of J. Rogers's
Sufferings, had they not an Heart of Stone, would be as much moved with pity as
P. P. since I suppose the like has not been known in the Kingdom of England for
some Ages past; and which continued for more than forty five Years.

He also confesses, that he had a reserve in his Favor, that possibly he might
be a good Man, etc. especially seeing all his Sufferings were not able to shake
his Constancy, or oblige him to recede from the least part of his Religion.

Reply, I must confess this Reason of P. P. is very sound, and agreeable with
the Scripture; and sufficiently proves that J. R. was not like the stony Ground
spoken of Mat. 13.20, 21. But he that receives the seed into stony places, the
same is he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it: Yet has he
not root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when tribulation or
persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended. But says P.
P. All his Sufferings were not able to shake his Constancy, or oblige him to
recede from the least part of his Religion.

This olso proves him to be one of those which Christ speaks of Mat. 7.24, 25.
Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken
him unto a wise man which built his house upon a rock: and the Rain descended,
and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell
not, for it was founded upon a rock.

At length (says he) my Brother became a very strict and devout Professor of
his Father's Religion, and so became less sociable, tell at length our
Conversation was almost wholly suspended for diverse Years.

Reply, Here it is observable, that when his Brother became a strict and devout
Professor of his Father's Religion, and himself remained in his vain
Conversation, they could no longer retain their former Fellowship.

Which well agrees with the Testimony of the holy Scripture, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
For what fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what communion
has Light with Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? And what
part has he that believes with an Infidel?

In page 2d. he enters upon his account of his first being led into Quakerism,
as he calls it.

He says, it pleased God in a solitary moment to bring into his thoughts those
words, Forsake the Foolish and live, and go in the way of understanding. Prove.
9.6. He says, he understood them to suggest that if he would live Eternally, he
must forsake his Sins, which the Scripture calls Folly, and his vain
Companions, which the Scripture calls Fools.

In page 3d he says, he took the Words as a Reproof of his vain Course of life,
and a Counsel and Invitation to him to walk with the wise and be wise.
Whereupon ( says he) I fully resolved from Thenceforth to turn from Sin to God,
and accordingly began to set up a strict and Religious Course of Life, to
reform the Errors of my ways, to Pray to God in secret, etc.

In page 5th. he goes on to give an account how incessantly he cried to God for
Mercy and Grace by secret Prayer, and how the Devil opposed him in his secret
Prayer. And in page 6th. he gives an Account how earnestly he cried to God to
rebuke those foul Spirits, and how instantly God answered his Prayer, and
caused them to vanish away.

In page 7th. he gives an Account how he began to Question whether he had not
been in the way of an Erroneous and Heterodox Religion; and that upon this
doubt with all possible Earnestness he asked Counsel of the Wonderful
Counselor, and Wisdom of him that gives it liberally to all.

In the remaining part of this 7th. page, together with the 8th. and part of
the 9th. he still goes on to show what scruples and doubts he was in as to the
several forms of Religion; and in the latter part of the 9th. page he gives an
Account how Earnestly he cried to God to direct him in the matter, which he
gives in manner following.

In this distress I poured out my Soul to God in Prayer, I implored the
Guidance of his Word and Spirit, I confessed my lost and Sinful Estate, but I
told him of his Word, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy help found.

I flew to our Savior's Words, That if a Son ask Bread, the Father will not
give him a Stone. Luke 11.11. and pleaded them in this manner: O thou that
hear Prayers, and have never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain;
who art a fountain of light and truth, and therefore the Sons of Men believe
thy Word, behold the promise of thy Son, which I now humbly plead before thee.
I implore the Bread of Life, and the knowledge of the Truth. Will thou now send
me strong Delusions to believe lies, and so let his Words fall to the ground?
Surely thou will not, for they are settled in Heaven, and more permanent than
the Heavens or the Earth, and I will believe them, and adventure my Soul
thereupon.

In page 11th he tells us, That after this he soon laid aside Family Prayer,
could see no Rule for the practice of it.

The eighth of January, (says he) being the Lord's Day, I doubted so much of
the Sabbath, that I dared not go to Meeting.

The 22d of January I thought it my Duty to Labor as on other Days, and I did
so.

Now that which is observable in the Relation which he has been giving is, that
when he came to fear that he had been in the way of an erroneous and heterodox
Religion, and resolved to examine it, and thereupon asked Counsel of the
Wonderful Counselor, as he says he did, and earnestly pleaded with God to give
him the knowledge of the Truth, and that he might not be held under strong
Delusions to believe lies.

And now God is graciously pleased to discover to him those strong Delusions,
which he had so long been deceived by, in thinking to please God by attending
formal and customary Prayers, which he had been taught by Tradition, and had
been practicing in his unregenerate state, while he was in fellowship with
Hypocrites, who always love to pray in Synagogues and public places, which
Christ forbids his Disciples to practice, Mat. 6.5.

Another strong Delusion which is now discovered to him upon his earnest
Prayer, is concerning the first Day, which in his unregenerate state he thought
to be a Sabbath; but upon this answer of Prayer, he thought it his Duty to
labor on as on other Days, and did so. So also when he saw no Rule for the
practice of his formal Prayer, he soon laid it aside: All which proves his
faithfulness to God at that time, by yielding Obedience to what God discovered
to him.

Page 12th he declares, that on the 26th of January he was carried to Prison
for refusing to pay a fine laid on him for profaning the Sabbath last before.
In the same page he tells us, how some labored to allure him by prospects of
worldly Advantage; and in page 13th. some cursed him in the Streets, wishing
him dead, etc. Others by mocking and other verbal abuses ministered such
Provocations, as one would think nothing but a Stock or Stone would have been
silent under.

Reply. This is no new thing, but has always been the practice of the wicked
World to persecute, Mock, Deride and Revile Gods faithful Children, as both Old
and New-Testaments do abundantly inform us. Mat. 5.11. Blessed are you when Men
shall Revile you, and Persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against
you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward
in Heaven: For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Joh.
15.18, 19. If the World hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.
If ye were of the World, the World would love its own: but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you. 1 John 3.13. Marvel not, my Brethren, if the world hate you. Isai.
59.15. Yea, truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a
prey. Isai. 51.7. Hearken unto me, ye that know Righteousness, the people in
whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of Men, neither be ye afraid of
their Revilings. Jer. 15.10. Woe is me, my mother, that thou have born me a man
of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth: I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet every one of them does curse me.

In the 13th. page he also tells us, how that in the Morning before he went to
Prison, he committed all concerns and Interests to God by solemn Prayer, and
that taking a sad farewell of his Wife, addressed himself to the Journey, taking
a Bible with him.

He also largely sets forth how great and terrible his Trials were, in
forsaking his dear Wife, with all other valuables in this World.

In page 14th. says he, Under these pressing Burdens I went to New London,
about sixteen miles from my own House, lifting up my Heart to God by the way,
in thousands of Ejaculations, with the most vehement application of Mind.

Reply. This account which he gives of his giving up in this great Trial is
sufficient to prove, that the great Love of God was shed abroad in his Heart at
that time, by which he was enabled to forsake his dear Wife, with all other
Earthly things for Christ's sake, and as Christ says, Mat. 10.37, 38. He that
loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves
Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me; then may we safely conclude,
that such as love Christ above all Earthly things, and are ready to take up
their Cross and follow him, are worthy of him, all which P. P. then did.

He also tells us, how that in this great Trial, he lift up his Heart to God in
thousands of Ejaculations, with the most vehement application of Mind, etc.

He still goes on in this 14th. page to set forth the great aggravations of his
Trials, by the Insulting of the Jailer over him, also the going into a dark
Goal without Fire or Lodgings, in a very cold Season, etc.

In the 15th. page he says, Under these Agonies, his Flesh and Heart cried out
for God, for the strong and living God, I supplicated his Mercy for Christ
sake, ( says he) confessing my Sin and Misery; I Blessed him for his Word, and
appealed to his Omnisciency, that I desired to keep his Precepts. I implored
his Spirit to help my Infirmities, and to lead me into all Truth.

After this, ( says he) looking into my Bible I lit upon the eighth Chap. to
the Romans and read on to the 35th. Verse, whereupon I was blown up into an
extatick Joy: I thought I had now assurance of my Union to Christ, and that
nothing should separate me from his Love.

This Rapture lasted me that Night, etc.

I was ( says he) in the Goal five days, in which time J. R. and his Company
often visited and treated me with sufficient Expressions of their tenderest
Regard; Providing me a Lodging in the Goaler's House the first Night, otherwise
it is like I should have dyed of the Cold, being a Man of a tender Constitution,
and not innured to hardships; and afterward they furnished me with Lodging and
other things for my Comfort, during my Imprisonment, and c.

Page 16th. he tells us, That the next Remarkable that happened, was upon
Reading Romans 10.9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall Believe with thine Heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved: for with the heart Man Believes unto Righteousness, and with
the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation.

Page 17th. He tells us, that his Sorrows were now turned into Joy, and his
Prayers into Praises of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

In the same page (says he) on the fifth day of my Confinement, my wife
(against my express Prohibition) having paid the Fine, and procured a Mandamus
to the Jailer to discharge me, the Messenger came in the Morning. This was
surprising and unwelcome news to me, for that Morning I had awaked in a
mavelous Calm, every thing was pleasant and easy to me, and c.

Page 18th. (says he) Amongst other things I had a desire to be Baptized by J.
R. Those words in Acts 22.16. ran much in my mind, And now why tarriest thou?
Arise and be Baptized, and wash away thy Sins, etc. And accordingly I was
Baptized of him, as soon as released from Prison, by burying my Body in the
Water. After which I went home, it being Tuesday.

And now we are got through the account which he gives of his being led into
Quakerism, as in his gross darkness he calls it.

Now the next account he is entering upon, is what he calls his recovery out of
Quakerism, which in truth is nothing else but his Apostasy, being overcome by
Persecution, according to what is written Mat. 13.20, 21. Concerning the Stony
places, which receive the Word with Joy, but when Tribulation or Persecution
arises, they are offended; So was it with P. P. who being thus overcome, soon
turns like the Dog to his own vomit, that is licks up again those erroneous
Principles which so lately he had disgorged; and like the Sow that was washed,
to her wallowing in the mire, by defiling himself again with his former vain
Conversation and Companions.

And now as to the Account of his Recovery out of Quakerism, as he vainly calls
it, I shall only Remark some Passages briefly, which may be sufficient to
satisfy every sober Reader, that he soon fell from Grace, into a state of total
Darkness; as by his own account appears, in the following Words: The residue of
that Week, ( says he) I walked in Darkness and deep Distress; for as I was
without Light, so I was without Comfort.

Here it is very observable, that as God had comforted and supported him in the
time of his Suffering, while he continued instant in Prayer and faithfulness to
God; so upon his forsaking God, and embracing the things of this World, God
leaves him in darkness and deep distress. This is no other than the Scriptures
abundantly show us, 2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if
we deny him, he also will deny us.

In page 23d. he tells us, that at the end of three Weeks, he made a Public
Recantation, which the Church accepting, received him into their Charity.

And here I cannot but take notice, That immediately upon his Apostasy, and
returning back into the spirit of the World, he is again received into the
favor of those Ishmaelitish Persecutors, who as he tells us in page 13th. a
few days before this were Cursing him in the Streets, and wishing him dead: and
by mockings and other abuses ministered such Provocations to him, that one would
think nothing but a Stock or Stone would have been silent under.

And in page 15th. he gives us an account, how that the first Night in which he
fell into the hands of those cruel Persecutors, they were like to have
Murdered him in the Prison, had not J. R. and his Company prevented, and c.

In page 24th. he tells us, That still after all there remained heavy upon him
the guilt of Sin and great Darkness, and uncertainty about his spiritual
Estate. I trembled ( says he) at the thoughts of those miserable Jews who
perished in the Wilderness, through the just Wrath of God, after their
deliverance out of Egypt, and never saw the good Land.

Also in the same page he adds as follows.

In my darkness I applied to my self almost in despair, what God said to
Pharaoh, Exodus 9.16. For this Cause have I raised thee up, that I might show my
wonders in thee.

Page 25th. ( says he) These deep discouragements were also accompanied with
the Blackest Temptations; through the force whereof I was ready to Envy the
Salvation of others. This startled me as what carried in it the express Image
of Satan.

In page 30th. he adds, That for diverse years after, he was frequently
assaulted with Temptations to call all in question over again, to consider
whether I had not apostatized from Christ and his Truth, which has been no
small annoyance, and the cause of a great deal of trouble to me, ( says he.)

And thus having briefly gone through the account which he gives us of his
recovery out of Quakerism, I shall not trouble the Reader with any Exposition
upon it; judging it so plain of it self, that every Christian Reader will be at
no loss to see that what he calls his being led into Quakerism, was a gracious
Call and Invitation of God to his Soul, and had he remained faithful to God,
and not fainted under his Persecutions, he might have been a happy Man. And
also what he calls his recovery from Quakerism, may as plainly be seen to be
his Apostasy. And by the great darkness and horror that attended him
immediately upon his Apostasy, I understand it to be the same that attended
Cain, Saul, Judas, Francis Spira, etc. and is largely threatened against
Apostates in the 10th. of the Hebrews, 26, 27. verses. For if we Sin wilfully
after that we have received the Knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries.

I shall add one Instance more for the better satisfaction of the Reader, that
what he calls his recovery from Quakerism, was his Apostasy; and that is his
sending to the General Assembly at Newhaven, to inform them, that he had found
out the wonderful Art of Longitude, which had been hid from Mankind since the
World began: desiring the Assembly to fit and furnish him for a Voyage to
England, that he might discover the fame to the Crown, from whom he expected a
vast Reward. But the Assembly not being taken with his Notion, and he soon
finding himself deceived, betook himself to Pleading Cases in the Common Law
for a living which Calling he follows to this day.

Now according to Christ's Doctrine, Mat. 6.21. For where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also, it is evident that P. P's. Heart and Meditations
were now set upon Earthly and Carnal Things, and were not in that spiritual
Frame as when he forsook his Wife, and all Worldly Enjoyments that he might
please God, and gain a treasure in Heaven.

Also the Spirit that he was led by in the time of his Sufferings, caused the
World to persecute, mock and revile him; but the Spirit that enters into him
immediately upon his Apostasy, unites him to the World again.

Also this Spirit which reenters into him upon his Apostasy, could not be of
God, because it was a false Spirit, as appears by its deceiving him in the
matter of Longitude, etc.

And so leaving what is abovesaid to the Consideration of the Reader, I shall
proceed to his next Article, which is several Songs composed in Verse, in which
he pretends to praise God for his Recovery out of the Errors of Quakerism.

This is no other than Apostates and Hypocrites were ever wont to do, I mean,
hypocritically to imitate God's People in their Songs and Praises to God; as
may be seen Amos 6.5. That Chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to
themselves Instruments of Music like David, etc.

Now some of the Sins which those Hypocrites were charged with, who were thus
imitating David in his Praises to God, may be seen in the 5th. Chap. of this
Prophecy of Amos, at the 12th. Verse. For I know your manifold Transgressions,
and your mighty Sins: they afflict the just, they take a Bribe, and they turn
aside the Poor in the gate from their Right. And in the 23d. verse says the
Lord, Take thou away from me the noises of thy Songs, for I will not hear the
Melody of thy Viols; but let Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as
a mighty Stream. From which Scripture we may observe, that those apostatized
Hypocrites whose Songs the Lord thus abhorred, were such as by taking Bribes
procured unrighteous Judgments, whereby the Poor were turned aside from their
Right.

And now as to his Songs and other Verses, I shall be very brief, only
mentioning some of the gross Blasphemies which they contain, not doubting but
all sober Christians, together with my self, will abhor such Profaneness as may
be seen in Page 36th. and is as follows.

That Sacramental Bond
by which my Soul was tied
To Christ in Baptism, I cast off,
and basely Vilifi'd.
I suffered to be washed
(as Satan instituted)
My Body, so my Soul thereby,
became the more polluted.
Now I suppose he intends by that Sacramental Bond, by which he says his Soul
was tied to Christ, that non-scriptural Practice of sprinkling a little Water
out of a Basin on his Face, in his unregenerate state. Now the Scriptures
abundantly show us, that the Spirit of God is the Bond by which God's Children
are sealed or united to him; as Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also after that ye believed,
ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise. Ephesians. 4.3. Endeavor to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. Verse 30 And grieve not the holy
Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. 1 John 3.24.
Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us.

Thus it plainly appears, that it is the Spirit of God which is the Bond by
which God's Children are united to Christ, and not by sprinkling a little
elementary Water on their Face, as P. P. has ignorantly and blasphemously
asserted.

2dly. Whereas he says, He suffered his Body to be washed as Satan instituted:
I suppose he intends his being Baptized according to the Rule of Scripture, of
which he gives us an Account in page 18. how that he was stirred up to submit
to this Ordinance from those Words, Acts 22.16. And now why tarriest thou?
arise and be Baptized and Wash away thy Sins. And that accordingly he was
Baptized by burying his Body in the Water.

This is according to the Rule given us in Scripture, relating to the
Administration of this Ordinance of Baptism, as may be seen Romans 6.4. Therefore
we are buried with him by Baptism. Col. 2.12. Buried with him in Baptism.

And because this Ordinance could not be truly Administered without a
sufficiency of Water to bury the Person in, we read John 3.23. That John was
Baptising in Enon near Salim, because there was much Water there.

2dly. As to the first Institutor of this Ordinance, we know that John the
Baptist was the first practiser of it; therefore let us take his Testimony as
to the Institutor of it, which is to be seen Joh. 1.33. And I knew him not, but
he that sent me to Baptize with Water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit, etc.

And here I suppose none but P. P. will dare to deny that it was God Almighty
that instituted this Ordinance, and sent John the Baptist to administer it.

Joh. 3.22. After these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the land of
Judea, and there he tarried with them, and baptized. Mat. 28.19. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptising them, etc. By all which Scriptures
it is evident, that it was the Lord Jesus Christ that instituted Baptism, and
not Satan, as P. P. has blasphemously asserted.

And now I shall proceed to his second Chap. wherein he pretends to give an
account of the principal Heads of Quakerism. As to this Chap. I shall not give
any particular Answer, and that for these following Reasons.

First. Because J. R. in his lifetime did largely publish his Principles in
Print, and therefore I shall refer the Reader to his Books; which will
sufficiently discover the abuses done him by P. P. now after his Death. And if
there be any Persons that have not seen his Books, and are desirous to be
satisfied in this matter, I have sufficient by me to supply them.

A second Reason is, Because his account is so confused, self-contradictory and
false, that it deserves no Answer. And for the proof of this, take these
following Instances.

In page 48. he tells the Reader as follows: But Rogers held three Ordinances
of Religious use, viz. Baptism, the Lord's Supper, and imposition of Hands. Of
Worship in general.

All Worship is in the Heart only, and there are no external Forms in which,
etc. ( Rogers.)

Here the Reader may observe, that first he owns that Rogers held three
external Ordinances, viz. Baptism, the Lord's Supper, and imposition of Hands;
and in the very next Words forgets himself and tells the Reader, that Rogers
held all Worship to be in the Heart only, and that there was no external Forms.
See how plainly he contradicts himself.

Page 46. he says as follows, Of Sanctification, Mortification and Perfection.
First, Sanctification is a perfect cleansing from Sin.

Reply. If P. P. will dare to say, that a Person which is perfectly cleansed
from Sin, is not in a state of Sanctification, I think the World will condemn
his Darkness; and if he owns it, why then does he charge it as an Error upon J.
R.?

2dly. Says he, The place of it is before Justification. Here he charges J. R.
with an Error, for holding that the place of Sanctification is before
Justification.

To which I answer, If God should justify a Sinner before he Sanctifies him,
then surely he must justify him while he remains under the guilt of his Sins,
which is both contrary to the pure and holy nature of God, and to the holy
Scriptures, as may be seen Exodus 34.7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
Iniquity Transgression and Sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty.
Exodus 23.7. Keep thee far from a false matter, and the Innocent and Righteous
slay thou not, for I will not Justify the wicked.

By which Scriptures it is evident that the place of Sanctification is before
Juftification, (otherwise God must justify the wicked.)

Page 49. Speaking of Gospel Ministers, at the third Particular, says he, They
must labor with their hands, for the support of themselves and others.

Reply. Here I think he does J. R. great unjustice, by charging him with this
Error, which if it be an Error, he ought to have charged it on the Apostle
Paul, who was the Person that gave the command to Gospel Ministers, as may be
seen Acts 20. At the 17th verse we have an account, that from Miletus he sent
to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church. And verse 33, 34. he sets
before these Elders or Gospel Ministers, his own Example, in these words, I
have coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel: ye your selves know that
these Hands have ministered to my necessitics, and to them that were with me.

And in the 35th verse he orders them to do the like, minding them of the words
of the Lord Jesus, as follows.

I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the
weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more
Blessed to give than to receive.

By which Scripture it is plain that it was Paul that gave this order to the
Gospel Ministers, and ought not to be charged as an Error upon J. R.

Page 51st. he tells us, That J. R. held downright, that Man had no Soul at
all, and that though he used the Term, yet intended by it either the natural
Life, or else the natural Faculties which he attributed to the Body, and held
that they died with it, even as it is with a Dog, etc.

Reply, In answer to this notorious Falsehood charged upon J. R.

I shall boldly appeal to all Mankind who had Conversation with him in his
lifetime, for that they well know it to be utterly false: And for the
Satisfaction of such as had not acquaintance with him, I shall refer them to
his Books, and particularly in this Point to his Exposition on the Revelations,
beginning at page 232. where he largely sets forth the Resurrection of the
Body, both of the Just and unjust, and of the Eternal Judgment which God shall
then pass upon all both small and great, etc.

All which sufficiently proves P. P. guilty of Slandering and Belying a dead
Man, a Crime generally abhorred by all sober People, and so I shall pass to his
3d. Chap. Judging that by these few Remarks which have been taken, the Reader
may plainly see, that the account he pretends to give of J. R.'s Principles is
so false and self-contradictory, that it deserves no Answer at all; and that it
was great folly in P. P. so to expose himself, as to pretend to give an Account
of J. R.'s Principles in such a false manner, since J. R. himself has largely
published his own Principles in print; which Books are plenty, and will fully
satisfy every one that desires Satisfaction in that matter, of what I have here
asserted.

And now we are come to his third Chap, which begins as follows.

Chap. 3. Giving an account of the unreasonableness of J. R.'s boasting of his
Sufferings: And offering some Advice to such as hold his Principles of Religion.

I purpose ( says he) in this last Chapter, to make a few Remarks upon some of
J. R.'s Sufferings, and the Causes of them; to the end it may be known, that
his Sufferings were not Persecutions, nor for his Religion and Conscience, as
he vainly and falsely boasted, and as some it is like have believed.

But that really he was himself a Persecutor, and that his Sufferings were the
demerits of his horrid Immoralities and Impieties.

The first thing that he mentioned on the account of his Sufferings, was the
divorcing his Wife from him. To which I answer, that the cause of it was his
Adultery, Beastiality, etc. in which he had lived for diverse years, as he
boasted, and endeavored partly to Justify.

If any in his behalf object, that the proof was insufficient, I answer, that
neither they nor I are competent to judge of that. And farther, that upon his
Trial, he never denied a tittle of the Charge, and out of Court always owned
it, and particularly to Mr. Edwards, who was his Council, but thereupon
deserted him, and gave an Evidence against him.

And for the Proof of this, I refer the Reader to the Records and Files in the
Secretary's Office at Hartford.

Reply, As to this first charge of P. P. against J. R. I shall first affirm and
then prove, that every Article of it is positively false.

But before I come to my Proof, I shall give the Reader a true account
concerning the matter of the first difference between J. R. and his Wife, as I
received it from their own Mouths, they never differing in any material Point
as to the account they gave about it.

But I must confess, that it is a hard task for me to give a true Relation of
this matter; for that it will so much expose the Adulterous Life which my dear
Mother was drawn into by those wicked Persons, who were the cause of that
Divorce.

And although I did faithfully and in the fear of God labor with her in her
lifetime, by persuading her to forsake her Adulterous Life and unlawful
Companions, yet since her death, should have been glad to have heard no more
about it, had not P. P. like a bad Bird befowled his own Nest, by raking in the
Graves of the dead, and by publishing such notorious Lies against them, whom
the Clods of the Valley forbid to answer for themselves: For which cause I am
compelled to give a true account concerning those things, which are as follow.

John Rogers and his Wife were both brought up in the New England way of
Worship, never being acquainted with any other Sect; and although they were
zealous of the Form which they had been brought up in, yet were wholly ignorant
as to the work of Regeneration, until by a fore Affliction which J. R. met
with, it pleased God to lay before his Consideration the vanity of all Earthly
things, and the necessity of making his Peace with God, and getting an Interest
in Jesus Christ, which he now applies himself to seek for, by earnest Prayer to
God in secret, and according to Christ's words, Mat. 7.7, 8. Ask and it shall
be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, etc.

And he coming to witness the truth of these Scriptures, by Gods giving him a
new heart and another Spirit, and by remitting the guilt of his Sins, did
greatly engage him to love God with all his heart, and his Neighbor as
himself, as did appear by his warning all People he met with to make their
Peace with God, declaring what God had done for his Soul, etc.

And now his Wife observing the great Change which was wrought in her Husband,
as appeared by his fervent Prayers, continual searching the Scriptures, and
daily discoursing about the things of God to all Persons he met with, and
particularly to her, persuading her to forsake her vain Conversation and make
her peace with God, did greatly stir her up to seek to God by earnest Prayer,
that he would work the same work of Grace in her Soul, as she saw and Believed
to be wrought in her Husband. And after some time it pleased God, graciously to
answer her Prayers, by sending the Spirit of his Son into her Heart, whereby
she was able to cry, Abba Father. The Spirit of God it self bearing witness
with her Spirit, that she was a Child of God; according to what is written,
Romans 8.15, 16.

And now her Husband and her self, came to be united together in a double Bond
of love; for before this there was only the love that is between a Man and his
Wife, but now there was the love of the Brotherhood, even that love by which
God's Children are united together. And in this unity they lived together
several Months, witnessing both to small and great what God had done for their
Souls.

But after some time, upon their diligent searching the holy Scriptures, they
began to doubt of some of the Principles which they had traditionally been
brought up in; and particularly that of sprinkling Infants, which they had been
taught to call Baptism; but now they find it to be only an invention of Men,
and neither Command or Example in Scripture for it: Upon which they bore a
public Testimony against it, which soon caused a great uprore in the Country.
And their Relations, together with their Neighbors, and indeed the World in
general who had any opportunity, were all united in persuading them that it was
a Spirit of Error, by which they were deluded: But the main Instrument which
Satan at length made use of to deceive J. R.'s Wife, was her own natural
Mother, who by giving her Daughter an account of her own Conversion, as she
called it, and telling her Daughter there was no such great Change in the Work
of Conversion, as they had met with; but that it was the Devil had transformed
himself as an Angel of Light, etc. And at length fully persuaded her Daughter
to believe that it was even so. Whereupon she soon publicly recanted, and
renounced that Spirit which she had been led by, and declared it to be the
Spirit of the Devil; and then vehemently persuaded her Husband to do the like;
telling him with bitter Tears, that unless he would renounce that Spirit, she
dare not live with him, etc.

But he constantly telling her that he knew it to be the Spirit of God, and
that to deny it would be to deny God, which he dare not do, etc.

Whereupon she left her Husband, taking her two Children with her, and with the
help of her Relations went to her Fathers House, about eighteen miles distant
from her Husband's Habitation. And I do solemnly declare in the presence of
God, that this is a true Relation of their first separation, as I received it
from their own Mouths; as also by the Testimony of Daniel Stubbins and Mary
Tubs, two of their next Neighbors, is fully proved, whose Testimonies are in
the foregoing part of this Book.

And so having left her Husband upon the account of his Religion, as has been
declared, and Renouncing her Profession, she soon returned into her vain
Conversation, and let in a flood of Malice against her Husbaud. For as Marriage
is an Ordinance of God, and is often made use of in Scripture to set forth the
union that is between Christ and his Church; so on the contrary, where Satan
has ever made a breach in that Relation, it is commonly followed with a greater
degree of Enmity than is common in other cases. For soon after she had left her
Husband, she declared, that he had given her an account of his former Course of
Life in his unconverted state, how he had been the worst of Sinners, and guilty
of many gross acts of uncleanness, which she said he had particularised to her,
and which she now makes a Catalogue of, and presents to the Authority by way of
complaint against her Husband; whereupon her Husband was seized by an Officer,
and committed to Hartford Goal, for a Trial at the next Court of Assistants,
where she appeared and tendered her Oath to confirm the truth of what she had
charged him with.

But the Court observing what an imbittered spirit she was in against her
Husband, refused to give her her Oath to any one Article of her Complaints; yet
her Complaints were committed to the Grand Jury, with all the Aggravations
which several Attorney's who were employed for her could invent; But the Grand
Jury judging the Charges of a prejudiced Woman against her Husband to be of no
weight, soon returned Ignoramus, and that they found not the Bill against him.
Whereupon the Court granted him Goal delivery, and so he was never brought to
any Trial. And for the proof of this, take the following Copy of Record.

At a Court of Assistants held at Hartford, May 25. 1675.
The Grand Jury having committed to their consideration the Case of John
Rogers, who is now in Prison for heinous Crimes objected against him, do
return, That they find not the Bill. Upon the return of the Grand Jury, this
Court does grant John Rogers Goal delivery, he paying the Jailer his just Fees,
and such necessary Charges as have been expended upon the handing of him to
Prison by the Marshal of New London, and his attendance.

A true Copy of Record, Examined per. Hez. Willys, Secretary.

Thus it appears by this Record, that upon the Grand Jury acquitting him, he
was set at liberty by the Court, and so never brought to any Trial about those
Charges alleged against him by his Wife; yet she never returned to him any
more, but continued to dwell with her Father about a year and half after this,
and then the General Court gave her this following Bill of Divorce, wherein
they give no Reason why they did it.

At a General Assembly holden at Hartford, October 12th. 1676.
This Court having considered the Petition of Elizabeth Rogers, the Wife of
John Rogers, for a Release from her Conjugal Bond to her Husband, with all the
Allegations and Proofs presented (...) clear the Righteousness of her desires,
do find just Cause to grant her desires, and do free her from her Conjugal Bond
to the said John Rogers.

A true Copy, Test. Eleazer Kimberly, Secretary.

Thu^ it appears, that this Court abovementioned, granted John Rogers's Wife a
Bill of Divorce, without giving any reason why they did it, which I suppose to
be a Precedent not to be Paralleled in the Kingdom of England.

And now having given a true and impartial Account of the first cause of John
Rogers's Wife leaving her Husband, and also the other proceedings that were in
that matter, so far as to the Bill of Divorce.

In the next place I shall make Reply to the several notorious Falsehoods
asserted by P. P. concerning this matter.

The first thing that I shall observe is, that he positively asserts, that the
cause of the divorcing his Wife from him, was his Adultery, Beastiality, etc.
in which he had lived for diverse years, as he Boasted, and endeavored partly
to justify, etc.

Here I think I may boldly conclude that he has reference to these charges laid
against J. R. by his Wife; and the reason why I may well conclude he means so,
is because I never heard or understood that ever he was charged with any
Misdemeanour in his life before that time.

And for P. P. boldly to affirm, that the cause of the Divorce was for his
Adultery and Beastiality, when the Divorce it self nor any other Record
alleges any such thing to be the Reason; and also the Record of that matter
proves that he was acquitted by the Grand Jury, and dismissed by the Court,
without so much as being brought to a Trial. All which proves P. P's. charge to
be abominably false.

In the next place he adds as follows.

If any in his behalf object, That the proof was insufficient, I answer, that
neither they nor I are competent to judge of that.

Here he confesses that he is not competent to judge whether the proof was
sufficient or not.

To which I answer, That the Jury who had the hearing of it, were competent to
judge of it, and accordingly did, and have left their Judgment upon Record,
which is the only Rule for all other Persons to judge by.

But then how abominable is it for P.P. who confesses himself not capable to
judge of it, yet has presumed to judge and condemn a dead Man, in a matter
wherein the Court had justified him fifty Years past, and I suppose near ten
Years before P. P. was born: And farther, (says he, speaking of J. R.) that
upon his Trial, he never denied a tittle of the Charge.

Reply, This is another positive Falsehood, in that J. R. was never brought upon
any Trial about the matter, as has been sufficiently proved already, yet I
confess that upon his Examination he did not deny any one tittle of his Wife's
charges, which is no token of a guilty Person. He taking his Example from the
innocent Lamb of God, who upon his Examination did the like, as may be seen,
Mat. 27.13, 14. Then said Pilate unto him, Hear thou not how many things
they witness against thee? And he answered him to never a word, in so much that
the Governor marvelled greatly.

Thus we see that it was the Example of Christ to do the like, and it is well
known throughout the World, that guilty Persons are never wanting in denying
the Crime they were charged with. Besides this J. R. saw that the Court refused
to give his Wife her Oath to her charges against him, and therefore it was no
Witness in Law, and altogether needless for him to deny it, so long as no
Witness was taken against him.

He also asserts that J. R. always owned the charge out of Court, and in
particular to Mr. Edwards, who was his Counsel, but thereupon deserted him, and
gave an Evidence against him.

Before I make any particular Answer to these last Assertions, I shall give an
account concerning this Edwards which he mentions: And first, I suppose P. P.
by not mentioning his Christian Name, would have the Reader believe him to be
Richard Edwards, late of Hartford, deceased, who was a sober Man, given to no
Vice, as I know of.

But this Edwards which tendered an Evidence against J. R. was one William
Edwards, a Man notoriously given to Drink, as is well known to all the ancient
Dwellers at Hartford. This Man was never employed by J. R. to be his Counsel;
yet he informed the Court, that J. R's. Friends desired him to speak in his
behalf; whereupon the Court admitted him. But J. R. not rewarding him as he
expected he would, he drew up an Evidence against him, wherein he declared,
that J. R. had confessed to him a gross act of Uncleanness: But J. R. affirming
his Evidence to be salse, and desiring the Court to interrogate him as to the
Time and Place, which accordingly they did; and he said it was at Hartford,
naming the day of the Month; and the Judges of the Court well knowing that J.
R. was at the same time at New London, which is fifty Miles distant from
Hartford, did sharply check him and command him out of the Court, which I think
was a moderate Punishment for such a Crime. And this I am told by them that
were present and saw it; yet for my own satisfaction I went to Hartford on
purpose to see it, and according did see it among the Complaints of J. R's.
Wife, his Oath not being given to it: Which evidenced the truth of what I had
heard about it.

And now as to P. P's. asserting that J. R. always owned the Charge out of
Court, and particularly to Mr. Edwards.

This I charge to be a Falsehood, and for the proof of it, I shall refer to the
Judgment of all who know the Duty of Grand Jurors, and the Custom of Courts,
who well understand, that if there had been but one Evidence given under Oath
to the Grand Jury, that they had heard J. R. own out of Court, that he was
guilty of any such Fact as P. P. alleges, they could not by their Oaths have
acquitted him, (as they did) but must have returned Billevera, and he must have
been brought to a Trial: Which is an evident proof that this is another Fashood.

Last of all, he refers the Reader for proof to the Files and Records in the
Secretary's Office in Hartford.

Reply, This is an unreasonable Imposition upon the Readers, in putting them
upon a Journey to Hartford, there to search the Records for fifty Years
standing, or they must remain as ignorant as they were before they saw his Book.

Yet I must confess it is the wisest Speech in his Book, since none will take
the pains to do it; and so he hopes to conceal his Lies to the World's end.

And now I cannot but take notice of P. P.'s great Folly, in proving his own
Illegitimacy to the World, in asserting, that the Divorce was on the account of
his Beastiality; which if J. R. had been guilty of, every Child that can read
the Scripture, knows he ought to have been put to Death by the Law of God,
whereby his Wife would have been lawfully divorced from him, and might have
been married to another Man, and not have been called an Adulteress; according
to what is written, Romans 7.2, 3. For the Woman which has an Husband, is bound
by the law to her Husband so long as he lives: but if the Hushand be dead, she
is loosed from the law of her Hushand. So then if while her Husband lives, she
be married to another Man, she shall be called an Adulteress, etc.

Thus P. P. has been left to act as sometimes it has happened to Thieves, who
in the time of their Theft, have been so much concerned to watch where they
expect most Danger, and thereby neglecting to look round them, have been
surprised and taken at unawares: So P. P. by watching all Opportunities to
mischief the dead Man, which he is fighting with, has neglected to look round
him, and thereby has proved himself a Bastard.

And now having fairly proved P. P's. charges against J. R. to be positively
false in every Article, I shall observe to the Reader, how plain it appears
that P. P's. end in publishing those Scandals against J. R. was only to expose
his Person, and not his Religion, since those charges laid against him by his
Wife, had only reference to the time in which he was a Member in the
Presbyterian or Independent Church in New London, and therefore could be no
blemish to the Profession which he lived and dyed in after his separation from
that Church; by which it is evident, that his Malice is only against the dead
Man's Person.

In the next place I shall proceed to give the Reader an Account of the woeful
event that followed upon granting of this unlawful Divorce, which was first her
Marrying P. P. the reputed Father of the present P. P. with whom I am now
concerned: And after some time, having a Child by the said Pratt, she was
remarkably smitten by the Hand of God, and the Child taken away by Death, as
was David's Child by Uriah's Wife, and she continued to be a monument of
Distress for many Months, not being able to help or raise her self off the Bed
on which she lay. In which time of her Distress, she also fell into sore horror
and trouble of Conscience on account of her Marrying P. P. after which time I
never heard her justify her self concerning that matter, otherwise than saying,
the Authority was guilty of it, etc. And although these things were the public
discourse of the Country in the time of it, yet because I would not fill this
Volume with more Evidences than needs must, I shall prove my assertion out of
the Town-Records of several Towns where she Recorded her self the Daughter of
Matthew Griswould, after she was Married to P. P. which is an evident Proof
that she did not esteem her Marriage to be Lawful. And here follows said Copies.

The Deed of Gift of Elizabeth Daughter of Matthew Griswould, late of Lyme,
deceased, to her Son John Rogers of New London, in which she conveys to him all
the Upland and Meadow that was given to her by her Father in Saybrook, bears
date the nineteenth of the fifth Month, in the year of our Lord 1707. and was
acknowledged by her the said Elizabeth before Thomas Bolles Justice of the
Peace, as appears by the Records of Saybrook, Lib. 2. Folio 337.

Test. Samuel Willard, T. Clerk.

The Acquittance from Elizabeth the Daughter of Matthew Griswould, to John
Rogers, of all her right in Mamacock, bears date the thirteenth of the tenth
Month, and was Recorded the 15th. day of December, 1687. Per Daniel Wetherell
Recorder. A true Copy of Record of the aforesaid Date.

Test. Edward Hallam, Recorder.

And for the proof that she thus Recorded her Name after she was married to P.
P. take this follow Certificate under another Clerk's Hand. Peter Pratt was
Married unto Elizabeth Griswould, that was Divorced from John Rogers; They were
Married the 5th. of August 1679. P. P. deceased the 24th. of March, 1688. A
true Copy out of the first Book of Records in Lyme, Folio 63. By Moses Noyes,
Town Clerk,

Thus it appears, that after she was Married to P. P. she Recorded her self the
Daughter of Matthew Griswould in two several Towns, which is a manifest Proof
that she did not esteem the Marriage to be Lawful.

In the next place I shall give an account of the great Horror and Distress
which P. P. fell into before his Death, on account of his Marrying J. Rogers's
Wife, as he publicly declared to the Neighborhood, many of which are yet
living; and for the satisfaction of the Reader, I have taken the Testimony of
two of his next Neighbors, which are as follows.

The Testimony of Moses Huntly, aged sixty odd years, testifies, That I was a
near Neighbor to Peter Pratt, formerly of Lyme, deceased, in the time that he
lived as a Husband with Elizabeth the Daughter of Matthew Griswould, who had
been divorced from John Rogers of New London; and after the said Pratt had
recovered of a great sit of Sickness, I heard him several times sorely lament
his marrying her; and said she was John Rogers's Wife, and that it was unlawful
in the sight of God, for him to be concerned with her; with more to that effect.

Moses Huntly.
Dated in Lime, September. 15th. 1725.
The Testimony of Christian Menter, aged about fifty four Years, testifies,
That I have often heard Peter Pratt, formerly of Lyme, deceased, lament his
marrying the Woman that had been divorced from John Rogers of New London;
saying, she was John Rogers's Wife, and that he was guilty of Adultery in being
concerned with her; with much more to that effect.

Dated in Colechester, Septem. 18th. 1725. Christian Menter.

Thus it appears, both by Records and living Testimonies, what was some part of
the woeful effect of that wicked Divorce.

And now having briefly given an account concerning the first Difference which
happened between John Rogers and his Wife, with several Circumstances which
happened therenpon; in all which Relation I have endeavored to prove what I
have asserted; and have not ordered the Reader a Journey to Hartford, to search
for proof there, as P. P. has done.

And for as much as P. P. is well acquainted with the Laws and Customs of the
English Nation, having made it his Study and Practice for many Years past, I
can do no less than blame him for signing his Book by a wrong Name, ( viz.)
Pratt, since he well knows that it is the Custom of the English Nation for such
Persons as he is, to bear up their Mothers Surname: And since it appears that
both his Father and Mother confessed their living together to be Adultery, and
his Mother in the time of it Recorded her self as is above expressed, he ought
also to have signed his Book Peter Griswould.

The next Suffering which he says J. R. falsely boasted of, and which P. P. says
was not for his Religion, was the taking away his Children, etc.

In answer to which he multiplies several abominable Falsehoods, on purpose to
deceive the Reader.

First. Insinuating as if it was done by a Law of this Colony.

2dly. As if it was to prevent his Children suffering on the account of
Education and suitable subsistence.

3dly. He asserts, That another Reason was, that J. R. went raging and raving
to that degree, that no sober Person could have thought him to have been fit to
have been a minute out of Bedlam.

Reply. For the discovering of all those notorious Lies, take this following
Copy of Record.

A general Court held at Hartford, October 11th. 1677.

Upon the Petition of Elizabeth Griswould, the late Wife of John Rogers, that
she might have her Children continued with her, and brought up by her, and not
with John Rogers, he being so Heterodox in his Opinion and Practice: The Court
having considered the Petition, and John Rogers having in open Court declared,
that he did utterly Renounce all the visible Worship of New England, and
professedly declare against the Christian Sabbath, as a mere invention, etc.
The Court see cause that the two Children shall be and remain with her the said
Elizabeth, and her Father Matthew Griswould, to be brought up and nurtured by
them in the Admonition and Fear of the Lord, during the pleasure of the Court,
etc.

John Allyn Secr.

Thus it appears, that the taking away J. R''s. Children, was by a special Act
of Assembly, and no Reason rendered for it, but only his Religion; which
plainly proves all P. P's. Insinuations and Affirmations concerning the matter
to be positively false, and that J. R. lost his Children only on account of his
Religion.

After some years (says he) his Son was returned to him by Authority; but his
Daughter having through God's Grace, so effectually imbibed not only the
Principles of true Religion, but the real beginnings and seeds of saving Grace,
as since has been more evident, nothing but Force could have obliged her to
abide with him, wherefore none was used.

Reply. For the discovering these two last Falsehoods concerning J. R's Son and
Daughter, take these following Testimonies, one of which is J. R's. Daughter,
who I hope P. P. will not object against, since he confesses, she has imbibed
not only the Principles of true Religion, but the real beginnings and seeds of
saving Grace, upon which account her Evidence ought to be esteemed more weighty
than a common Evidence.

The Testimony of Elizabeth Prentts, the Daughter of John Rogers, late of
New London, deceased, Testifies, that the first of my going to live with my
Father, was when I was about the age of fourteen years, being sent by my
Mother; and after I had continued with my Father same Months, he carried me
back to Lyme to visit my Mother and other Relations, where my Grandfather
Griswould forcibly stopped me, so that my Father went home without me; but it was
not long after before I got an opportunity to return to him again, and
continued to live with him from time to time till I was Married, which from the
first of my going to him, was about four years.

And I do farther testify, That the first of my Brother's going to him, was to
my Wedding, being also sent by our Mother.

Dated in New London, Septem. 10th. 1725. Elizabeth Prentts.

I the Subscriber was one of John Rogers's Family at the time when his Daughter
first came to him, and I continued to live in the same House till she was
Married, and I do testify to the truth of every Article that is above written,
excepting that I do not remember that it was her Mother that first sent her.

September 10th. 1725. James Smith.

Thus it appears by these two Witnesses, that what P. P. has here alleged is
absolutely false, and that J. R's. Daughter did live with him from the age of
fourteen years till she was Married, which was about four years. And whereas he
asserts, that nothing but Force could have obliged her to abide with him, it
plainly appears there was forcible means used to prevent her living with him:
By which it is evident, that the Account he gives of this matter is notoriously
false.

He also asserts, That after some years his Son was returned to him by
Authority, which is another abominable Falsehood, and is proved false by the two
last Witnesses, who testify, that the first of his going, was to his Sister's
Wedding, being sent by his Mother. And here I shall inform the Reader, that
soon after my Mother had sent me to my Father, one of the Magistrates gave out
a special Warrant, by which I was seized and brought before a County Court, in
order to take me forcibly away from my Father again; but the Court not agreeing
in the matter, some judging it not possible to take me from my Father, I being
not less than fifteen years old, and some judging it not Justice, they passed
no Judgment in the Case.

And here follows an attested Copy of the Warrant.

To John Rogers Junior, These are in their Majesty's Name to Will and Require
you forthwith upon sight hereof, to make your personal Appearance at the
adjourned Special Court to be holden in New London this Day, to answer the
Complaint of your Mother Elizabeth Beckwith, for your absenting your self from
her Service and Care, contrary to the Order of the General Court: Whereof you
may not fail.

James Fitch, Assistant
New London, the 26th of March, 1691. To the County Marshal or Constable of
New London, to Serve and Return.

This is a true Copy given by me, John Plumbe, County Marshal.



Thus it appears, that the Authority was so far from returning J. R. his son
again, as P. P. has falsely affirmed, that they did their endeavor to take him
away again, after his Mother had sent him.

In the same Page says he,

For these two Reasons he has unspeakably railed upon and vilified the
Authority of the Government, charging them with Adultery in the former, and
Persecution in both.

Reply. Here I must confess, that according to my Judgment, there is as much
truth contained in this laft Paragraph as in any part of his Book; for if the
Railing and Reviling was unspeakable, then it was never spoken by J. R. which
Construction I doubt not but will be the Judgment of all Persons who had
acquaintance with him in his lifetime; for it is well known that he was no
Railer or Reviler.

And well might he charge the Authority with his Wive's Adultery, since they
were the only cause of leading her into it, by divorcing her from her lawful
Husband, and giving no Reason why they did it, and then marrying her to another
Man, while her Husband lived; which was the occasion that both her self and the
Man that she was married to after her Divorce, so publicly confessed their
living together to be Adultery, as has already been proved.

And for as much as the Authority of the Government did deprive him of his
Wife, without giving any Reason why they did it; which is a sufficient proof
that it was only for his Religion; and also did deprive him of his Children
upon the account of his Religion, as has been proved by the Record of Court;
well might he charge them with Persecution in both.

In Page 56th he goes on as follows.

Another Suffering that he gloried in, was his Whippings and Imprisonments; of
which to speak particularly, and to show the criminal Causes of them, would
tire my self and you. Wherefore let it suffice to affirm, that great part of
his Imprisonment at Hartford, was upon strong suspicion of his being accessory
to the burning New London Meeting House.

Reply, As to this last Charge against J. R. concerning New London
Meeting House, were it not for the sake of those who live remote, I should make
no Reply to it; because there are so many hundreds of People inhabiting about
New London, who know it to be notoriously false, and that J.R. was a close
Prisoner at Hartford (which is fifty miles distant from New London) several
Months before, and three Years after said Meeting House was burnt.

And that this long Imprisonment was for refusing to give a Bond of fifty
Pounds, which he declared he could not in Conscience do, and to pay a Fine of
five Pounds, which he refused to do; for which Reasons he was kept a Prisoner
from the time of his first Commitment, three Years and eight Months, and then
set at liberty by open Proclamation, is so fully proved by the Records of
Hartford, that I presume none will dare to contradict.

And now in order to grove P. P's Affirmation to be false, in that he affirms,
that great part of his Imprisonment at Hartford, was upon strong suspicion of
his being accessory to the burning New London Meeting House, take these
following Testimonies.

The Testimony of Thomas Hancox, aged about eighty Years, testifies, That when
I was Goal-keeper at Hartford, John Rogers, late of New London, deceased, was a
Prisoner under my Charge for more than three Years; in which time of his
Confinement at Hartford, New London Meeting House was burnt, and I never heard
or understood that the Authority or any other Person had any mistrust that be
was any ways concerned in that Fact, nor did be ever suffer one Hours
Imprisonment on that account.

Thomas Hancox.
Kinsington, Septem. the 17th. 1725.
Samuel Gilbert, aged sixty two Years, testifies and says, That at the time
when John Rogers, late of New London, deceased, was a Prisoner several Years at
Hartford, I did at the same time keep a public House of Entertainment near the
Prison, and was well knowing to the Concerns of the said Rogers, all the time
of his Imprisonment: And I do farther testify, that New London Meeting House
was burnt at the time while he was a Prisoner in said Prison; but no part of
his Imprisonment was upon that account.

Samuel Gilbert.
October 18th. 1725.
Thus it plainly appears, that this Affirmation concerning New London
Meeting House, is a positive Falsehood.

He still goes on as follows. His Whippings there were for most audacious
Contempt of Authority; his sitting on the Gallows was for blasphemous Words;
and in short, he never suffered the loss of one Hair of his Head by the
Authority, for any Article of his Religion, nor for the Exercise of it.

Reply. First, he asserts, that his Whippings there, (viz.) at Hartford, were
for most audacious Contempt of Authority, but does not inform the Reader what
the Contempt was; making himself the Judge as well as the Witness, whenas it
was only his Business to have proved what the Contempt was, and to have left
the Judgment to the Reader. And for as much as his assertion is altogether
unintelligible, so may it reasonably be expected that my Answer must be by
supposition, and is as follows.

I suppose he intends that Barbarous Cruelty which was acted on J. R. while he
was a Prisoner at Hartford in the time of his long Imprisonment above
mentioned, which was so contrary to the Laws of God and Kingdom of England,
that I never could find that they made a Record of that matter, according to
Christ's Words, John 3.20. For every one that does Evil, hates the light, etc.

But J. R. has given a large Relation about it, as may be seen in his Book
entitled, A midnight Cry from the Temple of God to the ten Virgins, from page
13. to 15. where he asserts, that he was taken out of Prison he knew not for
what, and tied to the Carriage of a great Gun, where he had seventy six stripes
on his naked Body, with a Whip much larger than the lines of a Drum, with knots
at the ends as big as a Walnut, and in that maimed Condition returned to Prison
again; and his Bed which he had hired at a dear Rate taken from him, and not so
much as Straw allowed him to lie on, it being on the 18th. day of the eighth
Month called October, and very cold Weather.

And although my self with a multitude of Spectators who were present at
Hartford, and saw this cruel Act, can testify to the truth of the account which
he gives of it, yet I cannot inform the Reader on what account it was that he
suffered it, or what he was charged with; for as I said before, I never could
find a Record of that matter.

But if it was for Contempt of Authority, as P. P. asserts, then I think those
that inflicted such a Punishment were more guilty of Contempt against God, than
J. R. was of Contempt against the Authority; for God in his holy Law has
strictly commanded Judges not to exceed forty stripes on any account, as may be
seen Deuteronomy. 25.3. So that for Judges to exceed forty stripes, is high Contempt
against God.

In the next place he adds, that his sitting on the Gallows was for blasphemous
Words.

Reply. Here again he ought to have informed the Reader what the Words were,
which doubtless would have been more satisfaction to the Reader, than for P. P.
to make himself both Witness and Judge, and so leave nothing for the Readers to
do, but to remain as ignorant as they were before they saw his Book.

And he might as well have said of the Martyr Stephen, that his suffering was
for blasphemous Words, as what he says of J. R. for it was but the judgment of
J. R's. Persecutors, that the words were blasphemous, and so it was the
judgment of the Martyr Stephen's Persecutors that he was guilty of speaking
blasphemous words, as may be seen Acts 6.13. This Man cease not to speak
blasphemous Words, etc. Whereupon they put him to Death.

In the next place I shall give the Reader an account what these words were,
for which J. R. was charged with Blasphemy, the account of which here follows.

He being at a House in New London, where there were many Persons present, was
giving a description of the state of an unregenerate Person, and also of the
state of a sanctified Person; wherein he alleged, that the Body of an
unregenerate Person was a Body of Sin, and that Satan had his Habitation there.

And on the contrary that the Body of a Sanctified Person was Christ's Body,
and that Christ dwelt in such a Body. Whereupon one of the Company asked him,
whether he intended the humane Body? to which he replied, that he did intend
the humane Body.

Whereupon the Person replied again, will you say that your humane Body is
Christ's Body? to which he replied, (clapping his hand on his Breast) yes, I do
affirm that this humane Body is Christ's Body, for Christ has purchased it with
his precious Blood; and I am not my own, for I am bought with a price, etc.

Whereupon two of the Persons present gave their Testimony as follows: We being
present, etc. saw John Rogers clap his Hand on his Breast and say, This is
Christ's humane Body. But they omitted the other Words which J. R. joined with
it. And because I was very desirous to have given those Testimonies out of the
Secretary's Office, I took a Journey to Hartford on purpose, but the Secretary
could not find them: yet for as much as my self was present both when the Words
were spoken, and also at the Trial at Hartford, I am very confident that I have
given them verbatim. And whether or no this was Blasphemy, I desire not to be
the Judge, but am willing to leave the judgment to every unprejudiced and sober
Reader; and shall proceed to his next assertion which is as follows. And in
short, (says he) he never suffered the loss of one hair of his Head by the
Authority for any Article of his Religion, nor for the Exercise of it, etc.

Reply. In answer to this last extravagant Assertion, which the whole
Neighborhood knows to be false, I shall only mention the Causes of some few of
his sufferings, which I am sure that both the Records and Neighborhood will
witness the truth of.

In the first place he lost his Wife and Children on the account of his
Religion, as has already been fully proved.

The next long Persecution which both himself and all his Society suffered for
many years, was for refusing to come to the Presbyterian Meeting; upon which
account their Estates were extremely destroyed, and their Bodies often
imprisoned.

Also the multitude of Fines and Imprisonments which he suffered on the account
of Baptising such as desired to be Baptized after the Example of Christ, by
burying in the Water. All which Fines and Imprisonments were executed in the
most Rigorous manner. Sometimes the Officer taking him in the dead of Winter,
as he came wet out of the Water, committed him to Prison without a spark of
Fire, with many other cruel acts which for brevity I must omit.

Moreover, the many hundreds of Pounds which the Collectors have taken from him
for the maintenance of the Presbyterian Ministers, which suffering he endured
to the day of his Death, and which his Society still suffers.

But for as much as his sufferings continued more than forty Years, and were so
numerous, that I doubt not but to give a particular account of them, would fill
a larger volume than was ever Printed in New England, I must desist, and shall
only mention the last suffering which he met with from the Authority on account
of his Religion, and was but a little time before his Death, and is as follows.
J. R. and diverse of his Society having as good a Right to New London Meeting
house as any of the Inhabitants of the Town, it being built by a public Rate,
every one paying their Proportion according to their Estate, did propose to
hold his Meetings there at Noon-time, between the Presbyterian Meetings, so as
not to disturb them in either of their Meetings; and accordingly we came to the
Meeting House, and finding their Meeting was not finished, we stood without the
door till they had ended and were come out, and then J. R. told the People that
our coming was to hold our Meeting between their Meetings, and that we had no
design to make any disturbance, but would break up our Meeting as soon as they
were ready for their Afternoon Meeting. Whereupon several of the Neighbors
manifested their freedom in the matter; yet the Constable came in the time of
our Meeting, with an Order to break up our Meeting, and accordingly with his
attendance violently laid hands on several of us, hauling Men and Women out of
the Meeting like as Saul did in his unconverted state, as may be seen Acts 3.3.
And for no other Crime than what I have here truly related, J. R. was had to
Court, and charged with a Riot, though all that he did was to expound a Chapter
in the Bible, and all that his People did was to sit still and attend to his
Exposition, till the Constable with his Attendance made the Disturbance, as
aforesaid.

So that if my self had been the Judge, as I was not, I should have thought the
Constable to have been guilty of the Riot, and not J. R. However J. R. was
fined ten Shillings, for which the Officer first took ten Sheep, and then
complained that they were not sufficient to answer the Fine and Charges,
whereupon he came a second time and took a milch Cow out of the Pasture on the
same account, and so we heard no more about it, by which I suppose that the Cow
and ten Sheep satisfied the Fine and Charges.

And I mention this Article of his sufferings, because it was the last Fine
that was laid on him, for he soon after dyed.

But the same Spirit of Persecution under which he suffered, is yet living
among us; as is evident by what here follows. The last 5th. Month called July,
in the year 1725. We were going to our Meeting, being eight of us in number, it
being the first day of the Week, the day which we usually meet on, as well as
the rest of our Neighbors; and as we were in our way, we were taken up on the
King's Highway, by order of Joseph Backus, called a Justice of the Peace, and
the next day, by his order, cruelly whipped with an unmerciful Instrument, by
which our Bodies were exceedingly wounded and maimed; and the next first day
following, as we were returning home from our Meeting, we were again three of
us taken up on the King's Highway, by order of John Woodward and Ebenezer West
of Lebanon, called Justices of the Peace, and the next day by them sentenced to
be whipped, and were accordingly carried to the place of Execution, and stripped in
order to receive the Sentence; but there happening to be present some tender
spirited People, who seeing the Wounds in our Bodies which we had received the
Week before, paid the Fine, and so prevented the Punishment. Also the same John
Woodward soon after this, committed two of our Brethren to Prison, ( viz)
Richard Man and Elisha Man, for not attending the Presbyterian Meeting,
although they declared it to be contrary to their Consciences so to do. Neither
have their Persecutors allowed them one meal of Victua's, nor so much as Straw
to lie on, all the time of their Imprisonment, although they are well known to be
very poor Men.

But to return to the Matter I was upon, which was to prove P. P'.s Assertion
false, in saying J. R. never suffered the loss of one Hair of his Head by the
Authority, for any Article of his Religion, nor for the Exercise of it: Whenas
all these Sufferings which I have mentioned, were for Articles of his Religion,
and for the Exercise of it. And had not P. P. been bereft as well of Common
Reason as Conscience, he would not have presumed to have asserted such a thing,
which the generality of the Neighborhood knows to be false.

In the next place I shall proceed to his 58th Page, where in his Ishmaelitish
Language he pretends to give a Relation concerning J. R'.s second Marriage: But
before I trace him in his Mocks and Scoffs, I shall give the Reader a true and
impartial Account of that matter, which is as follows.

After J. R's. first Wife had lest him on account of his Religion, as has
already been proved, he remained single for more than twenty five years, in
hopes that she would come to Repentance, and forsake her unlawful Companions.
But seeing no Change in her, he began to think of Marrying another Woman, and
accordingly did agree upon Marriage with a Maid belonging to New London, whose
name was Mary Ransford. And for as much as he could not in Conscience conform
to the Customary Form of Marriage practiced in Connecticut Colony, having
publicly opposed them, and openly in Court declared that he did utterly
renounce all the visible Worship of New England, for more than twenty years
before, upon which account he had lost his Children, as has already been
proved; and there being no Person in the Government that would Marry them in
any other Form, they thereupon agreed to go into the County Court, and there
declare their Marriage: and accordingly they did so; he leading his Bride by
the Hand into Court, where the Judges were sitting, and a multitude of
Spectators present, and then desired the whole Assembly to take notice, that he
took that Woman to be his Wife; his Bride also assenting to what he said.
Whereupon the Judge offered to Marry them in their Form, which J. R. refused,
telling him that he had once been Married by their Authority, and by their
Authority they had taken away his Wife again, and rendered him no Reason why
they did it. Upon which account he looked at their Form of Marriage to be of no
value, and therefore would be Married by their Form no more, etc. And from the
Court he went to the Governor's House, with his Bride, and declared their
Marriage to the Governor, who seemed to like it well enough, and wished them
much Joy, which is a usual Compliment.

And thus having given a true and impartial Relation of the manner of his
Marriage to his second Wife, which I doubt not but every unprejudiced Person
will judge as authentic as any Marriage that was ever made in Connecticut
Colony.

In the next place I shall proceed to inform the Reader in what manner he came
to be deprived of this his second Wife, for after they had lived together about
three years, and had had two Children, the Court had up J. R's. Wife, and
^^arged her with Fornication, for having her last Child, pretending no other
Reason, than that the Marriage was not Lawful; and thereupon called her Mary
Ransford, after her maiden Name.

And then vehemently urged her to give her Oath who was the Father of her
Child, which they charged to be by Fornication, her Husband standing by her in
the Court with the Child in his Arms, strictly commanded her not to take the
Oath, for these three following Reasons. First, because it was contrary to
Christ's Command, Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc.

A second Reason was, because it was a vain Oath, in as much as they had been
Married so publicly, and then lived together three years after, and that he
himself did not deny his Child, nor did any Person doubt who was the Father of
the Child, etc.

A third Reason was, he told her they laid a snare for her, and wanted her Oath
to prove their Charge, which was, that the Child was by Fornication; so that
her Swearing would be that he was the Father of that Child by Fornication, and
so it would not only be a Reproach to him and the Child, but also a false Oath,
for as much as the Child was not by Fornication.

For these Reasons he forbid her taking the Oath, but bid her tell the Court,
that her Husband was the Father of that Child in his Arms. He also told her in
the Court, that if she would be ruled by him, he would defend her from any
damage.

But if she would join with the Court against him, by being a Witness that the
Child was by Fornication, he should scruple to own her any more as a Wife.

But the Court continuing to urge her to take the Oath, promising her favor if
she took it, and threatening her with severity if she refused to take it, at
length she declared that she would not be ruled by J. R. but would accept of
the Court's Favor, and so took the Oath; and the Favor which the Court
granted her, was to pass this following Sentence.

New London, at a County Court the 15th. of Septem. 1702.
Mary Ransford of New London, being presented by the Grandjury-men to this
Court, for having a Child by Fornication, which was born in March last, and she
being now brought before this Court to answer for the same, being Examined who
was the Father of her Child, she said John Rogers Senior of New London, to
which she made Oath, the said Rogers being present.

This Court having considered her Offense, Sentence her for the same, to pay
unto the County Treasurer Forty Shillings Money, or to be whipped ten stripes on
the naked Body. She is allowed till the last of November to pay her Fine.

A true Copy of the Record, as far as it respects the said Mary Ransford her
Examination and Fine.

Test. John Picket, Clerk.

And now the poor Woman finding that by her Oath she had proved her Child
illegitimate, and thereby denied her Marriage, and that her Husband dare not
own her as a Wife; for I think that no Woman can be said to be a Wife, (though
ever so lawfully married) if she turn so much against her Husband, as not only
to disobey his most strict Commands, but also to prove by her Oath, that his
Children are by Fornication as it was in this case.

She was also greatly terrified on account of her Whipping, to avoid which she
some time after made her escape out of the Government, to a remote Island in
Rhoad-Island Government, called Block-Island; and in about eight Years after
she had thus been driven from her Husband, she was married to one Robert Jones,
upon said Island, with whom she still lives in that Government.

Ant thus was J.R. deprived of his second Wife, who only for having a Child by
her Husband, was thus driven from him; By which means she afterward fell into
Adultery, as his first Wife had done before.

And for the proof of what I have here asserted, take these following
Testimonies.

The Testimony of James Wealch and Mary his Wife, both of lawful Age testify,
That John Rogers's second Wife, whose Maiden Name was Mary Ransford, came to
Block-Island after she left her Husband, and continued there several Years, and
then was married to Robert Jones, by Edward Ball, Justice of the Peace, and has
ever since lived with the said Jones in Rhoad-Island Government.

And we do farther testify, that they were married in the year 1710. Dated in
Colechester, November. 16th. 1725.

James Wealch. Mary Wealch.


And thus having enjoyed his second Wife but about three Years, is again
deprived of her; whereupon he again lived single twelve Years, which was four
Years after she was married to Robert Jones, and then he made suit to one Sarah
Coals of Oysterbay, on Long Island, a Widow; and by reason of the many false
Reports which had been spread about the Country, as if he had turned away his
second Wife, etc. he offered the Woman to carry her to Block-Island, where she
might know the truth of the matter, by discoursing with the Woman her self, as
well as the Authority and Neighbors, which accordingly he did, by which means
she was so well satisfied, that she proposed to be married before they came
off; and accordingly were married by Justice Ray, who gave this following
Certificate.

These Lines are to signify, That I the Subscriber married John Rogers of
New London, and Sarah Coals of Oysterbay, thu 25th of the seventh Month 1714.
in Block-Island, in Rhoad-Island Colony.

Attested by me,

Simon Ray, Justice.

Thus it appears by comparing the date of his Marriage with the date of his
Wive's Marriage to Robert Jones, that he remained single four Years after she
was married.

And this is a true account of his two last Marriages.

But to return to P. P. who seems to rouse up his Courage, as if he intended to
venture another Stroke at the dead Man with whom he is fighting, before he
takes to his heels, and thereupon arms himself like an Ishmaelite, with Mocks
and Scoffs; though all the Revenge he can promise himself thereby, is to move
some vain spirited Person like himself to a Laughter.

And first, he begins as follows. But before I conclude, let me mention some
other of his Sufferings, which though he fretted at at home, yet never complained
of publicly; I mean what happened to him about his Maid Mary Ransford, whom he
first bought, then took to his Bed, (at least when he wanted her) till she
proved with Child, and in the fifth or sixth Month of her pregnancy, as I
remember, he solemnly betrothed her to him; then afterward dwelling with her
several years, and having had two Children by her, upon some disgust put her
away, and all by his own Authority, agreeable to that Rule in the Law, at least
in one Respect, that in the same way that a Contract is made, it may be made
void.

Reply. As to what he says that he first bought her, I grant to be true, which
is an Argument that no Person had any challenge to her, and therefore no ways
unlawful for him to Marry her.

2dly. Says he, Then took to his Bed, at least when he wanted her.

Reply. This I take to be a false and lascivious Speech.

First, it is false, because their first Child was not born within the limited
time which the Law allows after their Marriage, nor were they ever charged with
Fornication, nor any unclean act relating to their first Child: and as to his
taking her to his Bed after he had Married her, no body doubts of it.

Yet to say a Man takes his Wife to Bed when he wants her, I suppose all modest
People will take to be a lascivious speech.

In the next place he confesses, that after he had solemnly betrothed her to
him, he lived with her several years, and had two Children by her, etc. Here he
plainly proves what I have already asserted, ( viz.) that the Courts punishing
her, was only on the account of their Marriage, because J. R. could not in
Conscience be Married in their Form, etc.

He also adds, that upon some disgust he put her away, and all by his own
Authority, agreeable to that Rule, etc. that in the same way that a Contract is
made, it may be made void.

This I affirm to be a positive Falsehood, for it was the Authority of the Court
which terrified her so as to cause her to renounce her Husband, and flee into
another Government, and marry another Man, as has already been proved.

And as to his Rule in the Law, it is very applicable to the taking away of J.
R.'s first Wife; for it was the Authority that married her to him, and the same
Authority took her from him, without giving a Reason why they did it.

After which ( says be) he was lawfully Married to a Woman of Oyster-Bay. He
also adds, That he is not at all at a loss how J. R. and this Quaker Woman
overlooked the small disparity in Religion that was between them, so as to
match together; but by what sophistry he levelled that horrible Jogg in his
Conversation, respecting Mary aforesaid, I cannot imagine.

Reply. I shall first inform the Reader what the horrible Jogg was, and
secondly how it came to be removed.

First, The horrible Jogg was those horrible Lies which P. P. has now presumed
to Print, which had been spread about the Country, as if J. R. had turned away
his Wife; and the way that it came to be removed, was by carrying the Woman to
Block Island, where she might not only have opportunity of discoursing with his
Wife, who had left him twelve years, and had been Married four years to another
Man, but also with the Authority and Neighbors, and so the horrible Jogg came
to be levelled; that is, the horrible Lies came to be discovered to the Woman,
and they were Married on the Island before they came off.

And now he proceeds in his Ishmaelitish Language as follows.

To me I remember he accounted for it after this sort: said he, I have
experienced wonderful operations of Gods hand upon my Body as well as upon my
Soul, and so proceeding signified to me, that upon his entering into a state of
suffering, he felt such a mavelous mortification of his members which were
upon the Earth, as that his venereal Propensity in particular seemed to be
totally extinguished. But however after he had encountered the sharpest of his
Trials, it flamed forth again, even beyond the limits of Nature, whereby it was
manifest, that God's hand was in an eminent way in it. Whereupon, etc. And I
never could get him an inch farther than this, yet he would not make a full
stop neither, but signified to me, that in a more convenient time he would let
me into that Mystery, and fully convince me that he did it by a divine Impulse
from first to last. I guess he told Capt. Wetherell, who was then Judge of the
Court, something of this story, by the Judge's Answer to him in Court.

You shall hear the Rounds of the matter, etc. It was thus, at a County Court
at New London, my self a Spectator, with a multitude of others being present,
came J. R. into Court, leading in his hand Mary aforesaid, and applying himself
to the Judges, said thus, ( viz.) I desire you all to take notice, that I take
this my Servant Maid to be my Wife; I bought her with my Money, and I take her
to be my Wife. Replied the Judge, How? how? What do you mean John? why are you
not Published and Married in an orderly way? Continued he, I do not regard your
Laws in that respect, nor will I be Married by your Authority. Then applying
himself directly to the Judge, said, Captain Wetherell, thou know something
of the occasion of this, for I hinted it to thee at such a time. Replied the
Judge, Why thou filthy Beast, I know nothing that thou toldest me, but of a
base Pang of Lust that beset thee; go for shame, be gone, the Court will not be
hindered.

Reply. As to the first part of those Mocks and Scoffs, in which he pretends J.
R. gave him an account concerning his Marrying his second Wife, I shall first
give the Reader a true and exact account of what it was that J. R. told him,
and the whole of it.

And 2dly. I shall offer some Reasons to convince the Reader, that the account
I give is true, and that his Account is false.

First, As to what J. R. told him, my self being present, with diverse others,
P. P. asked him concerning his second Marriage, after he had so long lived
single, etc.

J. R. told him that after he was unjustly deprived of his Wife, it pleased God
to give him the gift of Continency for more than twenty years, after which time
he thought it to be the Will of God for him to Marry again.

And this I affirm to be the whole of what he told him.

Now to satisfy the Reader that this account is true, and that P. P's. Relation
is false, take these following Reasons.

First, Because J. R. was never addicted to use such foul and extravagant
Language, but was always modest in his Discourse, as I doubt not but the
greatest of his Enemies will readily witness in his behalf.

2dly. No Rational Person will suppose, that a Man of his Understanding, would
frame such Mocks and Scoffs against himself.

3dly. A third Reason is, That were the account he gives translated out of his
Ishmaelitish and debaucht Language, into a civil Tongue, it might express near
the same thing as my account has done.

By these three Reasons it is plain that the account he pretends to give of
this matter, is nothing else but some of his Ishmaelitish Arrows shot at his
imagined Enemy.

And I do freely appeal to every Reader, who is endowed but with common
Morality, whether this civil Answer of J. R. to P. P's. Question, deserves all
those Mocks, Scoffs, Flouts and Derisions which P. P. has cast upon him: or
whether it is not the express Image of the most lascivious debaucht and unmanly
spirit of a Coward, thus to insult and trample upon the Grave of a dead Man.

And now having disgorged himself of thus much of his debaucht Meditations, and
fathered it upon J. R. he prepares himself for another Vomit of the same
matter, which he thinks to Father upon Capt. Wetherell, Judge of the Court,
another dead Man, Whom the Clods of the Valley forbid to answer for himself,
and accordingly proceeds as follows; You shall hear the Rounds of the matter,
and so goes on as has already been shown, till he comes to these following
words.

Replied the Judge, Why thou filthy Beast, I know nothing thou toldest me, but
of a base pang of Lust that beset thee; go for shame, be gone, the Court will
not be hindered.

Reply. That these lascivious Words were never spoken by the Judge of the
Court, but proceeded out of his own unclean Heart, is very obvious, for these
two Reasons.

First, For that it is altogether uncredible to suppose that an elderly Man,
who was Judge of a Court, should be so notoriously debauched and abusive, as to
tell a Man who came civily into his Presence to be publicly married, that it
was nothing but a base pang of Lust that beset him, and call him flthy Beast,
and bid him be gone: Surely it would be a great abuse to the Judge of a Court
after his Death, to suppose such a thing of him: Especially since there is no
better proof of it than P. P's. bare Word, which has been proved false
throughout his whole Book.

A second Reason is, because it so exactly agrees with the reft of his
debauched Discourse throughout his Book, that any one may boldly say it is P.
P's. Language, for his Speech bewrays him.

And now I can do no less than blame P. P. for that he neither attends the Rule
of Scripture nor proper Speech; and yet in Page 39th. upbraids J. R. with the
same thing, ( viz.) for not attending the Rules of Speech in his Books.

Now had P. P. attended the Rule of Scripture which says, Judge your selves, he
would not have been judging a dead Man, who is gone into the hands of a
righteous Judge.

And 2dly. Had he attended the Rules of Speech, he would not have called
Marriage a base pang of Lust, since it is written, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is
honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will judge. By which we may observe, that Marriage is an Ordinance of God, and
is not a base pang of Lust; but Whoredom and Adultery is a base pang of Lust:
And had he attended these two Rules, he must have confessed, that himself was
more properly the Effect of a base pang of Lust, than J. R's. marrying a second
Wife, after he had been unjustly deprived of his Wife for more than twenty five
Years.

But to follow him to the end of this Discourse, ( says he) In about three or
four Months as I remember, Mary brought him a Child, he owned it, and got her
with Child again, having suffered Persecution for the first according to Law;
foreseeing the second Persecution, he charged Mary not to lay the Child to him,
if examined by Authority, she promised him she would not, but failed of her
Word; which occasioned him farther sufferings for his Conscience; which so
roiled him, that he put her away, and dwelt no more with her.

Reply, As to what he first asserts, ( viz.) That Mary brought him a Child in
three or four Months, and that he suffered Persecution for it according to Law,
is abominably false; for the Authority never charged J. R. or his Wife with any
Misdemeanour relating to their first Child, as has already been declared. And
as to what he says that he charged her not to lay the Child to him, if examined
by Authority, and that she promised him she would not, etc. is not only false,
but so nonsensical and foolish, that it deserves no Answer: For what Person of
common Reason will believe, that after he had been married in the King's Court,
before a multitude of Spectators, as P. P. confesses in the same page, and then
live with his Wife three Years, until he had had two Children by her, and then
charge his Wife not to lay his last Child to him; surely none will believe such
Folly. And whereas he signifies, that his second Child was the occasion of his
suffering for Conscience, I confess to be true; for it was on account of his
second Child, that his Wife was sentenced to be whipped, for which she fled out
of the Colony, etc.

And that it was for his Conscience is evident, in that he could not in
Conscience be married according to the Custom practiced in Connecticut Colony,
which was the only Crime alleged against him, relating to that matter.

And whereas he says, that he put her away, and dwelt no more with her; that he
put her away is false, for she denied him and left him, and married another
Man, but that he dwelt no more with her is true, for she lives with the same
Man to this Day.

And now having followed him thus far through his Mocks, Scoffs and Falsehoods, in
which he has been insulting and sporting himself over a dead Person, a Crime so
contemptible, that nothing but the base and unmanly Spirit of a Coward could
have endured to have done.

In the next place I can do no less than mind him of the severe Threatenings
contained in the holy Scriptures, against such Persons as he is; who shall
presume to sport themselves by mocking and scoffing at God's faithful Children
after their Death, as he has done; which is to be seen Isai. 57.1, 2, 3, 4.
Verses. The righteous perishes and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men
are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil
to come. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one
walking in his uprightness. But draw near hither ye sons of the Sorceress, the
seed of the Adulterer and the WHORE. Against whom do ye sport your selves?
against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the Tongue? Are ye not Children
of transgression, a seed of falsehood? etc.

Thus it appears, that God will surely call such Persons as P. P. to an
account, for sporting themselves with their Falsehoods at his People after their
death.

In page 61. he endeavors to excuse his sullying the Character of the dead as
follows, Methinks when we are engaged in the Cause of Truth against Error, etc.
it may be very warrantable, yea, necessary, and more especially where the case
is peculiar as this is, that a Man boasting of Perfection, etc. should
deliberately practice Whoredom, and live in it diverse years, etc.

Reply. But instead of being engaged in the cause of Truth against Error, he
has been engaged in Lies against Truth, as has sufficiently been proved
throughout his Book, both by the plain Records of the Courts, and other
sufficient Evidence.

And as to what he says of J. R's. deliberately practicing Whordom, and living
in it diverse years, it is manifest that he has Reference to the three years
that he enjoyed his second Wife, before she was driven from him; for as I said
before, after he was deprived of his first Wife, he lived single twenty five
years, and then Married his second Wife, which he enjoyed but three years
before he was deprived of her, and then remained single again twelve years
before he Married his third Wife: So that he was suffered to keep a Wife but
three years in forty, which three years is the time that P. P. charges him with
deliberately practicing Whoredom. For he was never charged with Whoredom the
whole seven and thirty years that he lived single.

And I suppose P. P. forgets that he has several times in his Book owned her to
be his Wife, as in page fifty eight, where he says, He solemnly betrothed her
to him, then afterward dwelling with her several years, and having had two
Children by her, etc. Here he plainly confesses, that it was after she was
solemnly betrothed to him, that he had two Children by her; and yet in the
turning over but one leaf forgets himself, and calls it deliberately practicing
Whoredom, etc. And thus is he left through the false and envious spirit by
which he is acted, to confound his own discourse.

In page 62 he pretends to apply himself to such as are already fallen into the
snare of that Fowler, etc. But I shall pass over much of this Discourse,
judging it so nonsensical and contrary to the Scripture, that every Person of a
common Capacity will easily discern the Folly of it.

In page 66. says he, Again, be persuaded to take a view of J. R. and try
whether he were a Minister of Christ or not, etc. In trying of his Authority to
Preach and Baptize, I think you may safely conclude that the Office of a Gospel
Minister is like that of a Priest, in this respect, ( viz.) that no Man takes
the honor of it upon himself but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb.
5.4. Wherefore the Apostle says plainly, in Romans 10.15. How shall they Preach
except they be sent.

Reply. That all Gods Ministers both in the time of the Law and Gospel have
been called of God, as was Aaron, I grant, and on the contrary all false
Teachers and Hirelings which the World heaps up to themselves, have always had
their call from an earthly Power, and are not called of God as was Aaron, and
as to what is written Romans 10.15. How shall they Preach except they be sent?
(that is sent of God) by which I understand that none can Preach the Mysteries
of God's Kingdom, but such who are sent of God, and to such God reveals his
Mind and Will; so that they are capable to deliver their Message from his
Mouth, and have no need to study vain Words out of their own Heart, as false
Prophers and Hirelings have always done, as may be seen, Jer. 23.16. Thus says
the Lord of bosts, Hearken not to the Words of the Prophets that prophesy unto
you, they make you vain, they speak a vision of their own beart, and not out of
the Mouth of the Lord. 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the
People, etc. Verse 3. And through Covetousness shall they with feigned Words
make Merchandise of you. Thus the Scriptures show us, that false Prophets who
are not sent of God, are they who through Covetousness Preach studied or
feigned Words out of their own Heart, and not from the Mouth of the Lord. For
they are not called of God as was Aaron, and therefore are Ignorant of his Mind
and Will.

2dly. Says he, That the call of God thereto is either first, extraordinary as
God called diverse of the Prophets of old, and as Christ called the Apostles,
who always proved their Authority by Miracles, etc.

Or secondly, it is ordinary, ( viz.) by Ordination and laying on of the Hands
of the Presbytery, etc.

And every Man pretending to that Office, has always been able to prove his
Authority in the one or other of these ways, excepting a few such as George Fox
and John Rogers.

Reply, As Apostates and Heretics have ever been the fittest Instruments for
Satan to spread his damnable Doctrines abroad by, so I know of no Heresy more
dangerous than this now broacht by P. P. For if we are to reject, as he would
have us, all Prophets and Gospel Ministers, who cannot prove their Authority
either by Miracles or Ordination, and the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery, then surely we must Condemn all those Blessed Witnesses which God
raised up in the time of Popery, to testify against the Church of Rome, because
they did not prove their Authority by Miracles; nor was there any to ordain
them, but their cruel Persecutors under whom they suffered Martyrdoms.

Yet did God so open their understanding to understand the Scripture, and give
them a Mouth and Wisdom, that all their Adversaries were not able to gainsay;
which was a sufficient Testimony to prove their Authority, and that they were
the true Ministers of Christ.

2dly. By the same Rule we must also condemn John the Baptist, and judge him to
be a Deceiver; first, for that he did not prove his Authority by Miracles, as
the Scripture plainly tells us, John 10.41. And many resorted to him, (that is
Christ) and said John did no miracles, etc. Thus it appears by the Testimony of
those who were the Followers of Christ, that John did no Miracle.

And 2dly. That he was not Ordained by the Presbytery, is clear from Mark 1.1.
The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, etc. Ver. 3, 4. The voice of one
crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight. John did Baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of
Repentance, for the remission of Sins.

Thus it appears, that John's Ministry was the Beginning of the Gospel of Jusus
Christ; and therefore no Person was capable to Ordain him to his Office:
Otherwise they that did Ordain him, must have been in the Work before him, and
he could not have been the beginner of it.

And thus if we take P. P's. Rule, we must number John the Baptist in with
these few which he says are such as George Fox and John Rogers, because they
have not proved their Authority by Miracles, nor the imposition of Hands, and
so consequently we are to doubt of his Doctrine, which is the beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and on which the whole New Testament is built: And for
as much as the Old Testament is fulfilled in the New, this Heresy now broached
by P. P. tends to the overthrow of both Old and New Testament, and so
consequently to reduce the World into Paganism.

In Page 67. he goes on as follows. Once more be persuaded to make a few short
but reasonable Reflections on some part of his Life, and see if you can therein
discover the Characters and Signs of a Minister of Christ: Particularly the
matter about Mary Ransford. And methinks Reason should guide you thus in your
Thoughts, ( viz.) First, That she was either his lawful Wife, or not; if not,
then his Whore, etc.

Or, Secondly, If she were his lawful Wife, then his putting her away was
without sufficient Grounds, etc.

And consequently he broke Wedlock, and committed Adultery in so doing. If you
Reply, that David and Peter did as bad, I Will grant it; but I observe, that they
both repented of, confessed and forsook their Sins; but he always justified
his, and lived in it to the Day of his Death, that is his Adultery. If she were
his Wife, as I think you will judge she was, etc.

Reply. As to his quaerying whether she were his Wife or his Whore, I take to
be another of his Ishmaelitish Arrows shot at his imagined Enemy, for he has
already confessed in page 58th. that the two Children he had by her were after
he had solemnly betrothed her to him, and now again he says if she were his
Wife, as I think you will judge she was.

Here again he makes no doubt but every one will judge her to be his Wife; so
that there is no Argument between us concerning that point, since we both allow
her to be his lawful Wife.

And as to what he says concerning his putting her away, I have already given an
account how she was terrified by the Court, to deny and forsake her Husband,
etc.

He also asserts, That he lived in his Adultery to the day of his Death, by
which it is manifest that he forgets what he said in Page 59th. ( viz.) That
after this woman had left him, he was lawfully married to a Woman of Oysterbay,
etc. which if he had not forgot himself, he could not have been so ignorant,
but that he must have known that while a Man lived in Adultery, he could not be
lawfully married to another Woman.

In Page 68th. he concludes with this following Exhortation, ( viz.) Finally,
Pray and strive against this one Evil in special, which otherwise will greatly
retard your progress from Darkness to Light, and that is the slavish Fear of
being made the Scorn of Fools, and Song of the Drunkards, who will probably at
every turn upbraid you of Unconstancy, twit you and yours of your Quakerism,
and the like; this sort of Suffering is an evil Disease; it is what David
earnestly deprecated after his Fall.

Reply, Here he greatly abuses and wrests the holy Scriptures, through his own
Ignorance and gross Darkness: For David was so far from being unconstant in
matters of Religion, or giving his Adversaries occasion to twit him on that
account, that the Scriptures testify that he was a Man after God's own Heart,
save only in the matter of Uriah; and throughout the whole Scripture is he
mentioned as a Pattern of all such as was most constant and unmovable in
matters of Religion; And as to what David laments in the 69th Psalm 12th Verse,
how that he was the Song of the Drunkards, was not after his Fall, as P. P.
ignorantly affects: For before his Fall, and always after to the Day of his
Death, he was the most honorable King upon the Earth; being honored not only
by God and his Church, but by all the great Nations in the World, who were most
of them his Servants and Tributaries, and therefore was far enough from being
the Scorn of Fools and Song of the Drunkards. But the time that he was the Song
of the Drunkards, was when Saul with his drunken Army were hunting him like a
Partridge in the Mountains, and drove him out of all the Coasts of Israel, into
other Kingdoms, which he also laments in the same Psalm at the 8th. verse, in
these Words, I am become a stranger to my Brethren, and an aliant to my Mothers
Children. Now we know that he was no stranger to his Brethren after his Fall,
but was their King, and dwelt among them. By which it is manifest, that these
Expressions of David had only reference to the time of his exile by Saul, and
not after his fall as P. P. has ignorantly asserted; yet that this evil Disease
which he seems to groan under, has been very grievous to him, I doubt not, (
viz.) being twitted with his unconstancy in Religion, (...).

But how he thinks to get rid of his evil disease I know not, since he so much
slighted his Religion when he had it, as to swap and change it about till he
had none left; and for him to think to help his evil Disease by comparing
himself to the Prophet David, whose Life and Conversation was of such an
infinite Longitude ^^de of the Life and Conversation of P. P. that the very
comparison tends more to stir up the stink of his evil Disease, than any ways
to abate it.

And now having gone through his Book, I shall look back and briefly mind the
Reader of some Remarkable Passages therein contained, which may be worthy of
Observation. First, as to his Advertisement, he tells us, it was finished by
the best advice since John Rogers's Death.

Now compare this with what he says in his seventh page, where he tells us,
that when he began to fear that he had been in the way of an erroneous and
Heterodox Religion, etc. that with all possible earnestness, he asked Counsel
of the Wonderful Counselor, and Wisdom of him that gives it liberally to all,
etc.

From which I observe, that the Spirit which he was acted by in the time of his
visitation, (which he calls his being led into Quakerism) led him in times of
difficulties to ask Advice and Counsel of God, who is the Wonderful Counselor,
and he that gives Wisdom to all, etc.

But since his Apostasy, he calls that the best Advice which advises him to
deride and belly a Man in his Grave; which Advice must needs be given him either
by the Father of Lies, or some of his Children, which is another manifest Proof
of his Apostasy.

Another thing which I shall take notice of, is in page 54 where he asserts,
that the Divorcing J. R's. Wife from him, was his Adultery and Beastiality.

To which I answer, Here he greatly reflects upon the Authority of the
Government, for if J. R. was guilty of Beastiality, then the Authority was
highly guilty of injustice in a two fold manner.

1st. Because they did not execute that Punishment on him which both the Law of
God and their own Law required them to have done, which is Death.

And 2dly. It was great injustice to take away his Wife on that account,
because there is no Law of God nor this Colony that allows of such a Sentence.

And 3dly. They were highly guilty of Perjury, in not acting according to the
Law of God and this Colony, which they were bound by their solemn Oath to have
done.

And thus P. P. by belying J. R. has greatly exposed the Authority of the
Government.

Again in page 60. and 61. he informs the Reader, how the Authority Punished
John Rogers and his second Wife on account of their two Children, and yet in
page 58. confesses that J. R. had both the Children by her after he had
solemnly betrothed her to him.

So that in short P. P. charges the Authority with Punishing J. R. for having
Children by his Wife, and acquitting him for Beastiality.

And now to conclude, under the consideration of John Rogers's great
Sufferings, which began soon after his Conversion, and continued all his Life
after which was near fifty years, and that now after his Death the Adversary
having stirred up P. P. to pursue him in his Grave with Mocks, Scoffs and
abominable Lies, and yet throughout his whole Book, is not able to prove him
guilty of any one Misdemeanour in the whole course of his Life, which is a
sufficient Argument that he is one of those which Christ speaks of, Mat. 5.11,
12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake: Rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great u your Reward in Heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you.

FINIS.
Printed for the Author, and sold at his House in New London, 1726.


