THE TRIALS OF Sixteen Persons for PIRACY, etc.

Four of which were found Guilty, And the rest Acquitted.

At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Pirates, Held at Boston
within the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on Monday the
Fourth Day of July, Anno Dom. 1726. Pursuant to His Majesty's Commission,
Founded on an Act of Parliament, made in the Eleventh and Twelfth Years of the
Reign of King WILLIAM the Third, Entitled; An Act for the more Effectual
Suppression of Piracy. And made Perpetual by an Act of the Sixth of King GEORGE.

BOSTON: Printed for and Sold by Joseph Edwards, at the Corner Shop on the
North-side of the Townhouse, 1726.

At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies, and
Robberies upon the High Seas, Held at the Courthouse in Boston within the
Province of the Massachusetts*Bay in New England, on Monday the Fourth Day of
July, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, by the
Grace of GOD of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the
Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, 1726.
PRESENT.

THE Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief of
the said Province, President of the Court, and the other Honorable
Commissioners hereafter named, viz.

Of the Council of His Majesty's said Province.
William Tail^r Esquire Nathaniel By^ield Esquire Addington Davenport Esquire John Clark
Esquire Adam Winthrop Esquire Jonathan Dowse Esquire Samuel Thaxter Esquire Spencer Phipps Esquire
Thomas Palmer Esquire Pe^^ (...) Esquire Benjamin Lynde Esquire Thomas Hutchinson Esquire
Thomas Fitch Esquire Jonathan Belcher Esquire Paul Dudley Esquire John Turner Esquire Daniel
Oliver Esquire Edward Hutchinson Esquire
The Honorable Samuel Sewall Esquire Chief Justice of His Majesty's Superior
Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery within the said
Province.

John Meinz^es Esquire Judge of the Court of Vice-Admiralty.

Capt James Cornwall Esquire Commander of His Majesty's Ship of War the Sheerness.

J^^^ah Willard Esquire Secretary of the said Province.

Thomas Lechmere Esquire Surveyor-General of North America.

First Proclamation was made by the Crier Commanding all Persons to keep
Silence upon Pain of Imprisonment, whilst His Majesty's Commission for the
Trial of Pyracies, Felonies and Robberies, was in Reading.

Then His Majesty's Royal Commission was openly Read, and the Court Solemnly
and Publicly Called and Proclaimed

Then the Honorable William Dummer Esquire President of the Court, took the Oath
Appointed by the Statute, o^ Act of Parliament on which the said Commission was
Founded, and afterward Administered the same Oath to the other Commissioners
aforenamed.

Then the Court were pleased Unanimously to Appoint Mr. Samuel Tyley a Notary
Public within and for the County of Suffolk, and Province aforesaid, to be
Register of the said Court, who was Sworn to the Faithful Discharge of that
Office.

Then a Warrant issued out by Order of the Court, Signed by the Register;
Directed to Arthur Savage Esquire Marshall of the Admiralty, Requiring him
forthwith to bring into Court Capt. William Atkinson Mariner; His Majesty's
Advocate-General having Exhibited against him Articles of Piracy, Felony and
Robbery.

Afterward the Crier of the Court made Proclamation for all Persons that could
give Evidence for the King against any of the Prisoners to be Tried for Pyracy,
Felony and Robbery on the High Seas, to come into Court, and they should be
heard.

Then the said William Atkinson was brought to the Bar, and Arraigned upon
Articles of Pyracy, Felony and Robbery Exhibited against him by Robert Auchmuty
Esquire His Majesty's Advocate-General.

The Register read the said Articles in the words following, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, sc.
At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies and
Robberies on the High Seas, Held at Boston, within the County of Suffolk, on
the Fourth Day of July in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARticles of Pyracy, Felony and Robbery Exhibited by Robert Auchmuty Esquire His
Majesty's Advocate-General against William Atkinson Mariner.

First, For that the said William Atkinson, with others on Board the Snow then
called the Fames-Revenge (formerly called the Elizabeth) and then under the
Command of William Fly, on or about the Seventh Day of June last, in the
Latitude of -- on the high Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty
Court of Great Britain, did Pyratically and Feloniously seize, take and possess
him and themselves of a Ship named the John and Betty belonging to His
Majesty's good Subjects, and Commanded by John Gale, and Pyratically and
Feloniously then and there Robbed her of several of her Sails, Clothes, and
Small Arms, all of the Value of One Hundred Pounds, and the Property of His
Majesty's said Subjects.

Secondly, For that the said William Atkinson with others as aforesaid on board
the said Snow Named and Commanded as aforesaid, on or about the 11th* Day of
said June, and off Deleware-Bay, upon the high Seas, and within the
Jurisdiction aforesaid with Force and Arms Pyratically and Feloniously did
seize take and possess him and themselves of a Sloop named the Rachel belonging
to His Majesty's good Subjects, one Samuel Harris Commander, and with Force as
aforesaid, out of the said Sloop did take and carry away one James Benbrooke
one of His Majesty's Subjects, and then being in the Peace of Our said Lord the
King.

Thirdly, For that the said William Atkinson, with others as aforesaid, on
Board the said Snow Named and Commanded as aforesaid, on or about the 23 d Day
of June last, to the Eastward, on or near Browns Banks so called, upon the high
Seas, and within the Jurisdiction as aforesaid, with Force and Arms Pyratically
and Feloniously did seize, take and possess him, and themselves of a Fishing
Schooner, named the James, belonging to His Majesty's good Subjects George
Girdler Master, and then and there Manned the said Schooner with Six Pirates,
and sent her in quest of others His Majesty's Subjects, and kept the said
Master and two others on Board the said Snow Prisoners.

All which several Acts of Pyracy, Felony, and Robbery, were by the said
William Atkinson done and Committed in manner as aforesaid, Contrary to the
Statutes and Laws in such Cases made and provided, and to the Peace of Our said
Lord the King His Crown and Dignity, etc.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY, Advocate-General.

To which Articles the said William Atkinson pleaded not Guilty.

Then the said Robert Auchmuty made the following Speech to the Court.

May it please Your Honors, and the Honorable the Commissioners,

William Atkinson stands Articled against for Acts of Piracy (...) Robbery
perpetrated and done upon the High Seas, within the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty of Great Britain, and has pleaded, Not Guilty.

How Dear and Tender the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of His Majesty's Good
Subjects are unto Him clearly appears in His wise equal and Benign
Administration: And therefore such as are (...) by Special Commission to (...)
in His Name, (...) therewith to put an Edge on their F^ncy and Words, to the
cutting (...) of the innocent; for the Aqui^^e^ of the Guiltless is always most
Acceptable to Our Gracious Prince, and highly Satisfactory to (...) Honors.

I therefore Articled the Gentleman on Trial, not with the prosp^^t of
Conviction, but that the Laws may be Complied with. And acts be has an
Opportunity of Manifesting his Innocence before Your Honors, whose Wisdom and
Justice will render his Acqui^^al much more Honorable, if by you judged Not
Guilty.

And without further Trespassing upon Your Honors, I shall proceed to the
Examination of the King's Evidences.

Afterward, at the Motion of the Advocate-General, the Witnesses for the King
were called, namely George Girdler late Master of the aforesaid Schooner, named
the James, Joseph Marshall, and William Ferguson, Mariners, belonging to the
said Schooner, who being Sworn, Testified, That the said Schooner was taken on
the 23 d of June last, as she lay too, a Fishing on Browns-Banks, so called, by
a Snow called the Fames Revenge, one William Fly Master; who caused a Black
Flagg to be hoisted, and fired a great Gun at her; but the Witnesses when they
went on Board the Snow did not see the Prisoner Armed; that soon after they
were taken, they saw another Schooner, whereupon the said William Fly sent Six
of his Crew is pursuit of her in the Schooner which they had taken; and while
they were in Chase of the other Schooner, the said William Atkinson the
Prisoner at the Bar, with Three others on Board the Snow, seized the said
William Fly, and put him in Irons, and also secured Three other Pirates on
Board, now in His Majesty's Goal in Boston, namely Samuel Cole, Henry
Greenvill, and George Condick, and brought the said Snow into the Harbor of
Boston, where she now is. And no Witnesses appearing against the Prisoner, and
he having made a very good Defense, The Court was Ordered to be Cleared. And
after the Court had duly weighed and Considered the Prisoner's Case in private,
they Voted Nemine Contradicente; that he was not Guilty.

Then the Court was Opened, and the Prisoner brought to the Bar again, and the
President Pronounced him the said William Atkinson not Guilty: Whereupon he was
Ordered to be Discharged, without paying any Fees, or Costs of Prosecution.

Afterward the Marshall of the Admiralty was Directed, by Warrant, to bring
into Court Samuel Walker and Thomas Streaton, Mariners; His Majesty's said
Advocate having Exhibited against them Articles of Pyracy, Felony, and Robbery:
and they were accordingly brought to the Bar, and Arraigned upon the said
Articles, which the Register Read in the Words following, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, sc.
At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies, and
Robberies on the High Seas, held at Boston, within the County of Suffolk, on
the Fourth Day of July, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, Exhibited by Robert Auchmuty Esquire His
Majesty's Advocate-General, against Samuel Walker and Thomas Streaton,
Mariners.

First, For that the said Samuel Walker and Thomas Streaton, with others on
Board the Snow, then called the Fames Revenge (formerly called the Elizabeth)
and then under the Command of William Fly, on or about the Seventh Day of June
last, in the Latitude of -- on the High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of
the Admiralty Court of Great Britain, did Piratically and Feloniously, seize
take and possess themselves of a Ship named the John and Betty belonging to His
Majesty's good Subjects, and Commanded by John Gale, and Piratically and
Feloniously, then and there Robbed her of several of her Sails, Clothes, and
Small Arms, all of the Value of One Hundred Pounds Current Money, and the
property of His Majesty's said Subjects.

Secondly, For that the said Samuel Walker and Thomas Streaton, with others on
Board the said Snow, Named and Commanded as aforesaid, on or about the Eleventh
Day of said June, and off Deleware-Bay, upon the High Seas* and within the
Jurisdiction as aforesaid, with Force and Arms Piratically and Feloniously did
seize, take and possess themselves of a Sloop named the Rachel, belonging to
His Majesty's good Subjects, one Samuel Harris Commander, and with Force as
aforesaid, out of the said Sloop did take and carry away James Benbrooke, one
of His Majesty's Subjects, and then in the Peace of Our said Lord the King
being.

Thirdly, For that the said Samuel Walker and Thomas Streaton, with others as
aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, named and Commanded as aforesaid, on or
about the 23 d Day of June last, to the Eastward, on or near Browns Banks, so
called, upon the High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force
and Arms Pyratically and Feloniously did seize, take and possess themselves of
a Fishing Schooner, named the James, belonging to His Majesty's good Subjects,
George Girdler Master, and then and there Manned the said Schooner with Six
Pirates, and sent her in Quest of others His said Majesty's Subjects, and kept
the said Master and two others on Board the said Snow Prisoners.

All which several Acts of Piracy, Felony and Robbery were by the said Samuel
Walker and Thomas Streaton, done and committed in manner as aforesaid, contrary
to the Statute and Laws in such Cases made and provided, and to the Peace of
Our said Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity etc.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY.

To which Articles the said Samuel Walker and Thomas Streaton severally pleaded
not Guilty.

Then the King's Advocate moved the Court, That the said William Atkinson,
being now found Innocent of the Crimes where with he was Charged, might be
admitted to give Evidence on His Majesty's behalf against the Prisoners at the
Bar, which the Court consented to, and the said William Atkinson was
accordingly Sworn.

And being Interrogated, says, That he Agreed with Capt. John Fulker at
North Carolina, to come Passenger from thence to Boston in the Sloop John and
Hannah, whereof the said Fulker was Master; But that on the Third of June last,
as she lay at Anchor off Cape (...), they saw a S^ow ^^anding i^ for the
Harbor of Carolina, when the said Capt. Fulker, and the said Atkinson, with
one other Passenger, namely (...) Ro^hand Samuel Walker, (one of the Prisoners
at the Bar) who was Mate of the said Sloop, and one Boy, took the Sloops Boat,
and went on Board the said Snow* Imagining the Captain of her might be a
Stranger, and wanted a Pilot to carry her safely into the Harbor of Carolina*
But after they had been on Board some time, they understood by the People, they
were Pirates, and that she was then Commanded by one William Fly (now a
Prisoner in Boston Goal) and that he, with others on Board, had in the Night
time, in the Month of May last, surprised the Captain of her, viz. John Green,
and Thomas Jenkins the Mate, and thrown them overboard; But that Thomas
Streaton one of the Prisoners at the Bar, was in his Hammock, when the Fact was
committed, and no ways consenting to the Murder, as the Dep^nent understood,
and was by the Crew put in Irons, and that he, together with the said Samuel
Walker, the other Prisoner, were treated as forced Men by the Pirates at the
times of the several Captions of diverse Vessels which happened afterward.

Then George Girdler, Jos^ph Marshall, and William Ferguson, who belonged to
the aforesaid Schooner, were called and Sworn. And being asked as to the
Prisoners Behavior when the said Schooner was taken, They Declared, the
Prisoners at that time Affirmed, that they were forced Men, and were two of the
Men that afterward seized and subdued the said William Fly, and the Three
other reputed Pirates before-named.

Then the Court was Cleared and in Private. And after the Evidences produced
had been duly considered, The Court Unanimously Voted, That the said Prisoners
namely Samuel Walker, and Thomas Streaton, were not Guilty.

Whereupon they being brought to the Bar again, the President Pronounced them
not Guilty. And the Court Ordered them to be Discharged without paying any Fees.

Then the Court was Adjourned to Three a Clock Post Meridiem.

The Court Met according to Adjournment, when His Honor the President, and all
the Honorable Commissioners aforenamed were Present, except Captain James
Cornwall Esquire

THEN the King's Advocate moved the Court, That John Cole, John Brown, Robert
Dauling, John Daw, James Blair, Edward Laurence, Edward Apthorp, and James
Benbrooke, Articled against for Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, might be brought
into Court.

Whereupon a Warrant issued out, by the Courts Order, Directed to the Marshall
of of the Admiralty Requiring him forthwith to bring them into Court, and
accordingly they were brought to the Bar, and Arraigned upon the Articles
Exhibited against them, which were Read, and are as follows, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, sc.
At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies, and
Robberies on the High Seas, Held at Boston, within the County of Suffolk, on
the Fourth Day of July in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, Exhibited by His Majesty's
Advocate-General against John Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling, John Daw,
James Blair, Edward Laurence, Edward Apthorp, and James Benbrooke, Mariners.

First, For that the said John Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling, John Daw,
James Blair, Edward Laurence, and Edward Apthorp, together with William Fly,
Sam^el Cole, George, Condick, and Henry Greenvill, Mariners, and others, on or
about the Eleventh Day of June last past, on Board the Snow then called the
Fames-Revenge, formerly called the Elizabeth, and off Deleware-Bay, upon the
High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court of Great Britain,
with force and Arms Pyratically and Feloniously did seize take and possess
themselves of a Sloop named the Rachel, belonging to His Majesty's good
Subjects one Samuel Harris Commander, and with force as aforesaid, out of the
said Sloop did take and carry with them one James Benbrooke one of His
Majesty's Subjects, and then in the Peace of Our said Lord the King being.

Secondly, For that the said John Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling, John Daw,
James Blair, Edward Laurence, Edward Apthorp, and James Benbrooke, with others
as aforesaid, on or about the Twenty-third Day of June last past to the
Eastward on or near Browns Banks, so called, upon the high Seas, and within the
Jurisdiction aforesaid with Force and Arms Piratically, and Feloniously did
seize, take and possess themselves of a Fishing Schooner, named the James,
belonging to His Majesty's good Subjects, one George Girdler Master, and then
and there Manned the said Schooner with Six Pirates, and sent her in Quest of
others His Majesty's said Subjects, and kept the Master and others on board the
said Snow Prisoners.

All which several Acts of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, were by the said John
Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling, John D^w, James Blair, Edward Laurence,
Edward Apthorp, and James Benbrooke, respectively ^one and Committed in manner
as aforesaid, Contrary to the Statutes and Laws in such Cases made and
provided, and to the Peace of Our said Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY, Adv-General.

To which Articles the said John Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling, John Daw,
James Blair, Edward Lawrence, Edward Apthorp, and James Benbrooke, severally
pleaded not Guilty.

Then the Witnesses for Our Sovereign Lord the King were called, and Sworn,
namely Capt. William Atkinson, Samuel Walker, Thomas Streaton, George Girdler,
Joseph Marshall, and William Ferguson. And upon their Examination, it came out
in Proof, That on the Sixth Day of June last, the said John Cole, John Brown,
Robert Dauling, John Daw, James Blair, and Edward Lawrence (Six of the
Prisoners at the Bar) were taken in the Ship John and Betty, John Gale
Commander off the Capes of Virginia, by the aforenamed William Fly, then
Commander of the said Snow, by him called the Fames-Revenge, and detained on
Board her, contrary to their wills: And that the said Edward Apthorp, one other
of the Prisoners, belonged to the Sloop John and Hannah, John Fulker late
Master, and went on Board the said Snow, with the said Fulker, Capt. Atkinson,
and others, in order to Pilot her into Carolin^; And that James Benbrooke (the
other Prisoner at the Bar) was afterward, viz. on the Eleventh of June last,
taken by the said William Fly, and his Crew on Board the Sloop Rachel, whereof
Samuel Harris was Master, in her Passage from New York to Philadelphia. And all
the King's Evidences before-named Testified, That the Prisoners were not active
with the Pirates, in taking any Vessels, but were declared by the Pirates to be
forced Men, and disapproved of their Piratical Acts: And it also Evidently
appeared to the Court, that the said James Benbrooke was one of the Men that
seized the said William Fly, and took his Sword from him, and broke it. And no
other Witnesses appearing against the Prisoners, they were directed to make
their Defense: which accordingly they did; And the King's Advocate thereupon
Concluded the Prosecution by summing up the Evidence, and submitting the same
to the Consideration of the Court. Afterward the Court was Cleared; And having
duly weighed and Considered the Matters Alleged, as well by the King's
Witnesses, as by the Prisoners for themselves; the Court were of Opinion that
they were not Guilty.

Whereupon they the said John Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling, John Daw, James
Blair, Edward Laurence, Edward Apthorp, and James Benbrooke, were again brought
to the Bar, and the President, in the Name of the Court, Pronounced them not
Guilty, And they were Ordered to be Discharged, without paying any Fees.

Then M^rrice Cundon, Mariner, against whom His Majesty's Advocate had
Exhibited sundry Articles of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, was brought into
Court by the Marshall of the Admiralty, as by Warrant Directed, and Arraigned
upon the said Articles, which were Read in the words following, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, sc.
At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies, and
Robberies on the High Seas, held at Boston, within the County of Suffolk, on
the Fourth Day of July, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, Exhibited by His Majesty's
Advocate-General against Morris Cundon, Mariner.

First, For that the said Morris Cundon, not having the Fear of GOD before his
eyes, but being Instigated by the Devil, on the Twenty-seventh Day of May last,
and about One of the Clock in the Morning of the said Day, together with
William Fly, Samuel Cole, George Condick, Henry Greenvill, and others, on Board
a Snow called the Elizabeth, in her Voyage from Jam^ic^ to Guine^, upon the
high Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court of Great Britain,
in the Latitude of -- with Force and Arms, an Aff^^^^ did make on the Bodies of
Capt. John Green, the then Master, and Thomas Jenkins the then Mate of the said
Vessel, and both in the Peace of our said Lord the King then being, and with
Force as aforesaid, then and there threw overboard, the said John Green, and
Thomas Jenkins, by means whereof they were D^owned; so that the said Morris
Cundon, with others as aforesaid, then and there Feloniously Murdered the said
John Green, and Thomas Jenkins, in manner as aforesaid, (...) the Statutes and
Laws, in such Cases made and provided.

Secondly, For that the said Morris Cundon, with others as aforesaid,
afterward, viz. ^n the Twenty-Seventh Day of May upon the high Seas, ^s
aforesaid, and within the said Jurisdiction, Piratically, and Feloniously, did
surprise, seize and take the said Snow, burden about Seventy Tuns* together
with her Cargo, of the value of Two Thousand Pounds Sterling; the said Vessel
and Cargo being the Property of His Majesty's Good Subjects.

Thirdly, For that the said Morris Cundon, with others, as aforesaid, on board
the said Snow, and Commanded by the said William Fly, on or about the Third Day
of June last past, near unto the Bar of Cape Hadderas, on the high Seas, and
within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms, Pyr^t^^ally and
Feloniously did seize, take (...) possess him, and themselves of a (...) named
(...) John and Hannah, John Fulker then Master* belonging to His Majesty's said
Subjects, and Bulged her on the said Bar, keeping the said Master, and William
Atkinson, then a Passenger in the said Sloop, and others, all His Majesty's
good Subjects, Prisoners on Board the said Snow.

Fourthly, For that the said Morris Cundon, with others, as aforesaid, on
Board the said Snow, whom then they named the Fames-Revenge, Commanded as
aforesaid, on or about the Seventh Day of June last, in the Latitude of -- on
the High Seas, within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms,
Piratically and Feloniously did seize, take, and possess him, and themselves of
a Ship named the John and Betty, belonging to His Majesty's good Subjects, and
Commanded by John Gale, and Feloniously as aforesaid, then and there Robbed her
of several of her Sails, Cloths and Small Arms, all of the value of One Hundred
Pounds, Current Money, and the Property of His Majesty's good Subjects.

Fifthly, For that the said Morris Cundon, with others as aforesaid, on Board
the said Snow, Named and Commanded as aforesaid, on or about the Eleventh Day
of the said June, and off Deleware-Bay, upon the High Seas, and within the
Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms, Piratically and Feloniously did
seize and possess him, and themselves of a Sleep named the Rachel, belonging to
His Majesty's said Subjects, Samuel Harris Commander, and with Force as
aforesaid, out of the said Sloop, did take and carry with them James Benbrooke,
one of His said Majesty's Subjects, then in the Peace of our said Lord the King
being.

Sixthly, For that the said Morris Cundon, with others, as aforesaid, on Board
the said Snow, Named and Commanded as aforesaid, on or about the Twenty-Third
Day of June last, to the Eastward, on or near Browns Banks, so called, upon the
high Seas, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms,
Piratically and Feloniously, did seize, take and possess him, and themselves,
of a Fishing Schooner, named the James, belonging to His said Majesty's
Subjects, George Girdler Master, and then and there Ma^^n^d the said Schooner
with Six Pirates, and of their Crew, and sent her in quest of others His
Majesty's said Subjects, and kept the said Master, and two others on Board the
said Snow Prisoners.

All which said several Acts of Murders, Piracies, Felonies, and Robberies,
were by the said Morris Cundon, perpetrated, done and committed in manner as
aforesaid, contrary to the Statutes and Laws in such Cases made and provided,
and to the Peace ^f our said Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY, Advocate-General.

To which Articles the said Morris Cundon pleaded not Guilty.

The Witnesses on behalf of His Majesty were Sworn, namely Capt. William
Atkinson, Thomas Streaton, and Samuel Walker. And it appeared by their
respective Testimonies, That the said Morris Cundon belonged to the said Snow
while called the Elizabeth, and Commanded by Capt. Green, and that he was at
Helm when Capt. Green, and his Mate, were thrown overboard by William Fly, and
several others of the said Snows Company; But that the said Cundon was no ways
Acting or Consenting thereto, or to any of the Acts of Piracy, and Robberies,
afterward committed; And therefore the said Fly talked of dismissing the
Prisoner, the first Vesse^ he took, and of getting another Man in his room. And
further the Witnesses Deposed, that when the said Snow was taken by Capt.
Atkinson, and others, the said Cundon expressed his Joy thereat. And in his own
Defense, declared to the Court, that he never suspected the least design in any
of the Snows Company, to Murder the said Capt. Green, and his Mate, before Fly
came to him while at Helm, and threatened to blow out his Brains, if he stirred
from the Helm: And then it was not in his power to prevent their Executing
their wicked design, because most of the Snows Company were at that time upon
Deck, Assisting in, or Consenting to the throwing of the said Capt. Green, and
his Mate overboard: and it would have been a Rash Attempt, in him alone, to
oppose them.

The Advocate-General Concluded this Prosecution, in Observing to the Court,
That the Prisoner by no Act, discovered his Disapprobation of the Proceedings
of such as were actually Concerned in the said Murder; and was therefore by
Law a Principal, and Prayed Judgment accordingly.

Upon which the Court was Cleared, and in Private; And after mature
Deliberation, and Consideration of what the King's Witnesses Deposed, and the
Prisoner offered in his Defense; as also the Replication of the
Advocate-General, The Court Voted, That the said Morris Cundon is not Guilty.

Whereupon the Prisoner being brought again to the Bar, the President
Pronounced him not Guilty; And the Court Ordered him to be Discharged without
paying any Fees.

Then the Court was Adjourned to Tuesday the 5 th. Day of July Instant, at Nine
a-Clock, before noon.

Anno Regni Regis GEORGIJ, Duodecimo.
Tuesday July 5th. Ante Meridiem.
PRESENT.

The Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief, in
and over the Province aforesaid, President of the Court, and the other
Commissioners hereafter named. viz.

Of His Majesty's Council for this Province.
The Hon. William ^ai^er Esquire Nathaniel Byfield Esquire Addington Davenport Esquire John
Clark Esquire Adam Winthrop Esquire Jonathan Belcher Esquire Paul Dudley Esquire John Turner
Esquire Thomas Palmer Esquire Penn Townsend Esquire Benjamin Lynde Esquire Thomas Hutchinson
Esquire Thomas Fitch Esquire Elisha Cook Esquire Jonathan Dowse Esquire Samuel Thaxter Esquire
Daniel Oliver Esquire Edward Hutchinson Esquire

The Honorable Samuel Sewall Esquire Chief Justice of His Majesty's Superior
Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery for the
Province aforesaid.

John Meinzies Esquire Judge of the Vice-Admiralty. Josiah Wi^^ard Esquire Secretary of
the said Province. Thomas Lechmere Esquire Surveyor General of North America.
THe Court being Opened by Proclamation, His Majesty's Advocate moved, That
William Fly Mariner, lately Committed to the Goal in Boston, might be brought
into Court, to make Answer to several Articles of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery
Exhibited against him; And a Warrant issued out, by the Courts Order, Directed
to the Marshall of the Admiralty, Requiring him to bring the said William Fly
into Court; And accordingly the Prisoner was brought, and Arraigned at the Bar,
upon the said Articles, which were Read, and are as follows, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay Suffolk, sc.
At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies, and
Robberies* on the high Seas, held at Boston, within the County of Suffolk, on
the Fourth Day of July, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, Exhibited by Robert Auchmuty Esquire His
said Majesty's Advocate, against William Fly, Mariner.

First, For that the said William Fly, not having the Fear of GOD before his
Eyes, but being Instigated by the Devil, on the 27 th. Day of May last, and
about One of the Clock in the Morning of the said Day together with Alexander
Mitchell, Henry Hill, Samuel Cole, Thomas Winthrop, Mariners, (...) others, on
Board a Snow called the Elizabeth, in her Voyage from Jamaica to Guinea, upon
the High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court of Great
Britain, in the Latitude of -- with Force and Arms an Assault did make on the
Bodies of John Green, the then Master and Commander, and Thomas Jenkins, the
then Mate of the said Vessel, and both in the Peace of our said Lord the King
then being, and with Force as aforesaid, then and there threw overboard the
said John Green and Thomas Jenkins, by means whereof they were Drowned, so that
the said William Fly with others as aforesaid, then and there Feloniously
Murthe^ed the said John Green and Thomas Jenkins in manner as aforesaid,
cont^ary (...) the Statutes and Laws in such Cases made and provided.

Secondly, For that the said William Fly, with others as aforesaid, afterward,
viz. on the said 27 th. Day of May last, upon the High Seas as aforesaid,
within the said Jurisdiction, Piratically, and Feloniously did surprise, seize,
and take the said Snow, Burden about Seventy Tons, together with her Cargo, of
the Value of Two Thousand Pounds Sterling, the said Vessel and Cargo, being the
Property of His Majesty's Good Subjects.

Thirdly, For that the said William Fly, with others as aforesaid, on ^^ard the
said Snow, on or about the 3 d. Day of June last, near unto the Bar of Cap^
(...), on the High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and
Arms, Piratically and Feloniously, did seize, take and possess him, and
themselves of a Sloop* named the John and Hannah, John Fulker then Master,
belonging to His Majesty's said Subjects, and bulged her on the Bar, keeping
the said Master, and William Atkinson, then a Passenger in the said Sloop, and
one other Passenger, and one Boy, all His Majesty's Good Subjects, Prisoners on
Board the said Snow, then Piratically Improved, and Commanded by the said
William Fly.

Fourthly, For that the said William Fly, Commander as aforesaid, and with
others as aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, whom they named the Fames Revenge,
on or about the 7 th. Day of June last, in the Latitude of -- on the High Seas,
within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms, Piratically, and
Feloniously, did seize, take, and possess him, and themselves, of a Ship named
the John and Betty, belonging to His Majesty's Good Subjects, and Commanded by
John Gale, and Feloniously as aforesaid, then and there Robbed her of several
of her Sails, Clothes, and Small Arms, all of the Value of One Hundred Pounds,
Current Money, and the Property of His Majesty's said Subjects.

Fifthly* For that the said William Fly, Commander as aforesaid, and with
others as aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, named as aforesaid, on or about
the Eleventh Day of said June, and off Deleware-Bay, upon the high Seas, and
within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms Piratically and
Feloniously, did seize, take and possess him, and themselves of a Sloop named
the Rachel, belonging to His Majesty's said Subjects, one Harris Commander, and
with Force as aforesaid, out of the said Sloop, did take and carry with them
one James Benbrooke, one of His said Majesty's Subjects, and then in the Peace
of Our said Lord the King being.

Sixthly, For that the said William Fly, Commander as aforesaid, and with
others at aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, named as aforesaid, on or about
the 23 d Day of June last, to the Eastward on o^ near Brown's Banks, so called,
upon the high Seas, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms,
Piratically and Feloniously, did seize, take and possess him, and themselves of
a Fishing Schooner named the James, belonging to His Majesty's good Subjects,
George Girdler Master, and the said Fly, then and there Manned the said
Schooner with Six Pirates of his Crew, and sent her in quest of others His
Majesty's said Subjects, and kept the said Master, and two others, on Board the
said Snow Prisoners.

All which said several Acts of Murders, Piracies* Felonies, and Robberies,
were by said William Fly, Done and Committed in manner as aforesaid, Contrary
to the Statutes and Laws in such Cases made and provided, and to the Peace of
Our said Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY, Adv-General.

To which several Articles the said William Fly pleaded not Guilty. The King's
Advocate thereupon made a Speech to the Court, in the words, or to the Effect
following, viz.

May it please Your Honor, Mr. President, and the Honorable the Commissioners,

WIlliam Fly stands Articled against, for Acts of Piracy, Murder, Felony, and
Robbery, committed upon the High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty of Great Britain, Contrary to the Statutes in that case made and
provided, and to the Peace of our Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity; to
which ^e has pleaded* Not Guilty.

I shall not Trespass upon Your Honors Patience in opening the Nature of
Piracy, a Crime of the first Magnitude in the Catalogue of Capital Offenses;
this has been the work of others more (...) to the Performance. What I conceive
necessary to offer, is the Consideration of that Hackney Defense made by every
Pirate upon Trial, namely, That he was a forced Man, and in order to Strike the
Passions they represent in moving terms, what dangers they encountered, as the
Risque of having their Brains blowed, and what Severities they underwent, as
Sweating and the like, before they departed from their native Integrity. All
which, if proved, will not, strictly speaking, amount to an Exemption from
Punishment; For neither Necessary, Major Vi^, or Self-Preservation, can legally
justify the Commission of an Act, Malum in (...)* But unmask these Dreggs of
Mankind, and then they will appear Blaspheming their Creator, Co^^ing of Oaths,
Embrewing their Hands in Innocent Blood, and ^^^cking their Hellish Inventions
for un^eard of Barbarities.

This in a great measure will Turn out to be the dreadful Case of the Prisoner
at the Bar, and Providence seems to point out his punishment, (which I pray God
may be only Humane) not only in the wonderful manner of subduing him, but in
that he is to be Tried by your Honors, whose great Justice and Judgment has
been sufficiently Experienced, not to be imposed upon by the most sub^il
Prosecution, to Convict the Innocent, or by the most Artful Pretenses to acquit
the Guilty. I shall therefore proceed to Examine the Kings Evidences which will
Invincibly prove the Articles against him, and thereupon doubt not of your
Justice to His Ma^^^y, this Province, and to the Prisoner's Demerits in
declaring him Guilty.

Then Morris Cundon and Thomas Streaton, Witnesses in behalf of His Majesty
were Called and Sworn.

And first, the said Morris Cundon Declared, That on the 27 th. Day of May
^^st, about One a-Clock in the Morning, while he was at Helm, William Fly then
Boatswain of the Snow called the Elizabeth (belonging to His Majesty's Subjects
in Bristol in Great Britain) after he had been sometime forward with several
Sailors on Board the said Snow, came abauft, with some of them, viz. one
Alexander Mitchell, and others, and said to the Deponent while at Helm these
words, viz. Damn you, you Dog, if you stir Hand or F^^t, or speak a Word, I Will
blow your Brains out. And immediately thereupon the said Fly went into the
Cabin, where Captain Green was in Bed, and Alexander Mitchell followed him,
and while they were there, the Deponent heard the said Captain Green, Cry out,
what is the matter? and they soon hawled him upon Deck, and were about to throw
him into the Sea; when the said Capt. Green applied himself to the said Fly the
Boatswain, saying, For God's sake, Boatswain, don't throw me overboard, for if
you do I shall go to Hell: Then the said Fly bid the Captain say after him
these words, viz. " Lord have Mercy upon my Soul. And soon after he was thrown
overboard.

And the said Morris Cundon, and Thomas Streaton both Deposed, that some Days
after the Master and Mate were Drowned, they met a Ship called the Pompoy,
which came from Jamaica in Company with the Snow, when the Captain of the Ship
hailed the Snow, and asked how Captain Green did; and Fly being upon Deck, made
Answer, very well at your Service Sir.

Afterward Capt. William Atkinson, Samuel Walker, Edward Apthorp, John Cole,
Robert Dauling, John Brown, George Girdler, and James Benbrooke, Witnesses for
the King were called and Sworn; and Testified, that they were all taken by the
said Snow, and that the said William Fly Acted as Captain, when the several
Vessels, (mentioned in the Articles) to which they respectively belonged, were
taken; And at such times ordered the Black Flagg to be hoisted, and Encouraged
the Pirates when they were backward, to go on Board the said Vessels. And the
said William Atkinson particularly Deposed, That soon after the Caption of the
Schooner, named the James, whereof the said George Girdler was Master, they
discovered (...) her Schooner, whereupon the said Atkinson Advised the said Fly
to Man the said Schooner James with some of his Hands and go in Chase of the
said Vessel, as before expressed by the said Atkinson, in his Defense made upon
his Trial; which the said, Fly accordingly did; And some short time afterward
the said Atkinson discovering other Vessels forward, diverted the said Fly from
his Arms, which lay on the Quarter*Deck; And while he was looking with his
Glass to take fight of said Vessels, the said Atkinson and others, Overcame and
subdued him, and Three other Pirates, as before is set forth.

After the Witnesses had been fully heard, the said William Fly was Informed by
the Court, that then was his time to offer what he had to say in his own
Defense; which he did, by Denying any hand in the Murder, and several other
Facts Sworn to by the King's Witnesses: And thereupon the Advocate-General
summed up and Enforced the Evidence, and gave the Law upon the Facts: and
Concluded, that the Prisoner at the Bar was Legally Guilty of Murder, Piracy,
Felony and Robbery, according to the Articles.

Afterward the Court was Cleared, and in Private. And upon Deliberate
Consideration of the several matters and things by the Witnesses Sworn to
against the Prisoner, as also the Law thereupon; the Court Voted. That the said
William Fly is Guilty of the several Articles Exhibited against him.

Then he was brought to the Bar again, when the President in the Name of the
Court Pronounced the said William Fly Guilty. Upon which the Advocate, in
behalf of His Majesty, demanded Sentence against the Prisoner. Who was
thereupon asked if he had any thing to say why Sentence of Death should not be
given against him; and showing no sufficient Reason to the contrary, The
President passed Sentence against him accordingly in the words following, viz.
You William Fly are to go from hence to the Place from whence you come, and
from thence to the Place of Execution, there to be Hang^d up by the Neck until
you be Dead, And the LORD have Mercy upon your Soul.

Then the Prisoner was Remanded to Goal; and the Marshall of the Admiralty
Directed to keep him in safe Custody.

Afterward the Advocate-General moved the Court, That Samuel Cole, George
Condick, and Henry Greenvill, Articled against for Piracy, and Robbery, might
be brought into Court to receive their Trial: Accordingly the Marshall,
pursuant to the Warrant to him Directed and Delivered brought them to the Bar,
where they were Arraigned upon the Articles Exhibited against them, which the
Register Read in the words following, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, sc.
At a Special Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies, and
Robberies on the High Seas, held at Boston, within the County of Suffolk, on
the Fourth Day of July, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery, Exhibited by His Majesty's
Advocate-General against Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
Mariners.

First, For that the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill, not
having the Fear of GOD before their eyes, but being Instigated by the Devil, on
the Twenty-seventh Day of May last, and about One of the Clock in the Morning
of the said Day, together with William Fly, Alexander Mitchell, Henry Hill, and
Thomas Winthrop Mariners, and others, on Board a Snow called the Elizabeth, in
her Voyage from Jamaica to Guinea, upon the high Seas, and within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court of Great Britain, in the Latitude of --
with Force and Arms* an Assault did make on the Bodies of Capt. John Green, the
then Master and Commannder, and Thomas Jenkins the then Mate of the said
Vessel, and both in the Peace of our said Lord the King then being, and with
Force as aforesaid, then and there threw overboard, the said John Green, and
Thomas Jenkins, by means whereof they were Drowned; so that the said Samuel
Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill, with others as aforesaid, then and
there Feloniously Murdered the said John Green, and Thomas Jenkins, in manner
as aforesaid, contrary to the Statutes and Laws, in such Cases made and
provided.

Secondly, For that the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
with others as aforesaid, afterward, viz. on the Twenty-Seventh Day of May
upon the high Seas, as aforesaid, and within the said Jurisdiction,
Piratically, and Feloniously, did surprise, seize and take the said Snow,
burden about Seventy Tuns, together with her Cargo, of the value of Two
Thousand Pounds Sterling; the said Vessel and Cargo being the Property of His
Majesty's Good Subjects.

Thirdly, For that the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
with others, as aforesaid, on board the said Snow, and Commanded by the said
William Fly, on or about the Third Day of June last past, near unto the Bar of
Cape Hadderas, on the high Seas, and within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with
Force and Arms, Pyratically and Feloniously did seize, take and possess
themselves of a Sloop named the John and Hannah, John Fulker then Master,
belonging to His Majesty's said Subjects, and Bulged her on the said Bar,
keeping the said Master, and William Atkinson, then a Passenger in the said
Sloop, and one other Passenger, all His Majesty's good Subjects, Prisoners on
Board the said Snow.

Fourthly, For that the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
with others, as aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, whom then they named the
Fames-Revenge, Commanded as aforesaid, on or about the Seventh Day of June
last, in the Latitude of -- on the High Seas, within the Jurisdiction
aforesaid, with Force and Arms, Piratically and ^^loniously did seize, take,
and possess themselves of a Ship named the John and Betty, belonging to His
Majesty's good Subjects, and Commanded by John Gale, and Feloniously as
aforesaid, then and there Robbed her of several of her Sails, Cloths and Small
Arms, all of the value of One Hundred Pounds, Current Money, and the Property
of His Majesty's good Subjects.

Fifthly, For that the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
with others as aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, Named and Commanded as
aforesaid, on or about the Eleventh Day of the said June, and off Deleware-Bay,
upon the High Seas, and the Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms,
Piratically and Feloniously did seize and possess themselves of a Sloop named
the Rachel, belonging to His Majesty's said Subjects, Samuel Harris Commander,
and with Forces as aforesaid, out of the said Sloop, did take and carry with
them James Benbrooke, one of His said Majesty's Subjects, then in the Peace of
our said Lord the King being.

Sixthly, For that the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
with others, as aforesaid, on Board the said Snow, Named and Commanded as
aforesaid, on or about the Twenty-Third Day of June last, to the Eastward, on
or near Browns Banks, so called, upon the high Seas, and within the
Jurisdiction aforesaid, with Force and Arms, Piratically and Feloniously, did
seize, take and possess themselves, of a Fishing Schooner, named the James,
belonging to His said Majesty's good Subjects, George Girdler Master, and then
and there Manned the said Schooner with Six Pirates, and of their Crew, and
sent her in quest of others His Majesty's said Subjects, and kept the said
Master, and two others on Board the said Snow Prisoners.

All which said several Acts of Murders, Piracies, Felonies, and Robberies,
were by the said (...) perpetrated, done and committed in manner as aforesaid,
contrary to the Statutes and Laws in such Cases made and provided, and to the
Peace of our said Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity.

ROBERT AUCHMUTY, Advocate-General.

To which Articles the said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill,
severally pleaded not Guilty. Then the Witnesses on His Majesty's behalf,
Namely Morris Cundon, and Thomas Streaton, Mariners, which Sailed from
Jamaica in the said Snow, were Called and Sworn.

And first, the said Morris Cundon, Testified, That Samuel Cole, and Henry
Greenvill, were both of them upon Deck, with others, when Capt. Green, and the
Mate were thrown overboard, on the Twenty seventh of May last before Day.

And the said Thomas Streaton Deposed, That as he lay in his Bed in the Morning
of that Day, between One and Two of the Clock, he heard Samuel Cole, one of the
Prisoners at the Bar, say to Jenkins the then Mate, Come out of your Cabin,
you Dog, and presently after he was haul'd out of his Bed upon Deck, and the
Deponent heard some Body fall upon the Deck, which he believed to be Jenkins,
and soon after one Winthrop told him, that he should go overboard after his
Captain; and he was soon thrown into the Sea, where he called to the Doctor
earnestly several times to hand him a Rope, but by that time the Doctor was put
in Irons.

Afterward William Atkinson, Samuel Walker, Edward Apthorp, and John Cole,
were Sworn, and Testified* That the Prisoners were reputed Pirates when the
several Vessels mentioned in the said Articles were Taken and Robbed; and upon
all Occasions acted as such, never pretending to the contrary in the Deponents
hearing; only the Dep^nents said, that Samuel Cole, the Quartermaster, was put
in Irons by (...) for Mutiny, and so was continued in Irons while the two last
Vessels mentioned in the (...) Articles were taken; and that Condick was
commonly the worse for Drink, and not able to bear Arms when several of the
Vessels were taken; and for the most part was serviceable to the Pirates as
their Cook.

Then the Prisoners were heard what they had to say for themselves: And the
said Samuel Cole, and Henry Greenvill, denied that they had any hand in
Murdering the said Capt. Green, and his Mate; but said they had both of them
been cruel to the Men, and therefore they had agreed to rise upon them, and put
them on shore the first Land they made. And the said Cole and Greenvill also
owned that they were with others upon Deck when the Captain and his Mate were
thrown overboard* and the said Condick confessed in like manner that he was
consenting to the said Capt. Green, and his Mates, being put on shore, but
denied that he had any hand in their being Murdered, alleging that he was
then in his Hammock asleep. Upon whom the Advocate Replied, That by Law the
Prisoners Con^ederating and Consenting to do an Unlawful Act in Rising against
their Commander (which by the Statute is declared Piracy) and forcibly
pretending to put him on shore, and Death ensuing, they were severally Guilty
of Murder, if there were no other Evidence against the Prisoners: but the
Advocate also summed up the Evidence against them in Support of all the other
Articles, and Concluded in Demanding Judgment.

Whereupon Orders were given to Clear the Court: The Court being in Private,
fully and deliberately weighed and Considered the Evidences against the
Prisoners, and also the Defense made by them respectively, and the
Advocate-General's Replication, and Voted, as follows, Viz.

1 st. That the said Samuel Cole, is Guilty of all the four first Articles
Exhibited against him, but not Guilty of the two last Articles.

2 dly. That the said George Condick is not Guilty of the first Article of
Murder Exhibited against him, but of the other five Articles the Court Voted
him to be Guilty.

3 dly, That the said Henry Greenvill is Guilty of all the Six Articles
Exhibited against him.

Then the Court being Opened, The said Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry
Greenvill, were again brought to the Bar, when the President in the Name of the
Court Pronounced them severally Guilty as aforesaid. And then the
Advocate-General in His Majesty's behalf demanded Judgment against them.

Whereupon they were asked, what they had to say, why Sentence of Death should
not be given against them. And they offering no sufficient Reason to the
contrary, The President Pronounced Sentence against them in the words
following, viz.

YOU Samuel Cole, George Condick, and Henry Greenvill, are to go from hence to
the place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of Execution, and
there to be Hanged up by the Neck, until you and each of you be Dead, And the
LORD have Mercy upon your Souls.

Then the Prisoners were Remanded to Prison, and the Marshall cautioned to take
strict Charge of them. After which the Court was Adjourned to Six a Clock Post
Meridiem.

The Court met according to the said Adjournment.

AND in Consideration that the beforenamed George Condick was commonly
Intoxicated with Liquor, and an Ignorant Man, about Twenty Years of Age, having
no hand (as appeared) in the Murder of the Captain, or Mate, and seldom taking
up Arms at the Caption of any of the Vessels, but mostly was implo^ed as Cook
on board the Snow; The Court Voted, That the said George Condick be Recommended
to His Honor the Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of this Province,
for a Reprieve for Twelve Months, that so His Majesty's Pleasure by or before
that time may be known concerning him the said Condick.

Afterward, The Court proceeded to Consider when the Sentence against the said
William Fly, Samuel Cole, and Henry Greenvill, should be put in Execution. And
Voted, That they should be Executed on Tuesday the Twelfth Day of July Instant,
at the usual place for the Execution of Pirates, in or near Charles River, so
called, between the Hours of Ten and Four of the Clock: And that the said
William Fly, being the Chief Leader of them, his Dead Body should be carried
from the Place of Execution to an Island called Nick's-Mate, near the Entrance
of the Harbor of Boston, and there be Hung up in Chains. And His Honor the
President was Desired by the Court to Sign the Dead Warrant, Commanding the
Marshall of the Admiralty to put the aforesaid Sentences against them in
Execution on the said Twelfth Day of July accordingly.

APPENDIX.
Here follows a Copy of the Declaration of Capt. William Atkinson, taken, by
the Notary, upon his Arrival at Boston, in the Snow Elizabeth, otherwise called
the Fames-Revenge, (lately Commanded by William Fly,) on the 28th* of June
1726. And also Copies of the Examinations of several Persons on Board the Snow,
taken before Samuel Checkley and ^ab^^ah Sabage Esqrs Two of His Majesty's
Justices for the County of Suffolk, on the 29th* Day of the said Month, by
Order of His Honor the Lieut. Governor, and His Majesty's Council of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay.

THE Declaration of William Atkinson late Commander of a Brigantine called the
Boneta. This Declarant ^aith, That he left the said Brigantine at
North Carolina, and took his Passage in the Sloop whereof Capt. John Fulker was
Master, bound from Carolina aforesaid to Boston; And on the 3 d* of June
Instant, as the said Sloop lay at Anchor off Cape-Hadderas Bar, they discovered
a Snow standing in for the Harbor of Carolina; the said Capt* Fulker, his
Mate, and the Declarant with one other P^ssenger, and a B^y, took the Sloops
Beat, and went on Board the Snow, supposing that the Master of her wanted a
Pilot. When they came on Board Capt. Fulker and the other Passe^ger was sent
for by the Captain of the said Snow, whose Name was William Fly* and afterward
the said Atkinson was sent for and went down the Cabin to the said Fly, who
entertained him civilly; but after some short time the said Atkinson heard the
said Captain Fly say, they, viz. (he and his Company) were Gentlem^n (...)
Fortune (meaning they were Pirates as the Declarant understood) And upon
further Enquiry, the D^clarant understood that the said Snow was called the
Elizabeth, belonging to His Majesty's Subjects in Bristol in Great Britain, and
was Commanded by Capt. Green, who had Fifteen Men on Board, that the said Fly
was Boatswain, and in the Night about the 27 th. of May last, he with the rest
of the Men rose, and hawled the Captain and Mate from their Beds, and confined
the Gunner, Doctor, and Carpenter. Some few hours after, the said Snow came to
Anchor about three Miles from the Sloop. The said Fly and Company told Capt.
Fulker they must have his Sloop if she sailed better than the Snow; and
accordingly the said Fly sent the said Fulker with five or six of the said
Fly's Men on Board the Sloop in her Boat, in order to fetch her along-side the
Snow; but the Wind being contrary they could not bring her off, which Fly
perceiving, in a great passion, he Swore he would burn her, if they did not
bring her out. He ordered Capt. Fulker to the Geers, and caused him to be
whipped severely. Afterward the Boats Crew labored to bring the Sloop to the
Snow, and they carried her out as far as the Bar, but there she bilged and
sunk; then the Pirates tried to set her on fire, as Fulker's Mate told the
Declarant, but the (...) did not take. Afterward when the Snow was about to
Sail, the said Fulker and his Passengers, and Men, entreated the said* Fly for
to give them their Liberty, who promised them they should have their Liberty
the first Vessel they took, and not before; so on the fifth of June they sailed
from Carolina, and on the sixth Day of said Month, they saw a Ship called the
John and Betty* Commanded by John Gale bound from Barbades to Virginia, and
gave her Chase some considerable time, but finding the Ship out-sail'd the
Snow, the said Fly hoisted a Jack at the Maintopmast head, in Taken of
Distress, but Capt. Gale sailed from 'em notwithstanding. So the said Fly
continued the Chase till next Morning, when he hoisted the Black Flagg, and
fired several Guns at the Ship, and came up with her, there being then but
little Wind, and then the said Gale struck his Colors, and Fly Manned his
Longboat with a Patera^o, and the said Fly's Crew went on Board the Ship with
their Mus^etts, Pistols, and Cu^lashes, and having made the Men Prisoners sent
them to Capt. Fly on Board the Snow. And after they had robbed the Ship of
several of her Sails, and some Clothes and Small Arms, and detained 'em about
two days, they let them go, and also gave the said Capt. Fulker and his other
Passenger Mr. Roan together with Capt. Green's Doctor, liberty to go with the
said Capt. Gale, but they still detained the Declarant. And the said William
Fly told this Declarant that he should be their Pilot on the Coast of
New England, or else he would blow his Brains ^u^. Then they stood for this
Coast, and off Deleware-Bay they met a Sloop Commanded by one Harris bound from
New York to Pens^^vania, having about Fifty Irish and Scots Passengers on
Board, and the Pirate again hoisted his Black Flagg, and ordered the Sloop to
strike, which she did; And the Declarant was sent on Board the Sloop (though
without Arms with three of the Pirate Armed, to take possession of her; the
Declarant being Ordered to Navigate her, and keep her by the Snow, which three
Pirates Ra^sackt the Vessel; and one of her Company namely James Benbrooke,
being a l^sty Fellow, as they called him, was forced on Board the Pirate. And
after they had detained the said Sloop about twenty-four hours they let the
Captain and all his Men go in the said Sloop on their Voyage, except the said
Benbrooke. After this the said Fly Ordered the Snow to be carried into Martha's
Vinyard, but the Declarant purposely mist that Place, And the said Fly finding
his Expectation frustrated, was angry with and ^^^eatned to kill the Declarant,
a little beyond Nantucket. And on the 23 d. Day of June Instant they stood from
thence Eastward, and met with a Fishing Schooner on Brown's Banks, so called
(the Master is now on Board the Snow) and the said Fly hoisted his Black Flagg,
and fired a Great Gun a^ her himself, and told the People he would sink her, if
they did not bring their Boat on Board, so they came on Board; and Fly told the
Master he must have the Schooner, unless he could tell him where he might get
another that would Sail better; so alter he had received what Information he
could get, the Pirates set Sail after another Schooner which about Twelve
a-Clock that day appeared in sight, and the said Capt. Fly sent the Scooner
with Seven Hands, viz. six Pirates, and one George Tasker, after the other
Scooner; and he the said Fly with Three more Pirates (one of them being in
Irons for Mutiny) remained on Board the Snow, with fifteen others, who were
taken and detained by the said Fly, viz. the said Declarant, and Capt. Fulker's
Mate, and two of his Boy^* the Carpenter, and Gunner of Capt. Green, six of
Capt. Gale's Men, the aforesaid Benbrooke, who belonged to Capt. Harris, and
three of the Fishermen belonging to the Scooner. And while the Pirates on
Board the Scooner were gone in Chase as aforesaid, several other Fishing
Vessels appeared in sight ahead of the Snow, when the said Fly was on the
Quarter Deck, with two Small Arms loaded, and a Sword, and the said Atkinson
took notice to him, that he espied some Vessels forward, and thereupon Fly went
forward, and as he set on the Windless with his Prospective-Glass* the
Declarant secured his Arms, and Walker and Benbrooke by the Declarant's
Direction took hold of the said Fly, and put him in Irons; And the said
Atkinson, with his Mates, soon confined the other Pirates, and made themselves
Masters of the Snow, the rest of the People on Board standing Ne^^er, or
unactive, not being made p^ivy to the Design of taking the Pirates. And on the
Day of the date hereof the said Snow was brought up to the Great Brewster near
the Light-House, where the four Pirates are kept in Irons under the Guard of
the People on Board her. And further the Declarant says not.

William Atkinson. Attest. Samuel Tyley, N. Publicus.

Boston, June 28 th. 1726.
Morris Cundon, Native of Cork, says, That he was Shipped on Board the Snow
called the Elizabeth, belonging to Merchants in Bristol in Great Britain, Capt.
John Green of Bristol, Commander, and Sailed from Jamaica in her last April
bound for Guinea* But in the Prosecution of the Voyage, viz. on the 27 th. of
May, about One a Clock in the Morning, when the Examinant was at Helm, the
Boatswain, namely William Fly was forward (having the Charge of the Captain's
Watch) about an hour, with several other of the Men, Then the Boatswain came
aft, and said to the Examinant, that he would go and look on the Hour Glass, in
the Cabin, to see what a Clock it was: And after a few Minutes he came up
again and went forward. About a Quarter of an Hour after he came aft with
Alexander Mitchel, Henry Hill, Samuel Cole, Thomas Winthrop, and others of the
Sailors; And the said William Fly spoke softly to the Examinant at Helm,
saying, Damn you, if you stir hand or foot, or speak a word, I Will blow your
Brains out; and then he hawl'd up his Shirt, so that the Deponent saw his naked
Arm, and went down again into the Cabin, with some Instrument in his hand, and
Alexander Mitchel follow^d him, and presently the Examinant heard the Captain
say, What Is the matter; and they two soon brought the said Capt. Green upon
Deck, who (as it is thought) perceiving they were about to ^ling him overboard,
Applied himself to the Boatswain, saying* For God's sake, don't throw me
overboard, for if you do I shall go to Hell. The^ the Boatswain bid him say
after him. " Lord have Mercy upon my Soul. And he, with Mitchell and Winthrop
flung him overboard* And soon after* the Examinant heard Winthrop make his
boast that he had cut the Captain's Hand off with a Cooper's broad Ax, as he
hung by the Main-Sheets; Afterward others went and secured Thomas Jenkins the
Mate, and brought him upon Deck, and then Winthrop told him he should go over
after his Commander; And accordingly they threw him over, just before the
Main-Shrouds, having first cut him down the Shoulder with a b^oad Ax, as
Mitchel, Winthrop and Cole afterward declared: The Mate after he was thrown
over, Cried out to the Doctor, for God's sake, to give him a Rope, then Fly
went to the Doctor's Cabin and secured him, as he lay in his Bed, and put him
in Irons; and placed one John Fitz-Herbert at Helm, and the Examinant with the
Carpenter; viz. Thomas Streaton were laid in Irons; the said Herbert seemed to
be sorry for what was done. Then after some Consultation together they ^te^red
their Course for North Carolina; and came in sight of a Sloop at Anchor off
Carolina within the Bar, And Capt. John Fulker the Master, Capt. William
Atkinson Mr. Roan, another Passenger, with Samuel Walker, Fulker's Mate, and a
Young Lad, went on Board the said Snow, in order to Pilot her in; when the said
Fly told them he was come with a Cargo from Jamaica, but the Examinant being
confined in the S^eeridge, did not hear what else passed between them. They
sent away the Boat, in order to bring the Sloop over the Bar, but the Tide not
serving, they could not bring her out; And upon their return, by the said Fly's
Order, the said Fulker was severely Whipped. The next Morning they sent away the
Boat to bring the Sloop out, and as they were bringing her off, she run on
shore and Bilged. So upon ^he Boats return, the Snow weighed Anchor, and set
Sail for Martha's Vinyard to Water as they gave out: And in their way, off the
Capes of Virginia, they met a Ship which proved to be a Bristol Ship under
Capt. John Gale's Command; They took some Sails and other things out of her;
And after they had detained him about Twentyfour Hours, they suffered the
Doctor of the Snow, viz. Richard Ruth, and Capt. Ful^^r* one of his Passengers,
and a Servant Boy, to go in the Ship. And afterward in June, off the Capes of
Deleware, the said Fly took a Sloop that had about 50 Passengers on Board, the
Snow having a Black Flagg hoisted, and detained her some time, and took one
James Benbrooke out of her, who is now on Board the Snow; And when set the
Sloop and Passengers at Liberty, having first taken out of her some Small Arms,
and a Barrel of Cider. Afterward they purposed, as they gave out, to Water, at
Martha's Vinyard, and then go to the Coast of Guinea, but the Pilot missing the
place, went to Brown's Banks, so called, Eastward, and there on Thursday last
they took a Scooner one George Girdler Master, the Snows Black Flagg flying:
And the Pirates put six of the Snows Company in her, who with one Man more
sailed after another Scooner that appeared in sight; And while they were absent
the said Atkinson and others surprised and seized the said Fly: But the
Examinant being then Sick in his Hammock, can give no further Account of the
matter; save only, that the Snow being afterward Chased by the said Scooner,
and another Scooner that the six Pirates had taken, the Examinant, though Sick,
was so well disposed that he helped to load the Snows Great Guns and Small Arms
to defend her from the Pirates. And on the 28 th. of June he came to Boston in
the said Snow. The Pirates when they met with the aforesaid (...)

The Examinant adds, that after the said Fly and his Crew had killed the
Captain (...) Mate of the Snow, they met the Ship Pompy, which came out from
Jamaica in Company with the Snow, and the Captain of the Ship hailed the Snow,
and asked how Capt. Green did; and Fly answered, Very well, a^ your Service
Sir. And further the Examinant says, That John Cole, and six other of Capt.
Gales Men were made Prisoners, and put in Irons, who are all aboard the Snow,
except the Carpenter, namely George Tasker, who was left on Board the Scooner
with the six Pirates.

Morris Cundon his mark.

THomas Streaton, late Carpenter of the Snow called the Elizabeth, a Native of
London, Declares and says, That he shipped himself on board the said Snow at
Jamaica, under Capt* John Green's Command, to proceed a Voyage to Guinea; But
in the Prosecution of the Voyage, viz. on the 27 th. of May last, between One
and Two of the Clock in the Morning, he heard Samuel Cole say, to the Mate
Thomas Jenkins; Come out of your Cabin you Dog; and the Mate cried out soon
after, saying, For the Lord's sake, save my Life; but they ^awl'd him out of
his Cabin, and carried him upon Deck* And the Examinant heard some Body fall
upon the Deck, which he believ^d to be the Mate* And afterward he was thrown
overboard; And while he was in the Water be called to the (...), and desired
him to hand him a Rope. But by that time the Doctor was put in Irons.
Afterward the E^aminant got out of his H^mmock, and was looking up the
Hatches, Intending to go upon Deck, but one of the Snows Company told him if he
did not keep in his Cabin, he would blow his Brains out: About two days after
they met one of the Ships that come out in Company with the said Snow, viz. the
Ship Pompy, and some Person on board ba^led the Snow, and asked, how Capt.
Green did, to which Fly Answered, very well. The said Fly and his Company
consulted together, whether they had best Attack the said Ship, but '^was
alleged, that they had not Hands eno' to mann^er; and so they le^t her* and
ste^r'd their course for Carolina; and came in sight of a Sloop at Carolina,
when Capt. Fulker the Master of her, and others, came on Board the Snow, in
order to Pilot her (...) They Attempted to bring the said Sloop over the Bar,
but run her on shore on the Bar, where (...) Then the said Snow set sail
designing for Martha's Vinyard, to Water, as the Pirat^^ (...); and of^ the
Capes of Virginia they met a Bristol Ship Capt. Gale Commander, out of which
they took some things and gave the said Capt. Gale an Anchor and other things
by way of Exchange* the Pirates kept the Ship about twenty four hours, and then
permitted her to go, and gave leave to the Doctor of the Snow, and Capt.
Fulker, with one of said Fulker's Passengers, and a Servant, to go with them in
the Ship. And afterward in this present Month of June off the Capes of
Del^ware they took a Sloop that had about fifty Passengers on board, kept her
some time, and than le^^ her, only took out of her one James Benbrooke, some
Small Arms, and other things. Afterward they sailed for Martha's Vinyard, but
missing the Place, they arrived at Browns Bank to the Eastward* where on
Thursday last they took a Scooner Commanded by one Girdler, and put six of the
Pirates on Board, who went in pursuit of other Vessels then in sight, and while
they were absen^ Capt. Atkinson with the Examinant, and others, surprised and
subdued the said Fly, and three more of his Crew, who were put in Irons. The
Examinant further says, that the six Pirates in the Scooner* took another
Scooner, and stood after the Snow, but could not come up with her, and in the
Night they lost her, and made the best of their way for Boston, where they
arrived the 28 th. of June Instant.

The said Examinant says further, That John Cole, John Brown, Robert Dauling,
John Daw, James Blair, Edward Laurence, and George Tasker, were taken out of
Cap^. Gale's Ship and put in Irons, who were all on Board the Snow, except the
Carpenter, viz. Tasker, wh^ (...) le^t on board the Scooner with the six
Pirates.

Thomas Streaton his mark.

SAmuel Walker late ^ate of the Sloop John and (...) whereof John Fulker was
Commander, and Edward Apthorp, Mariner, being Examined, say, That (...) or
about the Third Day of June last, a^ the ^^id Sloop lay at Anchor off Cap^
Hadd^ras (...) in North Carolina, they espied a S^ow, and the said Fulker, Mr.
Roan, Capt. Atkinson, with the Examinant, and a Boy, took the B^^t and went on
Board the Snow in order to Pilot her in; and after they had been on Board some
time they understood the Men on Board the Snow were Pirates: And they Ordered
the said Walker and others, to go in the Boat and bring the Sloop along (...)
the Snow, but they run her on Shore, and she Bilged on the Bar; The Pirates
then Attempted to set the Sloop on Fire twice, but the Fire went out: After
they came on Board the Snow, they set Sail for the Coast of New England; And
about two or three Days after the said Fly and Company took a Ship whereof John
Gale was Master, belonging to Bristol, and carried away Seven of his Men, and
put them in Irons, namely ^^mes Blair, John Brown, John Cole, Robert Dauling,
John Daw, Edward Lawrence, and George T^^ker, (...) of them are now on Board
the Snow, except George Tasker: And the Pirates permitted Capt. Fulker* the
said Roan, and his Boy, and the Doctor of the Snow to go away in the said Gales
Ship. Then they stood away for Deleware-Bay, where they met a Sloop with about
Fi^ty Irish and Scots Passengers on Board bound to Philadelphia, and took out
of her one James Benbrooke, now in the Snow. From thence the said Fly and
Company designed to Martha's Vinyard, as they gave out, but missed the Place:
Capt. Atkinson was their Pilot, who carried them to Browns Bank Eastward, where
they took a Scooner, one George Girdler Master, and put on Board her Capt.
Gale's Carpenter, viz. the said George T^sker, and six Pirates, who went in
^arsuit of another Scooner; and while they were gone, the said Capt. Atkinson,
and the said Walker, with the said Benbrook and Thomas Streaton* ^ose up
against the said Fly, and three other Pirates on Board the Snow, and brought
her to Boston the 28 th of June Instant.

Samuel Walker, Edward Apthorp.


JOhn Cole, John Brown, James Blair, Edward Lawrence, Robert Dauling, and John
Daw, being Examined, say, That on the Sixth of June Instant, John Gale Captain
of the Ship John and Betty was taken off the Cap^s of Virginia, by one William
Fly Master of the Snow called by the Pirates the Fames-Revenge, formerly called
the Elizabeth; ^ho Robbed the said Ship of a Foretop-Gall^nt-Sail, a
Mizen*stay-Sail, and sundry other (...), and gave the said Capt. Gale an Anchor
and some Cask, and permitted the Doctor of the Snow, Capt. (...), and three
others to go in the said Gal^s Ship, but detained the Examinants on board the
Snow, and put them i^ Irons* And further the Examinants affirm to the Truth of
what (...) to the Pirates taking the Sloop off Deleware, and the Scooner, as is
above Declared by Samuel Walker and Edward Apthorp.

Signed by John Cole, (...) the other Persons above named.

(...) Benbrook of Dublin, a Passenger bound from New York to Philadelphia, in
the Sloop Rachel, Capt. (...) of New London Master, Declares and says, that
the said Sloop was taken on the Eleventh of From (...) six Leagues East from
Cape-May, by Wm. Fly, Commander of the Snow, Called the Elizabeth (...) the
(...) who plundered the said Sloop and took the Examinant, and put him in Irons
on board the said Snow, and on the 12th. Day of the said Month they dismissed
Capt. Harris and his Company, having (...) taken all the (...) Colors, Capt.
Harrie's Instruments, and some of his Clothes. Then they sailed to the Coast of
New England, and on Thursday last, took a Schooner on Browns Bank, and put
Seven Men on board, six of them Pirates, who went in pursuit of another Vessel;
and in the mean time Capt. Atkinson with the Examinant and two others, viz.
Thomas Streaton, and Samuel Walker, having projected how they should surprise
the said Fly, took this opportunity, and seized him, and put him in Irons, with
three more Pirates on (...) And then (...) Sail for Boston, where they arrived
the 28th. of June Instant.

James Benbrook.

G George Girdler of Marblehead, late Master or Skipper of the Scooner called
the James; Joseph (...), and William Ferguson, both lately belonging to the
said Scooner, being (...), say, That on Thursday last the 23 d of June Instant,
as the said Scooner lay too on Brown Banks (...), there bore down upon 'em a
Snow with English Colors; And when they came near to Windward they ^oisted a
Black Flagg, and fired at the Scooner, and bid 'em lower their Sails, and bring
their Boat on (...); and when the Examinants went on Board they perceived the
Snow was Commanded by William Fly a (...), who made Prisoners of the
Examinants; Then they put Six Pirates and another Man, viz. George Tasker on
(...) the Scooner, who, with Three Young Men more taken in her, viz. Thomas
S^^go, Richard Girdler and William Girdler, went in Quest of and took another
Scooner in sight of the Snow, and while they were gone Capt. Atkinson and three
others, surprised Capt. Fly, and made a Prisoner of him, and Three more Pirates
then on Board the Snow, namely, Samuel Cole* George Condick and Henry Greenvill.

George Girdler, Joseph Marshall, William Ferguson, his X Mark


Attest. Samuel Tyley, N-Publicus.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 16. after Adam Winthrop Esquire read Elisha Cook Esquire p. 7. l. 21,
22. instead of Richard Ruth, r. Mr. Roan, p. 15. l. 24, 25. dele as before
expressed by the said Atkinson in his defense upon his Trial. p. 17. at the end
of l. 7. add within. l. 23. dele Morris Cundon, and r. Samuel Cole, George
Condick and Henry Greenvill.

In the Appendix.
Page 19. line 9. read 29th. p. 20. l. 11. after Beds, add and threw them
overboard. l. 36. instead of Mr. Ruth, r. Mr. Roan.


