DEATH THE DESTROYER OF Earthly and False Hopes, UNDER The Divine Dominion. A
SERMON Preached on the Lord's Day, January 30, 1725.

By Thomas Foxcroft, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Psalm. 146.3, 4. Put not your trust in Princes nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that
very day his thoughts perish.

BOSTON: Printed by B Green, for Samuel Gerrish, in Cornhill. 1726.

DEATH destroys the Hope of Man.
JOB XIV. 19. THOU destroyest the Hope of Man.


IN this Chapter we have holy Job religiously meditating on the Life and Death
of Man; communing with his own Heart, and expostulating with GOD.

IN the first 6 verses, he represents the shortness and uncertainty of our
Lives, the vanity and vexation of the World, the Pollution of human Nature, and
the settled Period of human Life: and urges these Considerations with GOD, as
so many Pleas for Mercy and Forbearance. Man, that is born of a Woman, is of
few days, etc.

IN the next place he turns his Tho'ts upon DEATH, and affects himself with the
dreadful Nature and Consequences of it; groaning out his Soul in various
Complaints, Requests, and passionate Expostulations. He realises it to himself,
that Death is an awful and final Remove out of the Present World; but then
refreshes himself with the Prospect of a future Resurrection, and his Existence
in another and better World. ver. 7 -- 15. For there is hope of a Tree, if it
be cut down, etc.

HAVING said these things, he falls again into complaining Language; and though
not utterly desperate, yet is hard put to it to bear up under his present
Troubles. He complains of GOD's Severity in his dealings with him, as if he was
strict to mark Iniquity against him; ver. 16, and 17. For now thou numbrest my
steps, etc. In the next place he observes the decaying Condition and Mutability
of all Earthly Things: and then he speaks of it as the common Lot of all
Mankind to die; and mentions the power, the terror, and the agonies of Death:
ver. 18. to the end, And surely the mountain falling comes to naught, etc.

ALL things in Nature are subject to continual Vicissitudes, to Decays, and
Desolations; even Man (the noblest of visible Creatures) not excepted. We are
of the Earth, earthy, sprang originally out of the Dust, and must return to our
native Earth. The very Mountains and Rocks have not such a Stability, but that
they may be unfixed from their places, be removed and broken to pieces, or
gradually moulder away. No marvel then if frail Mankind be in a wasting
Condition. The very strongest, the most healthy and most powerful among Men,
are subject to Mortality, as well as others. Though they see many days, and last
a long time, yet sooner or later, they are worn out, as the Rocks in the Sea
wax old and Stones wear away with the continual dropping of Water upon them. --
And as to the Generality of Mankind, they are easily carried away, and often
suddenly, as Flowers of the Field, and tender Herbs which grow out of the dust
of the Earth, by a sweeping Rain, which (as Solomon observes) leaves no Food,
but cuts off the Expectations of the Husbandman, and when he looks for much,
brings it to little.

THUS says Job, directing his Speech to the ALMIGHTY, -- Thou washest away the
things that grow out of the Dust of the Earth; and thou destroyest the Hope of
Man. Thou prevailest for ever against him, etc.

HERE (1.) WE have an acknowlegement of GOD's Dominion and Agency in the Affair
of our Death. -- Thou destroyest etc.

(2.) WE have a Description of Death, by some of it is Properties, and Effects.

IN our Text he observes, It destroys the Hope of Man, puts a Period to all our
Worldly Hopes and Projects, and to the presumptuous hopes of the Hypocrite. In
the following verses it is observed:

IT prevails for ever against him, and he passes away. The Stroke of Death is
irresistible, and often makes quick dispatch. The Blow is many times given
suddenly, and the Man passes away; makes a speedy flight, as a timorous Bird
hastens out of it is Nest when disturbed, or as a conquered Soldier slys before
his pursuing Adversary. -- It Is added,

IT changes his Countenance; it is Approach is terrible, and discomposes the
Mind; and it is Execution alters the looks, slurs the Beauty of the Face, and
turns it into Paleness and Deformity.

IT sends him away, -- with Speed and Force; out of Time into Eternity; out of
a State of Probation into a State of Retribution. Finally, His sons come to
Honor, and he knows it not, and they are brought low, but he perceives it
not, etc.

I shall consider at present only the Beginning of the Account here given of
Death. And shall speak to it under these two Observations.

1. GOD is the Sovereign Dispenser of Death. 2. DEATH destroys the Hope of Man.
PROP. I. GOD is the Sovereign Dispenser of Death, and the absolute Disposer of
all the Circumstances and Consequences of it.

JOB attributes all to GOD, -- Thou destroyest the Hope of Man; Thou prevailest
for ever against him, -- Thou changest his Countenance, and sendest him away.
-- Thus he ascribes this great Event, in the several Circumstances and
Consequents of it unto GOD.

AND this Truth might be confirmed from many other Passages in sacred Writ. I
shall here only mention that one place, where GOD himself asserts his Dominion
over human Life, and challenges it as his Prerogative to dispose of it. Deuteronomy.
32.29. See now, that I even I am HE, and there is no God with me: I kill and I
make alive; I wound and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my
hand. He orders and disposes every thing relating to the Death of every one;
the Time, the Place, the Manner, together with all the Effects, and Things
which follow.

DEATH is no contingent or accidental Event, the fruit of Chance, but the
Result of Divine Counsil and Efficiency. It may be said indeed to be fortuitous
or casual with respect to us, who are ignorant of futurities, and meet with
many things we could not foresee, or did not expect. But GOD is perfect in
Knowledge, and foresees the most distant Events; and with reference to him
nothing can be called a Contingency, Accident, or Chance. He works All things
according to the Counsil of his own Will: and in particular, He presides in the
great affair of Death. Thus says Job, Chap. 12.9, 10. Who knows not in all
these, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this? In whose hand is the Soul
of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind. It is he turns Man to
Destruction, and brings us to the House appointed for all Living. The Decree
(wherein it is appointed unto Man once to die) came out of his Mouth; and the
Execution is done by his powerful Hand. Men don't die at random, just when and
as it happens: but our times are in GOD's hand; He measures out our Life, and
determins our days; the number of our Months is with him; He has appointed our
Bounds that we cannot pass. And when the set time is come, he gives the fatal
Blow, takes away our breath, and lays us in the dust. There is the hand of GOD
in every one's Death, whatever be the way, and means; whether it be a natural
or a violent Death; by Distempers or Disasters; if he be slain in Battle, cut
off by the Sword of Justice, or stabbed by an Ehud's Dagger etc. All comes to
pass by the Determination and Providence of GOD. It was according to the
determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, that our blessed Savior was by
wicked Hands crucified and slain. GOD directed the Arrow, when a certain Man
drew his bow at a venture, and smote the King of Israel between the Joints of
the Harness. It is appointed to us, not only once to die, but how and when: the
particular Time of our Birth is not more fully settled in the Counsels of GOD,
than the Time of our Death. There is a Time to be born, and a Time to die; a
set Time for both: and GOD determines the Times fore-appointed. It is the same
Invisible Hand, which writes down our Names in the Book of the Living, and
blots them out too.

THIS is a Truth we should often meditate upon; that GOD has the power of Life
and Death; and we should make a wise application hereof to the Ends of Holiness
and spiritual Comfort.

THIS Reflection should serve to greaten and elevate our Apprehensions of the
Divine Majesty. Death is one of the weightiest and most important Events. It Is
the Destruction of an human Body, which infinite Wisdom has fearfully and
wonderfully made. It Is the dislodging of an immortal Soul; a changing of its
State, and translating it from a world of Sense to a world of Spirits, from a
State of Trial, to a State of Rewards unknown and everlasting. It is therefore
a great and very awful Thing to die. And it is no small Exercise of the Divine
Dominion, which is seen in this Affair. Hence we should maintain a profound
Reverence of GOD, in whose hand our Breath is, and should have exalted Tho'ts
of Him on this account.

Again, THE Thought of this should strike a Terror on rebellious Sinners, and
excite them to a speedy Repentance. This tells you, that your Lives are under a
Divine Inspection, the most strict, accurate, and never-ceasing. The LORD of
all has his Eye upon you continually, observing how you fill up the measure of
your Iniquity, and waiting the fit season to turn the Keys of Death and Hell
upon you. O Consider this, and tremble. Your Death will certainly be a
miserable one, if you die in your Sins. And you know not how soon or suddenly
you may have the fatal Summons served upon you. The Providence of GOD is at
this day calling aloud on you in several sudden Deaths. It is owing entirely to
the Patience and Forbearance of a good and merciful GOD, that you are spared,
and have had your Lives lengthened out hitherto. You are continually abusing
this Patience by your Rebellion and Impenitence. And if you go on in your
Trespasses, there is hazard lest abused Patience should break out into inflamed
Wrath, and cut you down as Cumberers of the Ground, and cast you as fit Fuel
into the Everlasting Burnings. GOD has said, My Spirit shall not always strive
with man. O secure Sinners, think of this, and tremble lest Divine Vengence
should kindle against you, and burn to the lowest Hell. -- The Doctrine before
us reads loud Lessons of Terror to the Wicked. O that such would hear and fear
and no longer harden their Hearts, but to Day while it is called to day,
hearken to the Casts of the Gospel, and turn from their evil ways, that they
perish not. But then further,

IT reads sweet Lectures of Consolation to the Children of GOD.

UNDER the Difficulties and Troubles of Life, in general, it should minister
Support and Comfort to Believers, to consider that GOD is the Sovereign LORD of
Life and Death. However your Lives may be embitter'd to you by a Variety of
Afflictions; so that you may be even weary of Life, and be tempted (with Job)
to wish for Death, yet remember it is GOD who continues your Lives, and delays
your Death; HE performs the Thing that is appointed for you; and let this
Though It teach you a humble Submission and patient Waiting. And remember that er'e
long He will command Deliverance for you; will give you a Quietus, and bring
you to the Rest which remains for the People of GOD. The prospect of this
should calm your Spirit, and make you easy under all your present Trials --.

BUT in particular, under Bereavements, the Though It of GOD's Dominion over Death
should be quieting to you. Job composed himself with this consideration, -- The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, (Job 1.21.) Let such as are Mourning
under bereaving Dispensations, eye the hand of GOD. You may not with the
ignorant and foolish Philistines make a Doubt, Whether it is GOD who has done
this Evil, or whether it is a Chance that has happened to you. You must not
impute it to second Causes merely; but look above and beyond Instruments and
Means to the Prime Efficient, and acknowledge with Naomi, That the Hand of the
Lord is gone out against you. Realize the Agency of Divine Providence in your
Afflictions, and in the midst of your disquieting Tho'ts within you, let this
Reflection comfort you. Remember Who it is that has laid you under these
bereavements. He is One absolutely Sovereign and gives not account of any of
his Matters. Why then should thou strive against Him? Woe to him, who
striveth with his Maker! Behold, He takes away, and who can hinder him, or who
may say to him. What do Thou? Behold in this thou art not just: I will
answer thee, That GOD is greater than Man! Again, He is One Infinitely Wife;
and therefore knows what is best and fittest to be done, and even how to bring
Good out of Evil. Is it not then both a Duty and a Decency in you to acquiesce
in his Pleasure, with the highest Satisfaction? Moreover, He is infinitely Good
and Gracious, and has engaged himself by his faithful Promise, to employ his
Wisdom and Power in making all things work together for your final and best
Advantage; so that you shall be spiritual Gainers by your temporal Losses and
Bereavements. O how should this Though It sustain, animate and comfort you! I shall
only subjoyn, You may fetch in additional Consolations from the prospect of
that Happiness and Glory, which such of your deceased Friends, as were Pious,
are gone to inherit, and which shall be abundantly increased at their future
Resurrection. It is GOD who has taken them away; and you must needs conclude
from his Love to his People, and from his gracious Promises to them, that he
has removed them into a State more excellent and happy, than that they were in
here; and that he will raise up their Bodies at the last day, to Glory,
Blessedness and Immortality. So that not a Tear nor Sigh is due on the score of
the departed Godly, who are pleased with the Change which we lament. Wherefore
comfort one another with these words. Take them for a Sponge, to dry up all
your excessive Tears; and let not immoderate Resentments prevail over you, to
the dishonor of GOD, and the prejudice of your own Souls. At least, let your
Resentments turn upon Sin, the grand Occasion and Procurer of Death: Hear the
Lord's Controversy with you, and inquire into the Grounds of it; O humble your
selves under his mighty hand, and learn Righteousness from his Judgments;
knowing that He will one day call you to an Account for your Afflictions, as so
many Talents, put into your Hands to improve for his Glory.

Further, THE Doctrine before us should teach us all to be Thankful to GOD for
the Preservation of our Lives hitherto, and to trust in him for the future
Continuance of them. We live in the midst of danger, are encompassed with
innumerable Evils; and it is of the Lord's Mercies we are not consumed. To him
give the Glory of past Preservations; and in him let us put our Confidence for
the future. What Time we are afraid, let us trust in the Lord: when our Lives
are in hazard by Sickness, by Accidents, by the Rage of Creatures, let us
confide in GOD, and be quiet from the fear of Death. If He cover us with his
Feathers, we are safe, and need not fear whrt Men or Devils can do unto us.
Prove. 26.2. As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse
causeless shall not come. We should trust in GOD as the GOD of our Life, for
the preservation of it, and for all the Blessings needful to sweeten it to us:
and we should resign to his Will, as to the Time and Manner of our Death. We
should daily by Faith be putting over ourselves into his safe and glorious
Hands, and commit the keeping of our Souls, and ordering of our Bodies and all
our Concerns wholly unto Him; from a realising view of his Sovereignty,
Goodness, and Wisdom.

Finally, WHAT has been said should give Check to all inordinate Fears of Men,
however they may set themselves against us, or any of GOD's People. Are we
apprehensive of Danger to ourselves, or to the Public, or to the Church of GOD
abroad, from subtle and powerful Enemies? Do Tyrants and Oppressors arise, and
do they breathe out Threatenings and Slaughter? This is our Comfort, Their
Breath (as well as ours) is in GOD's hand; and though they may be called gods,
they shall die like men. The LORD, when he pleases, can dash them to pieces
with his strong Arm, and cover them with shame, can bring down the glory of
their high looks, and cast their Throne down to the Ground, by one easy
instantaneous Blow, either with or without Instruments. It was the Word of the
LORD to the Prince of Tire, Ezekiel. 28.8 -- 10. They shall bring thee down to the
pit, and thou shall die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the
seas. Will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am God? but thou shall
be a man and no God in the hand of him that slays thee. Thou shall die the
deaths of the uncircumcised, by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it,
says the Lord God. -- Pharaoh, that oppressor of GOD's Israel, was drowned in
the Red Sea. So Herod the King who vexed the Church, was smote by the Angel of
the Lord, and devoured of Worms. Thus those Persecutors were stopped in their
furious Career; by the Blast of GOD, they perished out of the Earth, and went
where the Wicked cease from troubling. Wait on the Lord then, and keep his way.
Fret not thy self because of evil doors; neither be afraid of Dying Creatures
though they plot against the just, and bend their Bow, to slay such as be of
upright Conversation. The wrath of Man shall praise GOD, and the Remainder
thereof shall be restrained. Lo, I have seen the Wicked in great power and
spreading himself like a green Bay Tree, yet he passed away; and lo, he was
not. The Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, and unto GOD belong the
Issues from Death, Psalm. 72.14. He shall redeem their Soul from deceit and
violence: and precious shall their blood be in his sight. 1 Pet. 3.13, 14. And
who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? But and
if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye: and be not afraid of their
terror, neither be troubled;

I come now to the other Observation.

PROP. II. DEATH destroys all Earthly and False hopes, and puts a period to
the Expectations and Projects of the Men of this World.

SO in our Text -- Thou destroyest the hope of Man. Death is the Destruction of
all those Hopes which are built on Worldly Confidences, and confined to Worldly
Comforts. Hope in Christ and hope of Heaven [well grounded] Death will
consummate and not destroy. But it destroys the Hope, which is Worldly or
False. We read 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Our days on Earth are a shadow, and there is
none abiding, or no Expectation, as it might be rendered, Prove. 11.7. When a
wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust men
perishes.

(1.) IT puts a period to all Worldly Projects, to all Earthly Hopes, and the
prospects of Temporal Glory and Happiness, which vain Man is so apt to flatter
himself with. Death puts an end to his temporal Life and Abode here on Earth;
and together therewith, to all his Worldly Employments and Designs, as well as
Enjoyments and Possessions. Death turns us out of our several Callings,
Relations and Secular Capacities, and leaves us no more opportunity to attend
the common works of Life, and pursue any designs relating to the present World.
Thus we read, Eccle. 9.10. There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither thou go. So Psalm. 146.4. His breath goes forth,
he returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. The meaning is
not, that the Soul then passes into a tho'tless, stupid indolent State, and
loses its power of Cogitation, No, but it imports, that a Period is then put to
the Designs they formed for this World. When Death comes, they can no longer
prosecute the Schemes they have laid for Worldly Gains, Pleasures or
Preferments. In that very day the Plans they have laid perish: "their designs
die with them, their Thoughts vanish with their Breath! -- In one Moment all
their Hopes are dash't; their Desires, and their Expectations perish forever.

HENCE, Let us not put our Trust in Men; whose Lives, however important and
useful, are uncertain; and therefore our Expectations from them very
precarious, and easily defeated. Hear the Prophet's Advice, Isa. 2.2 2. Cease
ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted
of? Surely Man is like to Vanity; his days are as a Shadow that passes away.
Men of low degree are Vanity: and Men of high degree are a Lie. Hear the
Psalmist's Advice, Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5. Put not your trust in princes, nor in the
son of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to
his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. Happy is he that has the God
of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God: "This is a Life, and
Will, and Power we may depend upon".

Again, LET us not be high minded and trust in uncertain Riches. We must not
fix our Desires and Hopes on the things of Time and Sense: we must not conceive
too big Hopes, nor indulge too peremptory Expectations; but always project and
act with an absolute Resignation to GOD, and sit loose from the World, as
Pilgrims and Strangers upon Earth. Let us not put on too much Confidence, nor
flatter and please ourselves too much with Worldly Hopes and Views at any time.
Hear the Wise Man's Caution, Prove. 27.1, 24. Boast not thy self of to morrow;
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. -- For riches are not for
ever: and does the crown endure to every generation? Remember the Admonition of
our Savior, in the Parable of the Rich Fool, Luke 12.16 -- 22. And that of the
Apostle, Jam. 4.13 -- 15. [Which, you will do well to turn to and read.]

LET us not be immoderately anxious, nor spend too much of our Time in
unprofitable Projections, about the perishing Enjoyments of the Life which now
is. But let us be laying Schemes for Eternity, which will never perish; and be
forming Designs of Good (Spiritual Good) to coming Generations. We should be
projecting proper Methods to serve Posterity, as well as the present Generation
in their Religious Interests: particularly by devoting of our Estates to Pious
Uses, by the Pious Education of our Children, etc. Thus we shall lay the
Foundations of peculiar Benefit and Service to the World, after we are Dead.
But especially we should be wisely laying Schemes for a Blessed Immortality: we
are hidden to lay up Treasures in Heaven, to lay up in store a good Foundation
against the time to come, that we may lay hold on Eternal Life. -- We are here
upon our good Behavior, in a state of Trial for Eternity. Great then is the
Folly of the Men of this World, who only seek a Portion under the Sun, and
terminate all their Tho'ts and Cares and Hopes upon Sublunary things. They set
their Hearts on that which is not, and neglect the great Salvation which is the
one thing needful. Verily this their Way is their Folly. O let us beware of
such egregious Folly. Eccl. 11.8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in
them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many.
All that comes is vanity. Let us show our selves Men, by applying all our
Powers to secure the great Interests of our Souls and Eternity, which will
never fail, and which are of the highest possible value and importance. Let us
look off from this present World, retire from it in our Thoughts, Affections
and Pursuits; live above its frowns and flatteries, and pass the time of our
Sojourning here in the fear of GOD. Let us look into the coming World, extend
our Cares, Designs and Hopes beyond the Limits of fleeting Time; and seek
another Country even an Heavenly. Let us make it the great Business of our
Lives to provide for the next World, and secure to our selves an Inheritance
among the Saints in Light. And considering the shortness and uncertainty of our
opportunities, let us make Haste. We are frequently warned of GOD, both in his
Word and Providence, to prepare for Death. The Voice of the Lord cries aloud
to the City, (in the late sudden Deaths, which have alarmed the Town) in such
moving Language as that -- BE YE ALSO READY, for ye know not the day nor the
hour. O let us fear GOD, and receive Instruction: let us number our days, and
apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. Hear, ye Old Men, and be wise, and understand
this. And hear, ye Children! O Young Man Remember now thy Creator in the days
of thy Youth, lest the Iniquity of thy Heels overtake thee, and thou be snared
in an evil time, and mourn at the last, saying How have I hated Instruction!
Verily Death (that irresistible Devourer of all false hope and peace) is
coming, yea it hastens greatly upon us, when the day of Salvation will end. Now
is the day of Salvation; now is the accepted time. Death will conclude the
season of Grace: and then there will be no retrieving lost opportunities;
'twill be too late to Repent, too late to obtain Mercy, too late to work out
our Salvation. It must be done Now or Never. When we have once put off the
Body, we shall never return into it, to redress the Errors of our former Lives;
but must receive our Reward, according to the things already done in the Body,
whether good or bad. After Death comes the Judgment, even eternal Judgment, an
irresistible Doom. After that we shall no more have the offers of Salvation
made to us; nor any more Enjoy the Hopes and Means of Grace; but shall be fixed
in an everlasting State. We have only the present short Life to work in and
prepare for an eternal World. We had need then be up and doing As our Lord
said, Joh 9.4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the
night comes when no man can work. Let us make haste and not delay. It is high
time to awake unto Righteousness. Let us not be secure, and trifle away our
time in idleness, putting far away the evil day: but let us do with Might, with
Speed and Vigor, what our hand finds to do, redeeming the Time. Let us not
content ourselves with empty wishes, and unactive Resolutions; for in the day
of Death all our Tho'ts will perish, and avail us nothing, unless now put in
Execution.

AND let us see to it that we be Sincere, that our Hearts be right with GOD,
and sound in his Statutes; that we so number our days, as indeed to apply our
Hearts unto Wisdom. Let no man deceive Himself. Be not deceived: GOD is not
mocked. But whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap. He that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. But he that sows to
the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption and Death. Let us see to it that
we be indeed the Children of GOD by Faith in Christ Jesus: and if Children,
then shall we be Heirs of GOD, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ; we shall
receive the End of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls.

BUT if we are not the Children of GOD, if we do not truly believe in CHRIST,
and live Godly in him, but prove finally the Children of this World, we shall
certainly perish, and our Hope shall perish: which brings me to say,

(2.) DEATH destroys the Hope of the Hypocrite, and puts an End to all his
Dreams of Heaven and Happiness. The Righteous has Hope in his Death, and
becomes an Heir according to the hope of eternal Life. But the Way of the
wicked shall perish, and the Expectation of the Hypocrite shall perish. If we
die in our Sins, verily Hell will be our portion; we shall lie down in sorrow
and be doomedd to everlasting Despair: If we die Hypocrites, verily all Hope
will die with us, and nothing but Misery and Confusion remain for us. However
we may now flatter ourselves in our own Eyes and rejoice in our Boastings, we
shall then be shaken out of all our ^rusts and have an End put to all our
Triumphs. (...) Hypocrites (...) compared to the ^ush and the Flag, which though
they (...) green and verdant for a while, and outstrip the Grass, yet are
hollow and empty, have no solid Foundation, or Consistence in their Nature, and
wither presently before any other herb. Even so (says he) are the paths of all
that forget GOD, and the Hypocrite's Hope shall perish. His Hope shall be cut
off, and his Trust shall be a Spider's Web (woven out of his own bowels, light
and airy, and easily swept away by the besome of Destruction:) He may lean upon
his house, but it shall not stand; he may hold it fast, but it shall not
endure. All the false Confidences of Hypocrites will fail them in the day of
Wrath; their sandy Foundations will crumble under them in the Storm that is
coming, and they themselves shall perish in the Ruins. The Refuges of Lies
will be swept away; and all their bright Thoughts of Heaven and Happiness shall
end in black Despair.

WHILE here in this World, Sinners in Zion are many times carnally confident
and at ease; They speak Peace and promise Safety to their Souls. They value
themselves upon their extraordinary Gifts, on their Gospel-priviledges, on
their Religious Profession and Performances, and the like: but these will all
prove vain Pleas, and avail them nothing. Of this we are assured by the Judge
himself, Mat. 7.21 -- 27. So in the Parable of the Virgins, Mat. 25.1 -- 12.
[Which Scriptures for brevity sake, I must only turn you to.]

THUS the Hope of the Hypocrite shall be cut off, and destroyed for ever. Now
to apply what has been said, in a hint or two.

CONSIDER this, ye that forget GOD and flatter your selves with presumptuous
Hopes; Let Destruction from GOD be a terror to you, and be persuaded by the
Terrors of the LORD. You may now think your Mountain stands strong, and be
crying Peace, Peace to your selves: but behold (Thou Hypocrite) Destruction
comes, as a Whirlwind, even a Destruction without Remedy. O Remember you are
ere long to DIE: and Death will storm you out of all your delusive Confidences,
and pull down your towering Imaginations. Then you will see the Vanity of your
present Dreams. That which is now a high Wall in your Conceit; a Munition of
Rocks, and a substantial Security unto you, will then prove but a shadow, mere
appearance and deceit. Then you will see and bewail your Folly and Presumption;
will be ashamed of your treacherous Hope, and abandon your self to everlasting
Despondence, Regret and Rage. -- At Death there will be a fatal period of all
your Joys and Hopes. Your Hope may now bud and flourish, and yield unto you
peaceable fruits; but verily the latter Harvest shall be a Heap in the day of
Grief and of desperate sorrow.

O that Sinners who are at ease in Zion, would hear and fear, and no longer
delude themselves with a groundless hope. Job 15.31. Let not him that is
deceived, trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompense. Consider before
it be too late, how vain and destructive your false hope will prove in the end.
Consider how Death is hastening upon you, which will destroy your Hope, and turn
it into en less Desperation. O give Credit to the Divine Threatenings, and take
seasonable Warning. Phil. 3.18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ: Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly: and whose glory is
in their shame, who mind earthly things. Isa. 50.11. Behold, all ye that kindle
a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks: walk in the light of your
fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand,
ye shall lie down in sorrow. O Rest not easy in your present Condition. Fly for
refuge to Jesus Christ and lay hold on the hope set before you. Repent and turn
to GOD, else how shall you escape the Damnation of Hell? How shall you escape,
if you neglect so great Salvation, and die in your sins? None can fly from GOD,
and hide themselves in secret places. None can resist. He will prevail for ever
against them, and will destroy all the hopes of the Wicked. And how aggravated
your Misery, if you perish from under the Gospel! Job 36.18. Because there is
wrath, beware lest be take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom
cannot deliver thee. To him that is joined to the Living, there is hope, but
Death destroys the hope of Sinners, destroys it totally, destroys it finally.

IN a Word, Let us all then from what has been said, be put upon Examining our
Hope, whether it be a Hope that Death cannot destroy.

THIS is an Inquiry of infinite Importance. It relates to our Souls, and to the
Eternal World; to our Spiritual and Everlasting Safety and Welfare: And
therefore surely must deserve our Consideration, and calls for a peculiar
concern that we be not deceivd about it.

BUT yet Multitudes do deceive themselves in this great Affair, resting in a
false Faith and presumptuous Hope.

AN Error here is fatal, and yet (alas) very common.

WE had need then apply our selves with the greatest Care and Solicitude to
inquire into the Truth and Grounds of our Hope, that we may not by a deceived
Heart be turned aside from the path of Life, and finally perish with a Lie in
our right hand.

Let it be Inquired then,

IS your Hope built on the Promise of GOD in Jesus Christ, and accompanied with
Qualifications and Deportments agreeable to the Terms of the Promise? Are you
of the Number of those, Phil. 3.3. Which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh? Can you take up the
Language of the Apostle, and from the Heart repeat his words in the following
verses, I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord; and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ; and be
found in him, not having on mine own Righteousness, but that which is of Christ
by Faith. I count not my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high Calling of
GOD in Christ Jesus.

DOES your Hope in Christ in flame your Desires and invigorate your Endeavors
after Communion with him and Conformity to him? In fine --

HAS your Hope a purifying Influence upon you? The Apostle John lays down that
infallible Character for us to try our selves by, -- 1 John 3.3. Every man that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as God is pure. -- Verily, if
these be the Properties and Fruits of your Hope, it is a good Hope, and shall
stand the shock of Death, and may well reconcile you to the Tho'ts of the
Grave. It is a Hope built on sure and everlasting Foundations, strong in the
LORD, and guarded with all the Forces of his strength. Wherefore it is said in
the Scripture, He that believes on Him, shall not be confounded. They shall
not be ashamed, that wait for the LORD, and hope in his Mercy. Such may triumph
with the Prophet, Isai. 50.7, 8. -- The Lord God will help me; -- I know I
shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifyeth me: who will contend with me,
etc. -- So you may glory with the Apostle, in like words, Romans 8.33, etc. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifyeth.
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died --. Who shall separate us
from the Love of Christ? -- Neither Death nor Life, nor Angels -- nor any other
Creature shall be able --. Verily, if you truly believe in CHRIST, your Hope is
such an one as shall not be disappointed; shall not make you ashamed. Even
Death shall not destroy it, but accomplish it. Your Flesh shall rest in Hope,
and your Hope shall never perish; but be completed in everlasting Fruition,
swallowed up in the Sight and Enjoyment of the Blessed GOD.

GOD may seem to hide himself from you for the present, but he will never
forsake you utterly. Isai. 45.15, etc. Thou art a God that hidest thy self, O
God of Israel the Savior. They shall be ashamed, all of them, -- that are
makers of Idols. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting
salvation: ye shall not be ashamed, nor confounded world without end. You may
be apt to condemn your selves, but GOD would have you trust in him. Isai.
50.10. Who is among you that fears the LORD, that obeys the voice of his
servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? let him trust in the Name
of the LORD, and stay upon his GOD. Finally, Men may vote you Reprobates, and
pass the Doom of Hypocrites upon you: but says the same Prophet, Chap. 66.5.
Hear the Word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word: Your brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my Name's sake, said Let the LORD be
glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. AMEN!

Some agreeable Lines, mostly taken out of the Rev. Mr. Simon Browne's Book of
Hymns.,
WAke up, my Soul! The awful Day
Is coming swiftly on,
When thou must leave this House of Clay,
And fly to Worlds unknown.
Oh! do not pass thy Life in Dreams,
To be surpised by Death:
And drop unthinking down to Flames,
When I resign my Breath.
No: every day thy Course review,
Thy real State to learn:
And with an ardent Zeal pursue
Thy great and chief Concern.
Rouse all the Man: thy Work is great,
And all the Man demands;
Thine head, thine heart, thy br^^^h, thy sweat,
Thy strength, and both thine hands.
Oh! let the important Work be done,
Done whilst it is called to Day:
Lest thou the time of Hope outrun,
And rue the mad Delay.
Repent (my Soul) Believe, and Pray:
Bid every Lust Farewell:
To thy Redeemer haste away,
And 'scape from Death and Hell
To whom, dear Jesus, should I live!
To whom but Thee alone!
Thou did at first my Being give,
And I am all thine own.
To Thee I Will then my self dovote,
My Life and all my Powers:
Each warm Affection, busy Thought,
And all my passing Hours.
I shall be safe, and rich, and blessed,
If I belong to Thee:
Contented here I Will take my Rest,
Thine let me ever be!
Thus shall my heavenly Hopes begin,
Thus I Will my Hopes maintain:
Nor once expect, in ways of Sin,
Eternal Life to gain.
O! let those glorious Hopes refine,
And elevate my Soul;
To heavenly Things my Heart incline,
And meaner Joys control.
May Faith and Hope stretch all their Wings,
And bear me up on high;
And as I mount, may Earthly Things,
Below unheeded lie!
JESUS, my Savior and my God,
My Life and Sacrifice!
My Hopes, deep founded in thy Blood,
Raise far above the Skies.
Prepare me, Lord, for thy Right Hand,
Then come the joyful Day:
Come Death, and come Celestial Band,
To bear my Soul away.
FINIS.

