THE LIFE and DEATH OF Old Father IANUS, The vile AUTHOR of the late Wicked
COURANT. A SATYR.
FAREWELL, old JANUS, since at last thy Doom,
Which some have feared, but more desired, is come;
Who in thy Life wast deemed a Public Pest,
And whom bright Fame shall restlesly molest:
The Smart you have given to Vice, each Wound declares,
And now thy mangled Name shall pay the Arrears.
Thou impudently did, with open Mouth,
In Presence of great Error, plead for Truth;
With traitorous Rage, for injured Justice fight,
Rather than roundly swear that Wrong was Right.
What though your Voice for Liberty was reared,
With your own Rules your Practice interfer'd;
For, when some only wanted leave to sin,
Thou, like a cruel Tyrant, rein'd them in.
Often you presumed to check the lawless Rake;
And from the Proud their flaunting Folly's take:
And yet, O Shame! thy self too proud to bend,
By sordid Arts, to buy a faithless Friend.
Stiff in the Right, a thriftless Fool remained,
While prudent Flatt'rers veer'd with every prosperous Wind.
How often have thou treacherously revealed
Those shuffling Tricks, which long had slept concealed?
Not a clean Piece of mystic Knav'ry done,
But thou must sound it round the wondering Town;
Till through your Zeal, is barb'rously betrayed
The gainful Secrets of the cheating Trade.
Baseness unparrellel! to bring to Sight,
Things which you knew deserved to see the Light!
What harm had sly Hypocrisy designed,
That in your Scrolls the Fair should be arraigned?
That you should cry her down in every Street,
And make the World believe she was a Cheat?
When all can say, that view her artful Dress,
She only differs from the Upright, in Grace.
Still to provoke, your Magic raised a Glass,
Which made each Villain hate his own dear Face:
And while in Sight your poisonous Arrows flew,
In base Disguise you skulk'd from public View;
That when the Guilty, whom your Rancour struck,
Roared for Revenge, they knew not where to look.
So when inspired by Night, some rambling Fool,
On Mischief bent, resolves to fight by Rule;
With a dark Lanthorn's overpow'ring Blaze,
On our confounded Sight he rudely plays:
Out flies a Cudgel from behind the Light*
We struggling feel the Blows, but know not whom we fight.
Long you disturbed the jovial Sinners Sports,
And, with bold Front, besieged the Imperial Forts.
Witness, great BACCHUS, how he charged your Troops,
And dared to atttack your Vot'rys at their Cups;
In horrid League with great APOLLO joined,
To break your Empire, and improve the Mind.
Then rushed presumptuous on our Ladys Hoops,
And sunk their Interest low with amorous Fops:
While some were with his saucy Satyr stung,
That only lashed the Virtuous with their Tongue.
When persecuted Wit forsook the Press,
He dared the beauteous Suff'rer to caress;
And with Politeness often in Custom's Spite,
Was known, vile Wretch, to walk in open Light.
But, what inflames his Guilt, he wrote good Sense,
Yet never at the College did Commence;
And like a Felon, stole a loftier Fame,
Than some that in the List can show their Name.
Nor did those Wreaths which round his Temples bloom,
In the honest Way of learned Dullness come.
Those baffled Bards, who once triumphant reigned,
Were by his Wit in barbarous Silence chained.
He tore the Laurel from great HERWICK'S Brows,
And would refined Poetry impose;
But, Ah! no Thanks to him, our Climate better knows.
All that had felt the Impressions of his Teeth,
Were forced to pray with Veh'mence for his Death;
Convinced, that till the scribbling Foe was dead,
There Is not a Vice would love to rear its Head.
Kind Avarice gripped, in Hopes his Fate to bring,
And famished Envy lent her blunted Sting.
But, midst their sweet Repast, Old JANUS teems
With unsuspected Spite, and guileful Schemes;
Till all was ripe, then stretched beyond their Reach,
And left them nibling round his DYING SPEECH.
Thus, vexed with Fleas, the Fox to save his Blood,
Contrives Deliverance from some neighboring Flood:
Softly he sails from Shore, then gently dives,
And on a Woolly Ark, the ravenous Vermin leaves.
Therefore adieu! No more shall impious Strolls
Be pained to practice over thy virtuous Rules.
Now may the imperious Wife the Breeches claim,
And Husbands sna^le without deserved Blame:
With Nonsense Fraught, shall Jinglers swarm the Town,
Like Rats and Mice, when once the Light's withdrawn:
The Golden Days of Ignorance return,
And Wit, like JANUS, meet with generous Scorn.
BOSTON: Printed and sold by I. Franklin in Union-Street. MDCCXXVI.


