AGRICOLA. OR, THE Religious Husbandman: The Main Intentions of RELIGION,
Served in the BUSINESS and LANGUAGE OF HUSBANDRY. A Work Adapted unto the Grand
Purposes of PIETY; And Commended therefore by a Number of MINISTERS, to be
Entertained in the FAMILIES of the COUNTRY.

1 Cor III. 9. Ye are GOD's Husbandry.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for D. Henchman, over against the Brick Meeting
House in Cornhil, 1727.

A Recommendation From several of the Elder Pastors in the COUNTRY.
HAving had a View of a Book entitled, AGRICOLA, Or, The Religious Husbandman,
and being sensible, that it is a Book wherein the Main Intentions of Piety are
served with much Accommodation; we earnestly recommend it unto a Country
greatly and mostly subsisting upon Husbandry; and heartily wish, that no Family
in the Country may be without a Book, wherein the best of Purposes are so well
provided for.

Peter Thacher, John Danforth, Nehemiah Walter.

A Recommendation, From the United Pastors in Boston.
TO Spiritualize the common Actions of Life, and make a religious Improvement
of worldly Affairs, is an holy and happy Art: A Walk with God very much lies in
this, and is greatly assisted by it: This is a part of that Spiritualmindedness
which is Life and Peace. Were Christians better skilled in this, their worldly
Business might be a Help, rather than a Hindrance to them in their way to
Heaven. Now no worldly Calling is more capable of a spiritual Improvement than
that of the Husbandman: And as it is a Calling which necessarily takes up so
great a part of the Sons of Men, to teach them the spiritual Use of it must
needs be a noble and blessed Design. This is the Design of the present Tract;
wherein the main Intentions of PIETY are served with an excellent
Accommodation, in the Business and Language of Husbandry. So our Savior
fetched several of the Parables wherein he instructed his Auditors, from the
Calling of the Husbandman. And it is to be hoped such a Book as this, (which
instructs the Husbandman how to dress his Soul, while he dresses his Ground,
and to make sure of his being received to a Crown in Heaven, when he is taken
from the Plow on Earth) will meet with a general Acceptance in a Country the
Business of which is mostly Husbandry, and which has been famous for religious
Husbandmen.

Indeed this Design has been excellently served in the Labors of those
Servants of GOD, Flavel and Steel: But their Treatises are not common among us:
Neither is it to be supposed that they have gathered in all the Sheaves of this
plentiful Harvest. Or if we are in this treated with the same things, it is in a
different Method, and with that Fervor and Pungency which is so peculiar to
the Author.

Concerning the very Reverend Author, we heartily pray that GOD would still
continue him long to Labor in his Harvest, and crown all his laborious and
excellent Essays to serve the Kingdom of GOD, with the desired Success. And
concerning this Essay in particular, (while we recommend it to all the Families
in the Country) we cannot but with Fervency wish, GOD SPEED THE PLOW.

Benjamin Wadsworth, Benjamin Colman, Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall, Thomas
Prince, John Webb, William Cooper, Thomas Foxcroft, Samuel Checkley, William
Waldron, Joshua Gee.


CONTENTS.
I. ARator. Or, The Work of the PLOUGH. II. Georgica Sacra. Or, The SOWING of
the Field. III. Pluviaria. Or, The RAIN waited for. IV. Defector. Or, The GRASS
before the MOWER. V. Arbores Frugiferae. Or, the ORCHARD flowrishing.

To which is added, Arbores Fulguritae, Or, Thoughts on a New Years Day.

VI. Gaudentius. Or, The Joyful HARVEST. VII. Agricultura Pia. Or, The Wishes
of PIETY produced by the Affairs of HUSBANDRY.
With Two Supplements.

1. FAMILY-RELIGION Excited and Assisted. 2. A Monitor for COMMUNICANTS.
-- Felices nimium, sua si Bona norint, Agricolae! -- ARATOR. The Work of the
PLOUGH.
Agricola incurvo terram molitus Aratro.
Jer. IV. 3. Break up your fallow-ground.


A Call from Heaven, which every Man upon Earth is deeply concerned in. It is
introduced so, Thus says the Lord unto the Man, in the singular Number;
Because every single Man is to look on himself as addressed in it. Unto every
Man whatever, it may now be said, O Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the Word of the
Lord. There is a Plow ordered for thee; a Plow, the penetrations whereof thou
must submit unto.

When the Illustrious and Immortal Prophet Elijah passed by One at the Plow,
for whom GOD intended uncommon Favors, the Prophet put upon him the Melota,
which he wore upon his Head; and Lo, the Influences of Heaven accompanied it,
so that he left the Plow, and he could let nothing hinder his becoming a Man of
GOD, and a follower of the best Man in the world.

It seems, to be at the Plow, is to be where the Influences of Heaven may find
us. Oh! That what passes from the Head of the Speaker may be accomcompanied
with Influences of Heaven on the Heart of the Hearer. But what? Leave the Plow,
upon it! GOD forbid. The Sermon, may find us at the Plow; But whether so or no,
the design of the Sermon will be, to bring us all to the Plow, yea, to keep us
at it all our Days.

The Glorious GOD calls a sinful People to REPENTANCE: REPENTANCE, without
which it is impossible a Sinner should be prepared for the Blessings of
Goodness. Of this Repentance, we have a notable Description, in that very
Expressive and Instructive Metaphor; Break up your fallow Ground. Now,
certainly it is the Plow in its Work, that is thus to Break up the fallow Ground.

The Plow, that grand Instrument of Husbandry; which we may celebrate, as, The
Ancient, and, The Honorable! The staff of Bread must sail us, and we must soon
fall down into the Earth, if the Plow wherewith we solicit the Earth for our
Bread, were taken away. Doubeless, its Antiquity is higher than the Days of
Tubal-Cain. And how much it Rivals the very Seeptre may be pondered, when we
remember; The profit of the Earth is for all; the King himself is also served
by the Field.

The Plow which is now called for, is, That which brings a Repenting Sinner, to
what we must all come to, that we may find mercy with GOD. The Breaking up of
the fallow Ground, with the Plow, is, The bringing of the Sinner to that
Repentance, which is necessary for him.

And the DOCTRINE of GOD our SAVIOR, the entrance of which now to give light
unto us is This.

It Is in the way of REPENTING, that they who have sinned, may look to be saved
from the evil Effects of their Sin; And there must be seen the PLOW breaking up
our Fallow Ground, in this REPENTANCE.

In the sacred Prophecies, with which the Scripture of Truth has been, as a
Light ^ning in a Dark plnce unto us, the Times that are to be longed for, [The
Souls under the Altar cry out, for them, How long!] even the Times, when the
promised Kingdom of GOD shall arrive, and the Times which according to his
Promise we look for; This is given as the Character of them; Isa. II. 4. They
shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares. My Brethren, There will be a
praelibation of those glorious Times in it, if the Plow-shares may now so come
into their operation, as to break up our fallow Ground, and produce the
Repentance in us, which will never be Repented of.

In the Prosecution of this Intention, let us Enquire, first; What is the
fallow Ground, which in the work of Repentance requires the Plow to be employed
upon it?

Verily, It Is the Heart of Man. O Man, it is thy Heart, and my Heart, that is
the fallow Ground. Whenever thou see any Ground lying fallow, thou may say.
I now see a Soil which my sinful Heart may be sadly compared unto. And, Oh!
what will become of us, if the Plow-share of Repentance do not go deep into it!

REPENTANCE will bring us to make these Acknowledgments; and we shall make them
with the bitterness of Wormwood and of Gall, and with a Soul humbled in us.

First; A Repenting Sinner will acknowledge This; My Heart is a very barren
Soil. Fallow Ground has growing upon it, none of those good things which we set
a value on. It has enough of those things which are good for nothing, or,
perhaps worse than so. Our Heart is this fallow Ground. It is an Heart that is
destitute of good Principles; and good Ends, and good Frames, and good
Thoughts, are not now the natural Growth of the Soil. Our Nature being woefully
corrupted by our fall from GOD, our complaint must be That; Romans VII. 18. I
know, that in me, (that is, in my Flesh,) there dwells no good thing. O
Wretched Heart that thou art; How empty of all that is Good! It must come from
an Hand which takes pains for thy good, if any good be found in thee. But for
the Reverse thereof, enough of that! The Thorns and the Thistles of the cursed
Ground are not such unhappy things as what our Heart is over grown withal. What
naturally grows in our Heart, and appears without our taking any pains to bring
it forward, is, what will be yielded, by an Heart fully set in us to do evil.
What can be imagined, but what is Evil enough in an Heart, whereof every
Imagination is Evil continually? What will be the growth of a carnal Mind that
is full of Enmity against GOD; and of an Heart, that is desperately wicked? The
growth of such a Soil has been told us, by Him who searches the Heart; Mat. XV.
19. Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adul^ Fornications,
Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies; The Things which difile a Man. What Thorns,
what Hen-bane, and Hemlock!

Secondly; A Repenting Sinner will acknowledge This; My Heart is a very
hardened Soil. Fallow Ground is become hard; by lying long undisturbed, its
parts come to stick very close to one another. Perhaps, it is the more hard for
being often trod upon. Our Heart is this fallow Ground. The Truths of GOD which
are the Seeds of Life, the Rays that are shot from the Sun of Righteousness,
the Doctrine which drops as the Rain, will not enter into so tough a Soil. Our
Heart will resist all good Admonitions; and Essays to do good, signify nothing,
because of what we read of; Romans II. 5. Thy hardness and impenitent Heart. Our
Heart will remain as ^ad as it was; and will receive no Benefit from ^he means
of good, that are used upon us. It has been so long under the Feet of Satan,
that now it will deny entrance to all that is good: No Counsels, no Warnings,
nothing at all, will enter into the Fool. In a Turn to GOD, this is usually one
of the first things, that is complained of: An hard Heart! An hard Heart! An
Heart which there is no moving of! That moan is heard; Isa LXIII. 17. Our Heart
hardened from thy Fear. Oh! Forlorn Heart! How shut up, against GOD, and
CHRIST, and all the good that he offers to do unto it!

Let us Enquire, Secondly; What are those operations of Repentance, in which
the Plow is to break up this fallow Ground?

You take it for granted, The Word of GOD, accompanied with the Influences of
the Holy SPIRIT, is the Plow with which this work of GOD is carried on. And now,

First; In a true Repentance, the Heart is broken, with a sense and grief of
the Sins, which the great GOD has been offended at. There is a compunction of
the Heart, and a contrition of the Heart, in that Repentance, which therefore,
O Transgressor, thou art so loathe to come unto, Of Penitents we read, Act. II.
37. They are pierced in their Heart. And of Penitents we read, Psalm. XXXIV. 18.
The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken Heart, and saves such as be of a
contrite Spirit. We are advised; By sorrow of Heart, the Spirit is broken. The
Earth is not more broken by the Plow tearing of it, than the Heart of a
Repenting one, is broken with the sorrow of Repentance. There is a godly sorrow
working of and in Repentance. The Repenting one makes a sorrowful Reflection,
on what he has done in sinning against the glorious GOD. With an Heartbreaking
Regret, and Remorse, and sorrow, he thinks; I have sinned, and I have done very
foolishly. But, Oh! What have I done, when I have sinned! I have denied the GOD
that is above, and set my self and my Idols above him. I have trampled on the
Authority of my Maker; defied his Power, derided his Wisdom, despised his
Goodness, disputed his Faithfulness; and opposed his Holiness. I have slighted
the SON of GOD, and scorned all his gracious Tenders. I have vexed the SPIRIT
of GOD, and stifled all his gracious Motions. I have disobliged the Angels, and
gratified the Devils. I have wronged my own Soul, and ruined all my Interests.
I have refused eternal Pleasures, and incurred eternal Torments; all for a mere
shadow of a delight, which is but for a Moment. Oh! What madness has possessed
me! Such sentiments as these enter with the wounding force of a Plow-share into
the Heart of a Repenting one. He feels that anguish from them, that makes him
cry out, My Heart is broken, O GOD, my Heart is broken. My wounded Spirit; Oh!
I cannot bear it! This, O thou that have gone on in thy Trespasses, This is
what the Plow must bring thee to; Psalm LI. 17. The Sacrifices of GOD, a broken
Spirit; a broken and a contrite Heart. And let not this be forgotten; One
conspicuous and perpetual mark of the broken Heart, will be This; The Heart is,
like the Earth yielding to the Plow and what follows upon it, made willing to
comply with the whole Will of GOD: Willing to come into whatever shape GOD
would have it brought into; willing to be any thing, do any thing, take any
thing, that GOD shall order for it. The Repenting one, lies at the Foot of the
glorious GOD, and says, Lord, what will thou have me to do.

Secondly. In a true Repentance, the Heart is left no longer under the Dominion
of the Lusts, that were the Weeds of the Soul. There is the Lust of the Flesh,
and the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, which engross the Soul, and
bind the powers of it fast, in opposition unto GOD. These Weeds which cover the
face of the Earth, in our Heart, and hinder our being filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness, are extirpated in that Repentance which brings us unto GOD. What
the Penitent comes to is that; Romans VI. 16. Sin shall not have Dominion over
you. Penitents have the experience of such a Deliverance, as that; Psalm. CXVI.
16. Truly, O Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant; Thou have loosed my
Bonds. The desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, and the diverse Lusts, which
are the Root of bitterness in the Soul, the intention of Repentance is to
disturb them; and anon the Heart of the Repenting one becomes dispossessed of
them. These poisonous Weeds of Death are disturbed, yea, they are destroyed by
the Plow, in the Heart of such as are by Repentance brought home unto GOD. No
Lust can live quietly in a Repenting Soul. Every Lust comes under a
Mortification in the Heart of such an one. The Plow share does a notable
Execution upon the Weods; and the Voice of the Repenting one is that; Hos. XIV.
8. What have I any more to do with Idols? The Repenting one comes to Renounce
the Flesh, and say, I will never do what I judge to be a Sin, that my Flesh may
have its pleasures. He comes to Renounce the World, and say, I will never do
what I judge to be a Sin, that. I may gain the Riches of the World. He
Renounces the Devil; and rejects and repels the Temptations of the wicked one.
The Language of Repentance is, O take away all Iniquity. Whatever dispositions
to Sin, a Repenting one finds in his Heart, though they have never such a deep
rooting there, yet the Heart under the Plow, is become desirous to be delivered
from them all: It says, Lord, let my Heart be cleared of all those abominable
weeds, which cleave to an evil Heart of Unbelief, departing from the living
GOD. Oh! do thou tear them to pieces, and let there be none to deliver them.

You have seen how the Plow breaks up the fallow Ground, in the work of
Repentance; But it must now be demanded, that you immediately feel the Plow
operating on you.

And now, GOD speed the Plow, when the good work of his Grace, is making its
way into your Hearts, in those Admonitions of PIETY, which are now brought unto
you from him.

We read, Prove. XXI. 4. The plowing of the wicked is Sin. All his employment is
nothing but Sin. Even what he does in his lawful Calling being designed only
for himself, it is no better than Sin. He looks no higher than Earth, in what he
does, and so he does nothing but Sin; Yea, Even wearies himself to commit
Iniquity. But now, Another sort of plowing is exhorted to; The plowing which is
to be used, in the confessing and forsaking of all wickedness, and in Repenting
of Sin. In order to this;

I. You must apprehend well, the mighty and awful Importance of that
REPENTANCE, which must be found in all the sinful Children of Men, that would
not perish in their Sins. Lo, GOD has sent forth his Voice, and that a mighty
Voice, unto all that sin against him; And, There is no Man that sins not.
Yea, he has uttered it more than once; Luke XIII. 3, 5. Except ye Repent, ye
shall perish: And again, Except ye Repent, ye shall perish. It Is indeed, what
the Conscience of every Man does preach unto him. Conscience, Do thou now lend
thy Hand unto the Plow. And, Oh! let the Heart now under the Word of GOD, feel
these Questions, pass like so many Plow-shares into it.

Question. I. Don't you really think, that you have been guilty of enough to be
Repented of? A Mind so disaffected unto the glorious GOD! A Life so full of
Rebellion against him! And not enough to be Repented of! Surely, The best of us
all have cause enough to come unto That; Job. XLII. 6. I abhor my self, and I
repent in Dust and Ashes.

Question. II. If you now come unto Repentance, can you doubt whether a
merciful GOD will receive you; or whether you shall not be the Blessed ones,
whose Transgression is forgiven, and Sin covered? What? When you have that
Assurance from the Mouth of the glorious One; Isa. LV. 7. Return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy; and unto our GOD, for he will abundantly pardon.

Question. III. Can you suppose, that if you decline the Repentance that you
are called unto, you can look for any other than a fiery Indignation to devour
you? Or, that a Righteous GOD will not be Terrible in his doings to them, who
lift themselves among his Adversaries? What? When you are warned; Psalm. LXVIII.
21. GOD shall wound the Head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one
as goes on still in his Trespasses.

Question. IV. If you die before you come unto Repentance, will it not be
forever too late for you; or can you suppose, that your cry, Lord, have mercy
upon me; will avail any thing, or be any other than all too late, when the Pit
has shut its mouth upon you, and you are lodged among Devils in the place of
Torment? What? When you are so taught; Isa. XXXVIII. 18. They that go down to
the Pit, cannot hope for thy Truth.

Question. V. What is the plain Language of the Procrastination, wherewith you
put off Repentance? Don't you plainly say, That Sin has nothing to be dreaded
in it? That GOD is not worthy of your Love; and his Threatenings are nothing to
be regarded? That His CHRIST has nothing that is precious to bestow upon you;
and you can do well enough without him? And, What shall be given to thee, what
shall be done to thee, O Tongue that can speak such things as these? What sharp
Arrows of the Almighty One; what Coals more ardent and more lasting, than those
of Juniper? It may be said, as in Psalm. XXXVI. 1. What says the Transgression
of the Wicked?

O Souls thus Expostulated withal; what, what Impression does the Plow make
upon you?

II. It Is to be vehemently insisted on; It can by no means be dispensed with:
You must presently endeavor to go through such a PROCESS OF REPENTANCE, as lays
hold on Eternal Life You have it Reveled from Heaven unto you, Act. XXII. 30.
GOD now commands Men every where to Repent. And the Wrath of GOD is Reveled
from Heaven against you, till this be done. What you have now to do, is with a
Change of Mind, from the Vain Thoughts you have had, while you have walked in
the Vanity of your Mind, Seriously and Regularly to do the Actions of a
Repenting Soul. Retire; And own your selves Unable to Return unto GOD, and
Unworthy that He should Enable you; but implore the Help of Sovereign Grace on
this Grand Occasion. Then, Call over, Confess, Bewail, your Transgressions on
what is Forbidden, and what is Required in the Commandments; Employing the
Explanation of the Commandments, which you have in the Catechism, for this
purpose: But above all, mourn over that Original Sin, which is the Fountain of
all your Transgressions; and an Heart that is the Mother of Abominations.
Hereupon, Show and Plead the Blood of your SAVIOR, that you may be cleanfed
from all Sin; Pray, Beg, Weep, for the Pardon of all your Sin: Do this, till
you have a comfortable Persuasion from Above, raised in you, That you are
pardoned. Now, Give up your selves to GOD, with hearty Desires, that having
done with Iniquity, you may not offend any more; and hearty Resolves, That in
the Strength of CHRIST living in you, you will walk in Holiness and
Righteousness before Him, all the remaining time of your Pilgrimage. But let it
always be remembered, A Repentance without a CHRIST, is but a Repentance for a
Devil, rather than a Christian; there is nothing to be got by it. In the whole
Process of Repentance, you must keep up an Encouraging Hope of Mercy, through a
CHRIST appearing for you. You must behold a CHRIST as having made Expiation for
the Sins of those those who come unto GOD in His Name to be Forgiven. You must
behold a CHRIST as ready to Assist you in cleansing your selves from all
Filthiness of the Flesh and of the Spirit, and carrying on Holiness to
Perfection in the Fear of GOD. This plain Process of Repentance, it is what your
Salvation from the Evil which pursues Sinners depends upon. Till you have
passed through it, you walk in Darkness, not knowing whither you are going. Nay,
you rather do know, that you are going down to Blackness of Darkness for ever.

III. But What? Is once enough? No, There must be a Repetition of the Process.
The Fallow Ground will not be thoroughly broke up, and Repentance will not have
its perfect work, except the Plow do over and over again go over it. A
Repenting Soul must say, as in Psalm. LI. 3. I acknowledge my Transgressions,
and my Sins is ever before me. The Aims of Repentance are to be ever within us;
and the Exercise thereof is never to be laid aside. There will be no Method so
sure as this, to assure us, That we have the Repentance never to be repented
of. Let us Repent over and over again. The process of Repentance must be
transacted over and over again. More especially, When any Calamitous thing
befalls us, now let us, in the day of Adversity consider, To what special
Expressions of Repentance am I now to be Awakened? And how often do we hear
things pressed in Sermons, whereof we should make this Use; To Repent more
particularly of miscarriages, which we are minded of? Yea, Repentance is to be
with us, a Daily Exercise of Godliness. In our Morning and Evening Sacrifices,
every Day, there is to be a Repentance exercised; and this with some
Recollection of what we can find amiss in our past Behavior. And as often in
the Day, as we are convinced of any Misbehaviour, we should with a fresh act of
Repentance look unto Him whom we have pierced, and mourn for what has been
Amiss. It Is with the spirit of Repentance, that we are to carry on the whole
course of our Walk with GOD. The proud spirit of Quakerism which has done with
Repentance, and in its Assemblies, is never heard with Repentance praying for,
The Pardon of Sin; It cannot but be detestable to the Children of GOD. There
needs no more to make every sober Christian say, To such Assemblies, O my Soul,
be not thou United. REPENTANCE TO THE LAST, is a Motto for one who walks with
GOD. The Curtains of our Death bed must be hung with Penitentials. Our Eyes
must be filled with the Tears of Repentance, when the cold Hand of Death, is
closing of them. Syrs, Here is a Plow, that is never to stand still. It Is to be
going in all seasons of the Year; Yea, And even in the Winter it shall be so!

IV. You must not think much of it, if you find Repentance to be a Laborious
thing. If you will do any thing at plowing, you must not be they whose Hands
refuse to labor. The Sluggard will do nothing in Repentance, that will avail
any thing. What a miserable Soul, will be the Field of the Slothful? O Soul
void of understanding! Lo, It Is all grown over with Thorns; Nettles cover the
Face thereof; and the Stone wall thereof is broken down. We read, 2. Tim. II.
6. The Husbandman labors. If the Life of Husbandry be Laborious, a Life of
Repentance is no less Laborious. GOD will be a Rewarder to none but those who
diligently seek Him. The Business of Repentance is to seek Him. A Diligence
must be found in the performances with which we manage it. It is with all our
Might that we are to do what our Hand finds to do. We are to Toil at it, yea,
to Sweat at it. It is to the Repenting Believer, as well as to the Laborious
Husbandman, that it has been said, In the sweat of thy Face thou shall carry
on, what thou have to do. Things very tedious, very tiresome, to Flesh and
Blood, are to be encountered in a life of Repentance. O Repenting Soul, Thou
shall often be weary in well doing; I trust; Never weary of it.

V. But will not you look for weeping, as well as working? Yes; look for This;
That the Glorious GOD will make many sad Things to be found among the Things
appointed for you. This will be, that so the work of Repentance may be the more
powerfully and effectually carried on. There will be Need that you should be
ever now and then in Heaviness; without it, the work of Repentance cannot well
be carried on. Of the Husbandmen we read; Psalm. CXXVI. 6. Each one of those in
going forth, does mostly weeping go; He carries forth the precious seed, a
little to be sown. He meets with many things, which makes him follow the Plow
with an heavy Heart. You must not think always to do nothing Sing at the Plow.
O Repenting ones, Never Dream, That you shall pass the time of your sojourning
here without Affliction; Or, That your few Days here, will not be full of
Troubles! A Dream in which there would be diverse vanities. What? When your
Heavenly Father has told you. If ye be without Chastisement, then are ye
Bastards and not Sons! This world, what is it but a Valley of Bacah? That is to
say, of weeping. Truly, All your plowing will be in the Valley of Bacah. Has
not your Faithful Redeemer forewarned you of it? And because of his
Faithfulness, he willfulfil it. O Disciples of a Crucified Lord; look for the
Cress. The Plow and the Cross will go together. The things that will call for
your Tears, Lord, how many are they? How are the things multiplied, which will
trouble you! Though the ways of Repentance are on many accounts ways of
pleasantness, yet there will be some Troublesome things in the ways. Though you
will sing in the ways of the Lord; and the worst of them are sweeter than the
Hard ways of the Transgressor; Yet you must also weep in the ways. Expect many
Troublesome things, and when they arrive, be able to say, That which I was
afraid of, is come unto me. And yet, be not afraid with any amazment! After the
Ground is plowed, the Harrow is drawn over it, that so the work may be perfect,
and the Face of the Soil so Levelled, as to be fit for what is to be cast upon
it. When we have Repented of our Errors, there will be the Harrow of Affliction
of drawn over us. Yea, our Affliction must come after another upon us. It Is all,
that so Repentance may hvve have its perfect work. It must be expected, and it
should not be unwelcome to us; That our Faithful Redeemer do by much Affliction
carry on the good work of Repentance after he has began it upon us. Harrowed
with much Affliction, O penitent Believer say, Blessed be my Redeemer who will
this way bring me to be what I should be!

VI. Nevertheless, hold on, hold out, O REPENTANCE; The Harvest will richly
repay thee; Heaven will make amends for all. Repentance is nothing, if
Perseverance do not Crown it. There is a dreadful Denunciation; Luke IX. 62. No
Man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom
of GOD. Oh! Take heed of all Backslidings from good Beginnings in Repentance
and Religion. And therefore take a due Notice of the least Beginnings, that may
lead on to such Backslidings. Let the Apostates Done, cause you to tremble at
all Degrees or Symptoms of Apostasy; Tremble at ending in the Flesh, after you
have begun in the Spirit. Hear the tremendous Doom; If any Man draw back, my
Soul shall have no pleasure in him. Now, that you may not be wearied nor faint
in your Minds, and that no Temptation to desert the Plow may move you; O commit
your selves into the hands of a SAVIOR, who is able to keep you from falling;
and rely upon Him, to be kept by His almighty Power, through Faith unto
Salvation. But then, Think on the Harvest that is a coming; An Harvest, wherein
every good thing that a Man has done, the same shall he receive of the Lord.
Indeed unto them to whom it may be said, Ye have plowed Wickedness, there will
be a proportionable Reaping Time; They shall Reap what their Iniquity will
bring them to; Woe to the wicked; for the Reward of his Hands will be given him.
On the other side; Plow in and by Repentance, and look for what will be Reaped
from it. We read; He that ploweth should plow in hope. Go on Repenting, and
keep the Plow always going: But still do it, in hope of a Time coming, wherein,
Thy Work shall be rewarded, says the Lord. Hope for something infinitely
better than what has been in any Country called, Plow-Money; Yea, infinitely
better than our Land yielding its Increase unto us.

VII. Finally; The Work of the Plow is in the Earth; In the Motions of it, he
who drives the Plow, must often look down upon the Earth, into the Earth. And
that the Work of Repentance may be carried on, it will be of great Advantage
unto us, to look down unto the Earth, whither, O Man, Thou art going! Thou art
art going! Look unto the Earth, O ye Sons of Earthly Man, and you will see,
what will have loud Exciters, and strong Incentives, to Repentance in it.

Beholding of the Earth, which the Plow digs into, Think; I was fetched out of
the Earth by the Great GOD, who formed all things. How much may this Meditation
do, To Humble you, and Abase you, and lay you in the Dust of Repentance, and
cause you to count your selves no better than a poor Clod of animated Earth,
before the GOD of Heaven, who is the Lord GOD Omnipotent?

Again; Beholding of the Earth which the Plow goes into, Think; In the Earth I
have my Grave waiting for me, where I know not how soon I may be lodged. How
much may this Meditation Quicken you, to Make haste in that Repentance, which
must be dispatched before you sleep in the Dust, or else nothing on Earth can
keep you from an Hell for ever to be trembled at.

My Friend, Smell to the Earth. It Is a very wholesome Scent. It will contribute
to the Work of Repentance wonderfully.

Thus you see the Plow in it Opetations. And upon the whole, what shall I say
unto you?

A King of England, was doubtless well pleased with the Town, where the People
presented themselves with some hundreds of Plows before him. Among all those
Plows, there was none comparable unto This; nor can there be a more acceptable
Present unto the Glorious One, who is King over all the Earth.

It has been counted a memorable Thing; That among the old R^mans, they
sometimes fetched a Man from the Plow, and one that was owner of no more than
Four Acres neither, and set him at the head of the Commonwealth. Christian,
Keep at this Plow, and GOD will one Day Raise thee out of the Dust, and fetch
thee out if the Dunghill, and set thee with Princes, even with the Princes of
His People.

I have done. The Plow has done its Work, and the Fallow-Ground is well broken
up, if the Word of GOD finds now a free passage into your Hearts. And, Oh! May
your Hearts be now so opened, by the Lord, that in whatever Word He comes unto
you, your consenting Hearts may say, Welcome art thou, O Lord, and welcome is
every Word of thine, unto me!

We read of it, as a very Improper Thing; Amos V. 12. Will one plow upon a
Rock? Sinful Soul, Though thy Heart be like a Rock, Yet, Oh! Let not the
Obduration continue, and let not all the Exhortations to Repentance, be but a
plowing upon a Rock. But let thy Relenting Heart, at least come so far, as to
beg it of thy Exalted SAVIOR; O my SAVIOR, whose Office it is; Do thou give
me both Repentance and Remission of Sins.

I did indeed say, I have done. But I know not how to part with my Plowman,
until I have taken a little Notice of something in his Hand, by which the
Creatures which draw his Plow for him, are Exagitated. He carries a GOAD in his
Hand.

We read of a Champion, Judge. III. 31. He slew six hundred Men with an Ox-Goad.
We may guess a little at the shape of that Ox-Goad, and how fit a Tool it was
for such an Execution, from what is related by Modern Travelers concerning the
Husbandry in those parts of the World. They tell us, That in plowing the
Husbandmen use Goads of an extraordinary size. They are eight Foot long, and at
the upper end, six Inches in Circumference. They are armed at the lesser end,
with a sharp Nail, for the driving of the Oxen; and at the other end, with a
small Spade, or Paddle of Iron, strong and massy for cleansing of the Plow,
from the clay that encumbers it in working. In such a Goad, behold, a better
Weapon than a Sword, for a Shamgar to employ upon his Philistines.

All that I shall observe upon it is; There are so many Goads, in the lively
Oracles of GOD, for our Excitation and Instigation to Repentance, and a life of
PIETY. We read, Eccl. XII. 11. The words of the Wise are as Goads. And such are
the Words of our GOD by which we are to be Quickened. Alas, why do we no more
find them so! How stupid a thing art thou, O Man, if thou do not feel such
pungencies? But then, the dealings of GOD with thee in his Providence, what are
these also, but so many stimulations to Repentance, and a Life of PIETY? If
they move thee not, O dull Soul, and if thou do not conform unto them, there is
that Voice from Heaven, unto thee on them, Act. IX. 5. It is hard for thee, to
kick against the Goads. Oh! do not by thy Dilatory proceedings in the Life of
GOD, provoke him to multiply the uneasy strokes of his Goads upon thee.

The Plain SONGS OF THE Pious HUSBANDMAN; In the Work of his Husbandry, and the
House of his Pilgrimage.
Singing at the PLOW. MY Heart, how very Hard its grown!
Thickened and stiffen'd Clay:
Daily trod by the Wicked One;
Of Sin the Beaten Way.
An Heart, wherein compacted Weeds
Of Diverse Lusts abound;
No Entrance for the Heavenly Seeds,
Falling on such a Ground!
O my Almighty SAVIOR, come;
Thy Word's a wondrous Plow:
And let thy SPIRIT drive it home;
This Heart, Oh! Break it so!
Lord, let my Broken Heart receive
Thy Truth with Faith and Love:
May it a Just Reception give
To what falls from Above.
Will my GOD Plow upon a Rock!
Change thou the Soil, my Lord!
My Heart once by thy Plow-share broke,
Will Entertain thy Word.
Georgica Sacra. The SOWING Of the Field.
Mark IV. 3. Hearken, Behold, There went out a Sower to Sow.


IT IS what is now adoing. O! May the Seed find a Soil, that shall not be
ungrateful to the Husbandry of GOD upon it.

In the admirable Sermons of Him that spoke so as never Man spoke, which the
Gospel, has, as the Golden Pot once did the Manna, reserved for us, there are
about Five or Six and twenty Parables; Wherein he condescends unto a way of
Teaching, which was much used among the Syrians, and which tends to bring the
Darkest and Rudest Minds, into an Acquaintance with the Mysteries of Religion.

One of these Parables, does Exhibit an Husbandman at work in his Field, and
lodging the Seed from whence he expects anon to have his Bread, in four several
sorts of Ground; Whereof three were Bad, but the fourth is Good, and yields the
expected Crop unto him. Of this Parable, as well as of one more, our Blessed
Lord is pleased Himself to give us the Exposition; so that we have the
satisfaction of enjoying an Infallible Expositor. The Heart of Man, is the
Field; The Word of GOD is the Seed; Our Lord himself is the Sower: Not
Exclusive of his Ministers and Instruments.

And the DOCTRINE, which is now to fall from his Hand [For it is he that
Ministers the Seed unto the Sower!] as the Seed upon the Field before him, [O!
may it prove as a Field, which the Lord has Blessed!] it shall be This;

The WORD of GOD, in the Promulgation of the Gospel, is a Seed which finds in
the Heart of Man a very different Soil when it is cast upon it; A Soil which
the Word has very various, Bad and Good Effects upon.

We are enriched with a GOSPEL, which is by our SAVIOR in his explaining of
his own Parable, called, The Word of the Kingdom. It Is the Word which
Proclaims a Glorious CHRIST, as the King upon the Holy Hill of Zion, who is
Lord of All, and has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him. It Is a Word
which brings the Law of this great King unto us, and promises unto them that
Follow and Obey him, the Glories of an Heavenly Kingdom, at his Appearing.

Of this Word, whereof, O Blessed People that we are, we hear the Joyful Sound,
some considerable things are to be now declared unto us.

I. The Word of GOD falling on the Heart of Man, is like a Seed of Corn, which
the Earth has from the Husbandman cast and sown upon it.

You need not be told, That the Man who hears the Word of GOD, and indeed every
Man on the Face of the Darth, may be compared unto the Earth. You are
sufficiently apprised of it, That the Body of Man, came out of the Earth, and
again goes into it. The devout Job, sitting on the Earth, called it, His
Mother; And sitting in his Mothers Lap, he confessed; Job I. 21. Naked came I
out of my Moehers Womb, and naked shall I return thither. This Mother of Man,
may well be allowed a Figure of Man. Let it not offend thee, O proud Man, if
the Term of, A Clod of Earth, be put upon thee.

But what I am to tell you, is, On what Accounts, the Seed of Corn (or of any
Plant) resembles the Everlasting Gospel, that is preached unto them, who dwell
on the Earth. The Accounts are many.

Is there a sort of Life in the Seed of a Plant? Our SAVIOR, the Prince of
Life, has told ns; Joh. VI. 63. The Words that I speak unto you, they are
Spirit and they are Life. O the fair and sweet Things, which pullulate from
these Lively Oracles!

The Seed must be sown, or the Fruit will be none: If it be kept in the
Granary, it will never Fructify. It is the speaking of the Word, that is the
casting of the Seed. We read, 1 Thessalonians. II. 16. It must be spoken to Men, that
they may be saved. There is ordinarily no saving the Souls of Men, but in the
way of the Institution, the speaking and preaching of the Word unto them. They
that are not in the way of it, are not in the ordinary way to be saved.

A Seed brings forth a Grain like it self; The Fruit is after its kind. What
the Word of GOD produces, is what is agreeable to the Word. It is a Good Word;
and it will do us this Good, it will make us Good; and make us love to do Good.
It is a clean Word, and it will make us to cleanse our Way. It is a Word of
Wisdom, and it will make us wise unto Salvation. Yea, 2 Cor. III. 18. We are
changed by it, into the same Image from Glory to Glory.

A little Seed will go a great way: A few Sowers may soon cover an huge Tract
of Land. Who can say, how much a few Hands may do in spreading the Word of GOD?
A Paul did it for Thousands of Miles: From Jerusalem to Spain, was near Three
Thousand Miles. What a few Men did, as we find in Col. I. 6. It brought forth
Fruit in all the World. Yea, One Sermon has converted Thousands. And Hundreds
of Thousands have been brought into the Life of GOD, by one little Book; such
as Arndts, of True Christianity. What a Dispersion of Truth, has been made by
Two such small Catechisms; as that of Heidelbergh, and that of our Assembly?

The Labor of the Sower will have no Success, without the Blessing of the
Lord, upon the Seed. It is Thou, O Lord, that preparest the Corn. The
Husbandman is an Atheist, if he do not Think so, and own it. The Ministry of
the Word, will be Unsuccessful, except it receive a Blessing from GOD. We are
informed; 1 Cor. III. 7. Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters; but GOD that gives the Increase. The Success of the Word proceeds
not from him that brings it, or from the skill with which he brings it; but
from the SPIRIT of GOD working in it. Let Isaac sow his Land, and if the Lord
Bless him, he will receive an hundred fold.

Finally; The Seed will not presently spring up, at the first sowing of it; No,
Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious Fruit of the Earth. Nor does the
Ministry of the Word, presently see all the Effect that it is to see. The Word
may ly for some while under Clods, in many an unconcerned Soul. GOD by some
occurence in his Providence, may bring to Remembrance a Word heard some while
ago, and then it operates. Yea, it may so fall out, as in Joh. IV. 37. That
saying is true, One sows and another reapeth. Oh! Let Parents be often
dropping some Word of GOD upon their Children; In the Morning sow thy Seed; and
in the Evening slack not thy Hand; A long while hence, it may be, after thou
shall thy self be sleeping in the Dust, the Word that seems to have been left
there, shall have its Efficacy.

The Seed you see; But, who the Sower? Be sure, The owner of the Seed, is the
principal sower of the Seed. It is the Word of CHRIST; and it is He that sows
it. The second Adam is the Blessed Husbandman, who Tills the Ground, and sows
the Field which the Lord has blessed. But then he has his Ministers, who do the
part of Sowers under Him. These are they who may say, as in 1. Cor. IX. 11. We
have sown unto you spiritual Things.

May our GOD Help us, That we may bring you none but the pure Seed of the Word;
Pick and Cleanse the Seed in our Studies; and not bring you the Chaff or Husks
of our own Brains; or the pernicious Darnel of unscriptural Error.

May we bring you also the whole Seed of the Word; And so honestly dispose of
the Seed committed unto us, that we may balk no Truth, but be able to say, I
have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of GOD.

But may we still see to it, that we Preach and Sow to the Advantage of our
Master: And all we do be aimed at this; That we may see you Glorifying of our
Lord, and Glorified with him.

Wherefore, Brethren, Pray for us.

The rather, in as much as our Calling is no easy Calling. The Sweat of the
Brain, not more easy than the Sweat of the Brow. The Calling of an Husbandman
is a painful Calling. That Man is not worthy the Name of a Minister, who takes
not as much pains as an Husbandman. Our Name, is Mat. IX. 38. that of,
Laborers.

Thus you see the Sower with the Field. But I know not how to dismiss this
matter, without some Reflection upon it.

Confess, O People that have the Word of GOD offered unto you, how Necessary it
is, that this Word should be dispensed unto you. It is threatened as a very
dismal Desolation; Jer. I. 20. I will cut off the Sower. In what a deplorable
Condition were you, if the sowing should utterly fail? If you should have no
Preaching, you would have no sowing; and if This fail, you soon fall under the
Terriblest Famine in the world; Even That; Amos. VIII. 11. Not a Famine of
Bread, but of hearing the words of the Lord. What, what will become of your
starved Souls, if the Bread of Life should be denied you? The Bread of Life
will be gone, when there are none to sow the Seed of Life. A Country without
the Word of GOD and CHRIST and Salvation in it, is a rueful Country: It Is all
Winter there, They see no Seed time; They are Destroyed for the lack of
Knowledge. Oh! If the Gospel be hid from us, we are a lost People! But ours is
not such a Country. Our GOD has given his Word unto us; Praise the Lord! And
give to his Word, a Fruitful Entertainment.

We read of a Time when, and a Place where, a Cab of Doves Dung was rated at
Five pieces of Silver. What we render Doves Dung, I suppose, may mean rather
the Offals, or the Refuse, of the Corn, which they commonly gave to their
Pigeons; That Coarse Grain, which was the vile Remains and Sweepings of the
Floor. Surely, It Is a better sort of Seed, that is generally cast upon the
Fields in this Country; It Is the finest of the Wheat; where is there what
exceeds it?

But then, Receive it Readily. Retain it Faithfully. Improve it Suitably. In
all the Fruits of the Spirit, make suitable Returns to Heaven for it. It was
once a sad Complaint; Master, Did not thou sow good Seed? Whence then are
these Tares? Oh! Let there not be cause of this Complaint; Lord, A good Seed
has been cast upon us: But whence then, this Profaneness, this Intemperance,
this Dishonesty? Whence these Abominable Impieties and Iniquities? GOD forbid,
that such Briars and Thorns ever should be found in a Soil, that a good Seed
has been sown upon!

II. The Heart of Man under the Word of GOD, proves a very Different Soil to
the Seed that is cast upon it: Various are the Effects which the Word of GOD
has upon them that hear it. For the Illustration and Confirmation of this
Observation, our SAVIOR has described the Hearers of his Word, and the Effects
of it on them that Hear it, under the Figure of no less than Four Soyls:
Whereof Three disappoint the Husbandman, but the Fourth proves as he would have
it. And indeed, among them that hear the Word of GOD, it is well if One in
Three entertain it as they ought to do. There is an Highway Ground, and a
Stony Ground, and a Thorny Ground, and at last a Good Ground, which the Seed is
cast upon. Each of these will now call for a Successive Contemplation.

The Highway Ground.
We are informed, First, That some who hear the Word of GOD, prove like an
Highway Ground, when the Seed is cast upon it: An Highway Ground, which being
much Trodden on, the Fowls of Heaven do steal away the Seed that falls upon it.
In the Land of Judaea, their Cornfieldsd usually had Highways thorough them;
and this is what the Discourse of our SAVIOR is Allusive to. Our SAVIOR has
thus explained it; These are they by the Highway; where the Word is sown, but
when they have heard, Satan comes immediately, and takes away the Word that
was sown in their Hearts. When he elsewhere says of this Hearer, He hears the
Word, and understands it not, the Greek Word rather imports an Unattentive
Hearer, than the simply Ignorant: Or one whose Heart will not go with what he
hears. It is a Carless Hearer of the Word, whose Guise and whose Fate, is to be
now set before us. O my Hearers, let it not at this very Instant have an
unhappy Commentary among ourselves; But, I beseech you, Carefully, and with
Earnest Heed, give Ear to this Admonition of the Lord.

The Devils, like the Fowls of the Air, come and catch the Word of GOD our
SAVIOR, from those Hearers, whose Hearts are like the HIGHWAY GROUND, where
that good Seed of the Word is trod under Foot.

We have now such Instructions as these, to be thankful for.

I. The Devils, which fly about this Air, under the command of a Prince and a
wicked One, who is called SATAN, are very fitly Resembled unto the Fowls of the
Air.

These Cursed Spirits, are called, Psalm. XCI. 3. Fowlers: Because they Ensnare,
and they Destroy the poor Children of Men, as the Children of Men themselves,
do the silly Birds, which they have a design upon. A seasonable and profitable
Meditation for any of you, when you are upon that Recreation. But then, they
are Fowls too. The Fowls and the Devils have indeed their lodging in the same
Element. The Devils are, Ephesians II. 2. The Power, or Army, of the Air. And, Ephesians.
VI. 12. Spiritual Wickednesses in those High Places. Here these Unclean Birds
will be Neasted, until our Lord JESUS CHRIST shall descend with flaming Fire,
to make this Air become the Seat for that City of GOD, where his Raised Saints
will be gathered unto him.

Can we tell the Number of the Fowls? There are more than Five Hundred species
of them; The Individuals are Thousands, and Myriads, and Millions; How
Numberless? But the Number of the Devils, may, for ought we know, exceed that
of the Fowls. It seems, that a Demon who molested one poor Man in the Gospel,
had no less than a Legion at hand under his Ordering, like so many French
Dragoons, to seize him and vex him.

What can emulate the Swiftness of the Fowls? Yea, but the Eagles hastening to
the Prey are not so swift, as those Fowls of a stronger Wing, the Devils, when
coming down to prey upon us. The Devils will convey themselves from one side of
the Earth to the other, doubtless, as fast as the Earth it self can whirl about
upon its Axis. Or as our Lord saw the Devils falling like the Lightening, why
may not we suppose 'em flying like the very Lightning?

Finally; The most mischievous Fowls, are therein an Emblem of the Devils, who
delight in Mischief. What are the Devils but Birds of prey? The Bible calls
them, Foul Spirits, and, filthy and hateful Birds. When we read, Mat. XIII. 19.
of, The Wicked One catches away, what is sown in the Heart, there is a Greek
word used, which implies, that the wicked One is an horrid Harpye to the Souls
of Men.

But, O ye Souls in peril; since you have such perilous Fowls of the Air
continually fluttering about you; Hearken, Hearken to the kind Calls of your
SAVIOR; Hear the kind Cloques of such a gracious Protector; Mat. XXIII. 37.
How often would I have gathered thy Children, (...) an Hen gathers her
Chickens under her Wings! Oh! Get under this protection, by the flights of a
lively Faith unto it!

II. Wherever the Word of GOD is dispensed, there the Devils will immediately
come to steal the good Seed of that Word, from the Hearts which it is cast upon.

Be advised of this, O worshippers of GOD; That in whatever Exercise of
Religion you are engaged, the Devils will with some Temptation there
immediately fall upon you. Even in the House of GOD, and where the Word of GOD
is dispensed, we must look to meet with Devils; and when the Sons of GOD come
to present themselves before the Lord, Satan will also come among them. You are
to Watch against your never-weary, never-sleeping Adversary, not only in your
Business, and in your Traveling, and in your friendly Conversations, but in
your Devotions too.

Be yet more particularly advised of it; That the Devils are very particularly
desirous, to hinder that good Seed, the Word of GOD, from taking Root in your
Hearts. The Word of the Kingdom, tends to rescue the Souls of Men from the
power of Darkness, and the Kingdom of Satan, and so to Translate them into the
Kingdom of the Son of GOD. It is the Word of a SAVIOR: It is the Gospel of our
Salvation. The Devils are grievously disturbed at the Word of GOD; It gives 'em
a frightful Alarm; They are afraid lest it prove the Power of GOD unto the
Salvation of them that sit under it; They suspect the losing of some Slave or
other from their Empire, by the verticordious Power of it. They surmise, the
Prey will be taken from the Mighty, and the Lawful Captive be delivered. The
Salvation of Sinners, is a Vexation of Devils. Their Malice cannot bear it,
that while they are Damned, any of Mankind should be Saved. Our Heaven adds Oil
to the Flame of the Hell, from whence the Smoke of their Torment ascends for
ever and ever.

And then, finally, Be advised of This; There are many ways, by which the
Devils do catch up the good Seed of the Word, when your Hearts have it falling
upon them.

What these Destroyers of Souls, and Hinderers of all that is Good, would be
at, is, To spoil our Attention to the Word of our GOD and SAVIOR But how is
it, that the Enemy does This!

They do it, by injecting of Impertinent and Unseasonable Thoughts of other
Things into our Hearts, when we should be Thinking on the Word of our GOD. What
is the way of the Serpent on the Rock in this, and how it is that the Devils
convey Thoughts into our Minds; This is a Thing too wonderful for me; it is what
I know not. But the matter of Fact, is what I know, and am certain of. The
Devils are Wandering Spirits, and they have a Faculty to throw Wandering Thoughts
into our Spirits. When the Word of GOD is cast upon us, it may be some Filthy
Thoughts, or some Angry Thoughts, or, at least, some worldly Thoughts, will
then be cast in, and carry away our Minds from what they should be upon. Our
GOD may say of us; Ezekiel. XXXIII. 31. They sit before thee as my People, they
hear thy Words, but their Heart goes after their Covetousness. While our GOD
is tendering his Word unto us, the Devils throw in the Images of a Bargain, or
a Journey, and some contrivance for our worldly Advantage, or, perhaps, what is
yet more Base than so: And while we think on these things, the good Seed of the
Word is picked away most unaccountably. If the Messenger of GOD, should
suddenly ask of some, What was the last Seed of the word cast upon you? They
must with Confusion own, I did not Regard what it was. Thus the Devils have
snatched it away. Vain Thoughts make the Word of our SAVIOR to be in vain
dispensed unto us. O my Hearers, What are you Thinking on? If upon Recollection
you find, that your Thoughts are at any time gone away from the word, whereof
you should be more diligent Hearers, think with Horror upon it; Some Devil is
now at work upon me!

Agaid, They do it, by prejudicing our Hearts against the Word of our GOD, or
the Dispensers of it. Sometimes, the good Seed of the word itself is not liked.
Either the Proud Men say to the Prophet, Thou speak Falsely. Or, something in
the manner of speaking it, is not pleasing. But oftener, It Is the Seeds-Man,
that is not liked. The Devils would fain have the Feet of them who Preach the
Gospel of Peace, to be not Beautiful: but have wrong steps charged upon them,
to fill our Minds with Prejudices against them. Not only would the Devils bring
the Hearers, to that Contempt of those who come unto them, What is it this
Babbler says? But also that Hatred of them; 1 King. XXII. 8. I hate him. It is a
potent Engine, that the Devils have, to take away the Seed of the Word from our
Hearts, when they have made our Hearts to dislike the Hands which throw it upon
us. It Is done sometimes by more Immediate Suggestions, which fill the Hearts of
Men with Grudges against those Dispensers of the Word, from whom they might
otherwise have the greatest Benefit. Many have a Distaste for such; and can
give no Reason for it. But the Spirit that works in them, can give the Reason;
is the Reason. Sometimes it is done, by the Tools of Ungodly Tongues, and Pens;
The Devils never want Venomous Defamers, and Scandalous Libellers, and
Pestilent Scoffers, to dress up the Servants of GOD in Bear-skins, and throw
them out unto the Dogs. These Black birds of Hell, do mightily prevent the Seed
of the Word, from getting well into the Hearts of the poisoned People. Who sets
them to work? Even, he that will pay them their Wages. To such Emissaries of
the wicked One, the Spirit of GOD says, O Full of all Mischief, Thou Child of
the Devil, Thou Enemy of all Righteousness! Christians, when some Slanderers
are talking with you, or when some Virulent and Abusive Pamphlets are before
you, you may do well to think, The Devil now designs upon me!

Once more; They do it by making us Drowsy and Sleepy, when the Word of GOD
should have the Respects of a wakeful Attention paid unto it. When the best
Preacher in the World, was casting the Seed, we find one; Aand. XX. 9. Fallen
into a deep Sleep. Who Rocqued the Cradle, I pray? From a Man that is Asleep,
any thing may be taken away. When the Devils have lulled us Asleep, they may,
and they do, take away from our Hearts, the good Seed of the Word. There is
many a wholesome Lesson, many an useful Counsil, many a needful Caution, which
might get into our Hearts, and stick there. But the Devils have cheated us
thereof, by laying us fast Asleep, at the time that they were uttered. Oh! That
we were more on our Guard! There may indeed be some Feebleness and Heaviness of
Constitution, which may sometimes betray very Godly People into this
Miscarriage. The Spirit would be willing to have it otherwise, and groans under
the Distempered Flesh which indisposes us. We have a compassionate SAVIOR, who
in this case pitties us. At the same time we should not Pardon and Indulge our
selves; or show any Pity to our own Irregularity. But when People can set
themselves to Sleep in the Dreadful place, which is the House of GOD and the
Gate of Heaven; and make a Trade of long Naps, when they are in the special
Presence of a GOD that will be sanctified in all them who draw near unto Him;
how poorly is the Fear of GOD exercised in them! Or can they think, that the
great GOD will hold them Guiltless, who so take his Name in Vain? Awake, my
Friends, Awake; And let us Charitably jog, and pull, and waken one another; The
Philistines of Hell are upon you! A Satanic Opium is administered unto you, by
those Fiends of Darkness; who have a Plot upon you, to deprive you of a Word,
that might Save your Souls. Alas, How many in our Congregations, very sinfully
and foolishly snore away their Sabbaths! And might, if they were not fast
Asleep, often hear their SAVIOR upbraiding of them, What? Cannot you watch one
Hour with me? Oh! That they would stir up themselves, and beg their Neighbors
kindly to watch over them, and waken them, and as often as they are overtaken
with the Fault, think; How can I bear Satan thus to Rob me, of that which is
the Life of my Soul! This I say, Awake, what meanest thou, O sleeper; Hearken
to thy GOD!

III. An Highway Ground are the Hearts of those, who permit the Devils to steal
the good Seed of the Word from them, in their Hearing of it. An Elegant
Similitude! For,

The Seed that falls on the Highway, does not sink into the Earth, but ly on
the top of it. There are Hearers of the Word, who are too unmindful of our
Savior's Direction; Luk, IX. 44. Let these sayings sink down into you. The
Word has no more than a Superficiary Touch upon them. It may inform their
Heads, but their Hearts are not reached by it, not moved by it, not changed by
it.

Again; The Seed that falls on the Highway, is not looked after. There are
Hearers of the Word who don't look after what has fallen upon them, to see what
comes of it; but it is with them according to That; Jam. I. 23, 24. He is an
Hearer of the Word, and not a Doer; He goes his way, and straightway forgets.
They do not Ruminate on the Word they have heard; their Hearts don't recall any
thing of it; but they carry toward it, as if they had never been concerned with
it.

Moreover; Highways are common Roads; They are ways that ly common and open
and obvious for every Passenger. The Hearts of many that hear the Word, are not
as Gardens enclosed; but they are the Walk of Satan; the Print of his Cloven
Foot is to be seen upon them: Nothing, though ever so Evil, is kept out of them.
For this Cause, the Denomination of the Gentiies, who in Matthew. XXII. 10. are
called, The Highway, may be put upon them.

Lastly; In the Highways the Seed that is cast by Hand is cast under the Foot;
It is Trampled on. Verily, There are Hearers of the Word, of whom we read; Heb.
X. 29. They have trodden under Foot the Son of GFD. Be sure then, they Tread
under Foot His Word; They Trample on the Commandments, the Promises, the
Threatenings of it. There may this Account be given of them; They Despise His
Word, until the Wrath of the Lord arise against them, and there is no Remedy.

I cannot go off this Highway Ground, without making at least these Two Remarks
upon it.

First. Under whose Malignant Influence, do you think, must they be, that
frequently and needlessly Absent themselves from the Word of GOD our SAVIOR,
when they might enjoy the Dispensations of it? If it be Satan that steals the
Good Seed of the Word, from the Way on which it falls, doubtless, it must be
Satan, who steals People from the Way of the Seed. He who does Catch the Word
from us, is he who does Keep us from the Word. The Jews gave this as a
Definition of a Bad Neighbor, It Is, One who don't come to the Synagogue. If
there be such a Bad Neighbor in the Town, we see, what is the Bad Spirit that
makes him so. It is noted of Origin, That in his Vigorous Homilies, he Reproved
no Crime so much, as that of Absence from the Holy Assemblies. This Crime I now
Reprove, with telling you, whom you serve and please in the committing of it;
The Devils!

It may be, the most Criminal are at this time, out of Hearing. Wherefore, let
such as wish well to them, carry them home something from the place where they
should have been. Ask them to read that awful Scripture; Joh. VIII. 47 He that
is of GOD, hears the Words of GOD; you therefore hear them not, because you are
not of GOD. If they plead, They have not Clothes fine enough; Ask them,
whether they had not better come with mean Clothes, where they may have the
Garments of Salvation put upon their Souls, than remain Wretched, and
Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and Naked, as they are? Ask them, Whether they
must not shortly be shrouded in a Winding Sheet, and their Naked Souls will not
then wish, that a pretense of Mean Clothes had not kept them among them that
Hate Instruction. If they profanely tell you, They Read a Chapter in Job: Turn
them to Job. XXIII. 12. I have esteemed the Words of His Mouth more than my
Necessary Food. Ask them, Whether they can say so; and what they think will be
the portion of them, who cannot say so?

Secondly. What is to be done, for our Defense from the Fowls of the Air? What,
that the Infaelicity of the Highway Ground, may not be ours, in our Hearing the
Word of our GOD?

These two Things to be done.
The First; In our Hearing of the Word, Oh! let us check the Roving of our
Mind. Whatever Improper Thoughts would press in upon us, chase them away; There
is the Devil in them! Deal with them as our Patriarch once; Genesis XV. 11. When
the Fowls came down, upon the Sacrifices, Abram drove them away. If Improper
Thoughts go to intrude, or bespeak an Admission, Repel 'em, Refuse 'em, Rebuke
'em; Say, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: Why should the
work cease, while I leave it, and come down to you?

The Second; Let our Hearing of the Word, be filled with our Praying to our
Lord. Oh! let such Echo's pass from us; Psalm. XXVII. 8. Seek my Face; My Heart
said upon it, Thy Face Lord, I will seek. Upon the Mysteries unfolded, say,
Lord, I accept this, as a Faithful Saying. Upon Follies condemned, say, Lord,
let thy warned Servant be kept from this Folly! Upon Duties propounded, say,
Lord, Help me to do this Duty. Upon the Blessings of the Righteous, let your
Heart say, Lord, let this be my portion. Upon the Curses of the Wicked, let
your Heart say, Lord, I am afraid of thy Judgments. This one PROPOSAL, should
be more to you, than a Golden Wedge of Ophir. You secure the Seed from the
Fowls of the Air, if it be complied withal.

The Stony Ground.
We are informed, Secondly, That some who hear the Word of GOD, prove like a
Stony Ground, when the Seed is cast upon it: A Stony Ground, on which if the
Seed has any Effect, yet it has no lasting ones. Our SAVIOR thus gives us to
understand the Parable, and the Interpretation; The Words of the wise, and His
Dark Sayings, are by Himself thus Interpreted. These are they which are sown,
(that is to say, They that receive the Seed) on Stony Ground, who when they
have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness: And have no Root in
themselves, and so endure but for a time; Afterward, when Affliction or
Persecution arises for the words sake, immediately they are offended. The
Success of the Gospel sown upon Hearts that are like the Stony Ground, is, you
see, first, very commendable and comfortable; then, very miserable and
lamentable.

The Admonition to be now prosecuted, is This.

In some Hearers of the word, whose Heart is like the Stony Ground, that Good
Seed of the Word may be Received with some seeming Faith and Joy; But in a Time
of Temptation, they and their Faith and their Joy, do quickly and sadly wither
away.

In the Prosecution of it, let these Instructions find some Entertainment with
you.

I. A Stony Ground is that which a sinful Heart, may be too justly compared
unto. Inheed, the Heart of every Man, in his Fallen and Corrupt Nature, is as
hard as a Stone; Hard like the Nether Millstone. And many do by Custom add unto
that hardness of Heart, which is by Nature in them. It Is called, Ezekiel. XI. 19.
A Stony Heart. In a Stone there is a close Fastening, and Knitting, and
Combining of the parts together, whereby it is made strong to resist, whatever
would from without act upon it. Such a Stone is this Heart of ours, and so does
it Resist, the Essays of Heaven to work upon it. Our GOD may say of us; as in
Zech. VII. 12. They made their Hearts hard as an Adamant-Stone, lest they
should hear the Law. No Stone can be more Insensible; No Stone can be more
Inflexible, than this wretched Heart of ours under all the means of Good that
are employed upon it. And as we read, Prove. XXVII. 3. A Stone is Heavy: Even
such also is this Heart of ours; There is no moving of it. It is as addicted
unto the Earth, as the Heavy Stone, which by its weight will descend unto the
Earth. It will mind Earthly Things; and not easily be moved from the wickedness
of tending to the Earth as the Center of it. Be sure, a Stone is no good Soil
to Sow upon. But is our unfruitful Heart any better? Though the good Seed of the
Word falls upon it, there is little good Fruit commonly obtained of it.

Oh! That we did every one more know this Plague of our own Heart! Feel thy
Stony Heart, O serious Penitent. Thy Feeling of it, and thy Groaning bitterly
and grievously under it; Alas, my hard Heart! My hard Heart! This would be the
first Symptom of the Hardness going off. That horrible Disease of the Stone in
the Wheel broken at the Cistern, would not be a greater matter of Horror to us,
than the Stone in our Heart, if the very Essence of the Stone did not ly in our
not Feeling of what we have cause to be most concerned about.

II. Some Hearers of the Word whose Hearts are like Stones under it, yet may
with some Faith and some Joy seem to Receive the good Seed of the Word that
falls upon them. This is as much as to say, That there are some Dissemblers,
(we may call them, shining Stones) among the Hearers of the Word, who may go a
great way in the Religion which the Word calls for, and yet perish after all.
There is not a more lawful Meditation for a Christian to affect himself withal,
than This; How far a Man may go in Christianity, and yet after all be found
among the False-hearted Hearers of the Word. There is no Grace, but what may
have a Counterfeit. A Stony Heart, is a Cheating one; It Is Deceitful above all
things. Others, and even ourselves too, may be deceived by it. It will out do,
even the Spirit that is called, The Deceiver of the Nations.

First; There is a Faith which False-hearted Hearers of the Word may pretend
unto. We read, Luke VIII. 13. For a while they believe. A True Justifying Faith
will be for more than a while; By its Uniting the Believer to his Redeemer, it
brings him into those Hands, from whence nothing ever can pull him away. The
mere Stony Ground has not this Faith growing in it. But there is a Temporary
Faith may look like a Justifying Faith; and mere Stony Ground, may have a Weed,
that shall seem this Herb of Grace. A False-Hearted Hearer of the Word, may
yield some Assent unto the Truth of the Word: Which indeed the very Devils do,
with Trembling at it. Yea, he may profess to yield some Consent unto it. Every
Baptized Person is a Professed Servant of GOD. But, alas, how many under the
Livery of CHRIST in their Baptism, have their Souls Unbaptised, Unpurified,
Unsanctified. Indeed, if a Man give a Real and Hearty Consent unto the Methods
of Grace in our Salvation by a Glorious CHRIST, such a Man shall be undoubtedly
Saved and Happy. But a sincere Consent is one thing, and a professed Consent is
another. Some do Profess to Consent unto the Covenant of GOD, and yet continue
in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. Behold, A Tragical Example;
Act. VIII. 13 Simon himself believed also.

Secondly; There is also a Joy which False-hearted Hearers of the Word may
attain unto. We read, Mat. XIII. 20. Such an one, Hears the Word, and anon with
Joy receives it. There is the Joy of a distressed Soul finding in an
Alsuffi^^ent CHRIST the Relief of its Distresses; a Joy accompanied with a
bitter and pungent Grief, in a sense of Sin, as the worst Evil in the World:
This is a Joy which the mere Stony Ground is a stranger to; A stranger to
Regeneration does not intermeddle with it. But there is a Flashy Joy, which may
look very like that Sacred Joy. A False-hearted Hearer of the Word, may have
some Delight in the Exercise of Hearing itself; may love to Hear such a Man.
The Prophet Ezekiel had some such attending on his Ministry. Yea, he may have
some Delight in some doing of something of what he hears. John Baptist had some
Followers that were none of the best; of whom it is reported; Joh. V. 35. Ye
were willing for a season to rejoice in his Light. Many may find it for their
Secular Advantage to comply with some things, which they hear in the Word of
GOD. There are Loaves! Thus, at the Reformation, very many People were glad of
that Word which decried the Abominations of Popery. The Gentry became enriched
with Abbey-lands, and the Peasants were delivered from the Tyranny of the
Clergy, and were taught how to come at the Pardon of their Sins, without being
Priest-ridden into cruel Penances for it. But according to the Ancient
Prophecy, many, yea, the most, Cleave to the Reformation only with Flatteries;
Their Hearts don't like the Maxims, which it must live upon!

III. The Hearers of the Word, that seem to Rejoice it, will meet with a Time
of Temptation, to try whether they have indeed received it. We read, Luke VIII.
13. A Time of Temptation comes upon them. When the Seed has been sown upon the
Ground, the Sun will be up, and fall with scorching Beams, upon it. A fit
Emblem of the Temptation, which they that Hear, and seem to like, the Word of
GOD, must look to meet withal.

First, There will be the more general Temptation of Adversity, to try the
sincerity and perseverance of them that seem to Receive the Word of GOD. We
read, Mat. IV. 17. Affliction arises. Many may have the Vanity to expect
little Affliction, when their ways are once directed for keeping the statutes
of GOD. O vain Dream! When our SAVIOR has expressly forewarned us, In the
world ye shall have Tribulation! But, by Adversity, there will be a Trial made
of us, whether we really Receive the word of GOD as we say, we do. Self-denial
is what the word of GOD in the first place, indispensably calls for; It Is, the
First Lesson of the word. When Adversity comes, it lays the Cross on us. It is
now Tried, how we can bear it, and whether we can patiently deny our selves of
every thing at the Call and for the sake of, our Lord. If under Adversity we
suitably, quietly, fruitfully bear the Cross, and forego what we must part
withal; then we have Received the word of GOD aright. But if under Adversity,
we grow weary of serving our Lord, and of waiting on Him, and of sitting under
His Discipline; then the word of GOD was never well received in our Souls. Oh!
that being Tried we may come forth as Gold; And by Learning the statutes of GOD
from it, and becoming more f^^m in our Adhering, and more full in our
Conforming unto them for it, we may find it Good for us that we have been
afflicted.

Secondly; There will be the more special Temptation of Persecution, to try our
sincerity and perseverance. We read, Mat. XIII. 21. Persecution arises because
of the Word. Cain's Club walks about, unto this very Day; and we have a fair
praemonition; All that will live Godlily in CHRIST JESUS shall suffer
Persecution. Until the second Coming of our great GOD and SAVIOR, the World
will never see a Day, wherein a Man may be an Holy Man, and suffer nothing for
being so. For, Satan will not be Bound, until the second Coming of the Lord.
And until Satan be Bound, we cannot imagine, that he will cease to give Trouble
unto all that Love the Lord JESUS CHRIST in sincerity. The Third Chapter of
Genesis, will never cease to operate, until we come to the Twentieth Chapter of
the Revelation. Where the Persecution of the Hand is Restrained, and wicked Men
have not their Tools to work withal, yet the Persecution of the Tongue, and the
Methods to express much Unkindness, much Aversion, will never fail. But as in
the Days of Ishmael, even so it is now. The genuine Children of GOD, must be
hated, and mocked, and wronged, by the Children of the wicked one. By this
Persecution there will be a Trial made of us; whether we do thoroughly Receive
the Word of GOD, and will by no means part with it; Hold fast what we have
received. It is Tried what Metal we are made of. If we cannot bear to be
Vilified and Ridiculed, for being strictly Conscientious, we have not yet
Received the Word of GOD. If we had rather commit a Sin against the Word of
GOD, than incur a Scoff on the score of our keeping the Word, Ah! Woeful Soul,
Thou have never yet Received it. But, if we can encounter Hard Measures for our
Fidelity to the Word of GOD, and will keep the word, whatever it cost us, Then
indeed we have Received the Truth in the Love of it. Oh! That in the Fiery
Trial, we may be found, what shall be for Praise and Honor and Glory at the
Appearing of the Lord!

IV. False-hearted Hearers of the Word, will wretchedly wither, when Temptation
scorches them. Not having the Root and the Sap of a good Principle in them, to
feed that PIETY which they seem to have, they wither, they wither! Yea, while
they are yet in their Greenness, and not cut down, they wither before any other
Herb: So are the Paths of all that forget GOD, and the Hypocrites hope shall
perish.

If it be enquired; What is the withering whereto the Corn of the Stony Ground
is obnoxious? It must be Answered; It is the Apostasy of these False hearted
ones, through prejudice at the Right ways of the Lord. In Two of the Evangelists
we read, They are Offended; In the Third we read, They fall away. It Is no rare
thing, for Hypocrites to prove Apostates. Our SAVIOR had some Disciples, who
went away, and walked no more with Him. The Primitive Churches, had those who
went out from them, not being truly of them. All Ages have Examples of it.

These False-hearted ones often come to a withering, even in their very
Profession. They Renounce the Orthodox Faith, with which they once flourished
in the Field of the Church. Or, if not so, yet instead of standing up for GOD,
and CHRIST, and Holiness, they become Formal, Carnal, Insipid Creatures, and
cast off the thing that is Good.

They come to a withering in their Affection. They leave their first Love:
Their Love to the Devotions, to the Appointments, to the Ministers of GOD, all
vanishes; and all their old Zeal is extinguished.

Yea, they come to a withering of the Gifts that once adorned them. They cannot
pray and speak as once they could. Their Parts are so withered, that every one
may plainly see, The Man is not what once he was.

And at last it comes to that; Job XXVII. 8. What is the hope of the Hypocrite,
though he has gained, when GOD shall take away his Soul? All the Seed cast on
the Hypocrite, and all the show of Good issuing from it, comes to nothing.

Some Reflection must be made upon these things. Though the Stony Ground yields
no Fruit unto the Husbandman, let us reap some Fruit from the Stony Ground
before we leave it.

Beware, Beware, O my Hearers, that what Impression of Religion may have been
made upon you, do not wither in Apostasy. The Word of GOD has doubtless raised
some good Motions, and some good Practices in many of you. For GOD's sake, let
them not wither. Your Prayers in your Closets, and with your Houshoulds; your
Cares to do Good upon your Children, and among your Neighbors; your watch over
your whole Conversation: your Appetite for Communion with GOD in His
Institutions; If these things do wither in any Man, My Soul shall have no
pleasure in him, says the Lord. Wherefore there are Three Things to be
earnestly pressed upon you. And though it be Stony Ground that I have to deal
withal, yet we will see what the Mighty Hammer that breaks the Rocks to pieces,
will do upon it.

First; Though you are never such a Stony Ground, Yet, Oh! be prevailed withal to
beg it of a Gracious GOD, that He would mercifully take away from you the Heart
of Stone. Is it the Stony Ground, that yields nothing but withering Fruit? Yet,
Oh! Let so much Fruit be found upon the most Obstinately Stony Ground among
you. Go to a Glorious CHRIST, with doleful Complaints about that hard Heart of
thine; and plead with the Lord His Promise; Ez^k. XXXVI. 26. I will take away
the stony Heart. Beg it of Him; Oh! Be it unto me according to thy Word! It may
be, He will do this Thing, when thou do entreat Him to do it for thee. And
when this Thing is done, Then, then, thou will have a Fruitful Soul. All things
will then work together for thy Good. But, if thy Heart must and will remain a
Stone, GOD will one Day break thee in the place of Dragons! But then,

Secondly, Be concerned, O you that have the Good Seed of the Word falling on
you, that it may come to have a good and a deep Root within you. The Fruit of
the Word in the Stony Ground perishes, because he has not Root in himself. What
is the Root? It is the Love of GOD implanted in the Soul. This is, The Root of
the Matter; This, the Root of the Righteous. May you be Rooted in the Love of
GOD, then all will be well. The Word of GOD has taken Root, when it gives a
Change and a Turn, and a Godward Biass to the Soul. But, how to come at this!
Assuredly, it is obtained, yea, it is begun, in looking to GOD for it. Oh! Ask it
of a GOD, who gives this Wisdom to them that Ask it. And importunately make
that supplication; Psalm. CXIX. 80. Let my Heart be sound in thy statutes; that
I be not ashamed. -- Be awakened, O Gospellized ones, to seek it carefully and
with Tears, and Beg it, O Glorious GOD of all Grace, put thy Fear into me, and
fill my Heart with thy Love, and quicken me to live unto thee. Lord, I cannot,
I will not let thee go except thou Bless me! This must be done by one that
would not fail of the Grace of GOD.

Thirdly; I know not how to give over plowing on the Stony Ground, until I have
gained thus far upon my Hearers; Bring your selves to a Trial, whether you have
under the good Word of GOD, ever yet arrived unto that good Work of GOD, which
is beyond what any mere Stony Ground has had the Experience of: Come to a
Trial, whether the Word of GOD has ever yet produced that Work in you, which
will endure the Trial; and which being Tried will never fall away.

If you do not see it with a Full Assurance that you are come to this work,
yea, Oh! that you may Now come to it! Now in the Hearing of it! You will do so,
if your Hearts fall in with the work, and Now come into the Acts which will
demonstrate it.

For your Help in this weighty Case, and that I may assist the Intentions of a
SELF-EXAMINATION, I will offer you a brief Model for it, which is Transcribed
from the VITALIA, of one Traveling to Zion, with his Face thitherward, loathe
to mistake his way to the City of GOD.

It is This;

Am I one who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and stand in His Holy
place?

Most certainly, I am in a state of Safety for Eternity, and the Good Work of
GOD is begun upon me, if I can thus declare before Him.

O my Glorious GOD, My LOVE unto Thee, such as it is, disposes me, to a Choosing
of it, and a Closing with it, as my Highest End and Wish and Satisfaction, To
be and to do what thou may with Delight look down upon. If I may be a
grateful Spectacle unto Thee, and an Object wherein Thou may be Gratified
with the Beholding of what Thou have brought me to, I ask for no more; This is
all my Salvation and all my Desire. The Thoughts of this Felicity, fill me with
a Joy unspeakaqle and full of Glory; They do so, though I should lay aside the
Views of Gains to my self in the Contemplation. For this Cause, I would for
ever Abhor and Avoid the Sin which I know to be Displeasing unto Thee; And in a
perpetual Respect unto all they Commandments, I would seek the Things that
please Thee. Yea, I am in a continual Struggle, to be pleased with whatever
shall be pleasing unto Thee, and have my Will swallowed up in Thine.

In order to This, and that the Blessed GOD may have Delight in me, I do by
FAITH make my Flight unto a Glorious CHRIST, and Beg and Hope to be found him
Him. Distressed with a Sense of the Condition, which my Fall from GOD in the
First Adam, has brought me into, I fly to my JESUS, as to the Second Adam, in
whom GOD has bidden me to look for a Plenteous Redemption; and I desire to be
comprehended in that Covenant which my SAVIOR has made with His Eternal
FATHER, on the behalf of His Chosen People. O my GOD, I present before Thee,
the Sacrifice of thy JESUS, that so Expiation being thereby made for my
Offenses, Thou may for the sake Thereof be Reconciled unto me. I present
before Thee, the Righteousness of thy JESUS, as my only Plea, that He to whom I
am United, having fulfilled thy Law, I may for the sake Thereof be Justified
before thee. And I Consent, and I Entreat, and with a comfortable Persuasion I
expect, That my SAVIOR should with His Good SPIRIT so take Possession of me,
as to Live and Act and Work in me, and be in me a Principle for Living unto
GOD, and bring me to be all that an Holy Redeemer would have me to be.

And now, with a serious REPENTANCE, I Confess and Bewail the many
Miscarriages, wherein I have denied the GOD that is Above; and especially the
Fountain of Sin with me, in an Heart that is desperately Wicked. And, my GOD, I
heartily give Thanks unto Thee, for all the Bitter Dispensations of thy
Providence, which Embitter my Sin unto me. Yea, That my Repentance may be
carried on unto its perfect Work, I heartily submit unto all the Methods, though
for the present, they should be not Joyous but Grievous ones, that thy Wisdom
and Goodness may take for to accomplish it.

Having said thus much, at present I need say no more, to find out what Ground
I am sowing upon. You cease to be Stony Ground, from the Moment that the Word
of GOD enters thus far into you. Oh! That This may be the Moment! Oh! That you
may carry away Hearts with you, that shall have such a Work of GOD upon them!
To Day, To Day, if you will hear His Voice!

The Thorny Ground.
We are informed, Thirdly; That some who hear the Word of GOD, prove like a
Thorny Ground, when the Seed is cast upon it: A Thorny Ground, in which the
Seed is choked at such a rate, as to defeat the Effects that are proposed for
it. Our SAVIOR thus Interprets this Article of the Parable; These are they
which are sown, (or, do receive the Seed) among Thorns; such as hear the Word,
and the Cares of this World and the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the Lusts of
other things entering in choke the Word, and it becomes unfruitful. The Sin of
our Father Adam has brought that Malediction on the Earth out of which he was
taken; Thorns it shall bring forth unto thee. So, Spinas ac Tribulos,
Maledictum parturit Arvum. And indeed, there is now no part of old Adam's
World, which has not Thorns enough to render it uneasy to us. But the worst
sort of Thorns are those whereof the second Adam has now advised us: And
whereof, let us now take this Admonition.

The Things of this World, and the Lusts of Men after these Things, are those
Thorns, which do often Choke and Kill and Spoil the Efficacy which that Seed of
Grace, the Word of GOD should have upon them.

We read, Prove. XXVI 9. At a Thorn goes up into the Hand of a Drunkard so is a
Parable in the Mouth of Fools. They had no Needles, but used Thorns instead of
Needles. A Drunken Man going to use a Needle, he misapplied it; he sticks the
Needle into his Hand instead of the Cloth; he wounds himself with the Needle
instead of doing what should be done. It Is to be hoped, we shall not now so
misapply what we read of the Thorns in the Parable, that it will be a Parable
in the Hand of Fools.

Let us use it as GOD shall Assist us.

And, here, first, It is Remarkable: How contrary the World and the Word are to
one another! How Read thou? -- Jam. IV. 4. The Friendship of this World is
Enmity to GOD. The World, since the Fall of Man, is very much under the
Management and Government of, Our Adversary the Devil. And the depraved Heart
of Man since the Fall, is very much indisposed for making such a right use of
This World, as may be for the Honor of GOD. Nor has GOD laid up our Chief
Happiness, in the Enjoyment of This World. No, It Is another and a better World,
wherein alone we may hope to be Happy. Now the Word of GOD our SAVIOR, is to
prepare us for That World; And therefore it is to Turn us, and Wean us, and
Alienate us from this present Evil World. Hence it comes to pass, that the
World and the Word, are forever clashing with one another; And, If any Man love
the World, the love of the Father is not in him. If this World have our Hearts,
it is very certain the Word ^f GOD cannot have them. If the Word of GOD prevail
upon us, it is very certain, our contempt of this World will be proportionably
prevalent^ Behold, the grand Choak-word, whereby the Efficacy of the Word upon
the Souls of Men is forever damnified. My Hearers, let these Thoughts be awful
to you.

I. The Lusts of Men after the Things of This World, are like Thorns to the
Souls of Men, that suffer themselves to be overgrown with such Encumbrances
upon them. An Heart full of Lusts, is a Ground full of Thorns. Those which the
Word of GOD calls, worldly Lusts, are woeful Thorns to the Minds of Men, that
are under the Enchantments of them.

First; Thorns do grow of themselves where they grow. It Is here said, The
Thorns sprung up! It Is not said, That any one s^wed these Thorns. And worldly
Lusts; They are of a Spontaneous Growth in our Hearts. Will Not they arise of
themselves, Appear of themselves, Flou^sh of themselves, in us? Yes, verily;
They are Natural to us. We find; Genesis VI 5 Every imagination of the Thoughts of
the Heart of Man, is only Evil continually. Our worldly Lusts, are not the
Fruits of mere Imitation. But are in us, as Rapacity is in a Wolf, which is
born Rapacious, and will devour a Sheep, though he has never seen one devoured
before. They would quickly show themselves, though there were no sinful Examples,
or Instructions to show us the way of them. There is no need of pains for the
Teaching of Children to be wicked. They will soon enough be self-taught, for
the Drinking in of Iniquity like unto Water.

Again; What are the Thorns on the Earth, but the Fruits of the Curse.
Possibly, there would have been Thorns, if Man had not finned: They may be
serviceable to us. But the super-abounding of Thorns, This is most certainly
from the Wrathful Curse of GOD, which Man's Hunger after Forbidden Fruit has
brought upon him. It is a Threatening upon a Vineyard in ill Terms with Heaven,
There shall come up Briars and Thorns in it. But, Oh! What a Curse from GOD, is
there upon us, in the worldly Lusts which our Hearts are possessed withal! I
tell you truly, a Man cannot be more Cursed, and more Damned, than by being
utterly given up unto them; and under such a dispensation as That; Psalm. LXXXI.
12. I gave them up unto the Lusts of their own Heart. A Soul overspred and
overwhelmed with the Thorns of worldly Lusts, is in a dismal Case: And the Soul
has the Thunder of GOD cursing of it, unto an Extremity, when it is under the
power of them.

Thirdly. Thorns in the Field, are they profitable? No, they are pernicious, if
thy are prevailing there. Can you Feed on Thorns; or Build with Thorns; or,
will Thorns be a lasting Fuel for you? No, you call them, as the Bible does,
Grieving Thorns. And worldly Lusts, I pray, what are they good for? It is
demanded, Romans VI. 21. What Fruit have ye of those things? Oh! Be sensible,
that Sin is good for nothing in the World. Its works are unfruitful works of
Darkness. Good! Nay, worldly Lusts are forever mischievous Things. They are
justly styled, Foolish and Hurtful Lusts. They War against our Souls. Yea, O
Man, If thou had not a Dead Soul within thee, the Desires of thy Flesh and of
thy Mind there, would give thee as much Fiery Torment and Anguish as if so many
Thorns were stuck into thee.

Fourthly; When the Thorns cover our Fields, it is our Sloth which is to be
blamed for suffering of it. The Man dwells, At the sign of the Sluggards Field,
who indulges them. I went by the Field of the Slothful, and lo, It was all
overgrown with Thorns. And, What shall be said of the Heart which has Worldly
Lusts permitted and prevailing in it? That Heart is, The Field of the slothful.
When the Israelites allowed and savoured the Canaanites, and through Idleness
forbore the Extirpation of them, GOD said unto them; J^sh. XXIII. 13. Know for
a certainty, They shall be Thorns in your Eyes. This you may Know for a
certainty; Men might, with the Blessing of GOD, very much Extirpate Worldly
Lusts out of their Souls; It Is from their own slothfulness in the Business of
Mortification, that these Things that should appear as Thorns in their Eyes,
are so swarming in them.

Filthly. In Thorns we see Disappointments to Expectations. It Is a Proverb for
those that are. Disappointed, They Reap Thorns. The World is full of
Disappointments; There are Disappointments that vex us, in all the Concerns,
all the Affairs, and all the Expectations of This World. Whence are these
Disappointments? They are our worldly Lusts, which procure them unto us. It Is
They, which upon a Recollection brings us to that; Eccl. I. 2. Vanity of
Vanities, Vanity of Vanities, All is Vanity. Our worldly Lusts impose upon us,
what our SAVIOR calls, The deceitfulness of Riches. They promise us a notable
Harvest of Satisfaction, from this and that Undertaking or Fruition. But they
Deceive us; To our Vexation, we are Disappointed of the promised Satisfaction;
The Things from which we hoped it, are Things that satisfy not; There are
Thorns in the Harvest; They make up the Harvest.

Lastly; Thorns are an Obstruction to Fruitfulness; The Soil that is filled
with them, yields no Fruit: The Thorns do suck out the Moisture, which the more
desirable Seed called for. You are aware who said, Sow not among Thorns. Our
worldly Lusts do us this Damage; They render our Hearts a Soil, which the Good
Seed of the Gospel, is unfruitfully cast upon. Our worldly Lusts engross that
Consideration, which the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST should be entertained
withal. It is directed; 1 Pet. II. 1, 2. Lay them aside, and desire the Word,
that ye may grow thereby. If we do not lay them aside, or are not willing to be
delivered from them, the Word will have no growth in our Souls.

O you that serve diverse Lusts; How can you bear to have such Thorns
continually harassing of you? Methinks, we should be as uneasy as they that sit
upon Thorns, or as they that lie down on a Bed of Thorns, till we are delivered
from the Lusts of Indwelling Sin. O wretched ones that we are; who shall
deliver us?

II. These Lusts of Men toward the Things of This World, are the Things by
which the Word of GOD falling on the Souls of Men, is rendered Ineffectual. It
is a rare thing for them that are much concerned in and for the Things of This
World, or worldly-minded ones, to get much Good by the Word of GOD. The Things
of This World, either hinder People from Hearing the Word of GOD. The
Opportunities for Hearing, especially at the Lectures, which are set up, that
they may not go too many Days together without the Bread, which strengthens the
Heart of Man, these are shamefully neglected, because like Martha, we are
careful and troubled about may things. Or, These Things hinder People from
Heeding the Word of GOD, when they Hear it. GOD may say of them, They sit
before thee as my People, and they hear thy words; but their Heart goes after
their Covetousness. Or, These Things hinder People from Doing the Word of GOD,
though they Heed it. So, They ihat will be Rich, fall into Temptation, and are
drowned in Perdition. But, where is the Fault of all this? It is not in the
Things themselves: The Things of This World are Good Things, when they be not
abused. No; The Fault is in those Lusts, by which our Hearts are Inordinately
carried out after these Things. Our SAVIOR having ranked the Thorns into Three
Classes, The Cares of this World, and The Deceitfulness of Riches, and, The
Lusts of other Things, I find an Invitation to rank my Hearers, into Three
Orders, and bring the Solemn Warnings of GOD unto them.

First. There are Worldly Lusts, more peculiar to Poor People, which hinder the
Word of GOD from having a good Effect, especially upon that fort of People. The
Cares that lie upon the Hearts of these, are like Thorns painfully piercing of
them; and these Cares confound them. There is a Prudent Care about the Things
of this World, which is a Lawful Care. But then, there is an Excessive, a
Distracting, an Unlawful Care, How to Live, by which the Lives of poor People
especially, are embittered, and their Souls endangered. The Word of GOD obliges
Men to a Great Care on that Great Point, What shall I do to be saved? But the
Care of This World, confines their Thoughts unto that other Question; Matthew.
VI. ^31. What shall we Eat? Or what shall we Drink? Or wherewithal shall we be
Clothed? Ah, How desperately is the Conversion and Salvation of multitudes in
the World, hindered by their Care, How to live in the World? Many a slight is
put upon the Word; and as he of old said, I have married a Wife, and I cannot
come: So they have this to say for it; I am a poor Man, and I have a Wife and
so many small Children to Maintain; and therefore I cannot use the Care that I
would use for the welfare of my Soul. When the Word of GOD is Preached, the
Care of This World will not let them spare Two Hours in six Days to take a step
into the House of GOD. The Word of GOD lies by Unread, because the Care of This
World makes them say, I am not at Leisure. The First and Great Commandment of
the Gospel, is; To Believe on a Glorious CHRIST, and carry a distressed Soul
unto him, with a Recognition of all his Offices. Now, if many an one should be
asked; Have thou taken Care to get thy Soul under the Wings of thy SAVIOR? The
Answer must be, No. And the Care of This World, is the Thing that has hindered
it. This Care keeps People from going through such a Process of Repentance, as
one would think every one that has any Thoughts of Death, must immediately come
into: The Care of living in This World, so takes them up, and so takes them
off, that from Day to Day they leave undone, what every Dying Man in his Wits
would immediately do. The Word of GOD calls Men to uphold secret Communion with
GOD, in a Religious Retirement; and have a Morning and Evening Sacrifice also
with their Families. But what keeps them from the doing of the Things that are
of so much consequence for the good of their Souls? It Is the Care of This
World. For, say they, We are so poor that we cannot spare the Time from our
Business for the Exercises of Religion. Yea, The Care of This World causes Poor
People to do those things, which are Forbidden in the Word of GOD, and for
which the wrath of GOD comes on the Children of Disobedience. You read of such
a thing as That; Prove. XXX. 9. To be poor, and steal, and then to take the Name
of GOD in Vain. Men will Cheat, and Ly, and Steal, and Forswear themselves, and
Profane the Lord's Day; because the Care of This World makes them afraid of
coming to want, if they do not by such courses releeve themselves. In fine, How
should this carking Care do any other than Choke the Seed of the Word? It
Choaks the very Soul and Life and all the Faculties of the Careful Ones. Yea,
some have Choked themselves li^ally, for fear of starving, and chosen
strangling rather than life.

Secondly. There are worldly Lusts more peculiar to Rich People, which hinder
the Word of GOD from having a good Effect, especially upon that sort of People.
The Riches which fill the Hearts of these, though they afford no better nor
longer Enjoyments than the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot; yet these Riches
are most Bewitching Things unto them. Awful, Awful is the Warning, which the
Lord who has the Keys of Heaven in his Hand, has given unto us; Mat. XIX. 23.
Verily, I say unto you, That a Rich Man shall hardly Enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Even so; A Rich Man will hardly be affected with the Miseries of an
Unregenerate Soul, of which the Word of GOD, is a Roll filled with Lamentation
and Mourning, and Woe. A Rich Man will hardly Abstain from those Liberties, of
which the Word of GOD requires our Flesh to bear some Abridgments and
Abatements. A Rich Man will bardly make it his Main Aims to lay up a Treasure
in Heaven, which the Word of GOD enjoins upon every one that would come to
Heaven. Our Apostle Paul never Preached more unsuccessfully, than when he had
an Auditory of Rich Folks, to Preach the Word unto. Rich Folks have many
Employments, many Diversions; If the Word of GOD come unto them they say like
that Unhappy Man, I will hear thee at a more convenient season. Rich Folks have
High Spirits; They are too ready to despise the Word of GOD, when it is brought
unto them; like Pharaoh who said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
Voice? Rich Folks have much of a Temporal Happiness in their hands. The Word of
GOD urges them, to nothing so much, as to seek after a Eternal Happiness. It Is
to little purpose; They have already what is Temporal: This they think may be
sufficient; They taste the sweet of it; they know no better. Nor will a Rich
Nabal easily be so Humble, so Thankful, so Bountiful, as the Word of GOD
commands them to be, who are the Rich in this World. There is one thing in the
Condition of many Rich Men which cannot be with sufficient Horror thought upon
Great Estates, like to great Rivers, often are swelled by Muddy Streams running
into them. Some of the Wealth is Ill gotten Wealth. Dishonest Gain has
increased it. Unfair and unjust Things have been done in the amassing of it. A
Restitution is now requisite; A Restitution as far as the Robber is able;
either to the wronged parties, or if they cannot be found, in Deodands: Without
This, their Sin remains unrepented of, and GOD will be a Revenger. Zacheus
comes to Restitution, and THEN Salvation comes to him. Now, How hardly is a
Rich Man brought unto This! He Will sooner Die than be brought unto it. I have said
enough. How often is that Word of GOD fulfilled, Eccl. V. 13. Riches kept for
the owners thereof to their Hurt. Surely, The Riches which keep the owners from
getting and from doing that Good, which the Word of GOD is intended and adapted
for, are kept for the Hurt of the owners. In short; Riches do Choke the Seed of
the Word. How? Because they Cheat the People that are fascinated with them.
It Is from what we are here told of, The Deceitfulness of Riches. Riches tell
us, That they will Defend us from all Inconveniences. But they Deceive us;
They signify nothing to deliver those that have them, in the Day of the wrath
of the Lord. They find, that in the midst of their sufficiency they are in
straits They are driven to dispute the common Translation of the Text, Money
answers all things; and on further search into it, see, that it is only a
Caution against Luxury, with a Remembrance, that Money must pay for all. Riches
tells us, That they will stay with us. But they Deceive us; They are usually
put into the Bag with Holes, which the Prophet Haggai speaks of. They take to
themselves Wings, and flee away toward Heaven; It Were well if the Hearts which
we set upon them did so. Though we are forewarned, that these Riches will Cheat
us, yet we believe the Cheat: And our Believing of the Cheat, is the undoing of
our Soul, and the Defeating of all the Good, that the Word of GOD would, if
That were Believed as it should be, do unto us. One thing more, It Is a Thing
which the Word of GOD exceedingly demands of us: and it is a Frame which Heaven
exceedingly approves in the Children of Men; yea, They who have it not, are the
Covetous whom the Lord Abhors: A continual Dependence on GOD, and on His
Fatherly, Favorable, Perpetual Providence. There is a Venom in Riches,
disposing our depraved Hearts, to cast off their Dependence on GOD, and betray
them into a vile Imagination, as if, at least, for the supply of their more
common wants, They can do well enough without Him. If they that have their
Hearts Insatiably set upon the heaping up of Riches, would search their own
Hearts, they would find This lying at the Bottom of their Eager pursuit; A
secret Inclination to be Released from their Dependence on the living GOD, and
have a Dunghill GOD of their own, at their own Command, their own Dispose;
[This, the Nonsense of the Cursed Idolatry!] to supply their wants from Riches,
which they count their Glory, by the Mammon which they trust in. O Hearts
departing from the living GOD! The GOD who searches you, even with Candles, he
sees what you would be settled on. How wretchedly is his Word lost upon you!

Thirdly; There are many Lusts incident unto all sorts of People, through which
it is that the Word of GOD comes to be without a good Effect upon them: Even
those which our SAVIOR calls, The Lusts of other things. But, what Lusts are
these? There are the Lusts of Pleasures that hinder Men from hearkening to the
pleasant Word of GOD; A Word sweeter than the Honey, and the Honeycomb. We
read in Luke VIII. 14. of being, Choked with the pleasures of this Life, and
bringing of no Fruit unto perfection. The ways recommended in the Word of GOD,
are pleasant ways. But the Pleasures of the Flesh, do prejudice and indispose
Men, to those Narrow ways. Hearts that are fat as Grease with the Pleasures of
sense, will be utterly senseless of every thing that the Word of GOD brings
unto them. An Herod, will fear a Righteous and an H^ly Evangelist; and keep a
watchful Eye over him, and having heard him he will be much perplexed, though he
heard him peaceably, [This is the Account given of him, in a Translation that
some have chosen of it:] Thus it will be, while he has an Herodias to entangle
him. Again; There are the Lusts of Honors, that hinder Men from Honoring the
Word of GOD, as they ought to do. Hence our Lord said; Joh. V. 44. How can ye
believe, that receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that
comes from GOD only? The Word of GOD calls for all possible Honors to be paid
unto the Son of GOD; Yea, That we Honor the Son as we Honor the Father. But
it exacts many things from us, which according to our Carnal Notions of the
matter, we fancy our Honors may be impaired by our Submission to. This Pride
makes Men ashamed of Confessing a CHRIST before Men as the Word of GOD bids us
to do. It hardens our Hearts: and makes us like those Proud Men who told the
Prophet, That they would not hearken to him.

Once more; The Apostle has decided it; Jam. IV. 1. Whence come Wars and
Fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your Lusts? There are the
Lusts of Contention often getting Head among them that hear the Word of GOD:
But then, The Contentions will not obey the Truth. No, but upon the Envying and
Strife among them, there follows Confusion and every Evil work. Very fitly
indeed may these Lusts be called, Thorns: For, by these Lusts People keep
shamefully Tearing and Scratching one another. Now, it is astonishing to to
think, how much the Success of the Gospel is hindered, where a Spirit of
Contention is got among a People. Satan knows what he does, when he throws in
Bones of Contention among a People, which embroil them, and enrage them.
Instead of getting the Good that should be gotten by the Word of GOD, their
Thought and their Time, is taken up in doing of Hurt unto one another. The
House of GOD becomes as an House haunted with Evil Spirits. GOD withdraws from
his House; yea, Abhors the Sanctuarp, and goes far from it.

The Grieved Spirit of GOD grievously witholds His Influences from His
Ordinances there. The Word of GOD is merely thrown away, among such a Thorny
People. Indeed, Our SAVIOR once appeared in a Thorn-Bush. But, When a Church
once becomes a Thorn-Bush, embarassed with Contention, our Lord JESUS CHRIST
will grant little appearance of himself, to bless his Word for the good of the
People there. Oh! That every Church, would Mark them that cause Division^ and
put Marks of Dislike upon them, and be afraid, of Dancing after their Pipe, and
of being led into a Cave to be trembled at. If a Contention should be going to
go to Begin, Oh! let it be left off before it is Begun. With Prudence, with
Patience, with Self-Denial, may the Sons of Wisdom, always crush the First
Beginnings of Contention: the very Eggs of a Cockatrice: Take away the Fuel, as
the Fire is just going to be kindled. Behold the out-breakings of Contention,
with as much Terror, as if that Voice were to be heard, from Heaven upon it;
Never any good Fruit be any more found among that unhappy People!

But I may not leave this Thorny Ground without some Essays of Cultivation upon
it. There are two Essays to be made.

I. It Is Time for us to Examine ourselves whether our Heart have not the Lusts
of a worldly Heart, reigning in it, and rendering it as a Barren So^l before the
Lord. It is too, too Evident, That the good Word of our GOD and SAVIOR, misses
of doing much of that Good, that should be done among us. As the Prophet of old
complained, Lord, who has Believed? The complaint may be renewed at this Day.
Lord, How few do, Turn and Live unto GOD and Cleanse their ways by taking Heed
according to his Word? How few do prize a precious CHRIST, and lay hold on the
Salvation, which is prepared before the Face of all People, in the Word of GOD?
How few do Behave themselves as the Word of GOD has directed them; and as
Believing the Eye of GOD always upon them, to see how Circumspectly they Walk,
and how much they seek to be Blessings unto all about them; and as Believing,
the awful Things of a Future State, whereof GOD has given Assurance unto all
Men? Lord, who is there that strives to enter the straight Gate, and lay hold
on Eternal Life? Now, what is the Cause of this? Whence does it come to pass,
that the Dispensations of the Gospel, are so deplorably unsuccessful among us?
Is there not a Cause? Doubtless, The Thorns of a worldly Heart are the Things
that Choke the Blessed Seed of Life in our Souls. Here, Here is that
Mother-Sin, which may indeed be called, A Mother of Abominations. It Is hinted
in that passage; Psalm. CXIX. 36. Incline my Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not
unto Covetousness. It Is because we have an Heart so much Inclined unto
Covetousness, and full of Covetous Inclinations to Propound a Faelicity in the
Fruition of This World, that our Heart is no more Inclined unto Compliances
with the Word of GOD. Examine yourselves, O unfruitful Hearers, Examine
yourselves, how far the Characters of a worldly Heart are to be found upon you;
And, because when GOD has sown much, there is but little brought in, Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways. Examine, with the more of
solicitude, because I now lay my Finger on the principal sore of a Country
that is full of putrefying sores. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is from Heaven
arraigning us upon that Indictment, That not having the Fear of GOD before our
Eyes, we set up this World for our GOD; and for our choosing of a New GOD, we
have War in our Gates. Methinks, we may hear our SAVIOR from Heaven sighing
over us, in such Terms as those; 2. Tim. IV. 10. They have Forsaken me, having
loved this present World. From a worldly Heart it is, that the Gospel is not
valued, not followed, not obeyed, and kept close unto; And the Institutions of
the Gospel, are not esteemed and observed. From a worldly Heart it is, that
abundance of Criminal Things, directly contrary to the Gospel of GOD, and
Reproachful to the Profession of the Gospel, are done among us. From a worldly
Heart it is, that after People have sat under the most Charming Dispensations
of the Gospel, for many years together, they are no more moved, than the Deaf
Adder, by the Voice of the Charmer, but they go on still in their Trespasses.
Yet more particularly, My Son, Be thou Admonished of these Two Things.

First; If the World have most of our Heart, it is a sign that the Thorns of
worldly Lusts have overgrown our Heart. Now, it is very plain, This World has
most of your Heart, if you can Indulge yourselves in any known Sin for the sake
of the World, or if you will venture upon any Thing that you take to be an
Ungodly or Dishonest Thing, to get or keep the World So it is, If This World
have the most of your Griefs, and upon the Loss of it you say, What have I
more? And if This World have the most of your Joys, and upon the Flow of it you
say, Soul, Take thine Ease, and be merry. So it is, If you are more Thoughtful
about your Interest in This World, than in another. Can you Rise Early; and sit
up late, and eat your Bread with carefulness, that you may secure the Food
which perishes, and at the same time, do you begrutch the Time that is to be
laid out in making provision for Eternity, and in laboring for that which
endures to Everlasting Life? If you are asked, What Evidences have you, that
such an House, or such a Ship, is your own? You have them at hand. But if you
are asked, Man, Where are thy Evidences for Heaven? Are you not utterly to seek
for These? Ah! Worldly Heart; What, what will become of thee? Choking Soul,
How will the Suffocation terminate? For,

Secondly. Many an one has a Soul undone, by the Thorns of the worldly Lusts,
that little suspects his own must undoing Circumstances. Deluded and Enslaved
Soul, If the Bramble reign over thee, a Fire shall come out of the Bramble, and
shall devour thee, though thou appear ever so much as one among the Cedars of
Lebanon. Verily, a worldly Hear^ will as infallibly keep a Man out from the
Kingdom of GOD, as any grosser and more scandalous Wickedness. For we are
taught, Idolaters shall not inherit the Kingdom of GOD; And we are also taught,
A Covetous Man is an Idolater. But now, Here is the Danger. Worldliness is a
close kind of a Sin. It Is a Sin that is not easily seen; and so it is not easily
escaped. It is usually a subtle Sin, and so a secret one. If a Man should fall
into Drunkenness, or Uncleanness, or, Dishonesty, his Conscience would fly in
his Face. But a Man may have a Soul choking with worldliness, and perish among
the worldly-minded Enemies of GOD, while he little imagines, what he is, and
what he acts, and whither he is a going. How many even great Professors do so!
The worst that shall be said of a Man, is. That he is a good Husband. But this
good Husband is one who sells a Soul for a Song; one who squanders away
Substantial and Eternal Glories for a little shining bit of Clay; One who
barters away GOD and CHRIST and Heaven, for a little of the Dust of the Earth,
and the Serpents Food. Ah, wretched Husbandry!

II. But then, it is Time to hearken unto the Debortation; 1. Joh. II. 15. Love
not the World, neither the things that are in the World. Let not the Lusts of
this World, hinder you from a Fruitful Hearing of that Word, which will save
your Souls, if it be heard as it ought to be.

I will fetch a few strokes of my Weeding-Hook, at the Lusts which threaten to
Choke all Good in your Souls. Yea, Oh! That you could Quench them as the Fire
of Thorns! But, In the Name of the Lord, I will try to destroy them.

First. Remember This; It cannot be long, that you shall enjoy the Things of
This World, after which your worldly Lusts do crave and rave and carry you out
Importunately. This Brand is to be set upon these Things; 1 Cor. VII. 29. This
I say, The Time for them is but short. We know to whom they were in a
Temptation all shown, In a Moment of Time. If you had them all, In a Moment of
Time, the Show will be over. And, Eye your Pot^ can feel the Thorns, in so
little a while, all the Light which these Thorns can yield you, it is, All
Vanished! All come to nothing!

Secondly. Remember This; While you Conform to the Word of GOD your SAVIOR,
you shall be sure to possess the Things of This World, so far as you have any
occasion for them. You have His never-failing Engagement for it; Matthew. VI. 33.
Seek first the Kingdom of GOD and His Righteousness, and all these things shall
be added unto you. Yield Obedience, and cast off all Diffidence, and make the
Experiment: Prove me now, says the Lord. See whether you have not such a
Competency of these Things, that you will have cause to, be content with such
things as you have. The rather, because you will have less Thorns in them, than
what others have: Your Little will be better to you, than the Riches of many
wicked, who have but multiplied Thorns unto themselves in all that they have
gotten.

Thirdly. Remember This; If the Thorns of this World, render you Children of
Disobedience under the Word of GOD your SAVIOR, you will at last suffer
Destruction like Thorns, in the Fire of His Indignation. It is a Mavelous
Word, 2 Samuel XXIII. 67. They shall be all of them as Thorns thrust away; and
they shall be utterly burut with Fire id the Sabbath: So it is to be rendered:
That is to say, At the coming of the Lord, in Flaming Fire, to bring on the
Great Sabbatism, that remains for the People of GOD. Oh! Let not your Hearts be
full of Thorns, in the Sabbath which is now vouchsafed unto us; lest in that
Sabbath you must have an Expectation of a Fiery Indignation to devour you. If
the Earth bear Thorns and Briars, it is Rejected and nigh unto Cursing, and the
End of the Wicked ones, who are themselves but Thorns and Briars, will be, To
be Burned.

But, What shall we do to be saved, from the Thorns, and from the Fate and Fire
of the Thorns?

Our Prayer, our Prayer, unto our GOD; and with an Eye unto a SAVIOR, who once
wore a Crown of Thorns for us; This is the First Thing that is called for. Beg
it of Him, That for the sake of those Thorns, you may be delivered from these
Thorns. Cry to Him; Lord, Save me from the Lusts of a worldly Heart! Lord, Let
not the Things of this World, hinder the good Effects of thy Word upon us!

But more particularly pray, That the Thorns of Affliction, by which this World
is Embittered, may be sanctified, for our being thereby made more Conformable
to the Word of GOD. Our GOD is Teaching us by the Thorns of the Wilderness,
what it is to Sin against Him. The Language of these Thorns is, Know and see,
that it is an evil Thing, and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
GOD. Let these Thorns awaken us to mourn for our Sin; and, let it reach to our
Heart, when we feel what our Way and our Doings have procured unto us. By our
Distresses and our Confinements, our GOD is Hedging up our way with Thorns. Let
us not be Angry at the Hedge, but even Thankful for it; And pricked by the
Thorns, let All the Fruit be, to take away our Sin, and bring us to say, I will
not offend any more.

Being so much among the Thorns, Oh! May we be as Lillies among the Thorns, in
regard of our PIETY flourishing in the midst of our Calamities. Whatever Sad
Thing befalls us, let us be inquisitive, What is the Voice of the Glorious GGD
unto me, from that Thorn in the Flesh, which He gives unto me?

And Finally; What can we now do so Reasonably, as long for the Second Adam's
World, which will have no Thorns to incommode it! Come, Lord JESUS, come
quickly!

We have seen Three sorts of Bad Ground all sown with that Good Seed, which we
have in the Word of GOD our SAVIOR dispensed unto us. But must All Ground
prove no better than so? GOD forbid! No, It may be a Consolation unto the
Faithful Servants of GOD, That wherever He sends His Good Word, He intends that
some Good shall be done by it. Wherever the Gospel comes, it is probable, there
will be some Good Effects of it, upon some or other of them that hear it. And
if there must be some Good Ground where the Gospel comes, I hope, that some of
it will be found here this Day. Grant it, O our Good GOD, that it may be so!

The Good Ground.
We are informed, Lastly; That some who hear the Word of GOD, prove a Good
Ground, when the Seed is cast upon it. And as there were Three Species of the
Bad Ground, so there are Three Degrees of the Good. All the Good Ground, has
this Report given of it; They hear the Word, and receive it, and bring forth
Fruit. But then the Fruit of some is more than the Fruit of others; Our SAVIOR
thus proportions it; Some Thirty-fold, some Sixty, and some an Hundred.

And this is the Admonition, from it, which, I hope, will find many Fruitful
Hearers among you.

The Good Hearers of the Gospel, though they are not all alike Fruitful, yet they
all bring forth some good Fruit; Yea, they both Increase and Persist in their
doing so.

It Is a Bread of Propositions, that is now to be set. before you on the Table
in the House of our GOD. The Bread made, of the Corn in the Good Ground, is to
be Exhibited in the ensuing Propositions.

I. There are some Good Hearers, among those whom the Good Seed of the Gospel
falls upon. It would be sad indeed if it should not be so! These Good Hearers
are they of whom our SAVIOR says, Luke VIII. 15. They have a Good Heart in the
Hearing of it. It were to be wished, that All the Ground, which has the Word of
GOD cast upon it, were Good Ground. But this is a Thing more to be wished for,
than to be hoped for. However, some of the Ground is Good. And, How comes this
to pass? Truly, The Word of GOD our SAVIOR, falls not upon any Heart that is
Good before the Word first falls upon it. There is no Good Heart in any Hearer
of the Word, until the Word itself makes it so. Woe would be unto us, we should
be Damned unto Eternal Wickedness and Barrenness; if the Word of GOD should
never do Good unto us, until we bring a Good Heart unto it. Every Man has in
him, An Evil Heart of Unbelief departing from the living GOD; And no Man can
give unto himself a Better Heart; Such and none but such, an Heart it is, that
we do at first bring unto the Good Word of our GOD. We read, Mic. II. 7. Do not
my Words do good unto him that walks uprightly? If the Word of GOD should never
do Good unto any, until they do walk uprightly, it would never do Good unto any
at all! But it first of all does this Good unto us; It makes us upright, through
a Change of Heart produced in us; and it Inclines us and Excites us to walk
uprightly; And Then follows all the other Good, which is received from it by
them that walk uprightly.

Now, if we Enquire, What are the Characters of a Good Heart under the Word of
GOD our SAVIOR, Behold, our SAVIOR himself will soon satisfy that Enquiry.

First. A Good Heart hearing the Word of GOD, hears it with Understanding. So
our SAVIOR explains it; Mat. XIII. 23. He that received Seed into the good
Ground, is he that hears the Word, and understands it. When the Disciples
of our Lord, heard his Word with a Good Heart, He said unto them, Have ye
understood all those things? They say unto Him, Yea, Lord. We are truly told;
Prove. XIX. 2. That the Soul be without Knowledge, it is not good. Be sure, It
is not a good Heart, that is without the Knowledge of those Things, which to
know, is Life Eternal. When you hear, who your SAVIOR is; What are your Wants
of Him; What He has done for us; What He will do for us; And, what He will have
to be done by us; Then, as Philip asked the Ethiopian Treasurer, Understandest
thou what thou Read? Thus we are to ask ourselves, Do I understand what I
hear? If we don't understand something of those points, our Ignorance will
prove the Mother of Destruction unto us. Yea, Being a People of no
understanding, He that made us will not have Mercy on us.

But then, Secondly; A Good Heart hearing the Word of GOD, hears it with
Affection. So our SAVIOR explains it; Mat. IV. 20. They Hear the Word and
Receive it. We then hear the Word of GOD with a Good Heart, when we give a good
Reception to it. A good Reception to it, implies a good Affection to it. It is
the mark of a Good Heart, when the Word of GOD is a Good Word unto it. Such a
Good Heart will say; Isa. XXXIX. 8. Good is the Word of the Lord. Yea, the
Desire of such an Heart (which is only good) runs out in such Terms as those,
Lord, Thou art Good, and thou do Good; O Teach me thy Statutes. A Good Heart,
hearing the Commandments of the Word, says, This Word is very pure, and
therefore, O Lord, thy Servant loves it. Hearing the Promises of the Word, it
says, I rejoice in these Testimonies more than in all Riches. Hearing the
Threatenings of the Word, it says, Lord, I am afraid of these Judgments.

More than this; Thirdly. A Good Heart hearing the Word of GOD, hears it with
Retention. So our SAVIOR explains it; Luke VIII. 15. Having heard the Word,
they keep it. It is a Good Heart, in which the Word of GOD, is kept, as it
forever deserves to be; and laid up, as the Book of the Law was in the Ark of
old. The Word of GOD must be laid up, as an Invaluable Treasure there. A Man of
a good Heart, may say, with Him; Psalm. CXIX. 11. I have hid thy word in my
Heart. In a good Heart, the Memory becomes a Storehouse for the word of GOD.
The Evangelized Soul, says, I will not forget thy word; and it gives earnest
heed unto the things which it hears, lest at any time it may let them slip; and
lose them, in their leaking from it.

Fourthly, and Finally. What is a good Heart, but an honest Heart? So it is
explained; Luke VIII. 15. An honest and a good Heart. The Term Honest, is as
much as to say, Beautiful. There is a Beauty in Religion; and particularly
those Acts of Religion, wherein we deal Justly, Kindly, and Fairly with our
Neighbors; These have a Beauty in them. An Heart sincerely Religious, is an
Honest, that is to say, a Beautiful Heart. The Glorious GOD looks down from
Heaven, and beholds from the habitation of his Holiness and of his Glory, and
with Delight He sees His own Beautiful Image upon it. But most particularly,
It Is an Heart loath to wrong or hurt any Man in the World, and an Heart set upon
doing all the Good that ever he can, to all that are about us. This is a Good
Heart, and there is that Beauty in such an Heart, that all the World will agree
to call Good. We are to have such an Heart as this, in hearing the Word of our
GOD.

But, What shall I do to get such an Heart? The Answer is, Come to the Word For
such an Heart, when you cannot come with it. And therewithal, come to the
Author of the Word, who is the Giver of such an Heart. Christian, Address thy
SAVIOR, with such a Petition as That; Psalm. LI. 10. Create in me a clean
Heart, O GOD. Thy SAVIOR demands, Give me thy Heart. Bring it unto Him, and
beg of Him, O my SAVIOR, My Heart is a Blind Heart, and a Base Heart, and an
Heart that is desperately wicked; But such an Heart as it is, I humbly lay it
before thee. Oh! Do thou take it, and make a good Heart of it, and then I shall
in an acceptable manner give my Heart unto thee.

II. All the Good Hearers of the Gospel, are Fruitful ones. There will be upon
every Good Hearer of the Word, those Laudable Things, wherein it may be said,
He bears Fruit. If a Man sit under the Word of GOD, and bring forth no Fruit of
it, what sort of a Ground is that Man? We are told, Heb. VI. 8. It is Rejected,
nigh unto Cursing.

The Question here to be thought upon, is; What is that Fruit, by which the
Good Hearers of the Gospel, are distinguished?

Fruit, in general, is, The Good Effect of the Gospel upon us. Of some we read,
Col. I. 6. The Word of the Truth of the Gospel brings forth Fruit in them. This
is, when we Glorify GOD our SAVIOR, with such a Faith, and such a Repentance,
and such a Purity, as the Gospel does oblige us to. A Good Hearer of the
Gospel, brings forth such Fruit as This; That the Gospel of the Grace of God
effectually teaches him to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live
Godlily, and Soberly, and Righteously in this present world.

O our Hearers; Hearken and Behold! The Good Fruit, expected from the Good
Seed, which in your hearing the Word of GOD there is cast upon you, must be
seen in such Things as these.

There must be this Good Fruit of what you hear; That you must carry your
perishing Souls unto your Mighty and Only SAVIOR, Beseeching of Him, and
Relying on Him, to Reconcile you unto GOD: Consenting, That He should by His
infinite Merit bring you into Peace with GOD, and by His Almighty Spirit work
in you that which is well pleasing in the sight of GOD.

There must be this Good Fruit of what you hear; That every Thing which appears
to the Light of GOD within you, an Evil Thing, must be Abominable to you: You
must Abhor it, Avoid it, wish and seek to be delivered from it: Count a
Deliverance from it, preferrible to all the Comfortable Things of this World.

There must be this Good Fruit of what you hear; That it must be your main
Intention to Render and Procure Acknowledgments to GOD; and the Service of GOD
must be the chief End of your Actions, the chief Sweet of your Enjoyments. You
must behave yourselves as having the Eye of GOD always upon you: Do Justice,
and love Mercy, and walk humbly with your GOD: Abound in Devotions to GOD, and
in Benignities to Men. Every Day be in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long;
Every where do as you would be done unto.

Here is Good Fruit. O Soul having such Fruit as this found upon thee, Come
near unto thy SAVIOR, and receive a Blessing from Him; and hear Him saying,
See, the Smell of this fruitful Soul, is as the Smell of a Field which the Lord
has blessed.

Syrs, You cannot be owned as Good Hearers of the Gospel, if you are not the
Better for it; more Acquainted with GOD by it; more Conformed to CHRIST by it;
made the more meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

III. Though all the Good Hearers of the Gospel, must be Really Fruitful, yet
they are not Equally so. We read, They bring forth, some Thirty fold, some
Sixty, some an Hundred. Our SAVIOR made His Allusion to the Grain then most
usual in that Country. For though Wheat, which is the Best Grain, and affords
the Best Bread, for the Sons of Men, and which by an observable Providence of
GOD, grows in almost all Climates! Will, one Bushel of it, sometimes yield, One
hundred and Fifty; yet, I suppose, the ordinary Increase is not above an
Hundred. Indeed, of our Indian Corn, one Grain will produce above a Thousand;
and of Guiny-Corn, one Grain has been known to produce Ten Thousand; but in
Wheat it is not so. And in this, every Soil is not alike Fertile; does not
yield alike. I take notice, that in one Evangelist, there is no mention of the
Thirty fold, and the Sixty fold produce. It is only said, Luke VIII. 8. The
Good Ground bare Fruit an Hundred fold. This may be to note, That though this
Uttermost Fruitfulness, be not the Attainment, yet it is the Endeavor of every
Godly Man: And our Good GOD makes a gracious Construction of the Endeavor, and
Accepts the willing Mind. The Endeavor of every Godly Man, in Hearing the
Word, is to bring forth as much Fruit, as the most Fruitful Saint that ever
lived. He does not stint himself, as to the Fruit of the Word upon him. He can
say of the uttermost Fruitfulness; as in Phil. III. 14. I press toward the
Mark. Yea, But this, even the Hundred fold, is not the Attainment of every
Godly Man. There is as much Difference between the Fruits found in the Good
Hearers of the Word, as between Thirty and an Hundred. Some good Men are not
one Third part so Fruitful as others are. As we read, 1 Cor. XV. 41. One Star
differs from another Star in Glory: So, One Saint also differs from another
Saint in Glory. It Is our Fruitfulness that is our Glory. Our David has many
Worthies; But there is a First Three, which all do not come up unto.

Indeed, the Good Seed of the Word, is not Alike dispensed among the People of
GOD. The Ordinances in some Churches, are administered with more Light, and with
more Warmth, and with more Heavenly Operations than they are in others. It may
be Expected, that the Fruit will be proportionable. And yet, among those who
enjoy the same Administrations, all the truly Pious do not bear Fruit in a like
proportion; and are not of equal Piety.

First. The Word of GOD it self, assures and assigns a Difference, among them
that are the Good Hearers of the Word. Thus we find several Classes in the
School of our SAVIOR. We find, 1. Joh. II. 13. Fathers, and Young Men, and
little Children; We find, 1. Cor. III. 1. Some that are Spiritual; others that
are Carnal, and Babes in Christ. We find, Romans XV. 1. Some that are Strong;
others that are Weak, and have their Infirmities. Hence we find, that some
Hearers of the Word, are perfect ones, in comparison of others that yet are not
in a state of Wickedness. We read, Jam. III. 2. If any Man offend not in Word,
the same is a perfect Man. It means not, that he is Absolutely perfect, but
that he is in the Highest Form of Christianity. The Man who rarely, if ever,
lets fall a Word, that another Man may have cause to blame him for, is this
perfect Man. Yea, we find some that are Nonesuch ones; and are so applauded,
Many have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all. So we read of Hezekiah,
2. King. XVIII. 5. There was none like him. So we read of Josiah, 2. King.
XXIII. Like unto him there was none. So we read of Timothy; Phil. II. 20. No
Man like-minded.

Thus, In the Fruits of Knowledge, all the Really Fruitful, are not equally so.
No; We read, Heb. V. 12. Of some, that may be Teachers; and of others, that
need one to Teach them the first Principles of the Oracles of GOD: Of some that
are of full age, and have strong Meat belonging unto them; and of others that
use Milk, and are unskilful in the Word of Righteousness.

In the Fruits of a True Faith; some can have it said of them, I have not found
so great Faith, no not in Israel. To others it may be said, O ye of little
Faith. In the Fruits of a True Love, some can have it said of them, They have
loved much. To others it may be said, Thou have not the First Love. In points
of Holy Living, it may be said of some, They do that which is Right in the
sight of the Lord, yet not like David; nor like a Man wholly after the Heart of
GOD.

Secondly. Some Good Hearers of the Word, are designed of Heaven to be prepared
by the Word, for Greater, Higher, Nobler Services than others are. Of one that
was to have a Charge over Jerusalem, we read, Neh. VII. 2. He was a faithful
Man, and feared GOD above many. GOD intends these and those for singular
Services; and so he will make them Fruitful Men above many, and such as his
Word shall bring to more of his Fear, than many are brought unto. There are
some, who are like Paul, to do more for GOD in a way of Active Obedience, than
others. There are some, who are like Job, to do more than others for GOD in a
way of Passive Obedience. Now, such as the Word of GOD shall do but little good
upon, these will not be furnished for what he will have some be called unto.
There must be some who shall Excel in Fruitfulness, because of some Excellent
Work, which GOD has intended for them.

IV. All the truiy Fruitful Hearers of the Gospel, will Increase in their
Fruitfulness. Concerning the Fruit on the Good Ground, we read, Mar. IV. 8. It
sprang up, and Increased. That Obedience to GOD, which his Word brings any
Person to, will certainly be a growing Obedience, and they that are in it will
Wax stronger and stronger. If there be no Growth in our PIETY, we may suspect
the Truth of our PIETY. We find, Joh. XV. 2. That which bears Fruit, must and
will bring forth more Fruit. When we first begin to bring forth Fruit unto GOD,
there is as the Apostle said unto some of old, Something lacking in it. But our
GOD will have it Proceed, and Improve, and Increase to further Degrees; It
shall see an Increasing of GOD. A Sincere and Newborn and Living Child of GOD,
will be a Growing one. Of the Faithful and the Fruitful, we read, Hos. XIV. 5.
He shall grow as the Lilly; of which they say, It grows as long as it lives. If
we be Rooted in Him, who is our GOD and our Life, His Interest will be
continually Growing in us.

O Hearer of the Word, come under a Trial that is now to be passed upon thee.

If thou art a Fruitful Hearer of the Word, thou will be upon the Increase in
thy Fruitfulness.

A Fruitful Hearer of the Word, will Increase in his Acquaintance with the
Glorious CHRIST, who is the very Sum of all the Word. It is required, 2. Pet.
III. 18. Grow in the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
He sees more and more Glory in a lovely JESUS; How great his Goodness and his
Beauty! He has more and more sense of the Miseries, which without a CHRIST he
lies exposed unto: And he becomes more and more sensible of the Alsufficiency
in a CHRIST for the Relief of all his Miseries.

A Fruitful Hearer of the Word, will Increase in his Ability to Repel
Temptations to Sin against the Word. The Devil cannot so easily prevail upon
him, as once he could. He can more easily Deny himself of those Pleasures and
Profits and Honors with which the Devil allures Men into Folly. The Variety of
Conditions through which he passes; he more easily bears them, and more easily
avoids the Errors incident unto them, He is less enchanted with Prosperity: It
proves not such a Dalilah, to lay him asleep in sinful stupefactions. He is
less disturbed with Adversity: He gains in the strength which keeps him from
Fainting in the Day of it.

A Fruitful Hearer of the Word, will Increase in his awful Resentments of the
Everlasting Invisibles, whereof we are advised in the Word. He becomes more
Awed by the Apprehension of GOD knowing the way that he takes. He becomes more
afraid of Grieving the Holy SPIRIT of GOD, by any Miscarriages. He becomes more
loathe to disoblige the Good Angels, and gratify the Evil ones, by any
Misbehaviours. He is more Swayed by the Hopes of the great Recompense, in the
spiritual Blessings of the Heavenly places; and he is more affected with the
Terror of the Lord; a Destruction from GOD is more of a Terror unto him.

Finally. A Fruitful Hearer of the Word, will Increase in the Conformity of his
whole Conversation to the Word. He becomes more full of Meditations on Things
pertaining to the Kingdom of GOD: More frequent, and more fervent in
Supplications to the Throne of Grace. He becomes a greater Sacrificer; and more
abounding in the Sacrifices which GOD is well-pleased withal. He makes notable
Advances, in a Cleansing from all Filthiness of the Flesh and of the Spirit;
and carrying on Holiness toward Perfection in the fear of GOD. The
Sanctification of his whole, ever. Spirit, and Soul, and Body, is carried on,
through the presence of the Lord.

Hearken, O Hearers of the Word: A Non-proficiency under the Word of GOD; Oh!
'Twould be a Black Token of Death upon you!

V. We cannot be Fruitful Hearers of the Word, except we also persist in our
Fruitfulness. Of the Hearers who are Good Ground, we read; Luke VIII. 15. They
bring forth Fruit with Patience.

But, what is intended in this Patience?

First; There is no Fruitful Hearer of the Word, but what shall be Tried by
some Affliction, whether he will continue to bring forth Fruit, or no; And be
Tried what Fruit it is, that he does bring forth unto GOD. There is no Disciple
of the Lord who died on the Cross, but what has a Cross provided for him. The
first Maxim that our Lord lays down for every Disciple, is, Mat. XVI. 24. Let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. Patience is a Virtue
disposing us to Love, and Serve, and Obey, our SAVIOR under the Cross. There
is no Fruitfulness without some Affliction: Indeed, with the Chosen of GOD, the
more Affliction, the more Fruitfulness. The Name of the Believer, is Ephraim;
Inasmuch as GOD makes him Fruitful in the Land of his Affliction. Wherefore, we
are to Run with Patience, through all that is before us. Look for it, O Believer;
Look for Affliction to try thy Patience. And let this be taken, as one
Intimation here doubtless given by our SAVIOR; A Man may not be esteemed a
Fruitful Man, until he be a Patient one. You must be People of Sorrows and
acquainted with Griefs: You must meet with Bereavements, meet with Injuries,
meet with Reproaches: As being under a Crucifixion, you must suffer one
Dolorous Pang after another, and suffer such a Succession of them, that one
shall no sooner be a little over, but another will come on; until the
Mercystroke of Death open an Outgate for you. Now, How do you Bear these
Things? If you Bear them with Patience, then you Bear Fruit with Patience. Man,
If thou have a Froward Soul, thou have not a Fruitful one!

Secondly. Nor was any one ever a Fruitful Hearer of the Word, but such as did
continue to bring forth Fruit unto the end. As we are told, Psalm. XCII. 11.
They shall still bring forth Fruit in old Age. Even so, They shall still bring
forth Fruit until the very Period of their Lives. The Harvest of that Fruit
which we are to yield, will not come, until the World to come. With Patience
then, we must hold on, and hold out, yielding Fruit as long as we are in this
World. Perseverance; Perseverance! This is that Patience, with which we are to
bring forth Fruit unto GOD. An Apostate Sinner, was always an Unfruitful
Sinner. The Good Fruits of such an one, were never any other than mere Shows of
Good. Soul, Have thou Begun to be Fruitful? O Tremble at a Degeneracy from
hopeful Beginnings. If thy Goodness be what soon passes away, the Glorious
GOD, as in a Deliberation what Vengeance to take upon it, says, What shall I do
unto thee? What shall I do unto thee? It is a Terrible Thing that He will do
unto thee.

And now, We are come to, The Conclusion of the Matter.

You are now determined, What is the Good Soil, and that which alone may look
for Good, and will come to Good, and which brings forth Fruits meet for the
Cultivation used upon it, and receives Blessing from GOD.

The Desirable Thing whereto you are now to be Exhorted, is This; Oh! Become
sollicitous, that you may under the Word of GOD, be as the Good Ground,
Fruitful from the Seed cast upon it; Become Importunate for the Good Heart
which may make you and prove you to be such Good Ground before the Lord.

In the prosecution of this EXHORTATION, there are three Counsils from GOD,
yea, Charges, to be in the Name of GGD, earnestly pressed upon you.

First. Examine your selves, O all you that are our Hearers, Examine your
selves, what Fruit the Gospel has had with you; What Fruit you have heard the
Word of GOD withal. The GOD of Heaven, who does require Fruit from the Soil,
and the Soul, on which He has bestowed the Seed of His Word, He does also
Enquire, what is the Fruit of all His Tillage. He says; Luke XIII. 7. Behold, I
come, seeking Fruit. But now, Enquire of thy self, O Hearer of the Gospel;
Enquire Seriously, Thoroughly, Impartially; What Fruit has the Word of GOD my
SAVIOR produced in me; and what am I the Better, under and after my Enjoyment
of the Glorious Gospel? The Word wherein the Wrath of GOD has been Revealed
from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, Enquire,
whether the Fruit of it has been seen, in your being Reclaimed from all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness. The Word, which Converts the Soul, and makes
wise the Simple, and Rejoices the Heart, and Enlightens the Eyes, Enquire,
whether the Fruit of it has been seen, in your having a Soul Converted, and
made Wise, and Rejoiced, and Enlightened by it.

There are especially Four Questions which I vehemently urge you to Retire and
ponder on.

Quest. I Have I ever yet had Experience of a Regeneration from the Word of
Truth? And has the Holy SPIRIT of GOD, by His Word so Quickened me for Living to
Him, and given such a New Biass to me, as to make a New Creature of me?

Quest. II. Is there no Evil which the Word of GOD has rebuked me for, yet left
unreformed with me?

Quest. III. Is there no Duty which the Word of GOD has convinced me of, yet
left unperformed with me?

Quest. IV. Have I left nothing undone, which is necessary to be done, that my
dying Hour may not be fearfully uneasy to me?

The Answers to these Questions will soon discover, how Defective you may still
be in your Fruitfulness under the Word of GOD. I beseech you to take these
important Questions into a just Consideration.

Secondly. You must become United unto your SAVIOR, by Believing on Him, that
so the Gospel may have its Fruit with you; and that so you may not be numbered
among them, of whom it shall be said, The Word preached does not profit them.
The very First and Main Fruit of the Gospel to be demanded of you, is This;
Give your selves up to your SAVIOR, and be willing to be found in Him. This is
the First Thing to be proposed and pursued in order to all further
Fruitfulness. Remember, That you never will be Fruitful, until you are first
united unto your SAVIOR, by Repairing to Him for all Good, and by Believing on
Him, who tells us, Joh: XV. 5. Without me, you can do nothing. The Good Works,
which are the Fruits of Righteousness, commanded of GOD; Remember this; They
are not Things to be done by an Unrenewed Mind, and a Soul not yet United unto
our SAVIOR. It Is Faith which is to do all these Good Works, and yield all these
Good Fruits. It must be the Obedience of Faith, which does them all, yields
them all. The First Thing to be propounded with you, is, To fly unto a Glorious
CHRIST, and beg of him to make you his own, and comply with all his Offers of
Grace: More particularly, Ask of him, Trust in him, that by Him living in you,
you may be made perfect in every good work. Christian, Thy SAVIOR says unto
thee, From me is thy Fruit found. Let it be the Echo from thy Soul unto him; O
my SAVIOR, by thee acting in me, let me be made a Soil fruitful unto GOD. I
wish the People of GOD were aware of it; The want of such Divinity, in our
Sermons, has proved almost the loss of Christianity under them.

Thirdly; Be Prayerful that you may be Fruitful. Indeed, Prayer it self is no
little part of the Fruit that is called for. Prayerless ones, besure are
Fruitless ones. There appear no Fruits of the Word, until that sprouts up; Act.
IX. 11. Behold, He prays. This, This is to be one special Article of our
Prayer; My GOD, Bestow thou the Blessings of a fruitful Soul upon me.

But then, more particularly, Pray over the Word of GOD, wherewith you are
Highly favored of the Lord. Before your Hearing of it, make that Prayer, Lord,
Let thy Word find my Heart prepared for it. After your Hearing of it, Think,
What fresh matter of Prayer have I now been minded of? In Hearing, turn all you
Hear into Prayer, as much as ever you can: Send up your Wishes tied unto the
Arrows of Ejaculatory Prayer; send them up to Heaven as thick as you can.
Fruitful, Fruitful will that Earth be, which in this way obtains the Sweet
Influences of Heaven upon it. --

But I may not forget one Advice more to be introduced before I leave you.

Our COMPANY will be a Thing of more than a little Consequence to our PIETY.
Our Fruitfulness in all the Good Works of PIETY, will very much depend on the
Company with which we choose to be most Familiar. A Grand Maxim of Wisdom, and
of the best Husbandry, is, Forsake the Foolish and live. We have read of one
whose Field was in a Bad Condition, He got it by being Amongst those who were
not as they should be.

For the Inculcation of this Caution, I will set before you Two Laws, which the
Holy One of Israel gave to His People concerning the Ancient Husbandry.

One Law was; Deuteronomy. XXII. 10. Thou shall not Plow with an Ox and an Ass
together. The Conjunction of Animals that are of so unequal a Nature and Size
and Strength, was doubtless a Magical Rite, invented by the Devil to be used by
Men, in Token of their Dependence on him for Fruitful Fields. There can be no
Reason but Magic found for such an improper Conjugation. Homer, and all the
World, have decried the Nonsense and Folly and Madness of it; and it was looked
upon as enough to proclaim Ulysses a Madman. But the Devil singularly delights
in Confusion, and in all Contradiction to the GOD of Order. The Ox was a
Sacrifice to the Dii Superi; the Ass, a Sacrifice to the Dii Inferi. Both sorts
of Deities were Sacramentally called upon, when these were in the Yoke together.

But, was there nothing else designed in forbidding this Diabolical Sacrament?
The Jews in their Baal-Hatturin tell us, There was this thing Mystically taught
us in it, That the Righteous and the Wicked should avoid Commerce with one
another. Yea, Bochart is of the Opinion, that our Apostle did allude unto this
very Law, when he forbids our being unequally yoked with Unbelievers.
Christian, It will marvellously creeple thee, to be yoked with Unbelievers, and
with such as indeed will Draw another way than what thy Soul tends unto.

Another Law was; Lev. XIX 19. Thou shall not sow thy Field, with a mingled
Seed. No doubt, the Original of this Injunction was this; There was, as
Maimonides tells us, a Superstition of the Zabians, to sow Barley and Raisins
together, that they might procure to their Fields, a singular Prosperity and
Felicity. Our Seldom finds among the Old Athenians, what a little resembles it.
The old Idolaters joined a Male God, and a Female in their Acknowledgements.
And Varro writing, De Re Rustica, directs this, to obtain a Success for their
Tillage. Thus the vain Idolaters, looking on the god of the Vine, as a Male,
and the god of the Grain as a Female; they would by the Rice of a Mixed Seed
unite them, that so they might have a lucky Vintage.

But, Methinks, I see a further Intent in this Law. There have been Two Seeds
in the World, ever since the Third Chapter of Genesis; Two Seeds very different
from one another. Syrs, These Two Seeds will never do well together. Let them
them keep at a due Distance from one another. The Work of GOD in your Souls
will not thrive, if you do not save your selves from the untoward Generation.
As for them who are evidently a Seed of Evil doers, and Children that are
Corrupters, the Voice from Heaven to you is; Come out from among them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and I will receive you; yea, I will be a Father
unto you; and ye shall be my Sons and my Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

Finally; Methinks, The Husbandry of Ashes, may here agreeably enough have some
Notice taken of it.

When we read; Psalm. CXLVII. 16. He scatters the Hoar-frost like Ashes, it
seems Allusive to what was done by the ancient Husbandmen. We often find it in
Books of Agriculture, a Receipt for Enriching of Ground that has been spent, or
worn out. There is a Salt in Plants, which is their proper Aliment or
Nutriment; and the more of that Salt there is in any thing, the better Dung it
will yield for the producing of a fruitful Soil. Now that Salt remains in the
Ashes of the Plants, after the Fire has done its part upon them. We see our
Husbandmen, ever now and then burning little Heaps of Rubbish here and there on
their Newplough'd Ground. Virgil speaks of such a Practice diverse times in his
Georgicks. In all probability the Hsbandmen of Israel did so too. They
scattered Ashes here and there on their Fields; or perhaps, they cast Ashes on
their Dunghills, where, being diluted by the Rains, the Salt very deeply
impregnated them; and rendered them fitter to be spread afterward upon the
Earth.

But now, What I would be at, is, To employ the Husbandry of Ashes, for the
producing of a fruitful Soul. And it is to be managed by serious and frequent
Meditations on Two Heaps of Ashes which we are all deeply concerned in. Such
Meditations are the most Fertilizing Things that can be imagined; It will be a
fruitful Soil, that shall be impregnated with them.

First. Meditate, O Dying Man, on the Ashes, which thy Grave will shortly
reduce thee to: Dust and Ashes! Often take a View of thy Flesh as Incinerated
in the Grave. And Think, What will all this World be to me, when I am laid up
in the dusty Chambers of the House appointed for all the Living! Think; What
have I to do, that I may with Courage and Comfort go down unto the Chambers?
The Fruits of such Thoughts will be Wonderful!

Secondiy. Meditate very much on the Ashes which will cover the Face of the
Earth, when the Flames that are now quickly to be looked for, have done their
part upon it. If the coming of the Son of Man in the Clouds of Heaven, which
cannot mean any other than His Personal and Visible Coming, must be at and for
the Destruction of the Roman (Papal) Monarchy, which must be given up to
Burning Flames! If the Second coming of our Lord, which will be in Flaming
Fire, must be at and for the Perdition of the Man of Sin, who has now run through
his Period of Twelve hundred and sixty Years; If the promised Felicities for
the Church upon Earth, take not place before the New Earth; And, if the New
Earth arrive not before, but must be brought in by, the Conflagration which
will make a dreadful Havoc on the Earth, and the Works that are in it; Then,
we know not how soon the Earth must undergo the tremendous Revolution, which
the XXIV. Chapter of Isaiah's Prophecies, and a thousand other Inspired
Oracles, have described and foretold unto us. Were this awful Matter so
Realized, as (...) should be, what Fruits would there be of it; and what manner
of Persons would it render us, in all holy Conversation and Godliness!

Consider what I say; And the Lord give you Understanding.

The SOWER a Singer.
GIve me thy Heart, My SAVIOR says:
It Is what I strive to do.
It Is Barren: Change it, Lord, by Grace,
A Fruitful Soil into.
[1.] When the Seed of thy Word is cast
On such a Beaten Road;
Let not the Fruit of all be lost,
Nor under Foot be trod.
May't be no Unattentive Heart,
When There thy Lessons fall;
Let not Hell's Harpyes do their part
To rob me of them all.
[2.] Oh, Do not leave my Heart to be
An Unaffected Stone,
Where Heavens Eye no Fruit will see,
But what will soon be gone.
Let there be found of PIETY
In me a Root so deep,
As from a vile Apostasy
Will me for ever keep.
[3.] Lord, Let not worldly Lusts and Cares
Thy Work in me annoy;
Choke all good Fruit; and prove the snares
That shall my Soul destroy.
Ye Cursed Thorns I deprecate
All your Entanglements.
My SAVIOR, Let not these defeat
Thy Gospels kind Intents.
[4] O Glorious CHRIST of GOD, from whom
Does all my Fruit proceed;
Let thy sweet Influences come,
And quicken Thou the Seed.
With Fruits make me a Blessed Field;
More precious Things than Gold;
With Fruits of thy Good SPIRIT filled,
More than an Hundred fold.
Pluviaria. The RAIN waited for.
Isa. V. 6. I will command the Clouds, that they Rain no Rain upon it.


A Most awful Judgment of GOD! If we take it Figuratively or Literally, it is a
most awful Judgment of GOD.

At a Vintage of old, their Usage was to have Songs of Mirth and Joy; In the
Vineyards there would be Singing, with glad Shouts and Acclamations. But behold
here, a Song over the Vineyard of GOD, which is Carmen Lugubre; a very Mournful
one, and fitted for Sighs and Lamentations. The Church of GOD is very fitly
compared unto a Vineyard. His Church among the Jews, was now become a
Degenerate Vineyard. The Impieties abounding in that Church, were Sour Grapes,
which very poorly answered the Divine Cultivation, that had been employed upon
the Vinerard. The Glorious GOD is introduced, as expressing His just
Resentments upon the Ill Fruits found in a People that had been so richly
Cultivated. One of the Punishments threatened unto the Unfruitful Vineyard, is
in this Article; I will command the Clouds, that they Rain no Rain upon it. The
Interpretation of the Parable, and of this Article in it, which I find in the
Writings of the Ancients, when I seek Understanding from them, is to this
purpose; It was accomplished, when GOD sent away His Apostles from the
Unbelieving and the Disobedient Jews, unto the Gentiles; when the Offers of the
Gospel were no longer dispensed as they had been unto that Rejected People, but
the saving Instructions and Influences of Heaven, were witheld from them; which
they have now been for many Ages.

The Doctrine which is now to distill as the Rain upon us, will be This.

When the Glorious GOD commands His Clouds to shed no RAINS upon a People, it is
a terrible Judgment, and that whereof such a forsaken and unhappy People should
be very sensible.

It Is first in the Figurative Sense of it, that we will take the Terrible
Judgment into our serious Consideration. It Is in the witholding Evangelical
Blessings from a Land, that GOD commands the Clouds, to distill no Rains upon
it. This is now to be considered as a Judgment of a very sad Importance: O our
dear People, not yet visited with it, I hope, you will apprehend it so, and
accordingly deprecate it!

I. We will enquire, first; When may a People have it said of them, That GOD
commands the Clouds to distill no Rain upon them?

In general; It Is when a People have not the Ministry of the Gospel, to bring
them home unto GOD.

By the Rain here spoken of, it is agreed among Expositors, That Coelestis
Doctrina, or, Heavenly Instructions are intended. It is well known, That in the
Hebrew Language, both the Raining of Heaven, and the Teaching of Heaven, are
expressed in Terms that come from the same Root. Even the Margin of the Bible
in our Translation, gives us a notable intimation of This; at Joel II. 23. He
has given you the former Rain. In your Margin it is, A Teacher of Righteousness.

In the Sacred Scriptures, we find the Teachers of Truth, resembled unto the
Clouds of Heaven. To these there may be applied that Word, Isa. LX. 8. Who are
these, that fly as a Cloud? No wonder then, that the Word of GOD, which is
taught by these, is resembled unto Rain. These are they who may say, Deuteronomy.
XXXII. 2. My Speech shall distill as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as
the Showers upon the Grass. Now,

First; When the Glorious GOD bestows not Able and Faithful Ministers of His
Gospel on a People, then He commands the Clouds to distill no Rain upon them.
The more Useful Ministers of the Gospel, are sometimes taken away from a
People. Perhaps Persecution Banishes them, or Silences them; The Tail of the
Dragon strikes them down from Heaven. Or, the ordinary Course of Mortality
takes them off, without Successors coming on. The Teachers are no more to be
seen, because of their being removed into the Dark Corner of the Grave. The
Clouds that should have Rained the Word of Life upon a People, are blown out of
the World, when they have no Ministers, to be the Dispensers of the Gospel unto
them. Yea, a People may have pretended Ministers, and yet have this Curse upon
them. They may have Men in Black, that yet shall be no Divines, nor any better
than so many Chemarims unto them: Or, Men that wear Garments only to deceive:
And, Men that being the Corruption of the Best Thing, are the worst Thing that
can be; Mankind has a Transcendent Pest in such Dissemblers and Stage players.
Of such we read, Jude 12. They are Clouds without Water. A People may have,
Ignorant, or Erroneous, or Vicious Ministers; and such as distill no Rains of
Heaven on the Souls of the People, but rather instill Poison into them. There
are Ministers who are mere Good-for-nothings: Their chief Talent lies at making
of Christless Christians. If they should overcome Sloth so far as to do
something like Preaching an hundred times in a Year, there is not one right
Gospel Sermon among all their Harangues. They are such Bunglers at Praying,
that it would shamefully expose them, to put them upon it. Their Conversations
are so Mean, so Vain, so Licentious, that the Blind lead the Blind, when the
People are so left of GOD, as to follow them: Unsavory Salt, fit only to be
trodden under Foot of Men! Ah, Miserable People! GOD witholds Clouds of
Heavenly Rain, from such a People. Nay, He Rains Brimstone on their Habitations.

More than so, Secondly; When a People that sit under Good Ministers, do get no
Good by them; then GOD commands the Clouds to distill no Rain upon them. The
Holy SPIRIT of GOD giving Efficacy to His Word, is likened aptly enough unto
the Rain. It may be said of Him therein, as Hos. VI. 3. He shall come unto us
as the Rain; as the latter and former Rain unto the Earth. People may have
Ministers that shall be Fat Clouds, and full of Rain. But, if GOD leave this
People, without any Impressions of Grace from His Holy SPIRIT, by His Word in
the Mouth of such Ministers, here is a People not Rained upon. A People may
have Excellent Ministers; such as are truly Men of GOD, and, Able Ministers of
the New Testament: And yet, the People may go on still in their Trespasses. The
Ministers may be, Burning and Shining Lights; And yet, the People remain in
Darkness, and never know the things of their Peace. The Ministers may be Good
Men, and zealous for GOD; And yet, the People not by their Means turned unto
the Lord. All the Pains taken by the Ministers with the People, are lost upon
them. The People continue the Children of Unperswadeableness, though the
Ministers do all they can for the persuading of them to Believe on CHRIST, and
Repent of Sin, and lead Godly and Sober and Righteous Lives. The Holy SPIRIT of
GOD, affords not His Efficacy to make all Effectual. The cursed Mountains of
Gilboa, are not left so much without Rain, as the Souls of such a People.

II. We will Enquire, next; What will be the Consequence of such a Judgment;
and what there is, that should make it appear Terrible unto us?

First. When the Clouds distill no Rains on the Souls of Men, the worst Famine
that can be, will follow upon it. There will follow that Famine; Amos VIII. 11.
Not a Famine of Bread, nor a Thirst for Water; but of hearing the Words of the
Lord. A Bodily Famine is a Judgment, than which there is none more dreaded
among the Children of Men. The King of Israel had cause enough to put the
Denomination of, The Evil, upon it. When the Glorious GOD is going to spend His
Arrows on a sinful World, He comes to an Extremity in this; I will send the
evil Arrows of Famine upon them. O Dismal Case! Wherein the Torture is
Intolerable! Men devour their own Flesh; Women devour the Infants at their
Breasts; A lingering Torment brings a fierce Rage, and a slow Death, upon the
Miferables! How pathetically is it set forth; and how Lamentably! Lam. IV. 9.
They that be slain with the Sword are better of it, than they that be slain
with Hunger; for these pine away stricken through for want of the fruits of the
Field. But now, they that are slain with a Famine of Bread and a Thirst for
Water, are better of it, than they that are slain with a Famine of hearing the
Words of the Lord. For these pine away in their Sins; They are stricken through
for want of the Fruits that are to bring and keep their Souls in Life; They go
down to Eternal Burnings; Weeping and Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth, in a
Destruction from GOD, is what they are eternally damned unto.

Secondly. To enjoy the Clouds which distill Rains on our Souls, it is an High
Favor of Heaven. Then it is a Sore Judgment of Heaven, to be deprived of such
Enjoyments. If People should undergo many Difficulties, yet the Clouds
distilling Rains on their Souls, would make amends for their difficult
Circumstances. Thus we read; Isa. XXX. 20. Though the Lord give you the Bread of
Adversity, and the Water of Affliction, yet thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers.
But, Ah, Abandoned People! If your Eyes can see no Teachers, you are worse of
it, than any scarcity of Bread or of Water can render you. They are a Blessed
People, who have the Word of GOD, with the Ordinances of Heaven which it leads
them to. An Undone People then they that have none of these things. When this
Good Part is taken away, the Best Thing a People can have, is taken away. They
have then the worst Thing that can be befalling of them. The People are lifted
up to Heaven that are made partakers of such Heavenly Privileges, as the
Clouds distilling Rains on their Souls. It Is then a mere Hell upon Earth, to be
destitute of them. In the Word of GOD Men Eat the Food of Angels. When this
Food is denied them, they are condemned and confined unto the Serpents Food,
and have their Souls filled with nothing but what leaves them forever Empty;
nothing but the Dust of the Earth. We read, Psalm. LXXIX. 15. Blessed is the
People that know the Joyful Sound. But then, Oh! the Curses that are poured out
upon a People, who know nothing of the Joyful Sound! All the Curses that ever
Mount Ebal roared withal, and enough to make a very Dreadful Sound! He was a
Man of Right Sentiments, who said, I have esteemed the Words of thy Mouth more
than my necessary Food. Then, if the Word of GOD be taken away, it is as bad as
if our necessary Food were taken away. Wandering Souls, It Is by the Perfect Law
of GOD, that you are to be Converted. Simple Souls, It Is by the Sure Testimony
of GOD, that you are to be made Wise. Dejected Hearts, It Is by the Right
Statutes of GOD, that you are to be Rejoiced. Ignorant Minds, It Is by the pure
Commandment of GOD, that you are to be Enlightened. What a Wretchedness to be
deprived of all this Blessedness! What a Wrath unto the uttermost!

Thirdly. It Is a Judgment that goes not alone. If the Clouds distill no Rains on
the Souls of the People, GOD has taken away the Signs of His Gracious Presence
from among them; They may bemoan themselves, We see not our Signs, when there
is no more any Prophet among them. The Lord Himself comes, where the Showers of
His Word come. Hence, when the Showers of the Gospel are departed from a
People, the Lord Himself is departed from them. This is the Burden from the
Lord, upon them, I will even forsake you, says the Lord. But, Oh! What a Word
is That! Hos. IX. 12. Woe to them when I depart from them! And now, What ensues?
All manner of Evil; And this Account of it, The Lord is not with us, and
therefore all this is befallen us. A People so forsaken of GOD, must needs grow
an Ungodly People. Satan has his Throne among them. From that Throne of
Iniquity there issue out most venomous Operations. The People are all of them
Captives to the Powers of Darkness, and the Prey of the Terrible Ones. GOD now
makes Darkness, and it is Night, and the Beasts of the Pit creep forth, and the
old Lions roar after their Prey, and the famished People become a Prey unto
them. Their Character is That; Foolish, Disobedient, Deceived, serving diverse
Lusts and Pleaures, living in Malice and Envy, hateful and hating one another.
O Rueful Condition! What Suburbs of Hell are we falling into! The People
destitute of the Desirable Showers, are as Unloving as they are Ungodly, and
are a continual Dropping to one another. The People make themselves to one
another like the Bitter Waters, which the Star called Wormwood, fell into; and
become Grievous Judgments upon one another. At the same time, they Ripen for
all the Judgments of GOD, and Open the Floodgates for them, and have no Methods
of escaping them. It Is with them according to that Report, 2 Chronicles. XV. 3, 5, 6.
They were without a Teaching Priest, and without Law; And in those times, there
was no Peace, for GOD vexed them with all Adversity. Ah, Forlorn People;
Sitting in Darkness, and in the Region of the sh^dow of Death;

But from these Things, let us make some Inferences.

I. A People that have the Clouds of Heaven distilling Evangelical Rains upon
them, should be Thankful to Him, who Covers the Heavens with Clouds, and who
prepares Rain for the Earth. It is the Glorious GOD, who Commands His Clouds,
to distill His Rains upon them, O our Evangelized People; It is He, who by
watering wearies the thick Cloud, and causes the Rain to come for His Land, and
in Mercy. On such an Occasion a People are so called upon; Praise ye the Lord.
I call to Mind a Passage; Psalm. LXXXIV. 6. The Rain fills the Pools. My little
Skill in Philology, finds, many Hebrew Words are so significant, that without
any Danget or Damage, we may suppose a further Sense in them, than what is at
first obvious. This Passage particularly may be read thus, The Teacher is
filled with Blessings. O People Traveling to Zion, You often meet with such a
Thing: A Teacher that is full of Blessings; A Cloud from and by which, the
Blessed GOD Showers down a Pour of Blessings upon you. Is there a Country any
where under the Cope of Heaven at this Day, Richer on this regard, than this
poor Country? Behold, Thy Dense Clouds, O People known above the most of the
Families of the Earth, Charged Clouds, from whence much of a Glorious CHRIST
comes down, like Rain upon the mown Grass, like Showers that water the Earth.
Yea, we read, Job XXXVII. II. Of, Bright Clouds; that is to say, Clouds that
have Rainbows in them. There are Candidates for the Work of GOD in our
Churches, which are such Bright Clouds; Young Men of growing Abilities, and of
settled Resolutions, to do all the Good that ever they can. These carry
Rainbows with them, and comfortable Tokens, that our Churches will not as yet
be overwhelmed in a General Desolation. O Churches that so find Life and obtain
Favor of the Lord; Give Thanks, give Thanks to our Ascended JESUS, who gives
these Gifts unto Men, and at the same time, sends a plentiful Rain, by which He
confirms His weary Inheritance.

Pliny mentions among those which they call, The Fortunate Islands, one that is
called, Pluviaria, because of the agreeable Rains which it is blessed withal.
Our Land may on the best Accounts be called, Pluviaria; None more happily
Rained upon!

It becomes us now to do what may be done, that the Clouds of Heaven distilling
Evangelical Rains, may be always afforded unto us; and that we may never suffer
a Famine of the Gospel, from the Clouds desisting to Rain upon us. The Three
Years and an half in which it Rained not in the Days of Elias, were a Type of
the Twelve Hundred and sixty Years, which make Three Years and an half of
Prophetical Days, that the Romish Antichrist is to famish the Nations. This
Period being upon its Expiration, We may be in more hopes than ever, that if
due Means be used, we shall obtain the Rains that are to be wished for. It is
to be hoped, that when our Elders give up the Ghost, our People shall yet know
where to seek the Meat, that should relieve their Souls. In order to this;

First; The Clouds that bring the Rains, are to be fairly dealt withal. Indeed,
if the Ministers of the Gospel are Men of no Merits. I am not aware of any
Respects due to them. If they be Foolish and Selfish and Slothful Men, I know
not why they should be Respected above other Men. If they are no better than
Idol Shepherds, O Churches of GOD, Get rid of them as fast as you can. If they
notoriously Miscarry, let not their Coat be a Shelter for their Miscarriages:
It aggravates 'em! Well, But if Ministers have the True Spirit of the Gospel in
them, and keep within the Commissions and the Directions of it, then in Abuses
offered unto them, it may in some sort be said, Ambassadors are abused. GOD
will call home His Injured Ambassadors, and there come none after them, like
those that went before them. Yea, It comes to that; 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 16, They
mocked the Messengers of GOD, and misused His Prophets, until the Wrath of the
Lord arose against His People, so far that there was no Remedy. Sometimes a
People are blessed with Ministers who are Heavenly and Luminous Clouds over the
Assemblies of Zion: Ministers that are the Beauty and the Defense of the
Churches; Ministers that are conspicuously full of Knowledge and of Goodness.
They discharge all their Offices, with great Capacity, with great Activity,
with great Fidelity. They study to do Good, and they do abundance of Good. They
are Tender Fathers to their Flocks; Praying for them, Watching for them, glad
of all Opportunities to be useful unto them; Scattering their Alms and their
other Kindnesses, like the Showers of Heaven among them. Of such Ministers, I
was going to say, Make much of them. Without recalling that Word, I will say,
Make Nothing of them. One of the Best among them said, 2 Cor. XII. 11. I am
Nothing. If they are what they should be, you cannot more oblige them, than to
see you looking through the Clouds, up to the Sun of Righteousness, who makes
them to be all that they are. They will count, that you never carry it so well
toward them, as when you take them to be Nothing but what their Glorious LORD
makes them to be; and ascribe unto their LORD, the whole Glory of all the Good
you find in them, and from them. Nevertheless, I may not leave unquoted those
Words of our Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. V. 12. We beseech you, Brethren, to know thens
who Labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and
esteem them very highly in Love for the sake of their Work. Yea, Let the
Conscience in the Breast of the People, now do the part of a Preacher; And, O
Conscience, Do thou Declare! -- Is it not pity that such Benign Clouds of
Heaven should be misused? Pity, they should have their Spirits broken with
Oppressive Necessities? Pity, they should be Reproached and Slandered, and
insulted with many Indignities? Pity, that any prevailing Party should load
them with such Expressions of Aversion for them, as may compel them to mourn
before the Lord; A Bad-spirited People have killed me; have hastened my Death
upon me! The GOD of Zacharias may look upon such Things, and not only take away
the Blessings, but also say, Let no more such Clouds distill my Rains upon such
a People!

But inasmuch as there is very much Sacrilege committed in the Country, and
many well deserving Ministers of the Gospel, do not receive a proper and a
decent Ma^ntainance, but suffer grievous Afflictions and Oppressions, and
scandalous Defraudations; I think it not unseasonable here to employ a Minute
or two of Remarks upon it. I would not have taken so much Notice of this
Matter, if I had not really thought the Cause of PIETY in the Country
considerably concerned in it.

The Glorious GOD in Strange Ways, even framing Evil, and devising one Device
after another against us, obliges the Country to Vast Expenses, which amount
unto much more than as much again as a Liberal Maintenance of the Ministry
throughout the Land would call for; And if we were so Wife, as to observe these
Things, and would wisely consider of His Doings, and consider our ways, we
should Think, Whether a Righteous GOD be not in these Things punishing us for
Witholding more than is meet, in this notorious Article.

But while the Country is under the Scourges of GOD, I will Read something of
the Law unto you; and set Cmscience to work with and on such Questions as these.

Q. I. If you Read the First Epistle to the Corinthians, the Ninth Chapter,
from the Fourth Verse to the Fourteenth, don't you find an Inspired Apostle of
our Lord, with six or seven Unanswerable Arguments, proving This, which he
makes the Conclusion of all: The Lord has Ordained, that they who preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel? And is it not then incontestibly Evident,
That if you do not your part, that your Ministers may live well, and have a
Food convenient for them, you Sin against the Ordinance of that Glorious LORD,
whose Name you have been Baptized into?

Q. II While you do not Communicate what may be Needful for the Support of your
Teachers, how can you stand before that plain Command of GOD your SAVIOR; Gal.
VI. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, Communicate unto him who teaches,
in all good Things? Or, will GOD be mocked, when you plead, That you cannot
afford the expenses herein called for, when GOD knows, you expend much more in
less useful ways, which might much better be spared?

Q. III. When our Lord sent forth His Ministers, did not He direct them to
expect a Maintenance from them to whom He sent them; Declaring, Matthew. X. 10.
The Workman is worthy of his Meat: And, Luke X. 7. The Labourer is worthy of
his Wages?

Q. IV. What an ample Provision of Temporal-Enjoyments, did the Holy One of
Israel make, under the Mosaic Paedagogy, for the Tribe that were set apart for
Spiritual Services; therewithal saying, Mal. III. 9, 10. Ye are cursed with a
Curse, for ye have robbed me: Let there be Meat in my House, and prove me now
herewith, if I do not pour you out a Blessing? And, if Moses took so much care
for his Ministers, can you dream, that our Blessed JESUS, the Son over His
House, takes no care for His?

Yea, Though your Ministers have a Ten times better Office than the Ancient
Levites, yet would they not in much less than a Quarter part of what was
allowed unto the Levites, reckon a very competent Allowance made unto them?

Q. V. Did not our Father Abraham owe and pay a Tenth unto Melchizedek? And is
not our Glorious CHRIST an High Priest, who has the Rights of Melchizedek
belonging to Him? How will ye prove your selves the Genuine Children of
Abraham, if you devote not a Tenth part of your Income to the true Melchizedek?
And will not less than One Half of this Tenth, ordinarily be much more than
your Ministers would be comfortably supplied and content withal?

Q. VI. Can it be Reasonable, that your Ministers Labourously spend all their
Time and Strength, in doing the Best Good that can be done for you and yours;
and neglect Advantages to Enrich themselves in the ways of other Business; And
that you should at the same time expose them to Straits, and Wants, and let
the^ ^nk under distressing Difficulties, and the various Temptations which a
pinching Poverty must lay them open to?

Q. VII. When a Laborious Minister of our Lord, received the Money which a Good
Spirited People gathered for him, did he not assure them; Phil. IV. 18 It was a
Sacrifice, acceptable, well-pleasing to GOD? Upon an Impartial Observation, may
it not be found, that those Persons, and those Places, which do Best for the
Maintenance of the Evangelical Ministry among them, Thrive most, under a very
sensible Benediction of GOD? If there could be Collected into an History the
Notabl^ Experiences, which here and there Particular Christians have had, of
GOD smiling on their Affairs, with a Conspicuous and Surprising Blessing, from
the time that they have set themselves to encourage his Meritorious Ministers,
would not the astonishing History be enough to convince an Atheist, and bring a
Churl to be Bountiful?

Seven ^UESTIONS, -- If duly Thought upon, certainly our Levites would have
their Portion more duly given to them!

In thus Contending for them, I will take occasion for a Parenthesis of the
Hebrew Husbandry.

[It was forbidden Deuteronomy. XXV. 4. To Muzzle an Ox treading out the Corn. They
(as well as other Nations) used Oxen in treading out their Corn, eitheir with
their Feet barely, or their Feet shod with Brass or Iron, or with drawing over
the Corn, an Heavy Cart, or Wooden Sled, with Iron Teeth or Nails next the
Ground. While the Oxen were at this Work, they sometimes muzzled them, or
daubed their Mouths, with Dung, or put Sharps into their Mouths, or hung an
Instrument about their Necks that hindered them from stouping, or kept them from
any Drink, or covered the Corn with Skins. These things are prohibited. The
Intention of the Prohibition, is, That we should make much, even of the Brute
Creatures that serve us. But it intends also, That we must learn to be Kind as
well as Just unto all that are employed for our Good. Now this Law is Twice
quoted in New Testament; and it is both Times for this purpose, To show, that
it is the Duty of a People, to give their Ministers a Comfortable Maintenance.]

I hope, I have said enough. I may now go on to say,

Secondly. When the Clouds distill Rains, the Fruits ought to be answerable.
Shall I tell you, who the People are, that are in hazard of having the Clouds
commanded, that they should convey no Rains unto them? It Is the Vineyard, that
brings forth no Fruits, but Sour Grapss. The Sour Grapes of Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness, abounding among a People that have the Gospel, these procure
the Salutiferous Clouds and Rains to be withheld from them. We are so warned of
GOD; Heb. VI. 7, 8. The Earth which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon
it, and bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose
end is to be burned. People hear the Word of GOD from time to time; and they
get no Good by it; They are nothing the better for what they hear; The Word is
not Embraced, not Obeyed, not Complied withal. If People will not Hearken to the
Word of GOD, they shall not have the Hearing of it. The Word of GOD is preached
among a a People; But, Few Sinners are Converted from the Error of their ways.
And, if any are Converted, they show but very Dull Marks of their Conversion;
they continue Barren and Lifeless Christians; there is little Power of
Godliness among them; they make little Improvement in Piety. Alas, What will
this Unfruitfulness bring them to? As our Lord said unto His Apostle; Act.
XXII. 18. Make haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem; for they will not
receive thy Testimony concerning me. Thus does the Great GOD now say to the
Clouds, which distill His Rains with so little profit upon the People; Make
haste, and come away from a People that hates to be Reformed. O my Word, Thou
shall stay no longer, where they will not receive thy Testimony.

III. The Clouds of Heaven distilling Evangelical Rains upon us, we should not
be satisfied without the Heavenly Influences coming with and in the Rains upon
our Souls. It is one of the Precious Promises; Isa. LV. 10, 11. As the Rain
comes down from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and
makes it bring forth, -- so shall my Word be, that goes forth out of my
Mouth. Oh! that we may feel this Word fulfilled unto us! Our Gospellized
People; The Clouds of Heaven have long been showring down the Rains of the
Gospel upon you. But, Oh! What the Influences of the Glorious Gospel! What the
Dispositions which it has brought you to!

I will describe to you, a Soul that feels the Influences of the Heavenly
Showers upon it. Examine what Experiences you have had of such Influences.

It Is a Soul happily Rained upon, that is come heartily to say; Great GOD, Thou
shall be my GOD and my Portion, and if I may live unto thee, I have all my
Desire! Heartily to say; O my Lovely SAVIOR, I Repair to thee, and Rely on
thee, that thou may bring me to GOD, and save me to the uttermost! Heartily
to say, Vile Sin, I will for ever hate thee, and shun thee, and seek the Death
of thee, and be glad of every thing that helps to kill thee! Heartily to say,
Vain World, I will expect nothing from thee; and I will not be uneasy, though thy
Pleasures and Riches and Honors be denied unto me! Heartily to say, I wish
well unto every one; Oh! that I may do Good unto all: Fain would I he a
Blessing in all Relations! Are these the Dispositions of thy Soul? O Soul, on
which the Clouds of Heaven have distilled the Showers of Blessing, To thee
there belongs that Word; Isa. LVIII. 11. The Lord shall satisfy thy Soul in
Drought; and thou shall be like a watered Garden.

But the EXHORTATION, shall at length come to us, in that Abridgment which
Hosea, that long lived Minister has given us, not only by his own Sermons, for
about fourscore Years together, but also of all the Sermons preached by all the
Prophets that were sent unto the Ancient People of GOD. You thus have it, Hos.
X. 12. It Is time to seek the Lord, until He come and Rain Righteousness upon
you. Behold what now falls from the opened Bottles of Heaven upon you.

O you that have the Clouds of Heaven over you; Be assured of this; Your Great
SAVIOR will come with a Blessed Rain of Righteousness, upon them that
Seasonably seek for such a Blessedness.

The Thing to be sought for, is; That we may, by the Faith of it, come to have
the perfect and peerless Righteousness of what our SAVIOR did in conformity to
the Law which is the Rule of Righteousness, as our Surety, may be imputed unto
us for the Justification of Life: And then, that our SAVIOR would Sanctify us,
as well as Justify us, and lead us in the Paths of Righteousness.

We are now to apprehend, That when our SAVIOR communicates of Himself and His
Righteousness, in His Word, unto our Souls, there is in the Word it self, a
sweet Rain from Heaven falling upon us. We shall soon make the Similitude very
apparent. For, Does the Rain make the Earth Fruitful? O our Gospellized People,
We hope, we hope, you can say, That you find the Word of your SAVIOR do so.
The Rain, Does it Comfort and Refresh the Earth? Doubtless, many of you can
bring in this Testimony for the Word of your SAVIOR, Lord, By this thou have
Quickened me! But then, The Righteousness, which our SAVIOR has to bestow upon
them, who attend upon His Word for it, This also may be compared unto the Rain,
and the Comparison is a very Apt one. Shall we say? None but GOD can give the
Rain. We are so taught of GOD; Jer. XIV. 22. Can the Heavens give Showers? Art
not thou He, O Lord our GOD? Therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou have
made all these things. All Other Causes o^ the Rain, are but Second Causes.
This is very sure; None but GOD can give Righteousness unto us. It Is, The
Righteousness of GOD. If our SAVIOR had not been GOD as well as Man, He could
never have brought in for us, that Everlasting Righteousness, wherein we may
appear before GOD. And none but an Almighty GOD could ever do for us, those
Things, which are done when Righteousness is conveyed unto us. Truly, it is a
Constellation of Miracles! When a Sinner is made Righteous, the Blind sees, the
Lame walks, the Dead comes to Life; Stone is turned into Flesh; a Wolf is
changed into a Lamb. The Holy SPIRIT, who does these things, -- O Lord, Thou
art Great, and thou do wondrous Things, and thou art GOD alone. Again; The
Necessity of the Rain; How feelingly is This confessed with us? A Drought soon
brings us to those Ejulations; Joel I. 19, 20. O Lord, -- The Fire has
devoured the Pastures of the Wilderness, and the Flame has burnt all the Trees
of the Field: The Beasts of the Field cry also unto thee. But then, the
Necessity of Righteousness is nothing short of That. Soul, Necessity is laid
upon thee, to obtain the Righteousness of thy SAVIOR, and woe unto thee if thou
do it not. There is a Fire that will devour thee, and a Flame that will burn
thee up, if thou be a Stranger to it. Once more; The Excellency of the Rain;
Who once ever disputed this? It Is elegantly descanted on; Psalm. LXV. 9, 10, 11.
Thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it; thou greatly enrichest it with the
River of GOD, which is full of Water; -- Thou make it soft with Showers; Thou
crownest the Year with thy Goodness, and thy Paths drop Fatness. But the
Excellency of Righteousness is yet more to be accounted of. Soul, Possessing
the Righteousness of thy SAVIOR, thou have what makes thee more Excellent than
thy Neighbor. GOD visits thee; thou art greatly Enriched with the River of
GOD. He Crowns thee with His Goodness, and His Paths drop Fatness upon thee.

In fine; What remains is This. O you that follow after Righteousness. PRAYER,
PRAYER, to GOD your SAVIOR for it; This is the Grand Method of your seeking
for a Rain of Righteousness. The Cry of a perishing Sinner, and a Soul gasping
like the parched Earth; -- O my GOD and my SAVIOR, Let thy Righteousness be
Rained upon me from above! -- May that Cry go up this Day from every one of us
all; and pierce the Clouds, reach the Heavens! No one ever comes into the
Righteousness of GOD, but here is the First of his Motions toward it, Behold,
He prays. Of the genuine Christian we read, Psalm. XXIV. 5, 6. He shall receive
Righteousness from the GOD of hu Salvation; This is the Generation of them that
seek Him. Christian, When thy SAVIOR is going to make thee Righteous, He will
bring thee into the Generation of them that seek Him.

Yea, but Remember, This is to be done in the Proper Time for it; even, when,
It is Time to seek the Lord.

Indeed, Every Day we are to take our Time for the seeking of GOD. Every Day
it is to be done in fit Retrements; Every Day it is to be done with our
D^mesticks. A Black Day it is, wherein GOD has not been sought unto. But then,
The Lord's Day; This, be sure, is a most proper Time for this Work. It Is the Day
of Rain. The Clouds which drop down Righteousness, are on that Day hovering
over the Assemblies of Zion. It Is Now, that the SPIRIT of GOD sollicits us; Take
This Time, O Soul far from Righteousness. Be not Stout-hearted. Fall down
before thy SAVIOR. Humbly look to Him, and beg of Him; for a Rain of
Righteousness upon thee. Verily, Millions of Souls, have on This Day, found a
Rain of Righteousness on them, from a SAVIOR sought unto!

There is yet one thing more to be said. The present Time is of all the most
proper Time. We must be so persuaded; 2 Cor. VI. 2. Behold, Now is the
Acceptable Time. Languishing Soul, Thy SAVIOR stands ready with His
Righteousness. He makes a Tender of His Righteousness. He says, Ask and it
shall be given thee. Thou have no Assurance of any but the present Time, to
accept the Tender: It Is thy only Time. Alas, What Multitudes fall short of
Righteousness and Salvation, because they let slip their only Time. Losing the
present Time, they lose all their Time, and lose their Souls. They would not
seasonably Worship the King, the Lord of Hosts; Even upon them there shall be
no Rain; This shall be their Punishment, says the Lord of Hosts.

Was it possible for me to say this, without annexing a most solemn Admonition
unto our Young People? Children, Be you admonished of This. The Time of Youth,
is the most proper Time in the World, for you to seek unto your SAVIOR, for a
Rain of His Righteousness upon you. You will never see such another Time. You
Read, [For, I hope, you every Day Read in the Book, which tells you of him,
even, the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make Children wise unto
Salvation!] of one, of whom it is related, While he was yet Young, he began to
seek after GOD. GOD brought that Young Man into His Righteousness, and made him
one of the Best Men in the World. I advise you to think on those two Passages,
in the Holy Scriptures. First, a pious Father laid that Charge upon a Son; 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 9. My Son, serve the GOD of thy Father; If thou seek Him, He
will be found of thee. The Devout Son kept in his Mind that Charge of his
Father. Anon, with an Eye to it, he wrote that strain of Wisdom, Prove. VIII. 17
They that seek me early, shall find me.

My Son, Mind the Charge GOD now laid upon thee.

But we will now take into our consideration, the Terrible Judgment in the
Literal sense of it. And what is now to be observed, is; That when the Glorious
GOD commands the Natural Clouds to Distill no Rains upon a Land, His Judgment
upon the Land should have a serious Notice taken of it.

It is what these Remarks are to be made upon.

I. The Clouds are Created by GOD, and when they distill Rains, it is because
they are commanded by Him to do it. The Philosophy of the Clouds and their
distilled Rains, is not here to be enlarged upon. It Is enough to say, The
Philosopher will tell you, That a Cloud is a Collection of little, but concave,
Globules, which therefore ascend unto that Height, wherein they are of equal
Weight with the Air; where they remain suspended, until by a Motion in the Air,
they are Broken, and so come down in drops, that make our Mists or Showers. But
it is the Religion of these Watery Meteors, with which we are now to be
entertained. Reason tells us, That there is a GOD of Infinite Power and Wisdom
and Goodness, who is the Creator of the World. These parts of the World then
must needs be the Creatures of that Glorious GOD. But let us hear what
Scripture teaches us concerning it.

The Book of GOD and of Truth, has taught us, That the Clouds are the Creatures
of GOD. So we read; Joh. XXVI. 8. He binds up the Waters in His Thick Clouds,
and the Cloud is not rent under them. So we read; Job XXXVII. 15. GOD causes
the Light of His Cloud to shine. The Clouds are therefore called, The Chariots
of GOD, and, The Chambers of GOD; and, The Treasures of GOD; and the Stories
which are built by GOD. Of our GOD we read; Psalm. CXLVII. 8. GOD covers the
Heavens with Clouds; and prepares Rain for the Earth. The Pagans called their
Jupiter, by the Name of Nubicoga; He that Orders the Clouds. We challenge the
Name for our JEHOVAH; Of whom we read, He commands the Clouds from Above.

And then, This Book of His, has taught us, That the Rains too are the
Creatures of GOD. So we read; Job V. 10. GOD gives Rain upon the Earth, and
sends Waters upon the Field. So we read; Job XXXVI. 27, 28. GOD makes small
the drops of Water, they pour down Rain according to the Vapor thereof: Which
the Clouds do drop, and distill upon Man abundantly. We are accordingly
informed, That GOD is the Father of the Rain; and, That GOD makes a Decree for
the Rain. When the Rain falls, there comes to pass that thing; Psalm. LXV. 9,
10. Lord, Thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it; Thou waterest the Ridges
thereof abundantly, Thou settlest the Furrows thereef: Thou make it soft with
Showers. We forget the Original of the Rain, if we don't look above the Region,
from which it falls upon us; and if we are Strangers to those Terms; Lord, It
is Thou that causest the Rain to fall upon thy Land. We ought then Religiously
to acknowledge the Providence of the Glorious GOD, in His disposing of the
Clouds and of the Rains. Behold the Distribution of the Clouds and of the
Rains, in such agreeable Proportions, as to answer the Necessities of the
World, and say, What a sensible Providence of the Glorious GOD! Man, Do thou
know the Ballancings of the Clouds? They are the Wondrous Works of a GOD who is
perfect in Knowledge. Behold the gentle and softly way, in which the Clouds do
drop down the Rains; not in destructive Torrents! And again say, What a
sensible Providence of a Glorious GOD! It is our GOD who does make small the
drops of Water, and pours down Rain according to the Vapor thereof. He that
owns not the Hand of GOD in the Clouds and the Rains, deserves to be struck
with something else, that the Clouds are sometimes charged withal; deserves to
see the Clouds darting down upon him their Thunderbolts!

II. When GOD commands the Clouds, to distill no Rains, it is a Judgment, that
Men should be affected withal. A long want of Clouds and Rains, or, the
promising Appearance of Clouds from time to time going over without Rain; This
is a very affecting Judgment of Heaven upon a sinful World. A DROUGHT is a sore
Judgment of GOD!

It is a Judgment that is often threatened among the Effects of the Divine
Displeasure: A Judgment of great Note among the Threatenings of GOD. Thus you
read, Lev. XXVI. 19. I will punish you, and I will make your Heavens as Iron,
and your Earth at Brass. Thus you read; Deuteronomy. XI. 17. The Lord Wrath kindled
against you, and He shut up the Heaven that there be no Rain.

Indeed, a Drought is a Plague, wherein a check is given to the Ordinary Course
of Nature. It Is the Hand of GOD that gives the Check; the Hand of an angry GOD.
The Burning Anger of GOD is discovered in it. The Lord GOD calls to contend by
Fire, in the Judgment. There is the Indignation of GOD, proclaimed against a
Land, when the Land is not Rained upon. The Great GOD was offended; And then
came this Judgment; Hag. I. 11. I called for a Drought upon the Land, and upon
that which the Ground brings forth, and upon Men, and upon Cattle.

But that in which a Drought proves a fearful Plague, is, The Consequence of
it. A Scarcity follows: Yea, the Famine; Than which, what is there more to be
trembled at? Perhaps Drink for Man and Beast, may grow scarce, by a Drought
going on to Extremity. Be sure, Food will do so. Thus we read; Jer. XIV. 3, 4.
Their Nobles have sent their little ones to the Waters, they came to the Pits,
they found no Water; they returned with their Vessels empty; they were ashamed
and confounded; and covered their Heads: Because the Ground is chapt, for there
was no Rain in the Earth, the Plowmen were ashamed. Thus we read; Amos IV. 7,
8. I have witholden the Rain from you, when there were yet three months to the
Harvest; and I caused it to rain upon one City, and I caused it not to rain
upon another City: One piece was rained upon; and the piece whereupon it rained
not, withered. -- So two or three Cities wandered unto one City to drink Water;
but they were not satisfied. The Vegetable World cannot subsist, except the
Showers of Heaven saturate it. The Showers of Heaven are needful, as a moist
Vehicle, to carry along with them that Nourishment which the Plants do subsist
upon. All Plan^s must languish and wither, if they have not these Waters to
bring into them the Sap, which they owe their Growth unto. But, if the
V^getables of the World be destroyed, the Animals will soon be so too. The
Fruits of the Earth, depend on the Showers of Heaven. All Animals do live on
the Fruits of the Earth, or on those Animals which do live on these Fruits. We
read; Job XXXVIII 26, 27. He causes it to rain on the Earth, -- to satisfy the
desolate and waste Ground, and to cause the Bud of the tend^r He^b to spring
forth. Hence, when a Drought is parching our Fields, there is this awful Voice
of GOD unto us in it; I will not feed you says the Lord! But, the Famine! A
Judgment which all Faces may gather Paleness at the very Mention of! To die of
the Famine: How Grievous a Death! I will show you how it looks; Lam. V. 10 Our
Skin was black like an Oven, because of the terrible F^min^!

But let us make a sew brief Inferences, from what has been thus Remarked unto
us.

First. When the Clouds do distill Rains upon us, our Thankful Praises to the
Glorious GOD are called for. My Brethren, Let our Praises go up in a greater
Plenty than any Vapors, to the GOD of all Grace, who now opens and empties the
Bottles of Heaven upon us. We read; Act XIV. 17. He left not Himself without a
Witness, in that He did us Good, and gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful
Seasons filling our Hearts with Food and Gladness. The Showers of Heaven then
bespeak from us these Thankful Confessions; Great GOD; Thou art a good GOD! Oh!
How much ought we to love and serve the GOD, who does good unto us, in giving
us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons! Verily, The Showers are worse thrown
away, than those that fall upon the Rocks, if they produce not such
Consequences from us.

But, Secondly. When the Clouds refuse to distill Rains upon us, the Glorious
GOD requires the Dispositions of Repentance from us. It is GOD who commands the
Clouds to distill no Rains upon us, when we undergo such a Calamity. It becomes
us now, with Repenting Minds, humbly to enquire, what Controversy the Holy One
may have with us, in such a Calamity? And, what Iniquity it may be, that such a
Punishment is inflicted for? It Is true; No People under the New Testament are
under such a Covenant for External Prosperity, upon Obedience to the Laws of
GOD, as the Israelitish Nation were, under the Mosaic Dispensation. The Blessed
GOD has not promised unto any People now, That if they will not scandalously
Break His Covenant, they shall see no Unfruitful Seasons. People may have the
Showers of Heaven, and other such Blessings denied unto them, and be brought
low through Oppression Affliction and Sorrow; And yet be able to say, All this is
come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in
thy Covenant. We see it, at this very Day. The People that have least of all
paid respect unto the Covenant of GOD, yet have not the fewest Showers of
Heaven upon them. Nevertheless, when Showers are witheld, it is frequently, it
is commonly, a Punishment upon a Land, for having sinned grievously when
Water-springs are turned into Dry-ground, and a Fruitful Land into Barrenness,
it is usually, for the Wickedness of those that dwell therein. It Is, as we
read; Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 15, 23, 24. If thou will not hearken unto the Voice of the
Lord thy GOD, Thy Heaven that is over thy head shall be Brass, and the Earth
that is under thee shall be Iron; The Lord shall make the Rain of thy Land
Powder and Dust. Wherefore, under such Fiery Rebukes of our GOD, we should
Loathe and Judge our selves for our Miscarriages. Of these, there is especially
One, that is a very Comprehensive One; That is to say, Our Unfruitfulness, our
Unfruitfulness! How Pertinently, but how Penitently, may this Reflection be
made on this Occasion! Lord, We bring forth little good Fruit of the
Cultivations which thou do employ upon us. How fitly, how justly, how wisely,
are an Unfruitful People punished with Unfruitful Seasons! Methinks, I overhear
the Angel of the Waters making his Acclamations; Thou art Righteous, O Lord,
because thou have judged so! It becomes us to find out our Miscarriages; to
Bewail them, to Reform them; and Repair unto the great Sacrifice of our SAVIOR
for the Pardon of them. Syrs, Our Main Work at such a time, is, To seek
Reconciliation with GOD. Oh! For Good Terms with the Great KING, from whose
Country it is, that our Country is nourished!

Thirdly. When we would have the Clouds to distill Rains upon us, what shall we
do, what can we do, but look up to the Glorious GOD for the supply of what is
wanting unto us? Both the Former Rain and the Latter Rain is that for which our
Glorious GOD is to be looked unto: The Former Rain, to soften the Ground before
the Sowing of the Seed; The Matter Rain, by which the Corn in the Blade is
brought on to Earing and Harvest. We have a Promise to plead for it, Isa. XXX.
23. He shall give the Rain of [or, for] thy Seed, that thou shall sow the
Ground withal, and Bread of the Increase of the Earth, and it shall be fat and
plenteous. Our GOD can command the Clouds, to distill what Rains He pleases upon
us. Our Main concern is with a GOD, who commands Deliverances.

This is the Direction which our GOD has given us; Zech. X. 1. Ask ye of the
Lord Rain in the time of the latter Rain; so the Lord shall make bright Clouds,
and give them Showers of Rain, to every one Grass in the Field. And in
pursuance of this Direction, there is a Notable Thing, which I am to mind you
of. In the Covenant which our Gracious GOD, after the Flood, made with our
Patriarch Noah, who was to Comfort us concerning our Toil, and the Work of our
Hands, because of the Ground which the Lord had cursed; there is a Promise of
Regular Seasons, [Perhaps better than what were before the Flood;] wherein
Seasonable Rains are comprehended. It may be partly with relation to that
Covenant, that we read; Psalm. XXXVI. 5. Thy Mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens;
they Faithfulness reaches to the CLOUDS. When we want Rain, we should do well
in our Supplications to plead that COVENANT of our GOD. It may be, if it were
more in Use with us, to plead that COVENANT, the Faithfulness of our GOD, would
bei^n the CLOUDS more displayed before us. My Friends, Our Invitations and our
Excitations, to our Supplications, are Numberless. Among these, we have what is
very cogent and pungent, when it pleases the Holy One, to send a severe Drought
upon us. How Wicked, and how Woeful, are the Prayerless, at such a Time, when
our GOD exhibits Himself as a Consuming Fire unto us! O Prayerless ones, what a
Share have you in procuring the Desolation, whibh we are in danger of, while
you will do nothing for the preventing of it? Our Business at such a Time, is,
To look above the Clouds, unto a Merciful GOD, who Numbers the Clouds in
Wisdom, and who can stay the Bottles of Heaven. Of this GOD, we are told; He is
One, whose Faithfulness reaches to the Clouds. It may be, a GOD of such
Faithfulness, will deal with us, according to the Word on which he has caused
us to hope; Even, that Word; If I shut up Heaven, that there be no Rain, and my
People humble themselves, and pray and seek my Face, and turn from their wicked
Ways, Then will I hear from Heaven, and heal their Land. We must come this Day
to that Resolution; Jer. XIV. 22. Are there any among the Vanities of the
Gentiles, that can cause Rain? Or can the Heavens give Showers? Art not thou
He, O Lord our GOD? Therefore we will wait upon thee: For thou have made all
these things. It was demanded of old, Can thou lift up thy Voice to the
Clouds, that abundance of Waters may cover thee? No; Let us Lift up our Voice
to the GOD, who commands the Clouds. It Is He alone who can send abundance of
Waters from thence upon us. He will not so hide Himself in a Cloud, that our
Prayer shall not pass through it, and come unto Him.

I have done, The Sermon of this Day, comes to you as one of the Clouds, from
whence the Rains of Heaven have been distilling upon you. But, Clouds
distilling of Rains often bring Thunder with them. The Showers of this Day
shall go off in Thunder and Lightning. We shall conclude with a COROLLARY, that
shall carry Lightning and Thunder in it.

Surely, The Wicked that shall be turned into Hell, and all they that forget
GOD, must see very direful Circumstances. Miserable they, on whom GOD Commands
the Clouds to distill no Rains. But, Oh! how miserable they, who go down to the
Fires that Burn in the Foundations of the Mountains! My Neighbors, If any of
you Die in your Sins, you go to a place, where GOD Commands the Clouds to distill
no Rains upon the Miserables. Alas, your Lot must be in such an horrid Land as
That; Isa. XXXIV. 9, 10. The Streams thereof shall be turned into Pitch, and
the Dust thereof into Brimstone, and the Land thereof shall become burning
Pitch; It shall not be quenched Night nor Day, the Smoke thereof shall go up
forever. In that place, GOD from His Clouds, being Terrible from his Holy
places, only sends down Hail stones and Coals of Fire, and burning
Thunderbolts. In that place, the Tormented in vain wish for a Drop of Water to
cool their Anguish. There, the Wicked are made as a Fiery Oven, by the Hot
Anger of GOD; And the Smoke of their Torment ascends forever and ever.

Oh! Be persuaded, Immediately to get into the Peace of GOD; Immediately to
flee from the Wrath to come; Immediately to lay hold on the JESUS, who delivers
from it. Be persuaded, Knowing the Terror of the Lord!

The RAIN gasped for.
O Father of the Rain, Look down
Upon us from on high;
If thy Land be not Rained upon,
What Lives on it will Die.
Lord of the Clouds; In thee we hope;
Thine all the Bottels are;
Except Thou open them, a Drop
will not fall upon us here.
If thou make Heaven as Brass, and burn
From thence the groaning Field,
Thy Earth will soon to Iron turn,
And no Production yield.
O Let thy Seasonable Rain
Drop Fatness on our Soil;
And grant to most unworthy Man
The Harvest of his Toil.
But, O my SAVIOR, in a Shower
Of Righteousness descend:
Gifts on me, with thy SPIRIT pour;
And Life that cannot End.
Yea, come upon a World forlorn,
And with a Quickening Dew,
Make thou Mankind, of Water born,
Though Dead, their Life Renew.
In the mean time, thy Ministers,
As Clouds, how Fat and Bright!
May they upon Salvations Heirs
Distill Things Good and Right.
Desector. The GRASS before the MOWER.
Psalm. XXXVII. 2. They shall soon be cut down as the Grass.


OF whom speaks the Psalmist This? Those whom the SPIRIT of GOD calls, Evil
Doers, and, Workers of Iniquity, are more distinguishingly and immediately
referred unto. But it is the Common Lot of Mankind, wherein such have their
Share, that is thus described unto us. Even Good Livers, They also who do no
Iniquity, have their Share in it. But it is mentioned on this Occasion. Besides
and beyond the more Private Interpretation of the Psalm, we are to apprehend
the Song of Zion before us, as consisting of proper Instructions for the Holy
People under the Reign of Antichrist, who holds Pres^ity to be a Mark of the
True Church. We find here foretold the Ruin of Antichrist, in a Tremendous
Conflagration, wherein the Enemies of GOD shall be consumed as the Fat of
Lambs; into Smoke they shall consume away: And we find foretold, the Bright
Prosperity of the Holy People, after the wicked one shall be destroyed by the
Brightness of the coming of the Lord. There is a Passage of the Apochrypha, in
which the Son of Syrach, has given us the Sum of the Psalm now before us,
wherein we enjoy a Rich Portion of our Canonical Scripture. That Passage is
this; A patient Man will bear a long time, and afterward Joy shall spring up
unto him In the wretched Ethics taught by the Adored Aristotle, whom yet we
may too justly call, a A great Apostle of Satan, it is commended as a Virtue,
To have an Indignation at the Prosperity of Unworthy Men. This Aristotelean
Virtue is here Cens^red, Rebuked, forbidden, as a Distemper. Fret not thy self
because of Evil doers, neither be thou Envious against the workers of Iniquity:
Let not the Prosperity of wicked People be any Disturbance to thee. There is
this Reason why we should not be disturbed at it; They shall soon be cut down
as the Grass: It will be but a short-lived Prosperity. And yet the difference
between the Godly and wicked, lies not in the Resemblance which the moveable
Grass bears to their Condition. So far the Rod of the wicked is but in the Lot
of the Righteous. They are both of them soon cut down as the Grass, in the
quick Advances of Mortality. But herein they differ. When the Godly are cut
down as the Grass, '^is that they may be lodged in the House of GOD; Yea, that
our SAVIOR may fill His Hand with them. When the wicked are cut down as the
Grass, it is that they may be cast into the Oven, and thrown into the devouring
Fire.

All that we shall here consider, is, The Common Lot of Mankind; For This is
but what Mankind in general is to look for.

The DOCTRINE with which we are now to be Instructed, but Oh! that as much
Affected! -- is This.

To be soon cut down as the Grass; This is a Condition, which Mankind is not a
Stranger to.

I. If all the Children of Men, yea, the most Glorious of them, and in all
their Glory, be compared unto the Grass of the Field, it is a Metaphor, which
the Oracles of our GOD have consecrated. As is the Grass of the Earth, even
such is Man upon the Earth. It was the Song of the Ancient Lamentations; Psalm.
CIII. 15. As for Man, his Days are as Grass; As a Flower of the Field, so he
flourishes. It continues the perpetual Note, and Cause of our Lamentations. I
have a Commission to speak at this rate; Isa. XL. 6. The Voice said, Cry. And
he said, What shall I cry? All Flesh is Grass; and all the Goodliness thereof
as the Flower of the Field. Man, Be thy Goodliness what it will, thou art but a
Leaf of Grass after all: At thy very best, no better than an Honey-suckle. To
justify this Elegant, Expressive, Instructive Metaphor, and the Denomination of
Grass like Man, let us call to Mind his Original. If the Grass do spring out of
the Earth, it is no other than what we read of Man; The Lord GOD formed Man of
the Dust of the Earth. Man, Thou have thy Root in the Earth. I wish thy Heart
may not be too much there; too firmly rooted there. Thy Foundation is in the
Dust. And, as the Grass cant't Rise and Thrive and Live, without Influences
from Above, no more can thou. There must be Dews and Shines from Heaven upon
thee, else thou will come to nothing. In GOD we Live and Move and have our
Being. The Grass don't come to Maturity at once. Nor does Man. It Is by Degrees,
that he comes to what is expected from him. In fine, The Fate of the Grass,
This, O Man, will be thy Fate also. We are taught of GOD so to speak; Jam. J.
10. As the Flow^e of the Grass, he shall pass away. It Is what we see every Day
before our Eyes.

But there is, methinks, one agreeable Improvement, which we may make of this
Thought, before we part with it. Since in our Life we are like the Grass, I
pray, why may we not Live like the Grass? Our Gospellized People, You enjoy the
Advantages of the Spring in the Gospel; you have the Shines and the Showers of
Heaven upon you. Oh! That you may now sprout, and grow, like the Herbage of a
Field which the Lord has blessed. Be not neither as Christians that are just
got out of the Earth, but sprout and grow up toward Heaven as far as you can:
And so, keep waiting all the Days of your appointed Time, until it shall please
GOD that the Sith shall come. For,

II. All the Children of Men are liable to the Stroke of Death; Every Leaf of
this Grass must be cut down by the Sith of Death: No Remedy nor Escaping! It
is an old Question, and every Man may from the Experience of all Mankind, give
a plain and a ^hort Answer to it: Psalm. LXXXIX. 48. What (...) is he that
lives, and shall not see Death? It Is in the Quality of a Mower, with an
I^resistible Sith in his Hand, that the King of Terrors appears unto him. It Is
he, who may truly challenge the Title of, The Catholic King. And as David once
dealt with the Geshurites, He smote the Land, and left neither Man nor Woman
alive; so does this Mower deal with all Mankind; He smites the Land; He carries
his Mortal Sith over the Face of it. He cuts down all before him, until not
one spire of Grass is left standing in the Field. The Matter, and the Reason of
the Matter, has by the Holy SPIRIT of GOD been thus declared unto us; Romans V.
12. By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed
upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Sin, Sin, put the Sith into the Hand
of the Mower; and has given the Edge unto the Sith: Hence, it is now come to
pass, Death as one may say, like Caesar, taxes all the World, and will not
spare even Caesar himself. As no Poverty will shelter the meanest, so no
Dignity will protect the Highest, from the cutting, stroke of the Sith. Of the
Heap fallen before the Sith, we read; Job. III. 19. The Small and Great are
there. A Lazarus feels the stroke; and so does a Nebuchadnezzar. We read, Psalm.
XLIX. 10. Wise Men Die, and so does the Fool. A Solomon feels the stroke; and so
does a Rehoboam. In the most Populous and Splendid City of Europe, and, I
suppose, of the World, there are by Computation, almost a Million, of those
whom we take leave to call, Spires of Grass. In a very little while, they will
be all cut down as the Grass; Not one of them left standing in the World. In
the English Nation, there are by Computation, almost Eight Millions of these
poor Spires of Grass. In a very little while, they will be all cut down as the
Grass; not one of them left standing in the World. But must not the Grass all
over the World, be used like the English Grass? They Compute for near Five
Hundred Millions of these frail Spires of Grass appearing on the whole Globe at
this time. In a very little while, they will be all cut down as the Grass; Not
one of them left standing in the World. We read; Eccl. VII. 2. This is the End
of all Men, and the Living will lay it to his Heart. Oh! That they would do so!
Sorry Leaf of Grass; No Corner of the Field thou stand in, will be a
privileged Place where the Arrest of Death cannot come upon thee; and where
the Sith cannot reach thee! Will Holiness render thee Invulnerable? No; Moses
is cut down. Will Courage? No; David is cut down. Will Vigor? No; Sampson is
cut down. Will Grandeur? No; Abashuerus is cut down. Will the Best Qualities
imaginable repel and retund the Sith? No; As accomplished a Man as Paul: must
have a Time of departune; and feel the Sith in the form of an Axe applied for
his Excision. They too whose Profession it is to keep others Alive, are not
suffered to continue by reason of Death. One Generation passes away, by the
Sith doing its Office upon it; and another Generation comes; but This also
still finds the Sith ready for it. A Sith, a Sith is sharpened, and also
furbished: It is shorpened to make a fore slaughter; and it shall carry all
before it.

But as we read, As many as came to the place where Aschel fell down and died,
stood still, so coming to such a vast Heap of Mown Grass, and seeing so many
lie dead. at this place, I cannot but stand still, and make a Pause. I can go no
further, till I have tendered a Counsil, that will carry a Satyr in it. The
very Tender of such a Counsil, is a Satyr upon the Spires of Grass, that seem
to have as little Sense as the Turfs of Earth, and the Clods of the Valley,
which the Grass grows upon. It Is this; O Man, Believe thine own Death, and
expect the Reach of the Sith unto thee. Oh! That we were come once to Realize
this thing; I am one of those whom the Sith of Death will cut down as the
Grass. This is a very strange thing! The most Mysterious Point in all the
Glorious Gospel of the Blessed GOD, has not more cause, than this Truth which
lies every Day before our Eyes, to complain, Lord, who has believed it! Though
we see that Word every Day fulfilled before our Eves; Heb. IX. 27. It is
appointed unto Men once to die: Yet how many do live, as if they were never to
die! The Epidemical Neglect of making due Provision for a Good State after
Death, it is a Transgression that says in my Heart, There is no fear of the
Sith before their Eyes. Men will grant it in the general Assertion, All Men
are to die. But many things ^ook, as if many of us did not grant it in the
particular Application; I am the Man that am quickly to die. Certainly, it
becomes us to say; Job XXX. 23. I know that thou will bring me to Death, and to
the House appointed for all the living. Oh! Let us bring this Consi^tion home
to our selves. Yea, Die daily; And, let us do those things, which will be sound
the Things of our Peace in the Day of our Death! Verily. There is no Wisdom
equal unto This!

III. Uncertain the Time when the Mower will come; The Offspring of the Earth,
is not always of one Age and of one Bulk, when the Mower applies the Sith unto
it. Old Jsaac was not the only Person, who may say, with him; Genesis XXVII. 2. I
know not the Day of my Death. All the Spires of Grass, that are Cut down, are
not of an equal Growth; but the stroke of Death is given with a Promiscuons
Excision among them. And, Mista Senum et Juvenum densantur Funera. The Sith
not only comes upon a Methuselah; But it comes upon an Abijah too; And the
Child died. We read of some; Job. XXXVI 14. They Die in Youth. How often has the
Report been made, since the Days of the Sons of Job, The Young Men are Dead! We
read of Children Dying. Read of such things! Yea, we see them every Day. The
Zareptaness, and the Shunamitess, are not the only ones whose Children have
died. It is a passage; Cant. II. 12. The Flowers appear on the Earth; the Time
of singing is come. It may be rendered, The Time of Cutting is come. The Flowers
of the Grass do no fooner appear, but the Time of Cutting presently comes upon
them. The Ccoming forth of Man, is quickly followed with his Cutting down. It
is a frequent saying, There are Skulls of all sizes in Golgotha We are warned
concerning the Time when the Sith is to come into its Operation; Eccl. IX. 12.
Ma^knoweth not his Time. They that have made Nice Remarks on Bills of
Mortality, will tell you; That one half of those that are Born, don't live
Seventeen Years; That about Forty of an Hundred are found alive at Sixteen
Years; That but Ten out of an Hundred, at Forty-Six; but Six, at Fifty-Six; but
Three, at Sixty-Six; but One, at Seventy-Six. When GOD pronounced the Sentence
of Death upon Mankind, it ran so; Genesis III. 19. Until thou return unto the
Ground. It is a Descant which one of the Ancients made upon it; He does not
say, Until thou have passed through so many Years; but he speaks Indeterminately,
Until the Time come; A Time which I will keep Uncertain to thee, when it will
come. Truly about the Execution which the Sith of Death is to do upon us, We
must say, Of that Day and Hour knows no Man. The Mower comes at that rate;
Luke XII. 40. At an Hour when ye think not.

Here again, how can I do any other than make a stop; and make it a Season to
bring what will always be a Word in Season? It will here be a seasonable
Admonition; The Uncertainty of Death should quicken us to labor for and Hasten
to, a Certainty, That it will go well with us when we Die? GOD forbid, That any
Leaf of Grass, the smallest as well as the largest, the Youngest as well as the
Oldest, should reckon themselves excused from that Grand Concern, A serious
Preparation for Death. My Friends, Embrace an offered SAVIOR in all his
Offices. Accept the Covenant of Life, with all its Proposals. Be Importunate
with the GOD of all Grace, for a sanctifying Work of his Grace upon you;
unpacified until you find in yourselves the comfortable Marks of a SOUL in good
Terms with Heaven. This must be done before you feel the Sith; Undone, undone
are you, if you Die before this be done. Mind, I beseech you, what comes now to
you from the Mouth of the Glorious GOD. If the Sith find you unprepared, and
strike you, while you are yet in your Sins. your Doom will be That; Psalm. XCII
7. When the wicked spring as the Grass, it is that they shall be destroyed
forever. Verily, The Sith will consign you over, to a Destruction from GOD,
which, why, why is it no more of a Terror to you! Oh! Be able to say, with him,
O Lord, I thought on my Ways and I turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies; I made
Haste, and I delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

IV. When the Children of Men who are the Children of Death, are taken away
with a stroke, and the Mortal Sith cuts us down as the Grass, it is not without
something of a Violence, that the stroke does what it comes for. This
Expression, They shall be cut down; denotes a Violence in what is done; It Is
Violently done. First, The Death which we call Violent, as it is opposed unto
Natural; This is no rare thing among the Prisoners of the Earth. It Is no rare
thing to Die by Casualties, or to Die by Adversaries. To Die like them on whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, or to Die like them whose Blood Pilate sacrificed
Sometimes the Sith strikes with a Damage that happens Accidentally. Sometimes
with a Mischief that is done Intentionally. We read of some whom the Sith
handles at that rate, Job. XXI. 13. In a Moment they go down to the Grave. Many
a Death is brought by External Occurrences; by Invasions from abroad; So Died
the First Man that ever died; While others may with Hezekiah say, He will cut
me off with pining Sickness. But then, In the Death whice is most Natural,
there is yet a Violence done to Nature. To Die, is a thing Against Nature. To Die
willingly, is a thing Above Nature. Death is a Dissolution which Nature has an
Horror of. Nature shrinks before the Sith which threatens to Cut us down. On
the Approach of the Sith we cry out, Psalm. XXXIX. 13. O spare me, that I may
recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more. Death appears as our
Enemy; An Enemy, that robs us of all our worldly Possessions; An Enemy that
makes painful Assaults without ceasing upon us; An Enemy, which nothing but our
Hearts-Blood will satisfy. Thou have found us, O our Enemy?

This Proposition also shall not be dismissed, without a Pertinent and
Important Admonition. Can we tell of no way so far to cure our Aversion for
Death, as to take away the Violence of the stroke, which the Sith must give
unto us? Yes; It may be so, that though our Death come ever so Violently, yet it
may come Acceptably, and we may bear the Cutting as indeed an Acceptable
kindness of GOD unto us. There was one who could say; Phil. I. 21. To me to Die
is Gain. It Is no wonder that it then follows; I desire to be dissolved. O you
that are going the Way of all the Earth, Hearken to me. Become Reconciled unto
GOD, and you will easiy become Reconciled unto Death. Get a well-grounded
Assurance of a Blessedness after Death, and you may overcome all your Antipathy
unto Death. Let your Conduct be such, that you need not be ashamed to live, and
you need not be Afraid to die. Lay hold on a Glorious CHRIST, in His Gospel
declaring Himself willing to be your Life and your All. If a CHRIST be your
Friend, then your Death will be your Friend. If a CHRIST be yours, then O Rich
Heirs of GOD, it may be said unto you; 1. Cor. III. 21, 22. All things are
yours; Even Death it self is yours. The SAVIOR who has made a Conquest of
Death, may give you a Triumph over it: The SAVIOR, out of whose Hands no Death
can pull you: The SAVIOR, who by suffering of it Himself, has taken away the
Sting of Death. Oh! Commit your selves into His Hands; and say, Lord, I am
thine, save me. Then, be no longer so loath to die. Especially, They that have
stood a long while in the Field; stood until they are coming to the Grave in a
full Age, as a shock of Corn comes in the season thereof; and can sing, Lord,
Now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace. My Brethren, Though Death be a
Violent sort of a Thing, yet, Oh! May our Death, be exceeding Voluntary! Let us
entertain the Stroke of the Sith, Easily, Readily, Cheerfully, with a most
amiable and admirable Resignation. Let us give an uncommon Welcome unto it.
Yea, Welcome, O Sith, coming to deliver me from the Hand of all mine Enemies,
and from the Hand of Sin! Welcome, O Killer, and yet, O Comforter! Welcome, O
Thou cutter of the Knot, upon the Dissolving of which I go to my Father. When
it is cut off I fly away to the sweet Mansions of my Fathers House. Oh!
Blessed, Blessed be my SAVIOR, who has made such an horrible thing as Death to
become so welcome to me, that in the dark Valley of the shadow of Death, I have
no more Horror of Darkness upon me!

V. The Stroke which brings our Death, may be a very sudden stroke; the Sith
which cuts down the Grass, may do it very suddenly, and with a quick Dispatch.
The Sith is not long adoing what it has to do; One Touch of it upon the Leaf,
and it goes down at once. It is a Case propounded; Number. VI. 9. If any Man die
very suddenly. How frequent a Case! Yea, any Man may do so. The greatest, the
strongest, the youngest may do so; and often does it. The Death of People may
be sudden, in this regard, that it surprises them, even when they fancied,
Goods laid up for many Years, and could perhaps impiously say of a Thing they
thought nothing of, I thought no more of it than of my dying Day: They are
surprised, with the Bow-string served upon them. They are engaged in a most
Eager Pursuit of This World; full of its Projections, full of its Amusements;
But, the Sith unexpectedly comes at them; and that Word is fulfilled upon
them; A Desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know of.
Yea, their Death may be sudden in regard of the quick Work it makes with them;
One Blow does it: They are gone on the sudden. They this Week make a lively,
perhaps, a Busy Appearance. The next Week they Disappear, and their place knows
them no more. Well one Day, Dead the next. Yea, Well one Hour, Dead the next.
So we read of some; GOD shall shoot at them with an Arrow, suddenly shall they
be wounded. They are talking, and walking, and working, and perhaps diverting
themselves; And within a few Minutes they are gone into Eternity. They go to
Bed well in the Evening, but there is a Midnight-Cry heard in the Family. They
go abroad well in the Morning. But some Wound, or Fall, or Pit brings a Night
before Sunset upon them. The Sith takes them, as the Hook does the Fish, or
the Shot the Fowl. So the Sons of Men are taken in an evil time, when it comes
suddenly upon them! There may be the Transcendent Mercy of a Gracious GOD in
such a Dispensation, to them that are Good, and the Upright in Heart. Some who
do not Fear Death, yet Fear Dying. Unto such the Sorrows of Death are abated,
by the Abbreviation of them. The Days of Tribulation are shortened unto the
Elect, and are presently over with them. They escape a Grievous Death, by not
having a Lingering one. There is an abatement of the Curse unto them, and they
run speedily and easily through the Shadow of Death, so that indeed it proves but
a Shadow of Death unto them. There may be also the Tremendous Vengeance of a
Righteous GOD in such a Dispensation, to them that walk in the Crooked Ways. It
is with them according to that Commination, The Anger of the Lord shall be
hindled against you, and shall destroy thee suddenly. They are so Destroyed,
that all Space to Repent is at once for ever taken from them; and they are
stripped of their slighted Opportunity to do what must be done, by all that
would be saved from the Devouring Fire, and the Everlasting Burnings. Of an
Ungodly Wretch, we read, The Lord will come upon him, in a Day when he looked
not for him, and in an Hour that he shall not be aware of. It Is to Ascertain a
dreadful Portion for them; that they are brought unto Desolation us in a
Moment. This is a thing which GOD often puts into the Portion of the wicked.
Their Desolation must come as a Whirlwind: It comes with the Rapidity of a
Whirlwind; but it is in His Wrath. Antichrist is not the only Son of Perdition
that must see the Fulfillment of that Prediction; When they say, Peace and
Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them.

Such a Quick Motion of the Sith, will render such an Admonition as This to be
infinitely Reasonable. It is not to be said, That a Man should Live every Day,
as if he knew it were to be the Day of his Death; But this must be said, We
should Live every Day, as not knowing, but that it may be the Day of our Death.
It was propounded among the Remarkables of the Christian Life; 2. Cor. VI. 9.
As Dying, and behold we live. How Remarkably would it befriend and bespeak and
strengthen a Religious Life; and how Remarkably would the Horrors of a sudden
Death be taken off; if we lived always as Dying, and as having a sudden stroke
of the Sith impending over us! When we Pray, Think, I may die suddenly, and
this may be the last Time of my calling upon GOD. When we Hear, Think, I may
die suddenly, and this may be the last Sermon that ever I spall be instructed
from. When the Sabbath arrives, Think, I may die suddenly, and be gone before
another Sabbath. And, when we Converse with our Friends, Think, I may die
suddenly, and this may be my last Conversation with them. Christian, So Number
thy Days, as to look for no Number of Days. This will apply thy Heart unto
Wisdom.

And now, upon the whole; There are some Lessons of PIETY, which, Oh! that they
may come upon us, with as much Efficacy, as they will with Pertinency!

I. Beware, O standers in the way of Unavoidable Death, Beware of those Things
that may Hasten the Stroke of Death, and bring the Sith before the Time upon
you. Death will come fast enough. It will soon cut you down as the Grass. The
Sith, and what follows unto the Ungodly, It slumbers not. But some Crimes will
bring it on sooner than the Course of Nature would ripen for it. We read, Eccl
VII 17. Be not overmuch Wicked: Why should thou die before thy Time?
Exceeding Sin, This will bring on Untimely Death. O Undutiful Children and
Servants; Do you Reform; and no longer persist in your Disobedient and
Refractory and Rebellious Behavior; Or else look that the Fifth Commandment
will bring on Anticipations of the Sith upon you; and forbid your Days being
Long in the Land. Let the Malignant Revilers of Good Men, and of them that are
Innocent and Industrious Instruments of Good in the World, Consider their Ways.
Methinks, The Twelfth and Thirteenth Verses of the Thirty fourth Psalm, should
stand like a Flaming Sword in their way, and make them stand in Awe, and not
Sin, in that way any more. Let all that use Dishonesty in their Dealings, also
Consider their Ways. While they make haste to be Rich, the Thing which is to
strip them of all their Ill-gotten Riches, does also make haste: And, He who
gets Riches, but not by Right, leaves them in the midst of his Days, and at his
end shall be a Fool. Rash Sinner, Do not by thy Sin call for the Sith; and
quicken the Pace of the Mower, that is upon his way unto thee.

II. Do presently, what you would certainly do, if you were sure to Die
presently; and leave nothing undone, which under the Stroke of the Sith you
will wish to have done. O Vain Mortal, for whom here is no abiding; What if the
Dead Warrant could be shown thee? This Year thou shall die; Or, A Month shall
devour thee. Would thou not presently go through a Process of Repentance;
Wherein thou will pass from Death to Life? Presently, Confess and Bewail thy
Sins, and plead the Blood of the Great Sacrifice for thy Pardon? Presently give
thy self up unto the Lord, and lay hold on the Covenant of GOD, and send up
vehement Petitions to the Glorious One to bestow a New Heart upon thee, and be
in Agonies until thou feel a New Biass on thy Soul, and the Love of GOD planted
in thee, as a Root, that shall prove a Tree of Life unto thee in the Paradise
above! Then, Let all this be done accordingly; be done immediately! The Advance
of the Sith requires that it be done, without any more ado. The Maxim is, To
make Hay while the Sun shines. While thou have the Benefit of the Sun shining
on thee in a Day of Grace, Oh! Do with thy Might, what thy Hand finds to do.
The Thoughts of a Dying Man, Oh! Come into them. They are the wisest Thoughts
that can inspire or direct the Living. Our Lord cured the Blindness of a Man
with putting of Clay upon his Eyes. If the Clay to which our Death will shortly
reduce us, were duly applied unto our Eyes, what a True Sight of Things would
it help us to! It was the Wish; Deuteronomy. XXXII. 29. Oh! That they were Wise; that
they would Consider their latter End, There are many points of Prudence: But,
This I say, Brethren; The most Finished and Exalted Prudence in the World, is,
For a Man to consider what Judgment he will pass upon every thing at his latter
End; how he will Judge of every Thing when he feels the Sith ^ntting him down;
And consider, what those things are, the doing whereof will at his latter End
give the most Comfortable or the most Lamentable Reflections unto him: And
order his Conversation aright; Even with a Behavior which the Sentiments of a
Man under the Sith, would justify. O Man going down to the Dead; Suppose thy
self a Dying, thy Blood boiling, thy Breath failing, thy Throat rattling, and
the Decretory Hour come upon thee; Consider upon it; What, what should I wish
to have done, at such a critical Time as this? Regulate thy self in every
thing, by what thy Conscience will now bring as a Message from GOD unto thee.

III. Let us fall before the Sith of the Destroyer, with a livel Faith of
Rising again, by the power of a Redeemer: Die Believing and Expecting a
Resurrection from the Dead Of the Patriarchs taken off by the Sith, we read,
All these died in Faith. Of wha^? Of a Good ^tate after Death; and of a
Resurrection from the Dead. We have a Sure Foundation of this Lively Hope, in
the Resurrection of our Blessed JESUS from the Dead. Our JESUS declared, That
an Hour shall come, when He will make all who are in their Graves to hear His
Voice and come forth. As an incontestible Token for this, He foretold His own
Resurrection from the Dead, on the Third Day after His Crucifixion. He did Rise
as He said He would; And his Resurrection has as Infallible Proofs as any
Matter of Fact that ever was in the World. Upon this, an Austin would cry out,
Cur desperabo! -- Why, why should I despair of his doing on me what he did on
himself, and for me? No; This Deliverer of Souls, has done enough to satisfy
us, of his being a true Witness, in all that he has Reveled concerning a
Resurrection to a Life of Immortality for his followers. He has now
sufficiently assured us, That he will Raise and Change ou^vile Bodies, by the
working of his mighty Power, which can subdue all things unto him.

It looks Melancholy, to see such Heaps of Grass, cut down by the Sith of
Death. But, Rejoice not over me, O my Enemy; For though I fall, I shall arise.
The coming of our SAVIOR is thus foretold; Psalm. LXXII. 6. He shall come down
like Rain upon the Mown Grass. This Rain, O Mown Grass, will fetch thee to Life
again. Yea, The quickening SPIRIT of GOD, shall come like the Dew of Herbs,
upon thee, to Revive thee, O Believer, at that Voice of thy SAVIOR, Awake, and
Sing, ye who dwell in the Dust. But in that Revival, O what an astonishing
Change will pass upon thee? In what Glory, How Luminous, How Vigorous, How
Incorruptible, will thou be Raised? O Comfort your selves and one another, with
such words. Particularly, At Funerals, let this be, The Consolation. In the
mean time, O thou Candidate of Heaven; Go thy way till the End be. For, thou
shall stand in thy Lot at the End; But in the mean time, thou shall Rest; and
be in a Celestial Garden of Eden, where, no Evil shall annoy thee; but thou
shall be Comforted, with Visions and Enjoyments of GOD; and be in those Courts
of the Lord, where One day will be better than a Thousand of the best here
below.

Come then; Be Dead before you die. Being Dead with CHRIST, and Crucified unto
the World, and Mortified unto all the Vanities of the present State, and so
improved in Piety under all the Killing Things you meet withal, that your Life
may lie only in a CHRIST left unto you; Be ready to entertain the Stroke of the
Sith, and say, Strike, O Mower, strike, when my SAVIOR shall Order thee; And
let me go to be with Him, where to be is by far the best of all.

The Song of the SITH.
O My Long-suffering Lord, I own,
And thy rich Patience praise;
The Mower, he has not cut me down;
I stand; O wondrous Grace!
I wait, O of my Life the. GOD!
I Am waiting for the Stroke.
I see the Mower: He Is on the Road;
Soon, soon, I Am overtook!
O that I were in Safety got;
That what I cannot Evade
I may with Comfort meet, and not
Be of the Sith afraid.
I do with a Repenting Heart
To thee, my GOD, Return;
From all my Idols I depart,
And for my Follies mourn.
To Thee, my SAVIOR, I Resign,
All that belongs to me;
Willing to be entirely Thine,
And Healed and Ruled by Thee.
By Thee to be Redeemed, and made
Righteous and Holy too;
And by thy Counsil to be led,
Thy endless Glory to.
Now, Welcome Sith; Come, Do thy worst;
Strike; Thou can do no more,
But fit me to be Lodged, I trust,
In my GOD's Blessed Floor.
Arbores Frugiferae. The ORCHARD flourishing.
Psalm. I. 3. A Tree -- that brings forth its Fruit in its Season.


O What the Blessings of the Man who is not walking in the Counsel of the Men
that are set for Impiety! The Man who stands not in the way of sinful
Wanderers! The Man who sits not in the seat of scornful Cavillers! The
Blessings of this Godly Man are declared unto us, under the Metaphor of, A
Fruitful Tree. Wherein there may be some Remembradce of, and some Allusion to,
a Passage in the Benediction which the Patriarch bestowed upon Joseph; A
Fruitful Bough by a Well; of whom we read, The Lord made all that he did to
prosper. No doubt, here may be a Prophecy of what our Glorious Lord will do for
His People, when He comes in His Kingdom, after the Fall of Antichrist, when
His People shall be the Branch of His Planting, the Work of His Hands, that He
may be Glorified. But the Blessings of every Godly Man, are to be considered in
it. And it is purticularly considerable, That his Blessings are as much in his
Godliness it self, as in any Article whatsoever. Fruitfulness is Godliness. It Is
among the singular Blessings of a Godly Man; That he shall be a Fruitful Man;
He shall bring forth Fruit unto GOD; He shall be a Tree, whereof it may be
said, [For so it shall be readd,] Whatsoever it does bear, shall prosper very
well. The Fruit shall not be lost.

But in the Text now before us, Behold, An excellent Property of the Fruit,
which will be found with the Godly Man. It will be Seasonable Fruit. He will
bring forth Fruit in the Season thereof. We read, Eccl. III. 11. GOD has made
every thing beautiful in the Season thereof. Come now, and behold a Tree which
GOD has made Beautiful in its Goodness; Its Top is among the Thick Boughs; All
the Trees in the Garden of God may envy it.

The Fruit I am now to bring forth, I hope, not unseasonably for your
Entertainment, and Edification, will be This.

The Fruits of PIETY brought forth in the season thereof, are the Endeavor and
the Character of a Godly Man; Yea, in such seasonable Fruits there very much
lies the Blessedness of Real Godliness.

The first Thing that I am to do, is to tell you, what are the Fruits that are
to be found in the Endeavor and the Character of a Godly Man. But have I not
already said, The Fruits of PIETY? You are to be told in one Word, The Acts of
PIETY are the Fruits to be expected from us. When the Glorious One says, Luke
XIII. 7. I come seeking Fruit: The Things which He seeks are the Acts of PIETY,
wherewith GOD is to be acknowledged in all our ways. When we are directed,
Exercise thy self unto Piety, it is a Direction unto Fruitfulness. To yield
Obedience unto GOD, is to bring forth Fruit unto Him. There are Fruits in all
Acts of Obedience to that Rule, which GOD has given us, That we may Glorify
Him, and Enjoy Him for ever. It is prescribed unto us, Prove. XXIII. 17 Be thou
in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long. This will be to bring forth Fruits
unto the Lord, all the Day long. The Fruits required of us, are all those
Points, wherein the Fear of God is to be exercised. The Acts wherein we live
unto GOD, and mak^ it our Design to serve and please Him; are the Fruits
required of us. The Acts wherein we prove that we Love the Lord our GOD with
all our Hearts, and Love our Neighbors as ourselves; are the Fruits required
of us. The Acts wherein we render Glory to GOD in the highest, and express Good
Will toward Men, are the Fruits which our GOD has required of us.

But the main Thing that I am to do, is, To Enquire what are the Seasons for
our Fruits, and what are the Fruits, with which the several Seasons are to be
accommodated. I hope, it will be a Word in Season. And how Good will such a
Word be, if it be well-hearken'd to?

We read, Eccl. III. 1. To every thing there is a Season, and a Time to every
purpose under Heaven. Truly, To every Fruit there is a Season; and a Time for
every thing that is to be done in our way to Heaven, and in pursuance of our
Purpose to come to Heaven.

I. There are the Fruits of PIETY, for which we have a Season every Day, at the
Hour of our Daily Sacrifices. The Devotions wherein we hear GOD speak to us,
and GOD hears us also speak to Him; The Devotions wherein we Read the Word of
GOD, and seek the Face of GOD, and Commune with our own Hearts; What are these,
but so many Fruits of Piety? First, there is the Religion of the Closet; So
prescribed, Mat. VI. 6. Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy
Door, Pray to thy Father who is in secret. And then, there is the Religion of
the Household; So prescribed, Col. IV. 2. Masters, continue in Prayer, and Watch
in the same with Thansgiving, Together with such as belong unto you. Now these
Fruits of Piety, in every Morning, and in every Evening, we are to find a
Season for them. The People of GOD had of old their Morning Sacrifices, and
their Evening Sacrifices. Our Devotion are Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to
GOD by JESUS CHRIST. In these Devotions, doing the part of Priests unto GOD, we
are to have both our Morning Sacrifices, and our Evening Sacrifices. In the
Morning, there is a Season for us to Retire, and Feed upon some Truths
wholesome to be taken, as we may say, next our Hearts; and then do like him who
said, My Voice thou shall hear in the Morning, O Lord; In the Morning I will
direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. In the Morning there is a Season
for us, to call our Domestics together, and after we have also fed them with
something from the Word of Truth, hereupon to do like him, of whom it is said,
He feared GOD with all his House, and prayed unto GOD always. In the Evening
there is a Season to Repeat such Devotions; and Renew our Visits unto Heaven.
Yea, Some will oftener in a Day than so, find a Season for Addresses to Heaven,
with some of these Devotions. He did so, who could say; Psalm. XV. 17. Evening,
Morning, and Noon will I pray and cry aloud. But in the Evening, for the close
of all, and that we may lie down in Peace, and sleep, and be assured of
dwelling in safety, have we not a Season to Reflect on the Favors we have
received in the Day, and be Thankful for them? A Season, to Reflect on the
Errors we have committed in the Day, and be humbled for them? A Season to
Resign our selves and our All, into the Hands of our SAVIOR, and by some Act
or other, put it out of Doubt, that we are in good Terms with Heaven, and in
safety for Eternity?

But as an Appendix to our Account of the Daily Devotions, wherewith we are to
bring forth Fruit in the Season thereof; Let the Table be brought in. It must
not be forgotten, That when we sit down at the Table, Now is a Season to
confess that the Glorious GOD is the giver of our Daily Bread, and that we live
not by Bread alone, but by the Blessing of GOD upon it. Now is a Season for us
to eat and drink for the Glory of GOD, intending thereby to fit our selves for
the Work which He has assigned us; and Govern our selves by the Rules of
Temperance which GOD has given us. Now is a Season to think on the Food which
endures to everlasting Life, and to feed those that are about us, with a
Communication that may Edify them.

II. There are the Fruits of Piety, for which we have a Season, as often as any
Ordinances of Public Worship are to be attended on. We read, Psalm. XCII. 13.
They that are planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of
our GOD; They shall bring forth Fruit. Verily, as often as we come into the
House of the Lord, we have a Season to bring forth Fruit unto our GOD. Yea, We
should still come hither with such Ends moving of us to come, that our very
coming it self should be to bring forth Fruit unto our GOD. We have our
precious Liberties, to do that thing, I will bless the Lord in the
Congregations. We have especially One Day in a Week, allowed us for this
purpose. With an Eye to the Fruits of Piety, which we have now and here a
Season for, our Dispositions are to be those; My Soul does flame with Thirst
for GOD, even for the Living GOD: When shall I come, and when appear before the
Face of GOD? And those, Lord, Better than a Thousand is One Day within thy
Courts; I on the Threshold choose to keep in the House of my GOD, rather than
have my Dwelling in the Tents of Wickedness. When the Prayers are made in the
House of GOD, Now is a Season to accompany the Confessions and Petitions that
are offered up unto GOD, with a Soul attentively coming into them, and
charitably bespeaking for all the People, a share in the Kindnesses of Our
Father in the Heavens. When the Psalms are sung in the House of GOD, Now is a
Season, to form some Holy Note, and some Holy Wish, from every Verse, and with
Grace in our Hearts, make a Melody to the Lord. When the Sermons are preached
in the House of GOD, Now is a Season to Receive the Truth in the love of it,
and make the Echo's of a Consenting Soul unto all that passes in them; and send
up numberless Ejaculations unto Heaven; those Ejaculations, Lord, I own it; or,
Lord I ask it! in the Hearing of what is brought from thence unto us. The
Baptism of the Lord administered in the House of our GOD affords us a Season,
over again to Lament our own Original Sin, and implore a Deliverance from it by
the Blood and Power of our Great REDEEMER; and overagain lay hold of the
Covenant of GOD for our selves and ours; and also to wish well unto the
increasing Families of the Neighborhood. But then, When our SAVIOR sets the
Children of GOD as Olive-Plants about His Table, Oh! what a Season have we
there to bring forth all manner of pleasant Fruits unto the Beloved of our
Souls! Now is a Season to Admire and Embrace a CHRIST evidently set forth as
Crucified before our Eyes; and be Ravished in the sweet Meditation, wherewith
Man may now eat the Food of Angels. Now is a Season, to make all the Sallies of
a Repenting and a Believing Soul, and a Soul making an Oblation of it self unto
GOD in the Flames of Love: O Spiknard, Now send out thy pleasant Smell! Now is
a Season, to strengthen and confirm the Resolutions of an Heart fixed for the
Ways of GOD. Yea, Now is a Season to take the Comforts of all the very great
and precious Promises, which are now sealed unto us, and Rejoice in the Hope of
the Glory of GOD, which we shall see when our Blessed JESUS brings us to sit in
the Heavenly Places with Him. I will add this one thing more; If on the First
Day of the Week, there be Gatherings, of what every one has laid by him in
store, out of what GOD has prospered him withal; Now is a Season for us to
bring the Sacrifices which GOD is well-pleased withal. Now say, Gracious GOD,
Will thou accept this little Quitrent, which confesses, that I owe my All unto
thee! Even the Widows Two Mites are Good Fruits unto GOD. But, when I said, We
have one Day in a Week, thus to draw near unto the GOD, whom it is good for us
to draw near unto, I did not say All, that might be said. For we have our
Lectures too; In which we have a Season for those Fruits, that our GOD looks to
find in the Fields of Zion. What Fruits may we both taste, and yield, if we
made a due Resort unto those Assemblies of GOD? Verily, The Assemblies of the
Faithful, at the Lectures, would not be so scandalously Thin, as they generally
are, if People were more careful to bring forth Fruit in the Season thereof.

III. There are Fruits of PIETY, for which we have a Season, very often when we
come into any Company. The Tongue of the Righteous, is compared unto a Tree of
Life, because of the Fruits which it brings forth unto them that are about him.
And thus we read; Prove. XII. 14. A Man shall be satisfied with Good, by the
Fruit if his Mouth. Be sure, Fruitless Visits are Things which will be avoided
by the Wise Men, who take the way that is Above. When we are upon the Visiting
Account, shall not we do well to think, What Fruit, even what Good, may this
Visit afford a Season for? The Visiters that are so kind as to come unto us,
may awaken the like Thoughts in our Minds. If the Company which we come into,
be Superior to us, Now is a Season for us to get Good by them. We may, by
Questions prudently proposed, put them upon bringing forth Fruit, for our
Instruction. But if we are more on the level with our Company, we have more
commonly, Now a Season to do Good unto them. Let us now shun the Raw Fruits of
Impertinences; the Sour Fruits of Controversies; the Stinking Fruits of an
Obscaene and Rotten Communication. Our Conferences ought always to have a
Tendency to something that is Good. Now is a Season, as for the Dispatch of the
Affairs which we come upon, so for them that Fear the Lord so to speak unto one
another, that they need not be ashamed, if their Talk be found written in a
Book of Remembrance before the Lord. Christians, When you are together, do Good
unto one another; Inform one another; Quicken one another; Comfort one another.
Do your Best, that you may be the Better for one another. Now and then propose
it, What Good may be done before we part? Oh! what Fruit would be brought forth
in the Season thereof, if Good Men when they come together, would more see to
it, that their coming together may be for the Better and not for the Worse! But
I know, what I say will have little Notice taken of it.

IV. There are Fruits of PIETY, for which we have a Season, when the Business
of our Temporal Calling is in its Prosecution. Every Israelite must be able to
make a suitable Reply, to the Interrogatory once put unto the Sons of Israel;
What is your Occupation? It is directed, 1 Thessalonians. IV. 11. Study to do your own
Business. Indeed This Thing it self, is to bring forth Fruit in the Season
thereof: When a Man minds and plies his own Business in the Season thereof. The
Business of the Personal Calling, wherein a Man deserves well of Humane
Society, and accordingly demands upon it; This is part of the Fruit, that
should be found upon us. For which cause every Man that is employed in any
Business which is of use to Humane Society, may challenge what that Maxim of
Religion has ordered for him; Honor all Men. The very Wheelbarrow is to be
with Respect looked upon. But then, O Christian, Will thou not bring forth
Fruit unto GOD as well as unto Man, in the Business of thy Personal Calling?
And will thou not be at work for Heaven, in what thou have to do upon Earth?
How Nobly, how Bravely, how Pleasantly, and with what Songs in the House of thy
Pilgrimage will the work proceed, if it may be so! Truly, Now it is a Season for
thee, to bring a Right Principle into its Operation, and think, Because GOD my
SAVIOR has ordered this Business for me, Therefore it is that I will now
Cheerfully do what my Hand finds to do. I will Obey GOD my SAVIOR, and be
emply'd as a Servant of His, in what my Hand finds to do. But then, all the
Industry, all the Honesty, all the Alacrity, in carrying on thy Business, from
this Right Principle, which thou have now a Season for; This also will be a
Fruit well resented with GOD. And can thou not Now likewise find a Season, to
have thy Mind filled with the Precious Thoughts of GOD, until it may be said,
How great is the Sum of them? Certainly, The less thy Business does require of
Intense Thoughts upon it, and where the Hand is more engaged than the Brain,
and the Hand also goes on with a Repetition of the same Thing a thousand times
over, Now it is a Season to multiply the Thoughts of one whose Conversation is in
Heaven. The Skill of making Occasional Reflections, on Visible and Various
Occurrences; Oh! the lovely Fruits, which it would help the Christian to abound
withal! What Life and Peace would such such a Spiritually-minded Christian be
blessed withal! It may be yet further said, That they who in the Shop spend
very much Time in waiting for Customers, it may be, more than in tending upon
them; These have Now a Season for very much Reading of such Things, as may fill
the Chambers of their Souls with precious and pleasant Riches. My Friends,
Consider what I say, and GOD give you Understanding.

V. There are Fruits of PIETY, for which we have a Season, when our GOD bestows
Comfortable Things upon us. There are Cultivations by our GOD upon us, in all
His Dispensations toward us. There are particularly so, when He dispenses unto
us, any Agreeable Things, and we have His Light shining on our Tabernacles. The
Glorious GOD now makes a Demand of Agreeable Fruits from the Children of Men,
when He makes an Hedge about them, and blesses the Works of their Hands, and
their Substance is increased in the Land. His Wrath fell upon one for this; 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 25. He rendered not again according to the Benefit that was done
unto him. Syrs, Are you in Prosperity? Now it is a Season for you to serve the
Lord with Gladness of Heart, in the Abundance of all things which He has given
you: A Season for you to maintain a most Intimate Communion with GOD; and for
you to Do Good in a most plentiful and copious Manner to all that are about
you. Yea, Upon every Article of Prosperity, which your Lives are sweetened
withal; Now it is a Season for you, to Give Thanks unto the Lord, who is Good,
and whose Mercy endures for ever. Now it is a Season for you to be Inquisitive,
What shall I render to the Lord for all His Benefits? Now it is a Season for you,
to be full of Projections, How you may bring others to share with you in all
the Blessings of Goodness.

VI. There are Fruits of PIETY, for which we have a Season, when our GOD
inflicts Calamitous Things upon us. There are some Strokes in learning the
Statutes of GOD, which are to be the peculiar care of them, who would be able
to say, It Is good for me that I am afflicted: Things peculiarly calculated for a
Day of Adversity. When we are Chastened of GOD what are the Things to be looked
for? Those Things; Heb. XII. 11 The peaceable Fruits of Righteousness. O you
that have an Heart stouping with Heaviness; Now it is a Season for you, to pour
out your Souls unto the Lord, that so you may be no more sad. You have been so
taught of GOD; Is any among you Afflicted? Let him pray. Now it is a Season for
you, To Search and to Try your Ways, and to Turn unto the Lord; and not be
Fools brayed in a Mortar. You are to find out the Errand which your Troubles
come upon, and see that it be well complied withal; Reform what your Affliction
comes to Rebuke you for; Perform what your Affliction comes to Excite you to;
And say, I have born Chistisement; I will not offend any more. Now it is a Season
for Patience to have its perfect Work; And when Killing Things befall you, it is
the Season for you to make a mighty Progress in Dying unto Creatures; in
patiently submitting to be stripped of every Thing, and have a CHRIST the only
Thing lest Alive unto you, and find in a CHRIST alone every Thing that you have
a Relish for. But what shall we do, if there be the Hand or Tongue of Man, in
what we suffer? If Men rise up against us, Revile us, Injure us; Yea, Floods of
Ungodly Men keep Dashing and Roaring upon us? Now it is a Season for us, with
Meekness of Wisdom, to take the True Way of dealing with, and shaking off, a
Viper. If Works of Iniquity are prevailing against us, Now it is a Season for us
to use the best Methods, that our Transgressions may be purged away. Now it is a
Season for us to be but the more zealous of Good Works, and to be Barked into a
greater Speed in Runnig the way before us. Now it is a Season for us, Generously
to Forgive Injuries, and Overcome Evil with Good.

VII. There are Fruits of PIETY, which every Age of Life, gives a
Distinguishing Season for. Most certainly, The Lively Oracles of GOD, so
distinctly calling on, Fathers, and Young Men, and Little Children; so
distinctly calling on Young Men and Maidens, Old Men and Children; These
intimate, that every Age is a Season for some Fruit unto GOD.

More particularly. Are there not Fruits which Old People have a singular
Season for; and are most singularly obliged unto? No doubt of it! We read of
some; Psalm. XCII. 14. They shall bring forth Fruit in Old Age. My Neighbors,
Has GOD brought you to be so stricken in Years, that you may say, Now I am Old
and G^ay-headed; Verily, Now it is a Season for you to get and keep your
Evidences for Heaven so clear, that you may be ready upon the first Call, to go
away Triumphing, and receive the King of Terrors, not at all terrified at his
Approaches, but saying, O Messenger of Heaven, Thou art welcome to me! Now it is
a Season for you to set an excellent Pattern of Serious Gravity; of a Soul
weaned from a World, which you have upon a long Trial, found so filled with
Vanity and Vexation; of an entire and profound Submission to the Will of GOD in
all Events; And with such a Pattern of all Goodness, to be full of Savoury
Discourses, and continually dropping wholesome Admonitions on those that may be
reached by them. Now it is a Season for you, to sit loose from all things here
below, and have your Thoughts and Hopes and Joys exceedingly applied unto the
Everlasting Habitations which you are quickly to be received into. And above
all, Get a Soul as full of a CHRIST as ever you can: Gather a Double Fortion of
that Manna, now your Sabbath is coming on! O Thou Hoary Head, thus found in the
way of Righteousness: Thou art a Tree, which we will keep with us as long as
ever we can. Thy Fall shall be only to Transplant thee into the Paradise of GOD.

But then, Oh! That Young People would be more concerned for the Fruits which
ought in this their most proper Season to be sound upon them! Children, Don't
you hear your GOD saying Mic. VII. 1. My Soul has desired the First Ripe
Fruits? The Fruits of Righteousness which are grateful to GOD from All People,
are more eminently so from Young People. Oh! Be not so Unrighteous as to
withold them. You are in that Season whereof it may Emphatically be said,
Behold, Now is the Acceptable Time. Now if Ever; Now is the Season, for you to
Cleanse your Ways; Let the Young Man do so. He Will do it, if he take heed,
according to the Word. Now is the Season for you to Remember your Creator; It Is
to be done in Youth, before the Evil Days come. Now is the Season for you, to
know the Holy Scriptures, that you may be made wise unto Salvation; and seek
that Wisdom, which will be found by the early seekers of it. Now is the Season
for you to make a Recognition of the Bonds which were in your Baptism laid upon
you; and from this Time say unto GOD, Thou art my Father, and my Savior, and
the Guide of my Youth. Now is the Season for you to be Espoused unto your
SAVIOR; and upon His Astonishing Proposal to make you His own, Heartily to
answer, Lord, I am Thine, save me! You, You are They, to whom your SAVIOR
says, O my Dove, Let me hear thy Voice; for sweet is thy Voice unto me. Will
you Now, even in the Season of it, Let Him Hear the Voice of your
Supplications? And therein that Voice, Lord, I am sorry for my Sin! That Voice,
Lord, In the shadow of thy Wings I make my Refuge! That Voice; Lord, Thou art
my Portion, I have said, That I will keep thy Word. Child, As young a Tree as
thou art, such Fruits may and should be found upon thee; Oh! That they may be
so! This, This is the fittest Season for them. Such Rathe-ripes, what a Price
would be set upon them!

Yea, But who can Reckon up, all the Fruits, which, O Fruitful Christian, thou
may find a Season for?

Scarce can I forbear making this Observation, That all the Four Seasons of the
Year, may be made so many Seasons, for those Desires of PIETY to be pursued,
that shall be most elegantly adapted unto them. Very particularly; There are
what may be called, Supplicationes Hyemales, or Winter Desi^es, which the
Accidents of the Winter make a Season to insist upon. Can we see the Sun at
such a Distance from us? And shall it not now be a Season to pray, Lord, let
not my Soul, nor the World, languish in a Distance from my SAVIOR? Can we see
the Snow? And shall it not now be a Season for us to pray; Lord, let the Blood
of my SAVIOR make my Guilty and Stained Soul, whiter than the Snow? Can we see
the Ice? And shall it not now be a Season for us to pray; Lord, Keep me from
Falls into Sin; And, Let not my Activities for thy Service be frozen up? Can we
see our Double Garments? And shall it not now be a Season for us to pray; Lord,
Clothe me with the Garments of Righteousness and Salvation? Can we see our Fuel
that warms us? And shall it not now be a Season for us to pray; Lord, make me
Fervent in spirit for thy Service; But O save me from the Fiery Indignation
which is to devour thy Adversaries? Can we feel the Cold, which who can stand
before? And shall it not now affect us to think; Who can stand before the Wrath
of the Lord Almighty? Can we see the Fruitless Face of the Earth? And shall it
not now be a Season for us to Hope; Lord, Though my Life he too much without Good
Fruits, yet thou can bring me to be Fruitful in Good Works; And though the Face
of the World at this Day be horribly Barren and Wretched, yet I will Hope in
thee to give it one Day a better Face, and bring on a Better Time.

Christians, other Trees bring not forth Fruit in the Winter. It Is not a Season
for it. We may be most Fruitful in the Winter. Some Fruit is then best in
Season.

But then, for the Other Three Seasons of the Year, why may we not be awakened
also, by the Circumstances of the Seasons, to form Supplications, which may be
seasonably insisted on?

For the Spring.
Lord, Let the Sun of Righteousness draw near unto me; and let me be Quickened,
and Revived, and made a New Creature, and made very Fruitful, by His Benign and
Blessed Influences.

Lord, Let a Glorious CHRIST return, like the Sun, to a miserable World; and
bring a New Aspect upon it; produce upon it a New Creation, and fill it with
the Fruits of Righteousness.

Lord, Let the Hours of Darkness grow shorter and shorter with me.

Lord, Let the Time for the singing of Birds come on. Let thy CHRIST fit me
for, and fill me with, the Songs of the Redeemed. And let the Songs of Piety
replenish the whole Earth, with an Heavenly Melody.

Lord, Enable me with Diligence to prosecute a Divine Husbandry; and with
Patience to wait for a Good Harvest of my Endeavors to serve the Kingdom of
GOD. Oh! Let Light and Joy be sown for me!

For the Summer.
Lord, Let me be as Fruitful as any of the Trees or Fields, which now yield a
grateful Spectacle. Oh! Let me abound in the Fruits of Righteousness,

Lord, Let my dear JESUS be to me as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary
Land. And may I also Drink of what flows from that admirable Rock.

Lord, Let me be Entitled to, and prepared for, the Blessedness of that World
where no uneasy Heat will molest thy Children.

For the Autumn.
Lord, Let me see a Joyful Harvest of all my poor Essays to Glorify Thee: Let
me Reap with Joy.

Lord, Let me arrive to my Grave, and thy Floor, as a Shock of Corn fully ripe
in the Season thereof.

Lord, Affect me, and the rest of Mankind, with a sense of our own Mortallity:
For, we all Fade as a Leaf!

I have done.

I have only Two short Motions to make; Upon Conforming to which, you will
bring forth Fruit in the Season thereof; Yea, much of that Fruit by which our
Father, and our SAVIOR, will be Glorified.

The First is This. Make it your Ambition to Live unto GOD, as Explicitly as
may be, in all your Actions, and all your Enjoyments.

In your Actions, often, very often, Think; In this Thing I would aim at the
serving and pleasing of the Glorious GOD.

In your Enjoyments, often, very often, Think^ I see the Glo^ious GOD in this
Thing, and would serve Him with it.

And in all, still Remember the Eye of the Glorious GOD upon you.

The Second is This. Be watchful Redeemers of your Time. Set an high Price upon
Time. Contrive to Husband your Time as well as ever you can. Lay out all your
Time, either in Mowing or in Whetting. Either in Doing and Getting of Good, or
in Fitting your selves for Good Purposes.

No Season will be without its F^uit, where such PIETY shall be always
exercised.

We read of a Tree, Rev. XXII. 2. which Yields its Fruit every Month. But here
is a Tree that Yields its Fruit every Day.

Thus, Even Thus, you shall find that Illustrious Word accomplished; Hos. XIV.
5, 6. I will be as the Dew unto Israel; He shall cast forth his Roots as
Lebanon; His Branches shall sp^ead; and his Beauty be as the Olive Tree.

Arbores Fulguritae. APPENDIX. Thoughts on a NEW YEARS Day.
Luke XIII. 9. If it bear Fruit, well; And if not, then after That, thou shall
cut it down.


A Day of Patience for one Year more is then obtained for a Barren Fig Tree.
After the utmost Hazard of Destruction, for a Barrenness of Three Years, an
Intercession is made, for one year more, to be allowed. It was begged, Lord,
Let it alone this Year also: that so a further Cultivation might be employed
for the Cure of the offensive Barrenness. But, Behold the Consequence to be
expected of the Grant thus made for Thu Year also. A Thing highly worthy to be
deeply considered by us; To be so at all times; But very particularly so, on a
Day, when we see the first Day of a New Year granted unto us.

The whole World had been very Barren of good Men, and of good Things, for no
less than Three Thousands of Years. In the Fourth, our SAVIOR made
Intercession for Mankind, which had hitherto stood as a Barren Fig tree. Upon
this Intercession the Great GOD staid unto the End of the Fourth. But then our
SAVIOR Himself was brought forth, and the Effusions of the Holy SPIRIT upon
Mankind, then produced those other Fruits, for which the World stands unto his
Day.

In making this Observation, I do not say, That I have made an Exposition of
the Parable now before us. But I will observe, That our SAVIOR being thus
brought forth, we have here set before us, in a Parable, some of the precious
Fruits, which the Church of GOD has found, in Him and from Him, who is indeed
the Tree of Life. Our Lord had newly warned the Jews, That if they did not
Repent, they must perish. Now, since it might be Enquired, How and why they
must perish, we have here in a Parable, an Answer to that Enquiry. The Prophet
Isaiah, in his wellknown Song had compared the Land of the Jews unto a
Vineyard. Our SAVIOR, not without some Allusion to that S^ng of Isaiah, here
compares the Church of the Jews, unto a Barren Figtree in that Vineyard. It is
here foretold, That GOD would by a R^man Axe cut down the Tree, for its
U^fruitfulness. However, there is Hope of the Tree; though it be cut down, it
shall sprout again, and the Tender Branches thereof will not cease. 'Twil do so
at the Resurrection of the Dead. But the Comparison may be carried on, unto
more of particularity. O Man, Thou art the Tree Every Person under the Means of
Grace may be compared unto a Fig Tree. The Flight which our Fallen Parents
presently made unto a Fig Tree for their Cover and Relief, has added unto our
Claim for the Resemblance. Every Person who does not improve in PIETY under the
Means of Grace, may be compared unto a Barren Fig Tree. But the Danger of such
unfruitfulness! The Doom of Cutting down is passed upon the Barren Fig Tree,
after an Expectation excended for Three Years to see Fruit upon it. And
Intercession is made, for One Year more of Expectation. The Consequence of what
shall be found upon the Expectation to be still kept for This Year also, is
here declared unto us. And an awful DOCTRINE shall introduce yet a fuller
Declaration of it.

When the too-unfruitful Children of Men, have one Year more of the Divine
Patience obtained for them, it is of the last Consequence, what Fruit shall in
This Year be found upon them. Let us, my Brethren, begin the Year, with some
Admonitions of PIETY, which may be of use to us every Day of the Year, or,
every Day that the GOD of our Life shall please to allow us in the Year.

I. Good Fruit is to be expected from all that have the means of growing Wiser
and Better, employed upon them: A Good Fruit of such means. The Voice of GOD,
Oh! Voice more than any Thunder to be trembled at! -- is this, Behold, I come
seeking for Fruit! People whom GOD places under the means of becoming what they
should be, ought to be a Fruitful People.

But what is the Fruit that is to be looked for? PIETY does in one Word,
express the Fruit which GOD expects from us all. PIETY and a Growth in PIETY.
The Fruit looked for, is found in the Progress of a Soul Returning to GOD. GOD
our Maker, has imprinted on our Soul, a Tendency for a Return to Him: In His
Gospel, He does direct and Assist this Natural Tendency. We do in the ways of
Sin Depart from Him, unto Creatures. We Return to GOD in the PIETY, which
Remembers our Obligations to our GOD that made us, and Endeavors to find That
in Him, which we vainly sought in Creatures. Just so much Progress as we make
in this Return to GOD, just so much Fruit is to be found upon us. To Live unto
GOD; This is to bring forth Fruit unto Him. Every Act of that Life, which lies
in seeking and serving, and pleasing of GOD, is part of the Fruit which is
required from us. Or, to use another Term for it: Good Fruit is found in every
Religious Compliance with the Will of GOD. All manner of precious Fruits are
laid up for the Bel^ved of our Souls, in those Demands, Mic VI. 8. To Do
Justice, and love Mercy, and walk Humbly with thy GOD. And, Tit. II. 12. To
live soberly, and Righteously, and Godlily in this present World. Every Grace
of GOD in the Soul, it is a Good Fruit. Such Things are called, Gal. V. 22. The
Fruits of the Spirit. Every stroke in the work of Grace, produced by the Holy
Spirit of GOD, in the chosen People of GOD, is a Good Fruit in the Soul. He
that becom^s a Gracious Christian, becomes a Fruitful Christian. An Holy
Christian has his Fruit unto Holiness. And all Gracious Actions are so many
Fruits of a Christian that has the Root of the Matter in him. They are called,
Phil I. 11. The Fruits of Righteousness. There are Good Fruits, in those which
are called, The right Thoughts of the Righteous. There are Good Fruits in those
Words, which make the Tongue of the Righteous as a Tree of Life. The Good Works
of the Righteous, are Good Fruits. There are Fruits in our Devotions; Fruits in
our Benignities; Good Fruits in all those good Things, wherein we render Glory
to GOD in the Highest, and express Good Will toward Men.

Will you hear the Good Fruit expected from you? My Hearers, Give Attention to
the Demands of Heaven upon you. It Is demanded, That you Repent of Sin, and
Believe on CHRIST, and give yourselves up unto GOD. It is demanded, That you
place your Love, and your Hope, and your Joy, in the Great GOD, and walk with
Him, and have your Eye, continually unto Him and be mindful of Hu Eye upon you.
It is demanded, That you be Diligent in your Callings, and Ingenuous in your
Dealings, and Useful unto your Neighbors.

It is demanded, That you carry it well in your several Relations, and so treat
your several Relatives as to Adorn the Doctrine of GOD your SAVIOR. It is
demanded, That you pay suitable Acknowledgements unto GOD under His various
Dispensations unto you: And, finally, That you place not your Happiness in This
World, but in the Enjoyments of that Heavenly World, where GOD shall be All in
All. Verily, you are unfruitful, if such Things as these be not found upon you.
Be sure; An Unregenerate Sinner is a Dead Thing; a Tree that has no Good Fruits
at all upon it. A Christian too, in whom the Grace of GOD is not very
Conspicuous, and who does Little Good; a F^eble Christian, it is pity he should
have the Honor to be called, A Fruitful One.

II. While Men continue Unfruitful there is from the ^atience of an Offended
GOD, obtained for them, One Year after another, with an Opportunity for Good
Fruits to be found upon them. Yea, After Three Years of looking for Good Fruit,
there is often One Year more obtained, that it may be seen, what Good Fruit may
be found upon us.

One Thing to be Remarked is, That the Barren Tree, is an Offense unto the
Glorious GOD. Of an Unfruitful Thing, we read, Heb. VI. 8. It is nigh unto
cursing. Alas, The Unfruitful have the Wrath of GOD abiding on them. The
Unfruitful are they with whom GOD is Angry every Day. Unfruitfulness is the
Grand Crime, for which the Wrath of GOD comes on the Children of Disobedience.
Even so provoking a Sight unto Heaven is a Barren Tree, that it is a Wonder the
Fate of the Tree in the Vision of the Chaldean Emperor comes not upon it; A
Wonder, that an Holy Watcher coming down from Heaven do not cry aloud, and say,
Hew down the Tree. But yet it is Remarkable, That the Patience of the Glorious
GOD bears One Year after another, with the Barren Tree. So is that Word
fulfilled; Isa. XXX. 18. The Lord waits that He may be Gracious. The Ax is
indeed lifted up The Barren Tree is ready for the stroke of the Ax. But there
is obtained a Liberty for the Barren Tree, to stand yet One Year more. And how
is it obtained? A Seasonable Intercession comes in to obtain it; Lord, Let it
alone this One Year also. So One Year more is added unto the Day of Patience.
The Enquiry may be; Whose Intercession is it, that prevails on this Occasion?
Be sure, No Intercession can signify any thing for a Sinner, without That of
our SAVIOR. It Is our SAVIOR, who is our Intercessor. It Is He, of whom we are
told, Heb. VII. 25. He ever lives to make Intercession for us. And indeed, an
Authoritative Intercession can be made by none but Him. The Day of Patience
indulged unto Reprobates, even This, is owing to our SAVIOR. Our SAVIOR
Intercedes, that GOD may be Glorified, by lengthening out the Day of Patience,
to those who after all will be Children of Wrath. The Pity, the Pity, in the
Heart of the Blessed JESUS, for them, does move Him to Intercede for a Day of
Patience to them. And then, for the Elect of GOD; The Day of Patience proves a
Day of Salvation for them. It Is as we read, 2 Pet. III. 15. The Longsuffering of
our Lord is Salvation. The Elect of GOD are for a while, and some of them for a
long while, Barren Tre^. There must come a Year, wherein they shall Begin to
bring forth Fruit unto GOD. With respect unto this Year, there is the
Intercession of their SAVIOR for them: Let them stand this Year also. A Sinner
that by long Barrenness has exposed himself to Destruction, is by the
Intercession of our SAVIOR, preserved from it. The Intercession by'nd by
arrives to these Terms, This Year also! For, This Year, The Sinner will be
converted from the Error of his way. This Year, the old Sinner will be a New
Creature; will become a Servant of GOD, and a Blessing in the World. Therefore,
Therefore it is, that the Tree stands, This Year also. And the Charitative
Intercession of them that wish well unto the Tree; the Charitative Intercession
of some whose Effactual Fervent Prayers will avail much; the Charitative
Intercession of Pastors, and of Parents, and of Godly Friends; This may also
Contribute unto this Day of Patience.

III. The Success of the Means used with the Unfruitful, while the Patience of
GOD, is waiting One Year after another, to see Good Fruits upon them; This is
Uncertain; To us, it is but Uncertain. Let the Barren Tree have One Year more,
obtained for it, it is to us for the present not certain, whether it will bear
Fruit, or whether Not. This Uncertainty indeed, is not with the Glorious GOD.
For, The Lord knows who are His. He Infallibly Foreknows, how Men will be at
the end of the Years. And His purposes are Unchangeable. But the Success of the
Gospel, and of all the Labor used about a Barren Tree, it is with us, that it
labors under an Uncertainty. When the Gospel comes any where, GOD sends it,
because He has a People there. Some of His Elect are there. And as we read,
Act. XIII. 48. As many as were ordained unto Eternal Life, Believed. Thus; None
of the Elect shall continue always in their Barrenness: A cutting down shall be
none of their Portion. But then, There are Many Called, who are not Chosen. And
because they live Both Together, the Gospel, with the Offers of a SAVIOR, and
the Means of coming to Knowledge and Goodness, are granted unto Both Together.
In the mean time, It Is not for us to discern which is which. This is among the
Secret Things which belong unto the Lord. Men cannot convert unto GOD whom they
please. The New Birth, is, J^h. I. 13. Not of the Will of Man. The Success of
the Gospel, depends on the Will of GOD; A Sovereign GOD, who will have Mercy on
whom He will have Mercy. Is any Fruit ever found upon any Soul? From me is thy
Fruit found, says the Lord. Should there be so much as one Barren Tree among
our Children, if it were in our power to convert them unto GOD? So much as one
Barren Tree in this Assembly of Zion, if it were in our power to give Success
unto our Ministry? Ah! Lord, If it were in our power, they should all bring
forth Fruit unto thee! But, we must hold on endeavoring for the Conversion of
all about us, Uncertain about the Success of our Endeavors. It Is uncertain to
us, whether it will remain a Barren Tree, or no. It may be, Fruit may This Year
begin to be found upon it. It may be, its Unfruitfulness may render it ripe for
cutting down. We must hold on faithfully doing what we have to do; and commend
unto GOD our Pains with our Prayers; leaving the Success of all with Him alone.

IV. If before the Year of Patience and Probation expires, People become
Fruitful unto GOD, It is well; All shall be well. The Barren Tree have one Year
more obtained for it, If it bear Fruit, it is well. Be sure, with the changed
Sinner himself, it will be well. The Quickened Sinner becomes a Pardoned one.
None of his former Unfruitfulness, nor of the Bad Fruits found upon him in his
Unfruitful Days, will be charged upon him; He will have the Pardon of them all!
It shall be according to That; Ez^k. XVIII. 22 All his Transgressions, that he
has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him. The Threatenings of GOD
against the Barren Tree, shall not now be executed on him. Though it is
Threatene^ (...) unto the Wicked; and it is Threatened, Evil pursues Sinners;
yet he is now safe, among the Just ones, to whom it must be said, It shall be
well with them; and, who shall have no Evil happen to them. His Jov may be hat;
Isa. XII 1. O Lord, I will praise thee; For though thou wast angry with me, thine
Anger is turned away, and thou do Comfort me. The Glorious GOD in His
Promises now speaks comfortably to him. The very treat and precious Promises in
the Covenant of GOD now belong unto him. All the Blessings purchased by the
Blood of the Son of GOD now belong unto him. The Fruit which he brings forth
unto GOD, what is it but a Fruit of the Everlasting Love in the Heart of the
Glorious GOD unto him? In every Right Thing, which GOD enables the Fruitful
Soul to do for him, He says unto that Soul, Behold, A roof of my Everlasting
Love unto thee; Behold, a Sign that I will have thee to stand one Day among the
Plants of Righteousness in my Garden, by which I will be Glorified Yea, And it
shall be well also for them who wished well unto the Tree; and especially to
them who have done any thing for the Tree; When they see the Fruit which they
have wished for. The Angels of GOD themselves, The Angels of GOD among whom
there is Joy over a Sinner that Repents! Even those Birds of Paradise, will
come and hover with Delight about the Fruitful Tree, and sit in the Boughs of
it, and Sing together, and Shout for Joy. My Friend, so well will it be, from
the Moment of thy becoming Fruitful unto GOD.

V. When the Year of Patience and Probation is expired, the Barren Tree no
longer to be born withal, has a Destruction appoin^ for it: A Destruction from
GOD, which, O M^n, should be a Terror to thee. If Now, it bear not Fruit, After
That, a Cutting down shall be ordered for it.

You must be, first, warned of this; That the Barren Tree shall not be always
born withal. The Glorious GOD will not always bear with it. The Patience of
Heaven may stay a great while; But anon the Leaden Feet will come with Iron
Hands. Of one, who had a space to Repent, and Repented not, we find anon it
comes to That; Rev. II. 12. A great Tribulation. Barrenness under the Husbandry
of GOD; shall I say, It Is a Sin? Yea, it is a Complication of all Sins. And this
under the Aggravation of sinning against Instruction, against Conviction; of
Rebelling against the Light. Can the Glorious GOD see a Disappointment of His
Husbandry, without an Infinite Indignation against it? A Fiery Indignation that
shall devour a Tree so obnoxious unto Him? Ah! Barren Tree; What a Contempt all
the while do thou cast upon the Patience of God? Thus to Despise the Riches
of His Goodness and Forbearance, and Long suffering! Thus to Turn His Grace
into Wantonness! GOD is greatly provoked at the Dishonor thus done unto Him.
His Honor is in His Patience, how abominably, how unaccountably trampled on!
He Resents the Disparagement. Yea, The Barren Tree will wax worse and worse.
Evil Men shall do so. They are the worse for the Patience of GOD. All tends to
nourish and augment their Corruption. This adds to the Provocation. Anon, they
grow Hopeless. Their Case is Desperate. They are Irrecoverable. To no purpose
is any further Patience. To what purpose, one Year more? The Wrath of the Lord
arises, and there is no Remedy. So, Abused Patience is turned into Fury. As a
patient Creditor, long baffled, and bantered, and played upon, at length takes
the Law upon the Debtor; becomes Inexorable: Thus the affronted Patience of
GOD, will no longer divest the Law from taking its Course, on the Unfruitful
Sinner. The Law is, Cut down the Barren Tree. O Unfruitful ones, Awake out of
your security. GOD limits a certain Day, saying, To Day if you will hear His
Voice. The Patience will come to an End, if your Barrenness don't come to an
End. And, Oh! presume not, The Vision is for many Days to come. It may come to
an End, sooner than you are aware of. It may come to an End, when you flatter
yourselves, To Morrow shall be as this Day, and much more Abundant. It may come
to an End, with such a Writ as that upon you, This Night thy Soul shall be
required of thee. But, Oh! What will your Condition be, when the Day of
Patience is come unto an End?

You must be, in the next place, warned of this; Destruction, Destruction
comes, the Year of Destruction is come, on the Barren Tree, when the Patience
of Heaven will not allow One Year more unto it. When the Barrenness of a Tree,
has, as we may say, wearied out the Patience that waited on it; Then comes the
Word, Cut it down! Stub it up! Root it out! A Tre^ is Destroyed that is thus
dealt withal. Of the Unfr^itful we read. Phil. III 19. Their End is Destruction
The Barren Soul will find it self as much under the Aversion and Abhorrence of
GOD, as a B^rren Tre^ is to the Disappointed owner. How shall I Pardon thee?
Says the Lord. GOD will so deal with the Unfruitful at the last, that there
shall be an End put unto all Hope, of any Fruit from them. With a Tree that is
Cut down, it is so. GOD will at length use no more Dressing upon them. No
Counsils, no Tenders, no Perswasives, will be used any more; or, if they be
used, the Dews of Heaven will not accompany them. There is an ^xe laid unto the
Root of the Tree. There are Instruments used by the Vengeance of Heaven, to
Cut^ff the U^fruitful Sinner, and the Days of the Wicked are shortened Perhaps
Mortal Sickness chops him down. GOD Thunderstrikes the Tree; The Hand of Heaven
strikes it down; hews it in pieces. Or, There may be some grievous Accident, or
some cruel Enemy, whereto he is delivered. It may, it is not at once dispatched:
There are several Blows given; There is a Repetition of the Blows. One Blow
comes upon another. There is a Succession of Judgments, All tending to the
Ruin of the Unfruitful Sinner. It Is anon thrown into the Fire. There is an
Hell which it is thrown into; An Hell compared unto a Fire, for the Torment of
it. None of all the Fuel there, will make or feel so hot a Fire, as the Barren
Fig tree. No punishment will be equal to that of those, who have had many Means
to make them Fruitful unto GOD; but the Means have all proved ineffectual.
Their Hell will be the worse, because of what Heaven did for them. The Light
against which they have sinned, will become as Oy^ to the Flame of their
Unquenchable Fire, They sin^ the deeper into the Blackness of Darkness forever,
because they were once, not far from the Kingdom of GOD. Unto them, who have
been Exalted unto Heaven in the Meant of Repentance, but all the Means have
been lost upon them, it has been declared; Mat. XI. 24. It shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the Day of Judgment than for thee! Oh! That
such Things as these were more thought upon!

APPLICATION.
Methink^ the very Day, may very agreeably invite you to Think upon them: The
Intercession made a Year ago, Lord, Let it alone this Year also, has obtained
it for us, That we are this Day entering upon a New Year. I am not sure of
obtaining one Year more; or that, if the Fruit required from us, be brought
forth any time within one Year more, it will be well; or that the Barren Tree,
if it will persist obstinately so, shall not be Cut down before one Month of
this Year be out. I will therefore insist upon some Lessons of PIETY, which on
this very First Day of the Year, should be hearkened to. My Hearers, you run
tremendous Hazards, if the Things be not Immediately hea^kened to. I am very
sensible, That New Years Day has too often been a Day of Paganizing
Superstitions. I am also sensible, That it would be a Criminal Thing to
alienate the Lords Day from the Intention of Sabbatizing to the Lord, in a
Commemoration of our SAVIUUR's Resurrection from the Dead. And yet I will
address you with some Lessons of PIETY, which will be but the more Beautiful
for the Season in which I bring them to you. There shall be the more of Cogency
and Pungency in them, for their coming unto you on a New Years Day. I will make
as a Bright a Beginning of the Year for you as I can; and as one who knows not
what a Year, no, nor what a Day may bring forth.

First, O Be very Thankful, very Thankful, for This, that you have had one Year
more, added unto the many Years, wherein the Glorious GOD has come looking fur
Fruit upon you. How Thankfully may you this Day say, as in Act. XXVI. 22.
Having obtained Help from GOD, I continue to this Day. This Day Consider, How
many ^ars have I seen, since I came into the World. Consider, How many Younger
than I, have been laid in the Grave, since I came into the World? Consider, How
often have I been very near unto Death my self since I came into the World? Add
this Consideration; How much have I provoked an Holy and Righteous GOD by my
Unfruitfulness, to have cut me down, many, many Years ago? Then fall down
before the Lord, with all possible Thankfulness. Yea, with surprised and amazed
Souls, and even swallowed up with Admiration at it, Cry out, O my GOD, I am
astonished at thy Patience! Oh, Let me make a Right use of it! Oh! Let it be
found, that thou in Love to my Soul have kept me so many Years from going down
into the Pit of Corruption.

Secondly. Confess it, Bewail it, that the Glorious GOD should so many Years
come looking for Fruit, and find so little of what he has looked for; and seek
and get the Pardon of it. Oh! Let it not be said This Day, as in Jer. VIII. 6.
I hearkened and heard; No Man Repented, saying, What have I done? This Day
examine your selves. You will upon Examination find, That you have brought
forth little of that Fruit which you should have had. You will find, That very
much evil Fruit has been found upon you. Oh! The Humiliations which you a^e by
your Unfruitfulness called unto! Cry out, Lord, I abhor my self, and I Repent
in Dust and Ashes! Cry out, Lord, such a Barren Tree deserves to be turned into
Dust and Ashes. Weep to the Lord for the Pardon of this Unfruitfulness. Plead
the Sacrifice of the Fruitful JESUS, who yet was Cut off. Let This be your only
Plea for your Pardon. The Cross is to be pleaded, that the Barren Tree may be
pardoned.

Thirdly. That you may be spared this Year also, yea, as not knowing whether
you shall be so, or no, Begin the Year with such Dispositions, and such
Resolutions, that some Good Fruit may even This Day be found upon you. Your
Good Fruit must not be put off, as what may one Year more be staid for. I do
vehemently This Day press for such Things as these.

First; O all you Unconverted ones, This Day, This Day, Turn to GOD; and Resign
yourselves up to the Conduct of your SAVIOR. Too long, Ah, too long, O
miserable ones, you have been under the Condemnation of a Total Barrenness.
It Is high Time for you, to come unto That; Psalm. CXIX. 59, 60. I thought on my
Ways, and I turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. I made Haste and I delayed not
to keep thy Commandments. Oh! Make Haste, and Think not of Delaying your Turn
to GOD, for one Year more. It Is enjoined upon you, Immediately to give up your
selves unto GOD, with Sorrows for your Wandering after Idols, and with Desires
that you may not offend any more. Immediately Receive your SAVIOR in all His
Offices, with all His Benefits. Immediately Resolve upon a Life of PIETY; and
say, Lord, I am Thine, Save me!

Secondly. If any of you are Conscious, of your having hitherto omitted any
thing that should have been some of the Good Fruit upon you, This Day put
yourselves into a way that the Year may not roll on much further, before you
are come unto it. Of This Good Fruit, let that Complaint be heard no longer;
Jer. XIII. 27. When shall it once be? This I press on those, that have not yet
set up the Worship of GOD in their Families. And this I press on those who have
not yet come into the sacred Fellowship at the Table of the Lord. Yea, I urge
for This; That we do every one of us This Day, study somewhat upon that
Question; In what points may I become yet more Fruitful unto GOD? Indeed I can
tell no better way to be spared this Year also. It has been an old saying;
Fructus Liberat Arborem. If the Tree would stand, let it bear. O Bearing Tree,
If thou fall This Year, it shall be only to Translate thee into the Eden that
is above.

There are Two or Three Meditations, which I entreat you in the Evening of This
Day, to give some Entertainment to. Muse, till the Fire burns.

First, Think This; Who knows, which are the Trees among us, that are to be cut
down this Year? It was of old said unto one; Jer. XXVIII. 16. This Year shall
thou die. Doubtless, There are some in the Auditory, who are This Year to die.
Every Year it has been so. And, Lord, Is it I? So may every one say. No one
knows, whose Lot it will be; whether it may not be his own, To die this Year.

Again; Think This; If I am cut down before I begin to bring forth Fruit unto
GOD, what will become of me? It Is a terrible Word; Matthew. VII. 19. Every Tree
that brings not forth good Fruit, is ^ewn down, and cast into the Fire. O
Tremble, Tremble, at the View of the Formidable Fire^ Look down into the
Devouring Fire, and the Evenlasting Burnings! and say, O Lord, I beseech thee,
deliver my Soul!

Finally; Think This; Though I should not be cut down, yet if I do not bring
forth good Fruit, I may be as bad as cut down. I will fay unto you, what will
be as Bad! As Bad as a cutting down will be that Sentence from the Mouth of
GOD; Matthew. XXI. 19. Let no Fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. To be
Judicially given up unto Eternal Blindness, and Hardness, and Ungodliness; O!
It Is a fearful Thing. Beware, Beware, lest this come upon you. Deprecate it
wonderfully.

And now Retire; If you presently bring forth Fruit, Even, This Day; for a To
Morrow must not be talked of; It Is well! But, if not, -- Then After That! -- who
can say, what is to follow? Oh! Consider of it.

I have done. I know not what sort of a New Year others may wish you. But I
wish you a Pious New Year; A New Year filled with the Fruits of PIETY; Full of
Goodness, and filled with all the Blessings of Goodness.

The Sons of GOD, Singing among The Trees of GOD; Full of Sap, and of Songs
before Him.
A Barren Tree! O, Why, My Lord,
This Cumberer of the Ground;
Why has it not yet heard the Word,
The Just Word, Cut it down!
It Is owing, O my SAVIOR, to
Thy Intercession still,
That I am saved and standing so,
And not thrown down to Hell.
But from this Time, Oh, let me be
A Tree of Righteousness:
Filled with the Fruits of it; A Tree
Which thou will own and Bless.
A Tree planted and pruned by GOD;
Fixed by His Waterside:
The Fruits thereof Rich, Sweet, and Good;
And Thou thence Glorified.
From the Forbidden Tree I am,
How Poisoned and Undone!
From thence, how dismal Mischiefs came,
And Deaths, in which I groan!
But, O my SAVIOR, By thy Death
Upon a Tree, thou art
The Tree of Life, to which my Faith
Flies with a Joyful Heart.
On Thee, O Tree of Life, I must
Rejoicing Feed and Live;
Thou Wilt me, when felled and laid in Dust,
A Resurrection give.
Yea, When below to Mortal Eyes
I must no more appear,
Transplanted to thy Paradise,
I shall still flourish there.
Gaudentius. The Joyful HARVEST.
Gal. VI. 9. In due Season we shall Reap, if we Faint not.


THE Joy of Harvest is now before us! Here is an Husbandry, that never will,
never can, miss of a Glorious Harvest! The Husbandry prosecuted in the Fields
of Nature, often misses of the Harvest expected by the Husbandman. Our Apostasy
from GOD, has brought a Curse upon the Earth, and a Failing of the Harvest
which we have Labored for. After much Labor, the Issue often is That; Joel I.
11, 12. Be ye ashamed, O ye Husbandmen; Because ^e Harvest of the Field is
perished. Joy is withered away from the Sons of Men. But in the Husbandry of
PIETY, a Blessed and a Joyful Harvest is never missed of. We are advssed from
Heaven of it; It shall have a Sure Reward. The Reward of PIETY is the Harvest
of it. Of this, the Holy SPIRIT of GOD has here given us this Assurance; Let us
not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall Reap, if we faint not.
It seems, The Work of PIETY may not be without its Wearisome Difficulties:
Things which our Carnal Minds may dispose us to be too soon weary of. But, Hold
on, Hold out, O Unwearied PIETY. There will be an Harvest, wherein thou shall
Reap, what will be a Great Reward, yea, a Full Reward of all: The Oracles of
our GOD have expressly called it so. But it is a Season that must be waited for.

Our Apostle is exhorting of the Faithful to shake off, yea, cut off. (with a
just Excommunication) the False Teachers from whom they suffered more than a
little Trouble. But at the same time, he exhorts them to advance a Liberal
Maintenance for the Orthodox, Diligent, Vigilant Ministers of the Gospel. He
would have them to beware, lest they mocked GOD in their Parsimony on this
Occasion; but asserts unto them, that their Liberality in this Matter, would
not fail of a Recompense. There would be a Desirable Harvest of it. But it is
asserted in such Terms, as to extend unto the whole Work of PIETY. And now,
having that Commission; Isa. III. 10. Say ye to the Righteous, that it shall be
well; For they shall eat the Fruit of their Doings: I will now execute it,
saying what I am thus led unto. What I have to say, is in this Admonition of
GOD our SAVIOR.

Whatever Difficulties the Work of PIETY may be encumbred withal, yet, Thy Work
shall be Rewarded, says the Lord: There will be a Joyful Harvest of it.

The Work of PIETY is, that Whole Duty of Man, which has been summed up in that
Wedge of Gold; Eccl. XII. 13. Fear GOD, and keep H^ Commandments; A Mass of
Gold, capable of being Beaten out, into how large Dimensions! Exceeding Broad.

Of this Work, it is ordered by the Wisdom of a Sovereign GOD, that it shall be
attended with Difficulties; even such as may render a Toilsome Husbandry a
Resemblance of it. That which creates the Difficulties of this Work, is
principally the Self-denial, which our Carnal Mind, makes necessary to be
exercised, in our doing of it. Our Flesh must be crossed, and our Appetites
must be mortified; yea, there are Enemies to be Encountered, that are not easily
to be Conquered; or else the Work of PIETY cannot be carried on.

But, GOD will not forget this Work and Labor of Love. O PATIENCE, Do thou
persist, even to Long-suffering, in the work of PIETY; There will be a Joyful
Harvest of it. Things must proceed according unto that Word; Jam. V. 7. Be
Patient, Brethren; -- Behold, The Husbandman waits for the precious Fruits of
the Earth, and has long Patience for it, until he receive the Early and Latter
Rain. Be ye also Patient. --

We have Two Enquiries before us. The first is, What will be the Harvest of
PIETY? What the Reward that shall be Reap^d of it? The second is; When will be
the due Season for it? When the Reaping Time? The Answer to both Enquiries, may
best join them together. And it shall be given in Two Propositions. In general,
We are taught, 1. Tim. IV. 8. Godliness has the Promise both of the Life which
^w is, and of that which is to come. In this Promise, there is laid up the
Harvest of Godliness; and what shall in the due Season be Reaped of it. More
particularly.

The first Proposition.
Even in this present Life, Laborious PIETY will see some Good Reward of its
Labor: In the midst of the Sufferings of this present Time, we shall Reap some
Harvest of our PIETY! Before we Die, we may see some First Fruits; and our PIETY
may have some Consequences, which may be some Compensations to us, for all the
Difficulties which have distressed it. In the Work of PIETY we may have those
things done for us, which may be a sort of Roasting Ears to entertain us, by
way of Earnest and Essay, toward the Fulfillment of that Word; Ephesians. VI. 8
Whatsoever Good Thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord. More
particularly.

First. If we lose any Temporal Enjoyments, in and for the work of PIETY, we
shall even in This World, Reap an Harvest of Spiritual Enjoyments, wherein our
Work will be Well-Rewarded. The Spiritual Enjoyments, of a Soul improving in
PIETY; growing in the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST;
having the Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST, more sensibly communicated unto it;
The Spiritual Enjoyments of GOD bringing Home His Electing, and Redeeming, and
Pardoning Love, in the precious Tokens thereof unto the Soul; The Spiritual
Enjoyments of a SAVIOR saying to the Soul, I am thy Salvation: These will be
enough to make a Rich Amends, for all that can be undergone in the Work of
PIETY. Soul, Thou are yet in thy Sins, if thou art not persuaded so; Yet
Unregenerate, if these Things, are not better to thee, than the Merchandise of
Silver, and the Gain of the finest Gold! Now, Hearken to some Remarkable Things.

It is observable; The People of GOD are put unto Considerable Expenses, that
the Ordinances of Heaven may be supported in the Churches of the Lord. In these
Expenses there is, what our Inspired Apostle here calls, A sowing to the
Spirit. There follows, Of the Spirit a Reaping of Life Everlasting. This will
be some Harvest of it. The Spirit of the Godly Man, who is Righteous and
Bountiful in these Expenses, will be most likely to profit under the Means of
Grace; most likely to flourish with such Fruits of the Spirit, as will bring on
Everlasting Life. The Good of the Word; verily, It Is more to be valued than the
Good of the World. GOD will bless thee with a Profitable Ministry.

An Observation akin to This, may be made; The more Pains any Take, and the
more Travel or Hardship, they pass through, that they may wait upon GOD in His
Institutions; The more does our Gracious GOD often grant unto such Devout
Souls, of Communion with Himself in them. They are well-paid for their Pains,
in what of GOD they meet withal. There will be an Immediate Harvest! The Rain
with which they have been Weather beaten, is requited in the Rain of the
Heavenly Doctrine, falling sweetly on their Souls. The Cold which has pinched
them, is requited in the Heavenly Warmth, with which they find their Souls
invigorated. Or, If they leave any Pleasant Company, for the sake of secret
Interviews with Heaven, they meet with such Pleasures in the Company of GOD,
that they can testify, An Hour in the Closet is better than a thousand
elsewhere.

Moreover; Christian, under Afflictions from the Hand of GOD, Let Patience have
its perfect Work. There will be this Harvest of it; The Consolations of GOD,
which are not small, shall fill thy Contented Mind. With much Submission bear
the Death of thy Offspring; Thy GOD will have this Mourners Cordial ready for
thee; I give my Son unto thee! Thou art one of my Children! It is now known
that thou fear GOD! With much Submission bear the Spoil of thy Estate; Thy
GOD will revive thee, with such an invaluable Recruit as this; I have laid up
for thee a Portion which no Spoiler can meddle withal. Submit cheerfully to
Bodily Sicknesses and Illnesses; Thou shall have in the Health of thy Soul,
that which will make it up.

Again; Under Injuries from the Hand of Man; Take no Personal Revenge; Be Full
of Goodness; and even overcome Evil with Good: Seek not that which Flesh and
Blood may call Satisfaction. There will be this Harvest of it. Upon thy readily
Forgiving the Wrongs which others have done unto thee, the Sealing SPIRIT of
GOD will powerfully say unto thee, Be of good Comfort, thy Sins are forgiven
thee. The Tranquillity of Soul, which thou shall enjoy in the sense of thy own
Pardon from GOD, while thou do generously Pardon the Worm that has wronged
thee; This, This will be the truest Satisfaction.

Finally; A Furious and Fiery Assault of Temptations, it is no easy thing to
Resist it. To gratify a Temptation, appears the most agreeable thing in the
World unto a Man, who has the Blinding Force of it upon him. There is no little
Difficulty, in saying, How shall I do this Wickedness, and Sin against GOD? But
now, the Harvest will be this. There is a mavelous Peace and Joy of Soul,
wherewith a Victory over Temptation uses to be accompanied. O Blessed
Overcomer, thou shall find a thousand times more Delight in Conquering of a
Temptation, than thou could have had in Consenting to it. Thus is there
accomplished, that Word concerning the Maxims of PIETY; Psalm. XIX. 11. In
keeping them there is great Reward.

Yea, Secondly; The Work of PIETY may Reap some Harvest, even in the Temporal
Enjoyments of this World. In the Work of PIETY, we are called often to part
with such Things, as appear, and we count our Interest: But the Work is often
Rewarded in those very Things. Our GOD will not suffer us to be Losers, in
those very Points wherein we offer to be so.

Another Catalogue of Remarkable Things, is now to be hearkened to.

Behold, The Harvest! O Well-doer, Trust thy GOD in the way of Well-doing: Thou
shall be no loser by thy Trust in GOD. A wondrous Thing fell out, in the Land
of Israel! The Israelites must go up Thrice a Year unto the stated Festivals.
They ran a great Venture in what they did. They left their Families exposed
unto the Enemies that surrounded them. Who should now protect their Families?
They had a Glorious Protector. GOD undertook their Protection; and said, Exodus
XXXIV. 24. No Man shall desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear before
the Lord thy GOD. They were to Trust GOD with all they had; and GOD kept all
they had. When we have plain Duty lying before us, let us do our Duty, and let
us trust GOD with the Event of it. The Event will be far better than if we had
shunned the Duty, because we feared the Event. The GOD of Truth loves to be
relied upon. We never fare so well, as in the way of Reliance upon GOD. The
Faithful Reprover afterward finds more Favor than the Fawning Flatterer.
Sacrifice thy Friends, O Man of GOD, in thy Testimonies against Miscarriages.
GOD will multiply thy Friends. It may be, He will make the Rebuked and Censured
Offenders themselves to become thy Friends. Eminent Confessors of the Lord,
often run desperate Risques in and for their brave Confessions. But how
^trangely have the Witnesses of GOD been often provided for! Turned out of
their Livings, the Sixth Chapter of Matthew has made Provision for them; They
have lived upon it.

Behold, The Harvest! Be very Bountiful, O thou Deviser of Good, in thy
Oblations for Pious Uses; Thou shall lose nothing, but be Enriched by thy
Bounties. To lay out will be to lay up. What a Judas calls, A Waste, thou shall
find far from so. We are so instructed; Eccl. XI. 1. Cast thy Bread-Corn on the
moist Ground; for thou shall find it after many Days; Or, In a multitude of
Days. For, Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the Lord spall preserve him,
and keep him alive. No Usury comparable to that of Lending to the Lord. GOD
Repays them who do it, with unaccountable Additions to their Possessions. While
Men do Good and Communicate, they find, that they Scatter and yet Increase.
They find that while they Honor the Lord with their Substance, their Barns are
filled with Plenty. O Atheistical Pharisees, Deride not these Faithful Sayings
of GOD!

Behold, The Harvest! With much Long-suffering put up and pass by Abuses, O
Servant of the Lord; Thou shall suffer no Loss, but be very much a Gainer, by
thy Long-Suffering. We read, 2 Timothy II. 24. The Servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be Gentle unto all Men, Patient. The less any Man strives for
himself, the more the Great GOD will do for him. Let one that apprehends
himself much Abused, keep down angry Resentments of the Abuses; and only set
himself to get as much Good as he can by the Evil that is intended him, and the
Indignities wherewith he is insulted, and study all possible Conformity to a
Lovely JESUS, who when He was Reviled, Reviled not again; but committed His
Cause to Him who judges Righteously. One would imagine, a Man should get but
little, by such a Lamblike Tameness. No; But GOD will espouse his Cause; GOD
will find a Time to bring forth his Righteousness as the Light. GOD will at
some time or other, show him a Token for Good, that they which hate him shall
see and be ashamed. Our SAVIOR said unto His Philadelphian Servant, I will
make them to know that I have loved thee.

Behold, The Harvest! Carry it well in thy several Relations, O Child of GOD;
Thy Good Carriage is what thou will be no loser by. We read, 1 Pet. II. 19.
This is Thank-worthy; GOD will Bless you for it: And anon, Men will also Thank
you. We are not Really Good, if we are not Relatively Good. But they who Deal
well with their several Relatives GOD often causes others to Deal well with
them. Especially, Children, Honor your Parents. A Conspicuous Recompense is
very commonly dispensed, unto those who treat their Parents as they ought to
do; and help them with a due Alacrity, when it shall be called for. The Jews
have a Saying, An Aged Mother is a Mine of Gold in a Family. Let none that
would be owned Christians, imagine otherwise. But in all Relations whatsoever;
Suppose any should not carry it well to us, yet let us carry it well to Them;
As a Paul did unto a People that very much mal-treated him. O thou Follower of
the Good One; Thou shall find the GOD of Patience, to be the GOD of Consolation.

Behold, The Harvest! O Candid Soul, Don't Repine, but Rejoice, at the
Prosperity of other People: Thou shall be no loser by thy Candor. We read,
Jam. IV. 5. The Spirit who dwells in us, vehemently wishes against Envy. They
who from the Dispositions of the Holy SPIRIT in them, keep under their Envy at
the Mercy of GOD unto other Men, and are full of Good Wishes to them, find GOD
showing of Mercy unto them, it may be, more than unto other Men. Their Good
Wishes do return into their own Bosoms at the last. Be Glad, when thou see
thy Neighbor Prosperous. This Ingenuity will make all the Prosperity of thy
Neighbor to become Thy own. It will also bespeak an Accession to thy own
Prosperity. GOD will say; Art thou glad of my Goodness to thy Neighbor? Thou
shall have more cause of Gladness: I will be as Good unto thee, as ever I have
been unto thy Neighbor.

As an Appendix to This; Take pleasure in Speaking well of other People. With
pleasure lay hold on all Opportunities, to Mention and celebrate what is
Laudable in them. See whether it now does not fall out unto thee, according to
that Word; With what Measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you again.

Behold, The Harvest! Be willing to ly Low, lay thy self Low, O Humble Soul;
Thou shall be no loser by thy Humility. Oh! The charming Invitation to
Lowliness! Luke XVIII. 14. He that Humbles himself shall be Exalted. So then,
Let us ly much in the Dust before the Lord. Let us do all we can to Glorify
GOD; But let us be willing to be Little, to be Nothing after all. Be even
afraid, left Men do unduly Magnify us, and render unto us the Respect which is
due to GOD alone. Be not at all Disturbed, though never so much Despised and
Rejected of Men. I dare not Say, and we should hardly care to Think, what will
be the Issue of Continual, Real, Sincere Self-Annihilation. It may too much
interfere with the proposed Self-Annihilation! But This may be told; Before
Honor is Humility. Self-Abasement, Self-Abasement, is the way to be made, how
serviceable.

Behold, the Harvest! Under all Adversity be full of Resignation, O Thou
Afflicted, and tossed with Tempest: Thou shall lose Nothing by thy Resigning of
every thing. To Resign every thing is the Best way, to Preserve what we have,
or to Restore what is taken away. One who had lost many Talents of Silver, and
Order given him to bear it quietly; had that comfort came with the Order; 2.
Chron. XXV. 9. The Lord is able to give thee much more than This. When there is
any thing taken from thee, compose thy Mind, and say, Lord, I will not open my
Mouth, because thou do it. Who can tell, but the Lord may Give thee much more
than all that is taken? My Friend, If one Loss come upon thee after another,
sit down before the Lord, and let the Will of GOD give Law to Thine: and say,
The Lord has given; the Lord has taken away; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.
I can tell of one who did so: And I can tell how it ended. The Lord blessed the
latter End of Job more than his Beginning.

Finally; Behold, the Harvest! Be first and most concerned for Spiritual
Blessings, O Spirituallyminded one; Thou shall be the more secure of Temporal
Blessings. Thou have the never-failing Word of thy SAVIOR for it: Mat. VI. 33.
Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and His Righteousness; and all these things
shall be added unto you. Be most sollicitous in thy Labor for the Eternal Food
that thy Soul may not Perish; It Is the way to make sure also of the Meat that
perishes. First and Most seek a Cure for the Maladies of thy Soul: 'Twill
operate well toward the Cure of thy Bodily Maladies. Be most sollicitous to be
at Peace with Heaven; so thy Enemies will be at Peace with thee. Let the
Lord's Day be entirely devoted unto the Lord; Things will go on the better all
the Week ensuing. Let the Lord have the Morning of every day; All Things will
go the better for it all the day. There will be smiles of GOD upon you, O you
Diligent seekers of GOD, wherein you will find him a Rewarder: Smiles which you
will wonder at, and say upon them; This I have had, O Lord, because I have kept
thy Precepts!

These, These are part of the ways of the Lord! But how little a Portion is
heard of them! And ye^, if we heard all, it would be but a very little Portion
in Comparison of what is to come: what is to come!

The Second Proposition.
'Twill be in the Life to come, that Laborious PIETY will receive its Full
Recompense of Reward: In our Arrival to THAT will be the Due Season, for the
Reaping that is to Reward our Labor; In another World, our PIETY will Reap an
Harvest, which Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, nor has it entered into the
Heart of Man to conceive. After Death we shall find such an Harvest, as will
Abundantly Infinitely, Eternally, Compensate for all the Difficulties of the
preceding Husbandry. Yea, O Believer. If thou art strong in Faith, it will
carry the^ so far a^ to say, I can freely Release the Holy One, from His
Promises to bestow any of This Worlds Good upon me; If He will bestow His
CHRIST, with the Blessings of an Healed Soul upon me, I will not complain, though
I should have nothing else in This World bestowed upon me. Freely, Freely will
I take up, with what is in a Better World prepared for them that wait upon a
GOD, who waits that He may be Gracious. This, This is the Language of a strong
Faith before the Lord.

It is a Memorable Passage; Psalm. CXXVI. 6. Concerning a Weeping Husbandman;
one who goes about his work, with an Heavy Heart. Afraid what will come of the
little Seed which he has to cast into the Earth; He carries forth the precious
Seed, a little to be sown; He surely does Return with Joy; he does bring back
his Sheaves. The Christian having done the part, not only of a Working but also
of a Weeping Husbandman, in a Life of PIETY, shall anon see a plenteous, yea, a
Joyful Harvest, of all his pious Obedience. But when, when will be the Harvest?
It is answered, Mat. XIII. 39. The Harvest is the End of the World. Indeed, we
shall have some Hansel of our Harvest, in what shall be done for our Spirits at
their Departure from our Bodies; which will be to us, in some sort, the End of
the World. Our Spirits will at our Expiration, be comforted in the Paradise of
GOD: So comforted, as to be Well-Rewarded, if we should Reap no more of all our
Labor in the Husbandry of PIETY. But as the Barley-Harvest was the Passover,
and fifty days after, even at Pentecost came the Wheat-Harvest; we shall Reap
yet more, and have the Perfection of all, when GOD our SAVIOR shall Judge the
Quick and the Dead, at His Appearing and His Kingdom. THEN, Then will be that
Word accomplished; Joh. IV. 36. He hat Reapeth, receives Wages, and gathers
Fruits unto Life Eternal. Our Harvest in the Consummation of it will be at the
Resurrection of the Just. It will be, when the Crown of Righteousness is to be
dispensed by the Righteous Judge unto all that Love His Appearing. It will be,
when the Time of the Dead shall come, that they shall be Judged, and the Lord
will give a Reward unto them that Fear His Name. O Thou Obedient Servant of
GOD; NOW is the Time that it shall be said unto thee, what is in Rev. XIV. 15.
The Time is come for thee to Reap. Yea, Blessed are the Dead which Die in the
Lord from Henceforth; For their Works will now follow them, in the Full Harvest
of them. Husbandman, Thou shall thy self be thrown under the Clods of the
Valley; thrown without a Metaphor, even where thou have thrown the Seed of thy
Expectation. Thou shall be thy self sown in the Earth, and there ly Dead, and
Buried and Covered, like the Corn which thou haste so often Interred there. Our
Apostle Paul was by the learned Witlings of Athens, called, A Seed-monger,
[which we translate, A Babbler,] no doubt, for comparing the Resurrection of the
Dead, as he did, unto the Rising of the Seed out of the Ground. But no Flout of
Infidelity shall defeat us of, The Consolation. The Quickening and Almighty
Voice of thy SAVIOR will fetch thee forth from the Dusty Chambers of Death.
Now, Doubtless thou shall come again Rejoicing, bringing thy Sheaves with thee;
Rejoicing in the Accomplishment of that Word; Psalm. XCVII. 11. Light is sown
for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart.

-- But, Oh! who can describe the Joy of their Harvest! The Joy of the Heavenly
World, a little of it, breaking into the Mind of a Believer, while he is yet on
this side of Heaven, Oh! It Ravishes him! It Amazes him! It even overcomes him!
He is not able to subsist under it. It is Insupportable. It makes him cry out,
Lord, stay thy Hand! If the Joy be so Exuberant, when a little of it here
enters into the Soul, what will thy Joy be, O Faithful Servant, when thou shall
Enter into the Joy of thy Lord! It is Impossible, I say again, Impossible, to
describe the Joy of a Just Man made perfect, in the Spiritual Blessings of the
Heavenly places; A Companion of Angels; An Heir of all things! One entirely
swallowed up with GOD, and GOD entirely possessing of him! The Joy of a Soul
got into Everlasting Rest! The Joy of a Soul which has all it can Wish! The Joy
of a Soul filled with all the Fullness of GOD! Or, what shall be done for us,
when according to Jud. 24. Our SAVIOR shall present us Faultless before the
presence of His Glory with exceeding Joy. In the mere Foreslight of this Joy,
we are so called upon, Rejoice and be Exceeding Glad; for great is your Reward
in Heaven. But, Oh, how shall we Rejoice, Oh, how Exceeding Glad shall we be,
when we come to receive that great Reward.

Corollary. I.
Our Judgment of PIETY! Surely, we must not Judge of some things in it, from
the present Aspect of them. The Work of PIETY has in it, the Toil of Husbandry;
Yea, such Things as may bring us into the Hazard of being Weary of well doing.
But now, Judge of Things from the Harvest of them. He that sees only the Toil
of the Husbandman, sees what looks very Discouraging. Poor Man, He is
Ploughing, and Planting, and Sowing, and Hilling, and Weeding, and Sweating,
and Rising Early, and laying, and leaving under Ground, all his Hope of living
above Ground. It looks very Disconsolately! Well; But wait a while. Some while
hence you will see this poor Man enriched with a Joyful Harvest. The Appointed
Weeks of Harvest are coming on. These Fill his Barns. Then! He says,
Well-employ'd all the Toil that comes to This! The serious Christian is the
Toiling Husbandman. Oh! The Labors, the Sorrows, the Fatigues, in which he
must keep waiting upon GOD all his Days! But now, From the Toiling part of
PIETY, look onwards to the Joyful part. Remember, There is an Harvest a coming.
It will not be long before the Light of the Glorious Face and CHRIST of GOD, will
put more Gladness into the Heart of the Believer, than any Increase of Corn and
Wine could give unto him. Soul, Take thy measures of PIETY, from, What is to
come. And on the other side, if the ways of Sin do for the present seem smooth,
and gay, and alluring, and there are Pleasures of Sin for a season; My Son, Be
not Enticed; Consent thou not. But, Oh! Think, on, what is to come! What is to
come! Think, What will ye do in the End thereof! [Consider, Eccl. XI. 9.]

This will bring on another Lesson. When the Prophet of GOD was Reasoning with
the People, about the Decay of PIETY among them; he said; 1. Sam. XII. 17. Is
it not Wheat Harvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, and He shall send
Thunder and Rain, that ye may perceive and see, that your Wickedness is great.
We are upon the Harvest: But, O Congregation of the Lord, There is coming on
Thunder with the Rain that falls upon you. The Thunder of GOD is going with
loud Peals to tell you, what will be the Harvest; in which all Wickedness will
terminate.

Corollary. II.
PIETY will have a Joyful Harvest: But will not Wickedness also have an
Harvest? You may be sure of it! Yea, O Wicked Creature, Thou shall have a very
Woeful Harvest of it. Verily, It will be That; Isa. XVII. 11. The Harvest will
be an Heap of Grief, and of desperate Sorrow. Peoples Reaping Time will be
according to their Sowing Time. You are so warned of GOD; Prove. XXII. 8. He
that sows Iniquity, shall Reap Vanity. And accordingly, it will anon come to
That; Hos X. 13. Ye have Ploughed Wickedness, ye have Reaped Iniquity, ye have
eaten the Fruit of Lies. The meaning of it, in short is, That GOD will render
to Men according to their Works. Unhappy Sinner, Thou art Sowing every Day.
Alas, There is a Sowing in all thy Sinning. Yea, even in thy doing of nothing
at all; there is a sort of Sowing. Ah, Sluggard, Thou will not Plough, because
of the Cold that is in thy Soul. Thou do but Laugh and Scoff at Industrious
PIETY. Thy Harvest will be to Beg in Harvest, and have nothing: To Beg, O great
GOD, Grant me some Fruits of Glory! And be Rejected, Unpitied, Have nothing
done for thee! Thou art Sowing; How? Not going forth and weeping, and bearing a
precious Seed; But, sowing in Mad Mirth, in Profanities, in Sensualities. The
young Fool, that has not sowed all his wild Oats, as we say, he is daily
sowing; daily doing what will by'nd by yield something to him. He that gets
Riches and not by Right, and uses the Projections and Practices of Dishonesty,
This Fool is daily sowing too; and a doing for something. But, what will be the
Harvest? O you Ploughers of Wickedness, and Sowers of Iniquity: What Harvest?
What Harvest? What shall you Reap of all that you are a-doing! This ye shall
have of my Hand, that ye shall ly down in sorrow, faith the Lord. Verily, The
Harvest of Impiety will have a Threshing in it. The great GOD threatened of old,
Amos. II. 12. [so it is to be read,] I will press your place, as a full Cart
presses the sheaf. It alludes to an ancient way of Threshing, which was, by
drawing a Laden Cart forwards and backwards over the Corn, that the Wheels
going over it, might force out the Grain. It Is to say, you shall have
Tribulation enough! Oh, the Tribulation, which the wicked shall feel under the
Heavy Judgments of GOD. But who can describe all the Horror of the Harvest! One
could say upon a sad Harvest: Isa. XVI. 9, 10. I will bewayl thee with weeping;
I will water thee with my Tears. For thy Harvest is fallen! And gladness is
taken away, and Joy out of the plentiful Field: There shall be no singing,
neither shall there be any shouting. And I will now say; I will Bewail with
weeping thy condition, O Sinner; I will water thee with my Tears, O thou
Forgetter and Forsaker of GOD. For thy Harvest is forlorn: Thy Gladness will be
forever taken away. Thy Harvest will be utter Darkness and Endless Burning.
There shall be no singing in it, neither shall there be any shouting in it. No,
there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth in it: Hunger and
cursing, and looking upward with uneasy and unceasing Lamentation.

Corollary. III.
Then, Faint not! Oh! For unfainting PIETY! The Thing to be now endeavored is,
that the Labor of the Husbandman may not fail. Wherefore, To work, All Hands!
And, Oh, Do with your might what your Hands find to do; Because there will be
an Harvest, beyond the Grave, whither you are going.

With an unfainting PIETY, Labor to Acquaint your selves with your admirable
SAVIOR, and live by the Faith of the Son of GOD. Labor to Acknowledge GOD in
all your ways. Labor to Mortify the Sin that easily besets you. Labor --
whether you Pray, or whatever else you do in the service of GOD, Labor
servently in it. Of all this Labor, there will be profit; You will see an
Harvest. Behold, I bring that Advice from Heaven unto you; 1. Cor. XV. 58. Be
always abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know, that your
labor shall not be in Vain in the Lord. I do not propound a Faultily Mercenary
Obedience, when I say, Have Respect unto the Recompense of Reward. Let the
prospect of the Harvest, Encourage you, Animate you. Go on patiently, and
vigorously, from the View of the Joy set before you! All the Tears, with which
your Labor may be accompanied, GOD your SAVIOR has a Lacrymatory for them;
They are every one of them in His Bottle; The Tears of Repentance well pursued,
and the Tears of Assliction well endured; These also are a precious Seed; and
there will be a glad Harvest of them, in the Day, when our GOD shall wipe away
all Tears from our Eyes.

Go, on, O unfainting PIETY; Heaven, Heaven, Even thy HARVEST there, will make
Amends for all.

The Songs of HARVEST.
IT IS not the Tilled, Poor, Lifeless Earth
Which gives me all my Store.
No: It Is my GOD! From Him comes forth
All that has filled my Floor.
For what Iv'e gathered from the Field
Thee, Oh! my GOD I bless.
But, Oh! that I Fruits too may yield
To Him who me does dress!
My Soul, with Gladness filled, and Food;
Returns, what shall be made?
In this Abundance serve thy GOD,
In Him for ever glad.
Now in Obedience all my Days
Hard at my Work I Will keep;
Him I Will take pains to please and praise;
Assured, That I shall Reap.
Yea, If I must through Sorrows go,
And Weeping Eyes employ;
I Am sure, That they in Tears who Sow
At length shall Reap with Joy.
But, Oh, What shall I Reap anon!
What Eyes did ever see,
Or to what Man on Earth is known,
What will the Harvest be!
My JESUS, My Rewarder Thou Will be; and more than so:
Thou my Reward wilt be. And now
No Higher can I go.
Agricultura Pia. OR, The Wishes of PIETY, Produced by the Affairs of HUSBANDRY.
IT is not enough that the HUSBANDMAN has been with Six or Seven Treatises thus
Preached unto. We must make him find himself surrounded with Preachers. In all
his Affairs, he must find so many Preachers. Under the Admonitions of GOD let
him come to these pious Aspirations. My Friend, Thou art a Dead Man, if thou
Breathest not. Oh! May the Glorious GOD, who knows thy Breathing, hear it
proceeding from thee, in such Supplications.

On the View of the Ground.
Lord; I see whither I am going! I am walking and working on my Grave. Out of
the Ground was my Body taken at the First. It will not be long before the
Dustereeurn to the Earth as it was. O may my Spirit be saved in the Day of the
Lord!

Fruitful Ground.
Lord; Make me a Fruitful Soil; and full of those things which will render me a
grateful Spectacle to Heaven under thy Cultivations.

Barren Ground.
Lord; Leave me not under the Curse of a Barren Soil; and a Soul Reprobate unto
every good Work which thou requirest of me.

On the View of the Dung employed for Fertilizing of the Ground.

Lord; Let me improve in all Goodness, under the Afflictions, and particularly
under the Reproaches, which thou do in thy Providence order me to be Dung'd
withal.

What an Humbling Thought is it, That without the Dispensations of the Dunghill,
there will be little Good found upon me!

On the View of the Weeds, which disgrace the Ground.

Lord; Extirpate out of my Soul, those Lusts which are abominable Weeds, and
which render me an Useless, and an Hurtful Creature in the World.

On the View of the Fence about the Ground.
Lord; Thou have in thy Law ordered a Fence to be about me. I Bless thee, I
Praise thee, I Love thee, for such a Fence. It Is infinitely for my Advantage to
be Fenced so. But, Oh! Let me by my continual Watchfulness keep up the Fence:
And let there be no Inroad of Wild Things upon me. If I permit any sinful
Temptations to break in upon me, what Mischiefs will be done unto me! My Soul
is the Field of a Man void of Understanding, if the Stone-wall thereof be
broken down!

But, O my GOD, Let me have the Fence and Hedge of thy Protection about all my
Interests.

On the View of the Stones in the Ground.
Lord; Save me from an Heart, that shall be as Insensible as the Stones of the
Field; and that shall feel as little Impression and Improvement, from the Means
of Good, as the Stones do from the Rains falling on them.

On the View of the Worms in the Ground.
Lord; Here is my Mother and my Sister. As Frail and Vile I am as the Worms of
the Dust. Oh! May I ever lie with all possible Self-Abasements in the Dust
before Thee. More easy can thou crush me, than I can one of the Worms under
my Feet. Oh! Let me not lift up my Head in Rebellion against thy Glorious
Majesty.

On the View of the Corn under a Threshing.
Lord; Let thy Graces in my Soul come forth with proper Exercises, when I am
under any Tribulation: And let there be desirable Effects of it, when I am Thy
Threshing, and the Corn of thy Floor.

On the Husking.
Lord; Make me willing to be stripped of all that thou would have me to part
withal, in order to my coming to what thou would have me brought unto.

On the Winnowing.
Lord; When such a Wind shall be raised as will discover, and will distinguish,
the sincere Professors of Religion from them that are not so, let me be found
Good Grain for the House of my GOD.

On the Chaff.
Lord; Let me not be one of the Ungodly, who are before thy Wrath like the
Chaff chased by the Wind. Oh! Let me not have my Portion with the Chaff, which
GOD will burn up with Unquenchable Fire.

On the View of the Barn replenished.
Lord; Let me not be the Fool, whose Full Barn bewitches him, to flatter a
Soul, with a Fancy of Good Things laid up for it in this World! when his
unhappy and unfurnished Soul is immediately stripped of all; and unexpectedly
dragged into eternal Misery.

But, Oh! Let me be Good Grain, at last lodged in that Barn, where my GOD lays
up His Treasures.

On the View of the Sheep.

Lord; Give me the excellent Innocence, and Patience and Usefulness, which
becomes the People af thy Pasture, and the Sheep of thy Hand.

But, Oh! What Precious Thoughts on the Lamb of GOD, and the SAVIOR who was as
the Sheep before the shearers, in His Wonderful Sufferings for me, am I led
unto!

Thou art my Shepherd, O my SAVIOR, and I shall want nothing, if thou take me
under thy Blessed Conduct.

On the View of the Ox.
Lord; Give me to know my Owner: And help me to submit unto thy Yoke; and carry
the Yoke both of Obedience, and of Adversity, without repining at it; And may I
need no sharp Goads to quicken my Pace in the Work I am called unto.

On the View of the Cow.
Lord; Being fed in the Fat Pastures of thy Ordinances, let me yield what is
justly expected of me

And Oh! Let the sincere Milk of thy Word, be the Food of my Soul.

On the View of the Horse.

Lord; Let me not be as the Horse that has us Understanding. Let not Satan be
my Rider. Do thou take me under thy Gracious Guidance.

And since I have such agreeable Servants by my GOD allowed unto me, and
bestowed upon me; Oh! What Service may I do for Him that is our Master! What;
What shall I render to the Lord!

On the View of the Swine.
Lord; Let me not be one of those Filthy Sinners, which are of little Use while
they Live; and which it is in vain to cast Pearls before; and which after
Washing, will return to wallowing in the Mire.

On the View of the Birds.
Lord; Since I behold the Fowls of the Air; that they Sow not nor Reap, nor
gather into Barns, yet my Heavenly Father feeds them, I will cheerfully depend
on thy Fatherly Care, to feed me and mine, with a Food convenient for us.

On the View of the Bees.
Lord, Give me to lay up, what I may hereafter live on; And especially to lay
up a stock of Understanding and Experience, which may be sweet like the Honey.
Let me be no Drone in the Hive of the Commonwealth.

Let thy Words also be to me sweet beyond the Honey and the Honeycomb.

And let the Words which thou shall help me to speak, prove sweet unto those
whom they are addressed unto.

On the View of the Ants.
Lord; Help me to consider the ways of those whom thou sendest the Sluggards
to, and be wise; and make a seasonable and sufficient Provision for a Future
State, and lay up a good Foundation for the Time to come.

Yea, In the ways of Industry and Honesty, let me provide aforehand also, for
the Temporal Necessities, which I should have a Foresight of.

On the View of Snakes.
Lord; Let me not be found among the Seed of the Serpent; or belong to the
Generation of Vipers.

Let my JESUS, the promised and powerful Serpent-killer, be my Redeemer, and
rescue me from the Death, which the Old Serpent has brought upon me.

I look up unto thee, O my SAVIOR, that I may be saved from the Stings of the
Fiery Serpents that surround me in the Wilderness where I am a Sojourner.

On the View of the Orchard.
Lord; Let me be one of those, of whom thou have promised, They shall be
called, The Trees of Righteousness, the Planting of the Lord, that He may be
Glorified.

And, Let all the Sad Things which befall me, be only thy Pruning of me (if need
be) that I may bring forth more Fruit unto thee.

On the View of the Garden.
Lord; Let my Soul be as a Watered Garden before thee; and be filled with such
Things as will be well-pleasing unto thee.

Yea, Come thou South Wind; and O Holy SPIRIT, Blow thou upon my Garden; and
let thy Afflations cause the Odours thereof to flow out; And let the Beloved of
my Soul, coming into His Garden, find that which will be pleasant unto Him
there.

On the Burning of the Woods.
Lord; I believe my SAVIOR will shortly descend in Flaming Fire at and for the
destruction of the Man of Sin. The Day of the Lord will burn like an Oven, and
all that do wickedly shall be Stubble in it. A New Earth, wherein shall dwell
Righteousness, will be the Consequence of this Tremendous Conflagration. Oh!
That in That Day, I may find Mercy with the Lord! In the mean Time, why should
I set my Heart upon an Earth, which is, none can say, How soon, to fall under
the Burning Vengeance of GOD!

But there is One Illustrious Creature of GOD, which it would be strange, if it
should be forgotten by our Husbandman.

The SUN.
The SUN arises, -- Man goes forth unto his Work, and unto his Labor, until
the Evening.

The SUN was no doubt, one of the First Objects, in the ancient Idolatry,
wherein the Evil Heart of Unbelief in the Children of Men, betimes disposed
them to Depart from the Living GOD. And if any Visible Creature could stand
fair for Adoration, the SUN would bid as fair as any for it; and with more
Shadow of Reason be adored, than many Things, which the more Bruitified Pagans
Deified. But, GOD forbid! If we Behold the SUN when it shines, our Mouth shall
not kiss our Hand unto it. We will Fear GOD, and give Glory to HIM alone.

How notably does the Sun, as an Instrument in the Hand of the Glorious GOD,
Illuminate This, as well as all the other Planets, and their Satellits, that
move about it, as the wondrously contrived Center of them! How notably does the
Sun, though but Instrumentally still, Invigorate, the whole Vegetable as well as
Animal World; So that if its Influences were obstructed or suspended, the Earth
would mourn and fade away; the Land would be utterly emptied and utterly
spoiled!

Look to the Heavens, O HUSBANDMAN; and Glorify the Infinite Father of Lights,
and maker of the SUN, who keeps the World from Languishing, by the Rays which
He sends forth from such a Creature upon it. Are not the Eyes, which cannot
behold the SUN, much more dazzled before the Infinite GOD, with whom there is
terrible Majesty!

But let thy Thoughts proceed unto thy SAVIOR, who is, The Light of the World.
Think, and wish, at this rate.

O Thou SUN of Righteousness; Do Thou Rise unto me with Healing in thy Wings.
Thou art as Useful and as Needful unto my Soul, as the Sun is unto the World.
Thou art unto the Intellectual World, what the Sun is to the Material. In thy
Light, Oh! Let me see Light; and by Thy Light, Let me walk through Darkness. Do
thou Impart Life, and Warmth, and Growth unto me. O Thou Face of GOD, shine
thou upon me, and I shall be Saved. Lord, I perish, if thou hide thy Face from
me!

Behold, The PIETY of the HUSBANDMAN; upon his Exercise whereof we may say,
Isa. XXVIII. 26, 29. His GOD does instruct him to Discretion, and does teach
him. -- This also comes forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in Working.

We read concerning a Great KING, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 10. He was a lover of
Husbandry. Yea, the Subject of Husbandry has been adorned, if I am not
misinformed, by the Writings and Labors of more than Twenty Kings. But here is
that more Noble Husbandry, which the Glorious KING of Heaven will with Delight
look down upon: And an Husbandry, which it would be no Diminution for Kings to
be served from. Such Husbandry will somewhat praelibate and emulate the Tillage
of that Paradise wherein the Saints that shall be caught up to meet the Lord,
that they may escape the Flames of the Burning World, shall afterward come
down changed and sinless, and in a New Earth wherein shall dwell Righteousness,
they shall plant Fields, and eat the Fruit of them; and the Blessed Ones who
see GOD, shall also Inherit the Earth.

FINIS.
Eratulella.
P. 16. l. 13. f. Our r. One.

P. 43. l. 3. f. Lawful r. awful.

P. 45. l. 7. r. in it.

P. 93. l. 14. f. Felicity r. Fertility.

There are a very few more Literals, not worth Noting.

Advertisement.
READER, It was proposed, that this Book might have been rendered a yet more
Complete FAMILY-BOOK, by serving more Explicitly the Interests of PIETY in Two
Instances, with Two Supplements. I. Family Religion Excited and Assisted. II. A
Monitor for Communicants. But because it was found, that these would swell the
Book beyond what was at first intended, they are laid aside; And they are to be
had by themselves, in Two Single Sheets, at the Booksellers.


