The New England PRIMER Enlarged.

For the more easy attaining the true Reading of ENGLISH To which is added, The
Assembly of Divines CATECHISM

BOSTON: Printed by S Kneeland, and T. Green, Sold by the Book Sellers. 1727

(...) will not a^part from it.

Chap. 23. 17, 18. Let not thy hears (...) sinners, but be thou in the (...) of
the Lord all the day long.

For surely there is an end, and thy expectation shall not be cut off, Ephesians. 1.
1. Children obey your (...) in the Lord, for this is right.

Of Serving GOD*

^. God^ will have no time to save (...), if, we find no day to serve Him^

^ Shall we have six. days in seven, and God not one?

1 Chronicles. 28, 9. My son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve Him with a
perfect hears, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts.

a b c d e f g (...) n o p q r s (...) y z and

Vowels.

A E I O U Y a e i o u y

Consonants, b c d f g h i k l m n p q r s t v w x z

Double Letters, ff ss st fi si sh fl sl ffi ssi ^^ c^

Italick Letters.

Aa Bb Cc Dd Ee Ff Gg Hh Ii Kk Ll Mm Nn Oo Pp Qq Rr Ss Tt Uu Ww Xx Yy Zz

Italick Double Letters

ff ss ^^ si sh sl fl sl ff^ ^^^ ssi c^

The (...) English Letters, A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U W X Y Z.

The Small English Letters.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t u w x y z ^.

Great Letters.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

Easy Syllables for Children.
ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud af of if of uf ag eg ig og ug ak
ek ik ok uk al el il ol ul am em im om um an en in on un ap ep ip op up ar er
ir or ur as es is os us at et it ot ut ax ex ix ox ux ba be by bo bu ca ce ci
co cu da de di do du fa fe fi fo fu ga ge gi go gu ha he hi ho hu ka ke ki ko
ku la le li lo lu ma me mi mo mu na ne ni no nu pa pe pi po pu ra re ri to ru
sa se si so su ta te ti tu
Words of one Syllable.
Are be child face air best clay fine add bed cry fair all hold cup few ape bad
ear fight God kid grace give great kind heart hat grant kill had has good kick
goose glass grass kiss hair he grow knee head health heal long nine peace how
man no peep hide maid nose pence knit mole of pitch known moon old play knew
more once pure
Words of two Syllables.
Ab-sent Absent Bold-ly Boldly Con-stant Constant De-pend Depend En-close
Enclose Fa-ther Father Glo-ry Glory Hus-band Husband
Words of three Syllables.
A-bu-sing Abusing Be-witch-ing Bewitching Con-found-ed Confounded
Drun-ken-ness Drunkenness E-ras-mus Erasmus Fa-cul-ty Faculty God-li-ness
Godliness Ho-li-ness Holiness Im-pu-dent Impudent Ka-len-der Calendar.
Words of four Syllables.
Ac-com-pa-ny Accompany Be-ne-vo-lence Benevolence Ce-re-mo-ny Ceremony
Dis-con-tent-ed Discontented E-ver-last-ing Everlasting Fi-de-li-ty Fidelity
Glo-ri-fy-ing Glorifying Hu-mi-li-ty Humility In-fir-mi-ty Infirmity.
Words of five Syllables.
Ad-mi-ra-ti-on Admiration Be-ne-fi-ci-al Beneficial Con-so-la-ti-on
Consolation De-cla-ra-ti-on Declaration Ex-hor-ta-ti-on Exhortation
For-ni-ca-ti-on Fornication Ge-ne-ra-ti-on Generation Ha-bi-ta-ti-on Habitation
In-vi-ta-ti-on Invitation
A In Adam's (...) We Sinned all.

B Thy Life to Mend This Book Attend.

C The Cat does play And after stay.

D A Dog will bite A Thief at night.

E An Eagles flight Is out of sight.

F The (...) Fool Is (...) at School.

G As (...) the Glass Man's life does pass.

H My Book and Heart Shall never part.

J (...) feels the Rod (...) blesses GOD.

K Our KING the good No man of blood.

L The Lion bold The Lamb does hold.

M The Moon gives light In time of night.

N Nightingales sing In Time of Spring.

O The Royal Oak it was the Tree That saved His Royal Majestic.

P Peter denies His Lord and cries.

Q Queen Esther (...) in Royal State To Save the JEWS from dismal (...)

R Rachel does (...) For her first born.

S Samuel anoints Whom God appoints

T Time cuts down all Both great and small.

U Uriah's ^eauteous Wife Made David leek his Life.

W Whales in the Sea God's Voice obey.

X Xerxes the great did die, And so must you and I.

Y Youth forward ^lips Death soonest nips.

Z Zacheus he Did climb the Tree. His Lord to lee.

Now the Child being entered in his Letters and Spelling, let him learn these
and such like Sentences by Heart, whereby be will be both instructed in his
Duty, and encouraged in his Learning.

The Dutiful Child's Promises;
I Will fear GOD, and honor the KING. I will honor my Father and Mother. I
will Obey any Superiors. I will Submit to my Elders. I will Love my Friends. I
will hate no Man. I will forgive my Enemies, and pray to God for them. I will
as much as in me lies keep all God's Holy Commandments. I (...) my (...). I
(...) keep the Lord's Day Holy* I will Reverence God's Sanctuary, For our GOD
is a consuming Fire.
An Alphabet of Lessons for Youth.
A Wise Son makes a glad Father, but a (...) Son is the heaviness of his Mother.

BEtter is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great creasure and trouble
therewith.

COme unto CHRIST all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and He will give you
rest.

DO not the abominable thing which I hate, says the Lord.

EXcept a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

FOolishness is bound up in the heart of a Child, but the rod of Correction
shall drive it far from him.

GRieve not the Holy Spirit.

HOliness becomes God's (...) for ever.

IT is good for me to draw near unto God.

KEep thy Heart with all Diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life!.

LIars shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone.

MAny are the Afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
them all.

NOw is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation.

OUt of the abundance of the heart the mouth speake^^.

PRay to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly.

QUit you like Men, be strong, stand last in the Faith.

REmember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.

SAlvation belongs to the Lord.

TRust in God at all times ye people; pour out your hearts before him.

UPon the wicked God shall rain an horrible Tempest.

WOE to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall
be given him.

EXHort one another daily while it is called to ^^y, left any of you be (...)
through the deceitfulness of Sin.

YOung Men ye have overcome the wicked one.

Z^al has consumed me because thy enemies have forgotten the words of God.

Choice Sentences.
1. (...) will make thee leave (...), or (...) will make thee leave praying. 2.
Our Weakness and Liabilities break not the bond of our (...). 3. What we are
afraid to (...) before Men, we should be afraid to think before God.
The LORD's Prayer.
Our Fa-ther which art in Hea-ven, Hal-low-ed be thy Name. Thy king-dom come.
Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Hea-ven. Give us this day our d^^-ly
Bread. And for-give us our Debts ^s we for-give our Deb^tors. And lead us not
in-to Temp-ta-ti-on, but de-li-ver us from e-vil, for thine is the King-dom,
the Pow-er and the Glo-ry, for e-ver, A-MEN.

The CREED.
I Be-lieve in GOD the Fa-ther Almigh-ty. Ma-ker of Hea-ven and Earth. And in
Je-sus Christ his on-ly Son our Lord, which was con-ceiv-ed by the Ho-ly Ghost,
Born of the Vir-gin Mary, Suffer-ed (...) Pon-ti-us Pi-late, (...) the quick
and the dead. I be-lieve in the Ho-ly Ghost, the Ho-ly Ca-tho-lick Church, the
Com-mu-ni-on of Saints, the For-give-ness of Sins, the Re-sur-rec-ti-on of the
Bo-dy, and the Life E-ver-lost-ing A-MEN.

The Ten Commandments. Exodus XX.
GOD spoke all these Words saying I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other gods before me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
(...) that is ^n Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in
the Water under the Earth; thou shall not (...) down thy felt to them, not
serve them, for I the Lord thy God am a jesus, (...) the uniquity of the Father
upon the Children, unto the (...). (...) (...)

(...)
(...),
(...),
No false (...), Mind little play,
By no (...), Make no delay,
It doing Good
Awake, arise, behold thou have
Thy Life a Leaf, thy Breath a Blast,
At Night lie down prepared to have
Thy sleep, thy death, thy bed, thy grave.
Learn these four Lines by Heart.
Have Communion with few
Be intimate with ONE.
Deal justly with all
Speak Evil of none.
The Names and Order of the Books (...) the Old and New Testament.
GEnesis Exodus (...) Numbers
Joshua Judges Ruth I. Samuel II. Samuel I. Kings II. Kings I. Chronicles II.
Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Solomon's Song
(...) Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah
Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi.
MAtthew Mark Luke John The Acts Romans I. Corinthians II. Corinthians
Galatians Ephelians Philippians Colossians I. Thessalonians II. Thessalonians
I. Timothy II. Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James I. Peter II. Peter I. John
II. John III. John Jude Revelations.
The numeral Letters and Figures* which serve for (...) finding if any Chapter,
Psalm, and (...) in the Bible.
i 1 one ii 2 two iii 3 three iv 4 four v 5 five vi 6 six vii 7 seven viii 8
eight ix 9 nine x 10 ten xi 11 eleven xii 12 twelve xiii 13 thirteen xiv 14
fourteen xv 15 fifteen xvi 16 sixteen xvii 17 seventeen xviii 18 eighteen xix
19 nineteen xx 20 twenty xxi 21 twenty one xxii 22 twenty two xxiii 23 twenty
three xxiv 24 twenty four xxv 25 twenty five xxvi 26 twenty six xxvii 27 twenty
seven xxviii 28 twenty eight xxix 29 twenty nine xxx 30 thirty xxxi 31 thirty
one xxxii 32 thirty two xxxiii 33 thirty three xxxiv 34 thirty four xxxv 35
thirty five xxxvi 36 thirty six xxxvii 37 thirty seven xxxviii 38 thirty eight
xxxix 39 thirty nine xl 40 forty xli 41 forty one xlii 42 forty two xliii 43
forty three xliv 44 forty four xlv 45 forty five xlvi 46 forty six xlvii 47
forty seven xlviii 48 forty eight xlix 49 forty nine l 50 fifty li 51 fifty one
lii 52 fifty two liii 53 fifty three live 54 fifty four lv 55 fifty five lvi 56
fifty six lvii 57 fifty seven lviii 58 fifty eight lix 59 fifty nine lx 60
sixty lxi 61 sixty one lxii 62 sixty two lxiii 63 sixty three lxiv 64 sixty
four lxv 65 sixty five lxvi 66 sixty six lxvii 67 sixty seven lxviii 68 sixty
eight lxix 69 sixty nine lxx 70 seventy lxxi 71 seventy one lxxii 72 seventy
two lxxiii 73 seventy three lxxiv 74 seventy four lxxv 75 seventy five lxxvi 76
seventy six lxxvii 77 seventy seven lxxviii 78 seventy eight lxxix 79 seventy
nine lxxx 80 eighty lxxxi 81 eighty one lxxxii 82 eighty two lxxxiii 83 eighty
three lxxxiv 84 eighty four lxxxv 85 eighty five lxxxvi 86 eighty six lxxxvii
87 eighty seven lxxxviii 88 eighty eight lxxxix 89 eighty nine xc 90 ninety xci
91 ninety one xcii 92 ninety two xciii 93 ninety three xciv 94 ninety four xcv
95 ninety five xcvi 96 ninety six xcvii 97 ninety seven xcviii 98 ninety eight
xcix 99 ninety nine c 100 an hundred

MR. John R^gers, Minister of the Gospel in London, was the first Martyr in Q.
Mary's Reign, and was burnt at Smith field, February the (...) 1554. His Wife,
with nine small Children, and one at her Breast, following him to the Stake,
with which sorrowful fight he was not in the least daunted, but with wonderful
Patience died courageously for the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Some few Days before his Death, he writ the following Exhortation to his
Children.

GIve (...) my Children (...) words,
whom God has (...), bought,
Joy up his laws (...),
and print them in (...)
I leave you (...) a little (...),
for you to look upon;
That you may (...)
when he is dead and gone
Who for the^ hope of heavenly things,
while he did here remain,
Gave over all (...) golden (...)
to Person and to Pai^*
Where, among my (...)
enclosed in the (...),
(...) my Death
I did compose this Work.
And for Example to your Youth;
to whom I wish all good;
I send you here God's perfect Truth;
and seal it with my Blood.
To you my Heirs of earthly Things;
which I do leave behind,
That you may read and understand;
and keep it in your mind.
That as you have been Heirs of that
which once (...) wear away,
You also may (...) that part,
which never shall decay.
Keep always GOD before your eyes;
with all your whole intent;
Commit no Sin in any wise,
Keep his Command (...)
Abhor that (...) Rome,
and all (...)
And drink not of (...) Cup,
obey not her (...)
Give honor to (...) dear,
remember well (...),
And recompense her in her Age
with the like love again.
Be always ready for her help,
and let her not decay;
Remember well your Father all
that should have been your stay,
Give of your Portion to the Poor,
as Riches do (...);
And from the peedy naked Soul
turn not away your eyes.
For he that does not hear the cry
of those that, stand in (...),
Shall cry himself and not be heard,
when he does hope to speed.
If GOD has given you increase
and blessed well your store.
Remember you are put in trust,
and should (...)
Beware (...)
lee (...)
Keep (...) your (...)
that (...)
(...)
(...)
And they that do defile the same,
shall surely come to bought.
(...) never Proud by any means,
build not thy house too high,
But always have before your eyes,
that you are born to die.
Defraud not him that hired is,
your labor to sustain;
And pay him still without delay,
his wages for his pain.
And as you would another M^n
against you should proceed,
Do you the same to them again,
if they do (...) in need.
^mpart your Portion to the poor,
in Money and in (...),
And (...) the seeble (...)
o^ that which you (...) ea^.
Ask Counsel always (...) the wi^e,
give (...) unto (...),
And never (...)
of him (...)
Be always (...) to the (...),
with Prayer and with Praise,
Begging of him to bless your work,
and to (...) your ways.
Seek first I say the living GOD,
and always him adore;
And then he sure that he w^ll bless
your basket and your store.
And I beseech Almighty GOD,
replenish you with Grace,
That I may meet you in the Heavens,
and see you face to face.
And (...) Body barns,
(...) to my (...);
That I cannot enjoy your love,
according to my (...).
(...) I do hope that when the Heavens,
shall vanish (...)
I shall see you in perfect shape,
in (...) and (...)
And that I may enjoy your (...),
and you (...)
I do (...) the (...) LORD
to here you (...)
Though here my (...)
it (...) Fire to (...),
My Soul I trust will straight ascend,
to live with GOD on (...).
What though this C^^case (...) a while,
what though this Life decay.
My Soul I trust will be with GOD,
and live with him for aye.
I know I am a Sinner born,
from the Original,
And that I do deserve to die,
by my Fore-Father (...)
But by our Savior's (...),
which on the (...),
Who (...),
to (...),
I (...),
(...)
(...) the Lord my Soul in Heaven
(...) with Glory (...).
(...) welcome Death, the end of (...),
(...) prepared to die,
(...) will (...) my Soul,
up to the Lord on (...)
Farewell my Children to the (...)
where you most yet (...)
The Lord o^ Host be your (...)
till we do meet again.
Farewell my true (...)
my Children (...),
I hope in Heaven (...) all,
(...)
(...)
as you (...)
you shall walk (...) your days,
until your (...)
GOD grant you (...) your days,
as he (...)
That I may meet you (...),
where I do (...)
The SHORTER CATECHISM Agreed upon by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at
Westminster.
Quest. WHat is the chief End of Man?

Answ. Man's chief End is to Glorify God, and to Enjoy Him for ever.

Q. What Rule has God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy Him?

A. The Word Of God which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, is the only Rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him.

Q. What do the Scriptures principally teach?

A. The Scriptures principally teach, what Man is to believe concerning God,
and what duty God requires of Man.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit, Infinite, Eternal, and Unchangeable, in His Being. Wisdom,
Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth.

Q. Are there (...) Gods than One?

A. There is (...) ONE only, the living and true God.

Q. How many persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are Three Persons in the God Head, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and these (...) are One GOD, the same in Substance, equal in Power and
Glory.

Q. What are the Decrees of God?

A. The Decrees of God are his eternal Purpose, according to the Counsel of his
(...). Will, whereby for his own Glory, he has foreordained wharf ever comes
to pass.

Q. How does God execute his Decrees?

A. God executes his Decrees in the Works of Creation and Providence.

Q. What is the Work of Creation?

A. The Work of Creation is God's Making all things of Nothing, by the Word of
his Power, in the space of six days, at all very good.

Q. How did God create Man?

A. God created Man Male and Female, after his own Image, in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and Holiness, with Dominion over the Creatures.

Q. What are (...) Works of Providence?

A. God's Works of Providence are his most holy, wise and powerful preserving
and severing all his Creatures and all their Actions.

Q. What special of Providence (...) Man in the (...)

A. When God had created Man, (...) into a (...) of Life with him, upon (...)
then of perfect. Obedience forbidding him to Eat of the Free of Knowledge of
good and evil upon pain of Death.

Q. Did our first Parents continue in the (...) wherein they were created?

A. Our first Parents being (...) the freedom of their own Will, fell from
(...) where in they were created, (...) sinning against God.

Q. What is Sin?

A. Sin is any want of Conformity unto, or Transgression of the Law of God.

Q. What was the Sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate wherein
they were created?

A. The Sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate wherein they were
created, was their eating the forbidden fruit.

Q. Did all Mankind (...) Adam' s first transgression?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam,not only for himself but for his
Posterity, all Mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation, sinned in
him, and fell with him in his first transgression.

Q. Into what estate did the Fall bring Mankind?

A. The Fall brought Mankind into an estate of Sin and Misery.

Q. Wherein consists the sinfulness of that estate where into Man fell?

A. The sinfulness of that estate where into Man fell, consists in the Guilt of
Adam's first Sin, the want of Original Righteousness, and the Corruption of his
whole Nature, which is commonly called Original Sin, together with all actual
Transgressions which proceed from it.

Q. What is the Misery of that estate where into Man feel?

A. All Mankind by their fall, lost Communion with God, are under his Wrath and
Curse, and so made liable to all Miseries in this Life, to Death it self, and
to the pains of Hell for ever.

Q. Did God leave all Mankind to perish in the estate (...) Misery?

A. God having out of (...)

Q. Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect?

A. The only Redeemer of God's Elect, is the Lord Jesus Christ, who being the
eternal Son of God, became Man, and so was, and continues to be God and Man in
two distinct Natures, and one Person for ever.

Q. How did Christ being the Son of God become Man?

A. Christ the Son of God became Man, by taking to himself a true Body and a
reasonable Soul, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of
the Virgin Mary, and born of her, and (...) with (...) Sin.

Q. ^?

A. Christ as our Redeemer executes the Office of a Prophet, of a Priest, and
of a King, both in his estate of Humiliation and Exaltation.

Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a Prophet?

A. Christ executes the Office of a Prophet, in revealing to us by his Word
and Spirit, the Will of God for our Salvation.

Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a Priest?

A. Christ executes the Office of a Priest, in his once offering up himself a
Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, and reconcile us to God, and in making
continual intercession for us

Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a King?

A. Christ executes the Office of a King, in Subduing us to himself, in ruling
and defending us, and in restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies.

Q. Where in did Christ's Humiliation consist?

A. Christ's Humiliation consisted in His being born, and that in a low
condition, made under the law undergoing the miseries (...) life the wrath of
God, and the cursed Death of the Cross, in being buried and continuing under
the power of Death for a time.

Q. Where in consists Christ's Exaltation

A. Christ's Exaltation consists in his rising again from the Dead on the
third day, in ascending up into Heaven, and (...) at the Right Hand (...) the
Father, and in coming to judge the World at the last Day.

Q. How are we made Partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. We are made Partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the
effectual Application of it to us by his Holy Spirit.

Q. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. The Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working
Faith in us, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our effectual Calling.

Q. What is effectual Calling?

A. Effectual Calling is the Work of God's Spirit whereby convincing us of our
Sin and Misery, enlightening our Minds in the Knowledge of Christ, and renewing
our Wills, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, (...)
offered to us in the Gospel.

Q What Benefits do they that are effectually called partake of in this Life?

A. They that are Effectually called, do in this Life partake of Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, and the several Benefits which in this Life do either
accompany or flow from them.

Q What is Justification?

A. Justification is an act of God's free Grace, wherein he pardons all our
Sins, and accepts us as righteous in his fight* only for the righteousness of
Christ imputed to us, and received by Faith alone.

Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an Act of God's (...) Grace, whereby we are received into the
Number, and have Right to all the Privileges of the Sons of God.

Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is the Work of God's free Grace, whereby we are renewed in
the whole Man, after the Image of God, and are enabled more and more to die
unto Sin, and live unto Righteousness.

Q. What are the Benefits which in this life do accompany or flow from
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification?

A. The Benefits which in this Life do accompany or flow from Justification,
Adoption or Sanctification, are assurance of God's love, peace of Conscience,
(...) Holy Ghost, increase of Grace, and perseverance therein to the (...)

Q. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at their Death?

A. The Souls of Believers are at their Death made perfect in Holiness, and do
immediately pass into Glory, and their Bodies being still united to Christ, do
rest in their Graves till the Resurrection.

Q. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?

A. At the Resurrection Believers being raised up to Glory, shall be openly
acknowledged and acquitted in the ^ay of Judgment, and made perfectly blessed
in full enjoying of God, to all Eternity.

Q. What is the Duty which God requires of Man?

A. The Duty which God requires of Man, is Obedience to his revealed will.

Q. What did God at first reveal to Man for the Rule of his Obedience?

A. The Rule which God at first revealed to Man for his Obedience was the Moral
Law.

Q. Where is the Moral Law Summarily comprehended?

A. The Moral Law is Summarily comprehended in the Ten Commandments.

Q. What is the Sum of the Ten Commandments?

A. The Sum of the Ten Commandments is, To love the Lord our God with all our
Heart, with all our Souls, and with all our Strength, and with all (...), (...)
and our Neighbor as ourselves.

Q. What is the Preface to (...) Ten Commandments?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments is in these Words, I am the (...) by
God, which have brought (...) out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
Bondage.

Q. What does the Preface to the Ten Commandments teach us?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments teaches us, that because God is the
Lord, and our God and Redeemer, therefore we are bound to keep all his
Commandments.

Q. Which is the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other gods before Me.

Q. (...) (...) required in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment requires us to know and acknowledge God to be the
only true God and our God, and to worship and glorify him accordingly.

Q. What is forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment forbids the denying, or not worshipping and
glorifying the true God, as God and our God, and the giving that Worship and
Glory to any other which is due to him alone

Q. What are we specially taught by these Words (Before Me) in the first
Commandment?

A. These Words (Before me) in the first Commandment, teach us, That God who
sees (...) notice of, and is much displeased with the Sin of having any other
god.

Q Which is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is, Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image,
or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth
beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth: Thou shall not how down thy
self to them, nor serve them, for I the Lord thy God and a jealous God,
visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and
fourth Generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of
them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

Q. What is required in the second (...)?

A. The second Commandment (...) the receiving, observing, (...) keeping pure
and entire all such religious Worship and Ordinances, as God has appointed in
his Word

Q. What is forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment forbids the worshipping of God by Images, or any
other way, not appointed in his Word.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment, are God's Sovereignty over
us, his Propriety in us, and the Zeal he has to his own Worship.

Q. Which is the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Q. What is required in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment requires the holy and reverend use of God's Name,
Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word and Works.

Q. What is forbidden in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment forbids all profaning or abosing of any thing
whereby God makes himself known.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the third Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the Third Commandment is, That however the Breakers
of this Commandment may escape Punishment from Men yet the Lord our God will
not suffer them to escape his righteous Judgment.

Q. Which is the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment is, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy six
Days shall thou labor and do all thy Work, but the seventh Day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy Son, nor
thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maid servant, nor thy Cattle, not the
Stranger that is within thy Gates; for in six Days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh Day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and (...)

Q. What is required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God such set times as
he has appointed in his Word, expressly one whole Day in seven to be an holy
Sabbath to Himself.

Q. Which day of the Seven has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath?

A. From the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ God appointed
the seventh Day of the Week to be the weekly Sabbath, and the first Day of the
Week ever since, to continue to the end of the World, which is the Christian
Sabbath.

Q. How is the Sabbath to be sanctified?

A. (...) is to be sanctified by (...) holy felting all that Day, even from
such worldly Employments and Recreations, as are lawful on other Days, and
spending the whole time in public and private exercises of God's Worship,
except so much as is to be taken up in the Works of Necessity and Mercy.

Q. What is forbidden in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment forbids the (...) or careless Performance of the
Duties required and the profaning the (...) by (...), or doing that which is
(...) it self (...), or by unnecess^^^y Thoughts, Words or Works, (...) worldly
Employments or Recreations.

Q. What are the (...) to the fourth Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment are God's allowing us six
Days of the Week for our own Employments, His challenging a special Propriety
in the seventh, his own Example, and his blessing the Sabbath Day.

Q. Which is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days
may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. What is required in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment requires the preserving the Honor and performing
the Duties belonging to every one in their several (...) Relations, as
Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals.

Q. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment forbids the neglecting or doing any thing against
the Honor and Duty which belongs to every one in their several Places and
Relations.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment, is a promise of long Life and
Prosperity, (as far as it shall serve for God's Glory and their own good) to
all such as keep this Commandment.

Q. Which is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is, Thou shall not Kill.

Q. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment requires all lawful Endeavors to preserve our own
Life, and the Life of others.

Q. What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment for-biddeth the taking away of our own Life, or the
Life of our Neighbor unjustly, and whatsoever tends thereunto.

Q. Which is the seventh Commandment

A. The seventh Commandment is, Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Q. What is required in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own, and our
Neighbor's Chastity, in Heart, Speech and Behavior.

Q. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste Thoughts, Words and Actions.

Q. Which is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is, Thou shall not Steal.

Q. What is required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring and Furthering the
Wealth and outward Estate of our selves and others.

Q. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids whatsoever does, of may unjustly hinder
our own, (...) our Neighbors Wealth or outward Estate.

Q. Which is the ninth Commandment

A. The ninth Commandment is, Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy
Neighbor.

Q. What is required in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining and promoting of Truth
between Man and Man and of our own and our Neighbors good Name, especially in
Witness (...).

Q. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids whatsoever is prejudicial to Truth, or
injurious to our own us our Neighbors good Name.

Q. Which is the Tenth Commandment?

A. The Tenth Commandment is, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's House, thou
shall not covet thy Neighbor's Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maid servant,
nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

Q. What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The Tenth Commandment requires full Contentment with our own (...), with a
right and charitable frame of Spirit toward our Neighbor, and all that is his.

Q. What is forbidden in the (...)

A. The Tenth Commandment in forbids all Coffeehouse with our own estate,
envying or grieving at the good of our Neighbor, and all inordinate motions
and affections to any thing that is his.

Q. Is any Man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?

A. No mee^ man since the Fall is able in this Life perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God, but daily does break them in Thought, Word and Deed.

Q. Are all Transgressions of the Law equally (...)?

A. Some Sins in themselves, and by reason of several (...), are more being as
(...) the right of God then others

Q. (...) deserve?

A. Every Sin deserves God's Wrath and Curse, both in this Life, and that
which is to come.

Q. What does God require of us, that we may escape his Wrath and Curse, due
unto us for Sin?

A. To escape the Wrath and Curse of God due to us for Sin, God requires of us
Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto Life, with the diligent use of all
outward Means whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits of Redemption.

Q. What is Faith in Jesus Christ?

A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving Grace, whereby we receive and rest upon
him alone for Salvation, as He is offered to us in the Gospel.

Q. What is (...)

A. Repentance (...) Life, (...) a saving Grace, whereby a Sinner out of a true
sense of his Sin, and apprehension of the Mercy of God in Christ, does with
grief and hatred of his Sin, turn from it unto God, with full purpose of, and
endeavor after new obedience.

Q. What are the outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to us
the benefits of Redemption?

A. The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption, are his Ordinances, especially the Word, Sacraments and
Prayer; all which are made effectual to the Elect for Salvation.

Q. How is the word made effectual to Salvation?

A. The Spirit of God makes the Reading, but especially the Preaching of the
Word an effectual Means of Convincing and Converting Sinners, and of building
them up in Holiness and Comfort, through Faith unto Salvation.

Q. How is the Word to be Read and Heard that it may become effectual to
Salvation?

A. That the Word may become effectual to Salvation, we must attend thereunto
with diligence, Preparation and Prayer, receive it with Faith and Love, lay it
up in our Hearts, and practice it in our Lives.

Q. How does the Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation?

A. The Sacraments become effectual Means of Salvation, not from any virtue
(...) that does administer them, (...) only by the blessing of Christ, and the
working of the Spirit in (...) that by Faith receive them.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance instituted by Christ, where in by sensible
Signs, Christ and the benefits of the New Covenant are represented, sealed, and
applied to Believers.

Q. Which are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

A. The Sacraments of the New Testament, are Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein by washing with Water in the (...), and of
the Son (...) the Holy Ghost, does (...) and se^l our ingrafting into (...),
and partaking of the benefits of the Covenant of Grace, and our Engagement to
be the Lord's.

Q. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible Church,
till they profess their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Him, but the Infants
of such as are Members of the visible Church are to be Baptized.

Q. What is the Lord's Supper?

A. The Lord's Supper is a Sacrament, wherein by giving and receiving Bread and
Wine according to Christ Appointment, His Death is showed (...), (...) worthy
Receivers are not (...) corporal and carnal Manner, (...) by Faith made
Partakers of His Body and Blood, with all his benefits, to their Spiritual
Nourishment and growth in Grace.

Q. What is required in the worthy receiving of the Lord's Supper?

A. It is required of them that would worthily partake of the Lord's Supper,
that they examine themselves of their knowledge to discern the Lord's Body, of
their Faith to seed upon Him, of their Repentance, Love, and ^ew Obedience,
(...) coming un worthily, they eat and drink judgment to themselves.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. (...) offering up of (...) Desires to God, for Things agreeable to His
Will, in the Name of Christ, with Confession of our Sins, and thankful
Acknowledgment of his Mercies.

Q. What (...) has God given for our Direction in Prayer?

A. The whole Word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer, but the special
Rule of Direction is that form of Prayer which Christ taught His Disciples,
commonly called, The Lord's Prayer.

Q. What does the Preface of the Lord's Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lord's Prayer, which is (...) Father which are in Heaven
(...) us to draw near to God with all holy Reverence, and Confidence, as (...)
to a Father, able and ready to (...) us, and that we should pray (...) and for
others.

Q. What do we pray for in the first Petition?

A. In the first Petition, which (...) Hallowed be thy Name, we pray (...) that
God would enable us and (...) others, to glorify Him in all (...) whereby he
makes him self (...) and that He would dispose (...) things to His own Glory.

Q. What do we pray for in (...) Petition^

A. In the second Petition, which is, Thy Kingdom come* we pray that Satan^
(...)

(...) pray for in the (...) Petition?

A. In the third Petition, which (...) Will be done on Earth as it is (...), we
pray, that God by (...) (...) Grace, would make us able and (...), to know,
obey and submit (...) is Will in all things, as the (...) do in Heaven.

Q. What do we pray for in the 4th Petition

A. (...) the fourth Petition, which (...) us this Day our daily Bread, (...)
pray that of God's tree Gift we may receive a competent Portion of the good
things of this Life, and (...) with them.

Q. What do we (...) Petition

A. In the (...) Petition which is, And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our
Debtors, we pray, that


