Mr. Prince's FAST and THANKSGIVING SERMONS ON THE EARTHQUAKE.

EARTHQUAKES the Works of GOD and Tokens of his just Displeasure.

Two SERMONS ON PSALM. XVIII. 7. At the Particular Fast in Boston, Nov. 2, and
the General Thanksgiving, Nov. 9. Occasioned By the late dreadful EARTHQUAKE.

WHEREIN Among other things is offered a brief ACCOUNT of the Natural Causes of
these Operations in the Hands of GOD: With a RELATION of some late terrible
Ones in other Parts of the World, as well as those that have been perceived in
New England since it is Settlement by English Inhabitants.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church in Boston.

Psalm. cix. 2. The Works of the LORD are Great, sought out of all them that
have Pleasure therein.

Psalm. lvi. 5. Come and see the Works of GOD! He is terrible in his Doing
toward the Children of Men.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed for D. HENCHMAN, over against the Brick Meeting
House in Cornhill. MDCCXXVII.

The PREFACE.
Giving a Summary Account of the OCCASION of the following Sermons.
ON the NIGHT after the Lord's Day October. 29. about 40 Minutes past X, in a
calm and serene Hour, the Town of BOSTON was on a sadden extremely surpised
with the most violent Shock of an EARTHQUAKE that has been known among us. It
came on with a loud hollow Noise like the Roaring of a Great fired Chimney, but
incomparably more fierce and terrible. In about half a Minute the Earth began
to heave and tremble: The Shock increasing, rose to the Hight in about a Minute
more, when the Movables, Doors, Windows, Walls, especially in the upper
Chambers, made a very fearful Clattering, and the Houses rocked and crackl'd,
as if they were all dissolving and falling to pieces. The People asleep were
awakened with the greatest astonishment: many others affrighted run into the
Streets for Safety. But the Shaking quickly abated, and in another half Minute
entirely ceased.

THE Noise and Shakes seemed to come from the Norwestward, and to go off
Southeasterly; and so the Houses seemed to reel. Some Damage was done to the
more brittle sort of Movables, and some Bricks on the Tops of some Chimneys
fell; but not an House was broken, nor a Creature hurt. At several times till
Daylight, were heard some distant Rumblings, and some fainter Shocks were
felt: But since, the Earth has been quiet in Town, though the minds of many
continue very greatly and justly affected.

IN the Morning between X and XI, a very full Assembly meg at the North Church
for the proper Exercises on so extraordinary Occasion. At V in the Evening, two
very crowded Congregations assembled at the Old and South Churches on the same
Account. At the LIEUT. GOVERNOR'S Motion, the Thursday of the same Week was
kept as a Day of extraordinary Fasting and Prayer in all the Churches in TOWN:
When the First of the following Sermons was Preached. And the Thursday After,
having been sometime before appointed by Authority for the General Yearly
Thanksgiving through the PROVINCE; I though it it not amiss to proceed on the
Subject: That being touched afresh with the sense of our late eminent Distress
and Deliverance, we might be raised up to the higher and livelier Acts of
Gratitude and Praise.

THUS of this awful Event in the Town: But the Circumstance of it in other
Parts I must leave to be observed in an APPENDIX.

AND as for the SERMONS, I have only to say -- That being penned in an
unavoidable Hurry on such an Occasion; I must desire the curious Reader to make
proper Allowances. I could not easily mend them, at least to my own
Satisfaction, unless their whole Frame and Expression had been almost entirely
Changed; and this would have made them quite others than what I delivered, and
have been too much imposing on those whose prevailing Desires were to see by
the Press what they heard from the Pulpit. In hopes of their helping the
Readers to some happy Improvement of this Extraordinary Providence; I humbly
commit them to the effectual Influence of the SPIRIT OF GRACE, the absolute
need of which I desire to acknowledge in all my Labors.

T. Prince.
Boston, Nov. 20. 1727.
GOD Shakes the Earth Because He is Wroth.
SERMON I. Thursday Morning, Nov. 2.
PSALM XVIII. 7. THEN the Earth shook and trembled; the Foundations also of the
Hills moved, and were shaken, because he was Wroth.
I SHALL make no Reflections on the Occasion of these Words as they lie in the
Psalm. I only propose to consider them as they are a mere Allusion to a most
awful and astonishing Work of GOD, which we were all the amazed Witnesses of a
few Evenings ago. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the Foundations also of
the Hills moved and were shaken, because He was Wroth.

NOR shall I make any critical Remark on the Text, unless this one -- That in
the Parallel Place of 2. Sam XXII. 8. The Foundations of the Hills are called,
The Foundations of Heaven. No doubt for the same Reason that the Hills are also
called the Pillars of Heaven, when they are said to tremble, in Job XXVI. 11.
And this because the Tops of the Mountains seem to touch the Clouds, and the
Heavens themselves to bear upon them Jackson on 2 Samuel XXII. 8.
. In this respect the Foundations of the Hills appear to the Eye, with that
Magnificence and Grandeur, as if they were the Pillars and Foundations of
Heaven it self.

BUT though the words be a mere Allusion; yet there must needs be a Justice and
Propriety in it, and they must allude to Realities: And what can they be but
these, --

1. THAT when the Earth shakes and trembles, and the Foundations of the Hills
move and are shaken, It is the great GOD himself that shakes and sets them a
moving.

2. THAT He does this terrible Work because He is Wroth, and thereby expresses
his fearful Displeasure.

THESE two things are fairly implied in the Text, as the very Ground and
Occasion of this proper Allusion. It is the most High GOD Himself that as the
First Cause makes the Earth to tremble: And this He does because He is Angry,
and thereby He clearly shows He is so. These are therefore the Observations
before us,

Obs. 1. THAT when the Earth shakes and trembles and the Foundations also of
the Hills move and are shaken, It is the Great GOD Himself that shakes and sets
them a moving.

THE Psalmist here uses a Variety of Phrases expressing nearly the same Idea;
to represent the Repetition and Fearfulness of this Divine Operation, and raise
our Minds to the most solemn and sensible Conceptions of it. But for the
Illustration I shall endeavor these three things,

1. To give some Description of this dreadful Event of Providence.

2. To consider something of the natural Causes.

AND then,

3. And lastly, LEAD you up to GOD as having the highest and principal Agency
in this tremendous Action.

I. TO give some Description of this terrible Event of Providence, the shaking
and trembling of the Earth.

AN Earthquake may very possibly be UNIVERSAL. There are doubtless Provisions
enough in Nature to produce such a one. Every Place on Earth, at every Season
of the Year, and at every moment of the Day and Night, is doubtless liable to
these Concussions. Whole Continents have trembled at once, with their
neighboring Islands, though the deep Channels of the Seas lay between them. And
as the same Causes may concur and operate in the four Quarters of the Globe at
once, they may at the same time effect a universal Convulsion.

SUCH a Shake of the whole Earth there seems to have been both at the Passion
and Resurrection of it is mighty Redeemer. Matthew. XXVII. 50, -- 52. Jesus, when
He had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost: And behold the Vail
of the Temple was rent in twain from the Top to the Bottom: and the Earth did
Quake, and the Rocks rent, etc. The Sun and Heavens had been veiled with
Darkness for three Hours before, at his dying Groans Mark XV. 33, -- 37. Luke
XXIII. 44, -- 46.
: And now the Earth was struck with Trembling at his Expiration. And at his
Rising out of the Grave, we read in the following Chapter at the first Verse,
And behold there was a great Earthquake.

How fit was it that the whole Earth should tremble; when the Maker, the
Upholder, the Lord and the Savior of it, was struggling in the Pangs of Death,
and his Soul and Body were violently rending asunder? And why should not the
whole Earth be moved; when He break out of the Bowels of it, in which He had
been imprisoned, to rescue it out of the Hands of those infernal Powers that
had for so many Ages usurped the Dominion over it.

OF this surprising Time it was foretold in, Hag. 11. 6, 7. For thus says the
Lord of Hosts, yet once it is a little while and I will shake the Heavens, and
the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land: and I will shake all Nations: So,
Ver. 21* 22.
And the Desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with
Glory, says the Lord of Hosts. And thus the Apostle explains it in Heb. XII.
26. -- ^^: though doubtless with a further View to a more astonishing Fulfillment
at our Blessed SAVIOR'S Second Appearance.

HOWEVER, The Great and dreadful Day is hastening, when there shall be a
universal Convulsion in this lower World. Of this amazing Time we read in Isa.
XXIV. 1, etc. Behold the Lord makes the Earth empty, and makes it waste, and
turns it upside down, and scatters abroad the Inhabitants thereof. -- Fear,
and the Pit, and the Snare, are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth! And it
shall come to pass that He who flees from the Noise of the Fear shall fall
into the Pit: And he that comes up out of the midst of the Pit shall be taken
in the Snare: For the Windows from on High are open, and the Foundations of the
Earth do shake: The Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean dissolved,
the Earth is moved exceedingly: The Earth shall reel to and fro like a
Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage, and the Transgression thereof
shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again.

WHOEVER diligently reads this Chapter and attentively Compares it with 2 Pet.
III. Rev. XX, and other Places of the Holy Prophesies, where the very same
things are mentioned, will doubtless clearly see that these Predictions of an
Universal Earthquake refer to the End of this present State of the World, when
there will also immediately come on a universal Conflagration. First, The Earth
will extremely shake and reel to and fro: and therewith the Buildings on it
must needs make a dreadful crackling Noise and tumble to Ruins. On this account
it is said, The Inhabitants shall Fly from the Noise of the Fear -- i. e. The
fearful Noise of their Dwellings rending to pieces: But flying from this, they
shall Fall into the Pit -- i. e. The gaping Caverns of the Earth opening round
about them: and those who escape from these shall be taken in the Snare -- i.
e. Such an inextricable one as we have described in Psalm. XI. 6. Upon the
Wicked He shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This
shall be the Portion of their Cup. The nature of this frightful Noise, with the
Pit and Snare, is therefore plainly pointed at in the words immediately
following, wherein the Two general Causes are thus assigned -- For the Windows
from on high are opened, A plain Allusion to the Lord's Raining down Fire and
Brimstone out of Heaven on Sodom: and agrees with the miserable Desolation of
the Earth by Fire, which we have described in the 4th 5th and 6th Verses of the
same Chapter.
and the Foundations of the Earth do shake.

OF the same dreadful Time we also read in Rev. XVI. 15. -- c. So Rev. VI. 12.
-- c. VIII. 5. and XI. 13. -- c.
Behold I come as a Thief: Blessed is He that Watches -- And there were Voices
and Thunders and Lightnings, and there was a great Earthquake, such as was not
since Men were upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so great: And the
great City was divided into three Parts, and the Cities of the Nations fell:
and great Babylon came into Remembrance before God, to give unto Her the Cup of
the Wine of the Fierceness of his Wrath: And every Island fled away: and the
Mountains were not found: and there (...) great Hail out of Heaven, etc.

AT the End of this present State of the World, will be such a universal sudden
and destroying Earthquake. But till that amazing time comes on, our Blessed
SAVIOR tells us; There shall be Famines, Pestilences, Troubles, Great
Earthquakes in diverse Places, and fearful Sights and great Signs from Heaven:
That these are the Beginning of Sorrows, and the Signs of his Coming, and of
the End of the World Mat. XXIV. 3, -- 8. Mar. XIII. 4 -- 8, Luke XXI. 7 -- 11.
.

THEY are these PARTICULAR Earthquakes that we are how considering: of which
there have been great Numbers of dreadful Instances in these latter Ages, and
in which there has been a very great Variety.

THEY sometimes come upon some threatening and foreboding Symptoms: But for the
most part at once, without the least Intimation or Suspicion. Sometimes in
dreadful Tempests; but oftener in the calmest and serenest Seasons. They are
sometimes of a narrower, at others of a larger Compass. Sometimes their Shocks
are of a shorter, at others of a longer Duration: Some are of a lesser, others
of a greater Violence: Sometimes they quickly cease and leave the Earth at
Rest; at other times they soon repeat their terrible Efforts, and throw the
Earth into new Convulsions.

SOMETIMES they make the Earth to jarr and vibrate, and sometimes to waver like
the Waves of the Sea. In such a manner was the Place shaken where the Apostles
were assembled. Acts 4. 31. And thus the Foundations of the Prison where Paul
and Silas lay bound, were shaken by the Great and sudden Earthquake, in Acts
16. 26. The Original Words in both those Places signify, to fluctuate like the
Waves of the Ocean, or to reel, or rise and lower like the Ships upon them.
Z^^ch, Bez. etc. in Leigh C^it. Sac


SOMETIMES they alter the Channels of the Seas themselves, and fill up the most
commodious Harbors. Sometimes they throw down Houses or roll the Mountains
upon them, and bury their Inhabitants under their Ruins: and thus their Beds
are made their Graves, and their Dwellings turned into Tombs to cover them.
Sometimes they open the Ground* and swallow up whole Streets and Cities into
the Depths of the Earth in a moment: The Parents and their Children go down
alive and shrieking, with all their Substance into the Pit together: They are
covered up for ever: And either the Earth closes over them, or the gushing
Floods of Waters in a moment overwhelm and drown them, and leave no sign of the
Places where they have lived and sinned together.

SOMETIMES with the opening Earth there issues out a fiery stream of Brimstone,
that runs with an amazing Swiftness, devours every thing before it, and that
none can escape. And sometimes they blow forth mineral and malignant Steams
that destroy the People round about with raging Pestilence. Thus it was with
Corah and his guilty Company. Numb. XVI. 31 -- 35. Numb. XXVI. 10. Psalm. CVI.
17, 18.
The Ground clave asunder that was under them, and the Earth opened her mouth
and swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all the Men that appertained to
Korah, and all their Goods: They and all that appertained to them, went down
alive into the Pit, and the Earth closed upon them, and they perished from
among the Congregation. And all Israel that were round about them (...) at the
Cry of them: for they said, Least the Earth swallow us up also: And there came
out a Fire from the Lord, and consumed Two Hundred and Fifty more that were
chief in the Wickedness. And with this dreadful Eruption there immediately
followed a Plague, that quickly destroyed hear Fifteen Thousand People.

AND now, surely I need not describe the Surprise, the Anguish and Horror that
seizes and distresses our Minds, when we are feeling our Houses rocking over
our Heads and straining every Joint, and the Foundations of the Earth a moving
under our Feet. When the Centurion and they that were with him saw the
Earthquake at the Crucifixion of CHRIST, They Feared greatly Matthew. XXVIII. 54.
. And of the Terror of such an awful Event we read, 1 Samuel XIV. 15. And there
was Trembling in the Host, in the Field, and among all the People: The Garrison
and the Spoilers they also trembled, and the Earth Quaked: So it was a very
great Trembling; or a Trembling of GOD, as it is in the Hebrew.

WE have oftentimes heard of such things at a Distance; and it is likely with a
^lighty Resentment, as remote or foreign Events that did not much concern or
threaten us. But now we have known by Experience, something of the Dreadfulness
of them.

WHILE our Curtains like those of the Land of Midian were trembling Hab. III. 7.
-- Fear came upon us and Trembling also, which made the multitudes of our
Bones to shake. Our Hearts were sore pained within us, and the Terrors of Death
were fallen upon us. Fearfulness and Trembling seized us, and Horror
overwhelmed and covered us: And we were ready to fly as they fled from the
Earthquake in the Days of Uzziah: Zech. XIV. 5.
Or to wish -- O that we had Wings like a Dove, that we might fly away and be
safe from Destruction! Did we not see every one with their Hands on their
Loins, as a Woman in Travel, and all Faces turned into Paleness? Alas! for THAT
NIGHT! it was Great, so that none was like it! It was even the Time of Jacob's
Trouble: Though we are saved out of it. Even when we remember, we are still
afraid, and Trembling takes hold on our Flesh.

AND thus much of the general Appearance, Effects and Attendants of this awful
Event.

WE go on to consider,

II. SOMETHING of the Natural, Instrumental or Secondary Causes of it.

AND here I shall be as brief as possible, least I keep you too long from the
view of the First and Principal Cause in these great Affairs: who for ever has
all created Things in his Hands, and always Acts on them in the wisest manner
to fulfill his Designs. Nor should I treat of these natural Causes, were we not
to consider them as the very Works or Operations of GOD, and the Means he uses
to accomplish his Pleasure. With a reverend Mind, and not a mere natural but
divine Philosophy, let us search a little into them, and see -- How the mighty
GOD invisibly works by sensible Causes, and even by those that are extremely
little and weak, produces the greatest and most terrible Effects in the World.

AND here, I shall entirely omit the many fine but uncertain Hypotheses of the
Projecting Philosophers both ancient Vid. Seneca Quest Not.
and modern; such as of a central Concave of Fire, a vast internal Abyss of
Waters, etc. I shall only take notice of those Natural Causes, whose Operations
are known to us all, and conceived with Ease when applied to these Matters.

AND I must in the first place observe, That in the very Constitution and Frame
of this Earth, GOD has created and formed it in such a particular manner as to
prepare and dispose it for such (...) Convulsions.

HE has not only made it of a very (...) Contexture, through which the Air and
Water and other subtle Materials can easily penetrate: But He has also formed
it with a vast and inconceivable number of Caverns or hollow Places within:
Vid. (...) Geog
and in every Part He has either primarily lodged, or by the constant
Circulation of Air and Water conveyed, great multitudes of Sulphurious,
nitrous, fiery and mineral Particles; such as those in the Clouds, which are
the natural Causes of Thunder and Lightning.

Now when these are put into Motion and strike against one another; we know
with what amazing Violence they fly off from each other, as we see in our Aurum
Fulminans and common Gunpowder. So prodigious is their Expansion, that it is
computed a Collection of them set on Fire, will in a moment spread so wide, as
to possess above a Million Times the space they did before, while they lay in
the Form of a compacted Body. They will first make their way into the easiest
Passages; and if they have not a speedy Vent, agreeable to their expansive and
united Power, they will tare and rend away all before them.

AND thus these diminutive Causes meeting and acting in a suitable Quantity,
whether in the Air or Water of the hollow Vaults and empty Spaces below; they
fly off from each other with the greatest Violence. They firstly issue or push
every Vapor before them into the neighboring Caverns: But still wanting Room,
and especially if the Perspirations or Pores of the Earth are stopped either by
Frost or Rains, whereby they cannot get through soon enough; they heave and raise
the Earth, till they force their way into the Air above.

NOR is (...) Tenth Part of our imminent Danger. (...) terrible Atmosphere over
us, which few are (...) is found to press with the weight of above (...)
Thousand Pounds Mr. Boil found it to be 2592 Pounds.
on every square Foot of the Surface of the Earth. And when by the violent
Explosions made from beneath, the Vapors within are on a sudden discharged and
leave a Vacuity; then this astonishing weight, besides that of the Earth,
immediately bares away every thing before it into the Spaces below, and sinks
whole Cities and Mountains at once. Yea, though there should be an Eruprion through
an easier Passage in any Part of the Land or Water about us, a great many Miles
off; Yet Here, a whole Town being over such an emptied Cavern, it may sink in a
moment: and even this without perceiving so much of the Shake of the Earth, as
the Places nearer and round the Eruption.

THUS has the most High GOD, in the very Composition and Frame of this Earth,
and by the Course and Laws whereby He governs all Nature, made sufficient
Provision for such dire Convulsions. Thus He has placed us over great and
hideous Vaults, large enough to receive the most spacious Cities, and ready to
open when He sees it time to bury us in them: And there He lays his terrible
Mines, to spring them at his sovereign Pleasure. And by such little weak
Things, He causes great and mavelous Alterations in this lower World, and
executes his most righteous Judgments.

I would therefore now proceed in the

III. and last place, TO lead you up to GOD, as having the highest and
principal Agency in this stupendeous Work.

How exceeding apt are we to terminate our views and rest in second Causes; and
look on them as certain fatal Things that move and act of themselves, and
without Design or Reason. But this our Prospect is exceeding narrow, shallow,
short and partial: And our Conceptions rising from it, are not only utterly
wrong and contrary to the Truth of things, but are also opposite to the Being
of Providence and the Nature of the Divine Perfections.

FOR this is to suppose, That when GOD had formed material Substances, He only
made some general Impressions on them for general Ends, and then left them to
Act according to those Impressions, without continuing his active or directive
Influence on them: which is to make these material things now independent on
Him in all their continued Actings, and is utterly inconsistent with his
continual Providence. Or if He continues his Influence for those general Ends,
that yet the most Wise GOD neither had nor has any particular View to all the
Effects they were to produce in the World: which is entirely repugnant to his
perfect Wisdom.

FROM the Operations of these natural Agents, we must therefore raise our Minds
to their most wise Creator. We must look on them as his Workmanship, and upon
Him as making and moving them in perfect Wisdom, and as having in View every
Effect they were to produce when first He formed them and set them a moving.
His all-wise and all-seeing Prospect must have taken and adjusted every Cause
and Effect in the most beautiful Place in the Scheam of his Providence. Having
therefore most wisely laid the universal Train in his Mind; He creates a vast
Variety of Things as means in which He pleases to Work, in the fittest Times
and Places to fulfill his Designs. And having made his Instruments, He
continually takes an effectual Care to empower and guide them to attain his
Ends.

BUT however it is as to created spiritual and intellectual Agents; we know
that merely material Substances can only move in the Circuits of Nature as they
are moved by Him. We see they always and every where move and act in a most
curious and regular manner with respect to each other, as if they perfectly
knew each other's particular Circumstances, and were the most intelligent
Agents. But they are incapable of knowing the wonderful Laws by which they are
Governed. They are therefore constantly Guided by the Wisdom and Power of Him
that made them: He must continually hold them in his immediate Hands, and both
empower and direct them in all their Actions. And what we call the Laws of
Nature, are only the usual Methods in which He is pleased to Work in the World;
and from which He sees not cause to depart, but in some extraordinary Cases
where his usual manner of working cannot reach his Designs.

AND in a particular manner -- To what else can we in Reason assign that
wonderful Force and Action of those peculiar Substances that are the Causes of
Earthquakes in their violent flying off from each other, but to the immediate
Influence and Action of GOD? Those merely material, exceeding small, senseless
and lifeless Atoms, that lie entirely dead and motionless, are no sooner
disengaged from each other; but such an amazing Force is in a moment inspired
into them from some other Agent, as to set the largest Countries of the Earth a
Trembling with all their Mountains and Cities upon them, and to heave them up
and rend them to Pieces.

IF you were to see Two mountainous Rocks to lie perfectly still while they
touched each other; but being by some Means removed to a small and particular
Distance, then of themselves to fly off from each other with the greatest
Violence -- would you not ascribe it readily to some mighty and invisible Agent
that with such a wonderful Force should beat them away? Why, The smallest Atoms
of Matters are of themselves as Dead and unable to fly off from each other as
the greatest Rocks in the World.

AND what mighty and invisible Agent should this be but GOD? These diminutive
Substances are ever dispersed all over the Earth, the Air and Seas* They rise
with the finest Vapor into the cloudy Regions: They distill in every Shower:
They pierce into every Vacancy of the Earth below: They mingle with every
Substance: And when their collected Parts are dis-join'd and removed to such
particular Distances, they are always in a moment moved with the same
astonishing Force and Violence, though they were absolutely still before. That
mighty and invisible Cause which moves them is every where always Present,
attending these numberless and most minute materials, and moving them all in
the most regular and intelligent manner. He moves them only at such a
determinate Distance, with such a uniform measure of Force and Activity, and to
such a Degree of Expansion; and then having performed his Work, and gained his
End, He drives them no further.

AND who can this all-present, all-wise, all-powerful and all-vigilant Being
be, but the most Glorious GOD? It is HE that holds all Nature in his sovereign
Hands, and continually rules it in perfect Wisdom. It is He that Acts on these
things He has made for such wonderful Ends, and that guides and imploys them as
Means to produce such dreadful Concussions as Earthquakes in this World below.

So Job that Divine Philospher, discovers and owns of the Invisible GOD, in Job
IX. 4, etc. He is wise in Heart and mighty in Strength -- which removes the
Mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his Anger: which
shakes the Earth out of her Place, and the Pillars thereof tremble.

So King David in Psalm. LX. 2. 3. Thou have made the Earth to tremble, Thou
have broken it: Heal the Breaches thereof, for it shakes: Thou have showed thy
People hard things, Thou have made them to drink the Wine of Astonishment. And
agreeable to this are those lofty Expressions in Psalm. CIV. 32. He looks on
the Earth, and it trembles: He touches the Hills and they smoke.

AND thus we see the Great GOD has the chiefest Agency in these wondrous
Works. Let us apply ourselves now to IMPROVE this Doctrine.

AND here,

1. IN these affrightful Shakings of the Earth we see the dreadful Majesty of
the Glorious GOD.

WHAT more awful or lively Instance can there be of this, than to see the Earth
and Mountains trembling at his Presence? Thus the ancient SINAI did; of which
it is said, That Because the Lord descended on it, the whole Mountain quaked
greatly. Exo. XIX. 18.
And when He went out of Seir, when He marched out of the Field of Edom; The
Earth trembled from before the God of Israel, Judge. V 4, 5.
The Earth shook at the Presence of GOD; even Sinai it self moved at the
Presence of the God of ISRAEL. Ps. LXVII. 7, 8.


WITH GOD IS most terrible Majesty: And when He has a mind to show it, He can
easily and in a moment do it in such an astonishing manner as to affright the
hardiest Creature. He can put all Nature, even the Great and inanimate Parts of
the World into such a Commotion, as to make us see in a most sensible manner,
the terrifying Actings of his Powerful Presence, and excite the highest and
most awful Reverence of Him. He can make the heavy and dull Earth to tremble;
as if it felt the Force of those awakened Passions that should rise in our
Minds at the Appearance of GOD, and as if it were moved with the Fear of it is
present Destruction. The Everlasting Mountains are scattered, and the perpetual
Hills bow down before Him. (...). III. 6.


2. WHO will not then fear and tremble before this Great and dreadful Being?

HE that can shake the Earth out of Her Place in a moment without any
Instruments; for He needs them not, nor is confined to them. Or if He sees
cause to use them, He has always a sufficiency of them at Hand to employ as He
pleases. He can improve the minutest of Atoms to shatter the Earth* And when He
is exerting his Power upon them in the invisible Caverns below; who can tell
how far He may do it in a greater measure, to the speedy and utter Destruction
of those that neither fear or regard Him? He that exerts such a Degree of Power
as He does in and by them, may as easily put forth a Million times Greater, and
in a moment blow up the Earth, with all things on it, and disperse it into a
Vapor.

HEAR now this O foolish People and without Understanding! which have Eyes and
see not; which have Ears and hear not! Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye
not tremble at my Presence? Jer. V. 21, 22.
It is the utmost Degree of Stupidity, to be fearless of Him; and a most
provoking Offense to his infinite Majesty. Such foolhardy Sinners He therefore
admonishes in those awful Terms. Psalm. L. 22.
Now, Consider this Ye that forget God! least I tare you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver.

LET us then have a Care of Returning to our former Security: And let us bare
in our Minds a lively Sense of our continual Danger. Let our Flesh still
tremble for Fear of GOD; and let us be ever afraid of His Judgments. Let us
stand in the greatest aw of this most Glorious Being, and not Sin against Him.
He is always Present, and the same Holy, Mighty and Terrible, as He appears to
be in the most hideous Earthquake.

LIKE the astonished Saul, while he trembled and fell down to the Earth; Let us
now earnestly cry -- Lord what wilst Thou have me to Do? Acts 9. 4 -- 6.
Or as the awakened Jailour, at the great and sudden Earthquake wherein the
Foundations of his Prison at Philippi were shaken; came in Trembling and fell
down before the Apostles and cried -- Sirs, What must I do to be saved? Acts
XVI. 26 -- 30.
In the affecting Remembrance of this awful Providence and in the lively view
of our continual Danger; Let us constantly adore and mention the dreadful Name
of GOD with Reverence: and as the Apostle exhorted those Philippians, Work out
our Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Phil. II. 12.
When Ephraim spoke trembling, He exalted Himself in Israel; But when He
offended in Baal, He Died. Hos. XIII. 1.


3. HEREIN we also clearly see the utter Uncertainty and Insufficiency of every
thing on the Earth.

WE see how they all continually stand on dangerous and uncertain Ground. Their
very Foundations may fail in a moment. In an Hour we think not of, they may
sink down with us, who have placed all our Affection and Dependence on them; Go
down together into the Gulphs below, and be buried up together, till the
Heavens be no more.

AND alas! How empty and vain did they look in That Night; while we were
shivering with them over the Pit, and in equal Hazard of being crushed to
pieces? could they yield us then any Support or Solace? Did they then appear to
be Precious? Or could we find any Comfort in our having Pursued them with so
much Eagerness, and valued them more than the Favor of GOD and an Interest in
Him.

Alas! WE then clearly saw the Vanity of these Earthly Things; We saw through
their deceitful Appearance; and then we also understood our Delusions. O! That
now having gained such a Sight and Descovery, we might never lose it again; nor
so highly value, nor so earnestly seek, nor so securely rely on these doubtful
things, that may so suddenly fail us, and leave nothing to comfort us in the
last Extremity.

4. HERE likewise we see the great Folly and Misery of those that live
unprepared for such a fearful Hour.

WE have in some measure seen with Astonishment how unexpectedly such a moment
may come: and we know not how soon we may be surprised with another, and ten
times more terrible. Even while we are securely Sleeping, as many were then, we
may be rouzed up in an Instant to see all things dissolving about us, or feel
our selves descending into the Depths Below. But O the Dismay and Confusion
that will then seize the Soul unprepared for such a dismal Scene.

THEN the most High, whom you have continually slighted, will take his turn to
despise and neglect you. Because He had called, and you had refufused; He had
stretched out his hand, and you regarded him not, but set at naught all his
Counsel and would none of his Reproof: He will laugh at your Calamity and mock
when your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as Desolation, and your Destruction
comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes on you. Then shall you
call on him, but He will not answer: you shall seek him earnestly, but you
shall not find him. Prove. I. 24, -- 28.


AND O vile and guilty Earth! The Time is approaching, when the glorious GOD
shall appear to search out and disclose thy Wickedness, and to shake it out of
Thee in the Day of his Anger. Tremble Thou Earth at the Presence of GOD! For a
Fire shall go before him, and shall burn up his Enemies round about: His
Lightenings shall enlighten the World: And the Earth shall see and tremble: The
Hills shall melt like wax at his Presence, at the Presence of the LORD of the
whole Earth: The Heavens shall declare his Righteousness, and all the People
shall see his Glory. Psalm. XCVII. 2 -- 8.
In vain then shall the Wicked go into the Clefts of the Rocks, and into the
Tops of the Ragged Rocks, for Fear of the LORD, and for the Glory of his
Majesty, when He arises to shake terribly the Earth. Isa. II. 20, 21.
But Zion shall hear and be Glad, and the Daughters of Judah Rejoice, because
of his Judgments. Rev. VI. 12, e.


5. and Lastly, HOW exceeding safe and happy are they who have the mighty GOD
for their Friend and Redeemer?

THEY that have received HIS SON, forsaken their Sins, and obeyed his Gospel.
Their Offenses against Him are Pardoned: He is become their constant Friend: He
has engaged to be so by an everlasting Covenant, that shall never be broken. In
his Almighty Hands and under his Eye, they are always secure: And they need not
Fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea, though the Waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the
Mountains shake with the swelling thereof: The LORD of Hosts is with them, The
GOD of Jacob will be their Strength and Refuge, and a present Help in their
Trouble, Psalm. XLVII. 1, -- 7.

SUCH as these, our Blessed SAVIOR rather exhorts to rejoice, even in the
midst of those Tumults and Confusions of Nature that shall usher Him into these
visible Heavens. Luke XXI. 25 -- 28. And there shall be Signs in the Sun and in
the Moon, and in the Stars; and upon the Earth Distress of Nations, with
Perplexity, The Sea and the Waves roaring; Men's Hearts failing them for Fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming on the Earth: For the
Powers of Heaven shall be shaken: And then shall they see the Son of Man coming
in a Cloud with Power and great Glory. And when these things begin to come to
pass; THEN LOOK UP AND LIFT UP YOUR HEADS; For your Redemption draws near.

I shall CONCLUDE with those Words which are spoken of that Great and terrible
Day, in Joel III. 14, -- 16. Multitudes, Multitudes in the Valley of Decision!
For the Day of the LORD is near, in the Valley of Decision: The Sun and the
Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining: The LORD
also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his Voice from Jerusalem: And the
Heavens and the Earth shall shake: BUT THE LORD WILL BE THE HOPE OF HIS PEOPLE,
AND THE STRENGTH OF THE CHILDREN OF Israel.

The END of the First SERMON.
SERMON, II. Thursday Afternoon, Nov 9.
PSALM XVIII. 7. THEN the Earth shook and trembled; the Foundations also of the
Hills moved, and were shaken, because he was Wroth.
HAVING spoke to these Words on a late solemn Occasion; But not having Time to
treat of many important Heads they suggest, nor to make such an Improvement as
so awful a Subject requires; I shall now proceed to the further Consideration
of them.

AND surely such an extraordinary Providence as has been the Occasion of such
Meditations, will justify our persisting in them, and our further Endeavors to
preserve and improve those hopeful Convictions it seems to have produced among
us. Nor can such a Discourse be in any measure unsuitable to the present
Solemnity; when it becomes us to Sing both of Judgment and Mercy, to rejoice
with Trembling, and this Day is a witness of our Great Deliverance. What is
there that has a stronger Tendency to excite our Gratitude to Him that has
given it, than a lively Reflection on the eminent Danger we have but just
escaped, and by whose Great Mercy at that Conjuncture it is, That we are now
tasting the sweetness of every Comfort?

LET us therefore still look back both with an affectionate Awe and
Thankfulness on that dismal Night; when The Earth shook and trembled, the
Foundations of the Hills moved and were shaken, Because He was Wroth: And yet
in the midst of his Wrath He remembered and made known his Mercy; He spared and
saved us, that we and our Families might come to this joyful Time and Unite in
his Praises.

BUT you may remember our

2. OBS. was, THAT the Great GOD does this terrible Work, Because He is Wroth,
and thereby He expresses his fearful Displeasure.

AND for the Illustration of it, I shall endeavor these two Things --.

1. To show that GOD does this terrible Work, Because He is Wroth, and thereby
He expresses his fearful Displeasure.

2. CONSIDER the Motives of this Divine Displeasure and these dreadful
Expressions and Discoveries of it.

I. TO show that the Great GOD does this terrible Work, Because He is Wroth,
and thereby He expresses his fearful Displeasure.

UNDER the former Head we have very clearly discovered, it is the Great GOD
Himself that Acts though in the way of natural Causes, in this astonishing Work:
And when we feel the Earth to tremble, we must needs conceive it is the mighty
Power of GOD that so terribly shakes and sets it a moving. In this respect He
Acts as a Physical Cause: But we are now to consider Him as a Moral or
Political Agent in this tremendous Action: As one that has to do with Rational
and Sensible Creatures, who are capable Subjects of Suffering in these Affairs,
and who are under his wise and righteous Government.

HE is a Being of perfect Intelligence, Wisdom and Justice; and therefore He
must needs have a wise and righteous Reason and Motive for all his Actions; and
to be sure for acting in such a terrible manner.

AND no doubt, One great End and Motive must be the same with others of his
wondrous Works; viz. To show his glorious Power, Being and Presence, and to
excite the Sons of Men to admire and honor Him. For these great Operations of
Providence having a just and natural Tendency to produce such proper
Conceptions and Excitements in us; they must needs be some of His Ends and
Motives in them.

AND for the same Reason, as they have such a Tendency, to raise in our Minds
the awful Conceptions of his Justice, Holiness and Divine Displeasure, and to
excite our Fears of his righteous and destroying Judgments; these must be also
some of his Motives in these dreadful Works.

GOD is in Himself invisible: But as He clearly reveals his Being and Nature,
so also his Mind and Divine Dispositions by what He does in the World. In his
Works of this lower Creation He abundantly shows both his Kindness and Anger to
his Intelligent Creatures. All the Good things in it must flow from his
Kindness, and are the Evidence of it: And all the Evils must proceed from his
Anger, and sufficiently testify it to the Sons of Men. And in the Works of
Providence -- Preservations, Supplies and Prosperities must be the genuine
Fruits and Signs of his great Benignity: And Destructions, Calamities and
affrightful Dangers must needs be the moral Effects and Discoveries of his
righteous and holy Displeasure.

IT is indeed very difficult for us to conceive aright of Wrath or Anger in
GOD: Because in our Conceptions thereof we are apt to mingle those painful
Sentiments we feel in our selves in our angry Passions. But these can never
arise in the Mind of that Glorious BEING to interrupt his Blessedness. His
Wrath is only a just Resentment of his Creatures Contempt, Opposition and
Enmity to Him, with a just Inclination to Honor Himself in inflicting a
righteous Punishment. And when Anger, Wrath and Fury are ascribed to GOD --
they only express so many various Degrees of Offense in the Creatures, with his
answerable Resentments, and Inclinations to punish them in a suitable manner.

BY terrible Works the Righteous GOD then effectually shows his just
Displeasure. And this not only by inflicting real Calamities, but also by
giving the usual and frightful Signs or Appearances of their coming upon us.
For by his Works He may threaten as well as his Word: And those Works of his
which bring us into the greatest Dangers, are the most awful Threatenings. And
in Proportion to the Greatness of the Evils either inflicted or threatened must
his Displeasure appear: though there may be a far higher Resentment remaining
still in his Mind, in Proportion to his Creatures provoking Offenses, which He
has not discovered.

BUT of all Temporal Judgments, what is more terrible than a sudden and
destroying EARTHQUAKE? Famines, Plagues, and Wars are wasting and dreadful
Calamities. But these destroy in a gradual manner, and give the Inhabitants
time to escape or prepare to meet them. But an Earthquake comes on a sudden,
and frequently does it is destructive Work in a moment, and there is no
resisting or flying away.

AND now -- who can think any other, than as this Great and Almighty BEING is
then shaking the Earth, and making the Foundations of it to tremble; so He acts
and appears in such a fearful manner, Because He is Wroth? If this be not a
certain Effect and Appearance of his Divine Displeasure; then the most
Righteous GOD may terrify and threaten his Creatures in the severest Degree
with the Prospect of immediate Ruin, and yet not be offended. And if such
ruinous Judgments as they frequently prove, are not the Expressions and Effects
of his Wrath; then He may destroy the whole Earth, as well as a single Town, in
a moment, in the most tremendous manner, without being Angry: And the Holy
Angels who look on and behold the astonishing Work, will have no Reason to
Glorify Him for his Righteous Judgments.

AND in such a dismal Hour, while the Earth is Quivering under us -- Does not
every one rightly conceive, they feel the Glorious GOD then shaking it with his
amazing Power? Does not every Mind look up and clearly see Him offended in an
high Degree, and apprehend Him ready to express his Wrath in their immediate
and utter Destruction? Does not every Conscience then justly reflect on it is
undeniable Guilt in the Eyes of that Glorious GOD, whereby they have highly
provoked Him thus to threaten and in a moment destroy them? Does not every Soul
then confess and bewail it is Offenses as the provoking Cause, and earnestly Cry
for the present Removal of his insupportable Frowns and for the contrary and
immediate Appearance of his infinite Mercy?

ARE not these the common and just Apprehensions of the Children of Men both
religious and impious, in the Times of this tremendous Providence?

AND how agreeable to them are the plain Expressions of DIVINE REVELATION?

So Job discerns and declares of GOD in that forementioned Chapter IX. v. 4, 5. He
is wise in Heart and mighty in Strength: who has hardened Himself against Him
and prospered? which removes the Mountains, and they know not* which
overturneth them in his Anger, etc. And in Chap. XXVI. v. 11. The Pillars of
Heaven tremble, and are astonished at his Reproof.

AND how agreeable to this is that sublime Representation of GOD in the
Beginning and Progress of these and such like Divine Operations, Hab. III. 10,
-- 12. The Mountains saw Thee, and they Trembled -- Thou did march through the
Land in Indignation.

THUS we read a most terrifying Threatening of this particular Judgment, as a
declared Expression of the Anger of GOD, Ezekiel. XXXVIII. 19, 20. For in my
Jealousy, and in the Fire of my Wrath have I spoken: Surely in that Day shall
be a Great shaking in the Land of Israel: So that the Fishes of the Sea, and
the Fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the Field, and all creeping Things
that creep on the Earth, and all the Men that are on the Face of the Earth;
shall shake at my Presence: And the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the
steep Places shall fall; and every Wall shall fall to the Ground, etc.

AND thus the amazed Prophet gives us a most lively Description of the like
terrible Judgment, as if He had seen it in the full Execution; and then
ascribes it to the Divine Displeasure, Jer. XXIV. 24 -- 26. I beheld the
Mountains, and lo they trembled, and all the Hills moved lightly: I beheld, and
lo there was no Man, and all the Birds of the Heaven were fled: I beheld, and
lo the fruitful Place was a Wilderness, and all the Cities thereof were broken
down, at the Presence of the LORD, and at his Fierce Anger.

AND thus have we briefly shown, That the Great GOD does this terrible Work,
Because He is Wroth, and thereby He expresses his fearful Displeasure.

WE now go on --

II. TO Consider the Motives of this Divine Displeasure, and of these dreadful
Expressions and Discoveries of it.

WHAT should be the meaning of this Heat of his Anger? Wherefore should He be
so highly Offended? And what does He intimate by these awful Expressions of his
holy Displeasure?

AND here we must needs be sensible that our heinous and multiplied Sins are
the unhappy Kindlers of his terrible Wrath. For every Sin is directly contrary
to his Nature, Design and Will, as they appear in his Works, as well as his
Word. It has a natural Tendency to deface the Beauty of his excellent Works, to
pervert their Uses, to disturb their Order and Harmony; and so to prevent his
Designs, to cloud the appearance of his Perfections in them, and Eclipse his
Glory. It is a provoking Contempt and Opposition of his Law and Authority, an
high Indignity offered to his glorious Sovereignty: And how exceeding Offensive
must it be therefore to Him? especially when continued and persisted in by the
contemptuous Creature.

OUR Iniquities then, are the things that have so highly provoked Him to
threaten us with such a speedy and ruinous Judgment. These dreadful Convulsions
are his loud and angry Declarations against them. They are his awakening
Warnings: And O how awfully have they been repeated among us? And surely their
Design must be either first to Reform us; or if we wont be Reformed, then to
ripen us for utter Destruction. And as they have justly moved Him to threaten;
so then -- to perform his Threatenings, and punish us in the most terrible
manner.

AND thus we find that Disobedience to GOD, and Contempt of his Will in the
General, is by the Prophet assigned as the moral Cause of his Anger and of this
fearful Calamity. Jer. v. 24, 25. Because they have cast away the Law of the
LORD of Hosts, and despised the Word of the Holy One of Israel; therefore is
the Anger of the LORD kindled against this People, and He has stretched forth
his hand against them: And the Hills did tremble, and their Carcasses were torn
in the midst of the Streets.

AND as for Particular Sins which are exceeding Offensive to the Glorious GOD
-- I might easily mention a great Variety -- such as the Love of the Earth and
the Things of it above Him -- the Imposition of Humane Inventions in his sacred
Worship -- the Profaning of his holy Name and Sabbaths -- Disobedience to
Parents and those in Authority -- malicious Carriages toward our Neighbors --
Drunkenness, Whordom, Oppression, Cheating, Lying, Coveting, Pride, etc. And
especially when these are attended with Apostasy, Hypocrisy, and perverse
Continuance in them. When these grow rampant among any People, especially those
who profess themselves to be His; they do greatly dishonor his Name, excite
his Anger, and move Him sooner or latter to show it in some terrible Judgment
or other. And He may choose the Kinds and Times He sees most fit for his
Glorious Purposes.

BUT I shall here only mention those Particular Sins that seem to be threatened
with this particular Punishment. Now these are

1. THE provoking Sins of Oppression, Desire of the World above GOD himself,
Uneasiness with his holy Sabbaths, and Cheating and Extortion on others.

COVETOUSNESS is the Root of these violent and mischievous Evils: And I rank
them thus together, Because they are all thus numbered as the provoking Causes
of this tremendous Judgment, Amos VIII. 4 -- 8. Hear this O ye that swallow the
Needy, even to make the Poor of the Land to fail -- There Is unmerciful
Oppression -- Saying, When will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn;
and the Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat? There Is Desire of the World above
GOD Himself, and Uneasiness with his Holy Sabbaths, as they usually go
together. Making the Ephah small and the Shekel great, and falsifying the
Balances by Deceit. There Is abominable Cheating in Commerce. -- That we may
buy the Poor for Silver, and the Needy for a Pair of Shoes; yea and sell the
Refuse of the Wheat -- There Is vile Extortion on the Necessitous -- These are
the provoking Sins, and now comes on the direful Threatening -- The LORD has
sworn by the Excellency of Jacob; surely I will never forget any of their
Works: Shall not the Land Tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein? And it shall rise up wholly as a Flood; and it shall be cast out and
drowned, as by the Flood of Egypt.

THAT the Trembling of the Land, and it is Rising up like a Flood, or as the
Dutch Translation renders it -- Being driven to and fro like the Waves of the
Sea. -- That this intends a dreadful Shake of the Earth; seems very likely, not
only from the extreme agreement of the Phrases to such a sort of Calamity; But
also from the accurate Remark of the precise Time of the Delivery of this
particular Threatening. For in Chap. ^. V. 1. We read, It was in the Days of
Uzziah King of Judah, and two Years before the Earthquake. Agreeable to which we
have also a Prediction of their hasty Flight from some terrible but nameless
Calamity, in the latter End of the IId Chapter: And this we find exactly
fulfilled, in Zech. XIV. 5. As ye fled from before the Earthquake in the Days
of UZZIAH King of Judah.

BUT then,

2. ANOTHER provoking Sin to GOD is PRIDE; for which He also threatens this
distinguishing Punishment.

Now this Vice consists in an high Conceit of our selves, in undervaluing and
contemning our Neighbors, in Envying their Honors, and exalting our selves
against the Glorious GOD. And it expresses it self in in Boasting of and
Praising our Persons or Actions; In extravagant Apparel, Building, Furniture,
expensive and pompous ways of Living: In haughty Carriage toward others,
Reviling and Defaming them; In scorning to submit to the Yoke of Religion, and
rising up in Anger against the Corrections of GOD.

THERE is therefore hardly any Sin described in Scripture as more offensive to
Him, or threatened with severer Calamities. I shall only mention this particular
Judgment, as it is represented in the most awful manner, in Isa. II, etc. For
the Day of the LORD of Hosts shall be upon every one that is Proud and Lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low -- and upon
all the high Mountains, and upon all the Hills that are lifted up, and upon
every high Tower, and upon every fenced Wall, and upon all the Ships of
Tarshish, and upon all pleasant Pictures: And the Loftiness of Man shall be
bowed down, and the Haughtiness of Men shall be made low: And the LORD alone
shall be exalted in that Day, when He arises to shake terribly the Earth.

THIS particular Threatening being likewise uttered in the Days of UZZIAH King
of Judah; it seems plainly to foretell, and in part to be fulfilled in the
dreadful Earthquake which fell out in the same King's Reign, as we observed
before: Though doubtless with a view to those that were to follow in every Age;
and at length that most finishing one which is to destroy the whole Earth.

AND agreeable to this is also that in Isa. XIII. 9. etc. Behold the Day of the
LORD comes, Cruel, both with Wrath and fierce Anger, to lay the Land desolate,
and He shall destroy the Sinners threof out of it -- And I will punish the
World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity; And I will cause the
Arrogance of the Proud to cease, and I will lay low the Haughtiness of the
Terrible: -- Therefore I will shake the Heaven, and the Earth shall remove out
of her Place, in the Wrath of the LORD of Hosts, and in the Day of his fierce
Anger: And it shall be as the chaced Roe, and as a Sheep that no Man takes up.

AND thus we see what Particular Sins are so provoking to GOD, as to move Him
to threaten us with this Particular Judgment; and if they are not forsaken, to
bring it in his Times on the Earth.

WE must now proceed to some further IMPROVEMENT.

AND,

1. IN these dreadful Works of GOD, Let us see the extreme Evil and Danger of
sinning against Him.

OUR Sins of every Kind are full of Contrariety and Dishonor to this most
Glorious BEING. And as they are justly most offensive to HIM, they are also
most dangerous and destructive to Us. They are so many Instances of our
slighting his supreme Authority, of abusing his infinite Goodness, and of
rising in Opposition against Him. It is by this alone we raise his Anger; and
by our Continuance in them, move Him to express it, both in Threatening and
Bringing on us his destroying Judgments. And O! who can stand before Him when
once He appears to be Angry? For The LORD is the true GOD, He is the living
GOD, and an everlasting King: At his Wrath the Earth shall TREMBLE, and the
Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation, Jer. X. 10.

IT is this offensive and mischievous Thing that has moved Him to testify his
Displeasure in this lower World, and in every Age: To destroy not only
particular Persons, Families and smaller Villages; but even whole Cities,
Countries, Kingdoms, with their vile Inhabitants, and in various manners.
Famines, Fires, Wars, Tempests, Plagues and EARTHQUAKES are so many bitter
Fruits and Tokens of his high Resentments of the Sins of Men. There is no
Calamity, though ever so great, extensive, grievous, sudden; but what our Sins,
especially when persisted in, expose us to, and provoke the righteous GOD to
execute on us.

NOR will our sacred Covenant Relation to Him, our high Profession, or our
formal religious Services, in the least avail to secure us from them. No! Alas!
They rather aggravate our Guilt, inflame his Wrath, and put Him on to mark us
out with more signal Miseries; as He declared to his ancient People, about Two
Years before the Earthquake. Amos III. 1, 2. Hear this word that the LORD has
spoken against you, O Children of ISRAEL, against the whole Family which I
brought up from the Land of EGYPT, saying; YOU only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth: Therefore I will Punish YOU for all your Iniquities.

AND for Particular Places that have been most eminent for Religious Services
-- See how severely He threatened JERUSALEM of old, under the Term of ARIEL; i.
e. The Lion of GOD. When she grew rampant like that Creature in her violent and
sinful Courses; He would no more spare but treat Her with the utmost Rigor. He
would bring every Kind of Distress upon Her: and among the rest this dismal
one. Isa. XXIX. 1, ^, 6. Woe to ARIEL, to ARIEL, the City where DAVID dwelt: Add
ye Year to Year, let them Kill Sacrifices: Yet will I distress ARIEL, and there
shall be heaviness and sorrow, and it shall be come as ARIEL: Yea it shall be
at an instant suddenly, Thou shall be visited of the LORD with Thunder, and
with EARTHQUAKE, and with GREAT NOISE, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of
devouring Fire.

THIS terrible Threatening is doubtless put on Record for our Admonition upon
whom the Ends of the World are come: and the Righteous GOD may execute it when
He pleases on the like provoking Towns and Cities. O! That we might continually
Remember it! and fear; least as it has begun to be acoomplish'd on us, it
should go on to be fulfilled in it is extreme Severity.

2. WHAT abundant Reason have we to adore the Patience and Mercy of GOD, and be
exceeding Thankful, that We, our Families and Towns are not swallowed up in
this calamitous Dispensation.

WHAT Loads of Guilt and Wrath are lying on us: and how have they been growing
every Year? How long have we been going on in our provoking Sins, against Light
and Grace, Threatenings, Invitations, Mercies, Judgments, and every Means that
GOD has used for our Reformation? And O! How heavy did we feel our Guilt, and
what awful apprehensions had we of the glorious Holiness, Omniscience, Power
and Justice of an angry GOD in that dismal Night of our Distress and Danger?
Then we see no other Refuge but that mighty BEING, whom we had been constantly
Offending: and yet to Him alone must we look for Safety.

AND while we felt Him shaking us over the dreadful Gulf, it may be of Fire and
Brimstone, and our Houses over us also ready to give way every moment and crush
us to pieces -- O! How earnest were our anxious Souls for speedy Mercy and
Deliverance? O LORD have Mercy on me, make have to help me! Preserve the House
from Breaking, and let me not sink into the Depths of the Earth! O GOD, in the
multitude of thy Mercy hear me! Let not the water flood overflow, nor the Deep
swallow me up, nor let the Pit shut her mouth upon me! O LORD, Hear me, for thy
Loving Kindness is Good! Turn to me according to the multitude of thy tender
Mercies, and hide not thy Face from me: For I am in Trouble: Hear me speedily:
Draw nigh to my Soul and redeem it, etc

AND how wonderfully Gracious and Kind was GOD in our Time of Trouble. If He
had put forth his Power in an higher measure, or had not stayed his Hand as He
did, but shaken us a few Minutes longer; our Dwellings could not have born the
Shock, but must have fallen to pieces on us, destroyed the Lives of Multitudes
at once, and most miserably crushed and broken others. What a doleful howling
from mortal Wounds and Death had come out of our fallen Houses? and what an
astonishing Desolation had we been this Day?

BUT his Divine Compassions wrought toward us, as they wonderfully did to
EPHRAIM and ISRAEL of old -- How shall I give Thee up? How shall I deliver
Thee? How shall I make Thee as ADMAH? How shall I set Thee as ZEBOIM? Mine
heart is turned within me: my Repentings are kindled together: I will not
execute the Fierceness of mine Anger: I will not return to destroy Thee: For I
am GOD and not Man, the holy One in the midst of Thee!

AND that we may see some thing more of the Greatness of our Deliverance; I
shall here briefly mention these Two Things,

1. GOD'S amazing Execution of this sort of Judgments in other Places.

AND,

2. His repeated Threatenings of them in these Parts of the World.

1. GOD's amazing Execution of this sort of Judgments in other Places.

AND here I must invite you, in the Words of the Psalmist -- Come, Behold the
Works of the LORD, what Desolations he has made in the Earth! -- I will speak
of the glorious Honor of thy Majesty and of thy wondrous Works: And Men shall
speak of the might of thy terrible Acts, and I will declare thy Greatness.

NOR need I here search the Records of former Ages: But only confine my self to
the most awful Instancss within this last Threescore Years. And as I enumerate
the Circumstances, I desire you to consider, that they might have been the same
with us, and would have been, were it not for the wonderful Forbearance and
Mercy of GOD.

IN a Province of PERSIA, which lies in the same Latitude with ours Betw. Lat.
41. and 43.
in 1667, there was an extraordinary Earthquake which lasted Three Months, and
not only overturned Houses, Towers, Churches, etc. But swallowed up in one
Moment Eighty Thousand Men, besides Women and Children. Multitudes of Villages
and Towns, through out the Province were destroyed the same Day: Several
Mountains sunk into a Level, and the great Roads were broken up and become
unpassable. And about Four Years after, there was another Earthquake in the
same Province, on New Years Day, which swallowed up abundance of People and
Houses. At^. Geog. for Asia.


IN the famous City of SMYRNA, which stands on a most convenient Harbor in one
of the finest Bays of the World, is one of the principal Seats of Trade in the
Turkish Empire, consisted of about 90,000 People, and is not far Lat. ^8.
from our Latitude neither -- On June 30 1688, at Noon Day, there was a
terrible Earthquake, which in one Minute threw down most of the Buildings and
shattered the rest. Immense Wealth was swallowed up: The Castle sunk into a
Chasm that opened under it: and Five Thousand People perished. And to add to
the misery, a few Hours after, a Fire broke out of the Ruins, which consumed
the Rest of the City but a few scattering Houses Atlas Geogr. for Asia.


IN the Kingdom of SICILY, near the same Latitude Between Lat. 37 and 39.
in the Night after March 8. 1669, came on a dreadful Earthquake: which shook
all the Buildings of One of their Towns to the Ground, and almost ruined Two
more. E. of Winchelsea's Relation.


BUT this was nothing to that most amazing one which befell that Kingdom on Jan.
19 and 21. 1693, 4.

THE Night after Friday Jan. 19. in a serene, warm and pleasant Time, the
Shakes began with a Quivering motion, and were so violent as to throw down a
great many Buildings and fright the People into the Churches and Fields for
Refuge. But on the Lord's Day following they came on like a swist Rolling
Billow, and with such a vehement Impulse, as in Four Minutes to throw above
Fifty Towns and Cities, with their magnificent Streets, Churches, Colleges,
Castles, Towers and Palaces, into utter Desolations. Great Churches fell down
at once, while the frighted People were at their Devotions and crushed them to
Death by Thousands.

AMONG the rest, CATANIA, a famous, ancient splendid City, full of Wealth and
Learning, was entirely demolished, and such a great Destruction of the People,
that of Eighteen Thousand Nine Hundred of it is Inhabitants, Eighteen Thousand
perished: And throughout the Island about Sixty Thousand. Lowthorp's Abrid. Vol.
2.


PALERMO the chief City at the other End of the Kingdom received some Damage in
most of it is Buildings, but the People then were spared. But doubtless, we well
remember the awakening Accounts not long since Published here of the late
dreadful Earthquake which befell that City in the Night between the 1. and 2.
of September last was Twelve Month. It began between 10 and 11, and in a calm
and serene Sky like ours; though at first the Shocks were not so violent and did
no hurt: But soon increasing they continued with great Fury for above Twenty
Minutes: whereby about a Quarter Part of that large City was entirely
overturned, and reduced to a Heap of Rubbish. In one of it is Wards, an whole
Street gaped at once with a dreadful Noise: from whence there broke out Flames
mixed with calcined Stones and a Torrent of burning Brimstone, which consumed
the whole Ward in less than half an Hour* In Five Days after there were Three
Thousand drawn out Dead from the Ruins, and many dismally mash'd to pieces: and
'twas computed that about Fifteen Thousand People perished in that amazing
Convulsion.

AT BATAVIA in the East Indies, between the 4th and 5th of Jan. 1699. there was
an Earthquake, whereby Sixteen Hills sunk down in the adjacent Country.
Lowthrop. Vol. II.


AND at the City of LIMA, on the Continent of SOUTH AMERICA, on Monday October.
10. 1687. at Four in the Morning came a terrible Earthquake with an horrible
Noise: when some Houses fell and some Persons perished under their Ruins. At 5,
another shake with the same Noise. And at 6, when they though it they were all in
Safety, came on a Third with a rushing Noise and great Fury. The Sea roaring
arose beyond it is Bounds: The Bells rung of themselves: The Destruction was so
great that no Building stood: Several Places round about were ruined: Above
Five Thousand Dead Bodies were found, and they found more Daily when the
Accounts came away: so that they knew not their Number. Lowthrop. Vol. II.


BUT to come a little nearer Home.

THERE are many in this Assembly that well remember the fearful Tidings of that
Earthquake in JAMAICA, on June 7th 1692. It came on between 11 and 12 at Noon,
in a clear, calm and Sunshine Day. It began with a small Trembling, so as to
make some think of an Earthquake: which though it was confirmed by a second Shake
something stronger, accompanied with a hollow rumbling Noise almost like
Thunder, which made them begin to run out of their Houses. But alas! This was
but short warning for them to provide for their Safety: For at the Heels of the
second came the Third and most violent Shake, which threw down and drowned 9
Tenths of PORT ROYAL their Capital Town in two Minutes, and all the Houses by
the Wharf in less than One. Lowthiop. Vo1. II.


THE Streets rose like the Waves of the Sea; lifting up all that were in them,
and immediately dropping down into Pits. The Shake was so fierce, that it threw
the People on their Knees and Faces, as they run in the Streets to seek for
safer Ground. In several Places the Ground would Crack and open and shut quick
and fast in a wonderful manner. Some have seen Two or Three Hundred of these
Openings at one time. In some of which many of the People were swallowed up:
Some the Earth caught by the middle and squeezed to Death: The Heads, Arms or
Legs of others only appeared above Ground. At the same Time a Flood of Water
boiled out and rolled over others: Some caught hold of Beams and Rasters:
Others were afterward found Dead and almost covered with Sand. Some who were
swallowed quite down, rose again in other Streets, being cast up with great
Quantities of Water, and some into the midst of the Harbor: and yet some of
these through the wonderful Goodness of GOD were saved; while others that went
down quick, were never seen more.

THESE were the smaller Openings. The larger swallowed Great Houses: and out of
some there issued whole Rivers spouting to a vast Hight in the Air with ill
Stenches that were very offensive. All the Wharves and some of the Houses sunk
at once: And the most so soon, that the People had no time to get out; those
who were in the upper Chambers meeting the Water at the Garret Stairs as they
were running down for Safety. Some of the Houses were quite swallowed up in the
Earth: others thrown on Heaps: And even the best Streets in the Town full of
stately Buildings sunk so deep as to be near thirty Foot under Water.

SEVERAL Sloops and Ships where overset and lost in the Harbor. The Sea
suddenly rising and swelling with a strange Emotion, came rolling with such a
Force as to drive the Ships from their Anchors, breaking their Cables in an
Instant, and dashing them against the Tops of the sunken Houses.

WHILE the Earth was laboring in these Convulsions, the People run up and
down, pale and trembling with Horror, like so many Ghosts; as if the
Dissolution of the whole Frame of the World were at hand.

AND yet the Shake was stronger in the Country than in the Town, where it left
more Houses standing than in all the rest of the Island; though it be One Hundred
and Fifty Miles in Length, and more than Sixty Broad. They were almost all
either thrown down or swallowed up. And my Author says, It is not to be
doubted, if there had been Five Thousand Towns in Jamaica, but every one of
them had been ruined.

THE Waters of Wells above 30 Foot deep flew out at the Top. In several Places
the Earth gaped prodigiously with great spoutings of Water. The Sky which
before was clear and blew, become in a minute, dull and redish, like a red hot
Oven. Amazing Noises were made by the Fall of the Mountains and the Rumblings
that were heard under Ground.

IN the Mountains were the most violent shakings. Some falling down, stopped up
the Roads and Rivers, and others were thrown in Heaps on one another. A great
Mountain split, and tumbling, drove all the Trees before it, and overwhelmed
several Settlements with their Inhabitants, a Mile off. Another large high
Mountain sunk and was quite devoured: And in the Place thereof arose a Lake 12
or 15 Miles over.

IN the Northern End of the Island, the Planters Houses, with the greatest Part
of their Plantations, were swallowed up, Houses, People, Trees and all in one
great Opening; in the room of which arose at first a Lake of a thousand Acres
extent: But afterward it dried away, and left not the least appearance of
House, Tree, or any thing else that was there before.

IN fine, The Earth continued shaking for Two Months after: And all the while,
the Mountains tottering, and bellowing most loud and hideous Noises. About two
Thousand People perished in Town, a Thousand more in the other Parts of the
Island; and it is though it, if the shakes had fell out in the Night, but but very
few had been left alive. Great Numbers of Dead Bodies were floating from one
side of the Harbor to the other; sometimes one or two Hundred in an Heap, as
the Winds and Seas drove them. And such a general Sickness presently followed
which few escaped, and was very fatal. Half the People saved from the
Earthquake at Port Royal, are said to have Died of the Sickness at Kingston:
where Five Hundred Graves were dug in one Months time, Two or Three buried in
one Grave. About two Thousand swept away; and in the Rest of the Island a
Thousand more.

ON Feb. 19. 1687, 8, at 8 in the Morning, there had been a smaller Earthquake,
which was generally felt through the Island at the same Time or near it, and was
much like ours. It came by Three several Shocks, with a little Pause between;
was accompanied with a small Noise, and lasted about a Minute. The Ground rose
like the Sea in a Wave, as the Earthquake passed along to the Norward. Some
Houses were cracked and almost ruined. The upper Floors especially, reeled, as
if the Foundations of the Houses were raised: In the upper Chambers it had more
visible Effects than below; the Things being mostly thrown off the Shelves: And
the People were generally in a great Consternation. But the astonishing
Earthquake, which fell out about Four Years and three quarters after, makes
this to be the less remarkable.

AND thus I have mentioned something of GOD'S amazing Execution of this sort of
Judgments in other Places.

WE may now briefly,

2. CONSIDER his repeated Threatenings of the same in THESE PARTS of the World.

THIS is no less than the Eighth or Ninth Earthquake which has been perceived
in this Country since our Fathers Arrival hither, and even within this Ninety
Years. Four or Five of the Shocks were indeed much smaller and less extensive.
But this is the Fourth that has been very General and very Awakening.

THE First of them all was on June 2. 1638. Mr. MORTON says, It was a Great and
terrible Earthquake. It was heard before it came with a rumbling Noise like
remote Thunder. It came from the Norward and passed Southward. As the Noise
came nearer, the Earth began to shake: And it quickly rose to that Violence as
to make the movables to clatter and fall. Those who were in their Houses were
afraid of their falling: And others abroad were not able to stand, but were
forced to catch hold of Fences to preserve themselves. About half an Hour
after, came another Noise and Shaking, though not so loud or strong as the
former. It was far in the Land as the Indians observed: and not only ashore,
but also at Sea, some Ships on the Coasts being shaken thereby.

THE same Author tells us, That in 1638 there was ANOTHER Great Earthquake in
New England.

AND on Jan. 26. 1662, 3, at the shutting in of the Evening, there was a very
Great Earthquake; and the same Night Another; though somewhat less than the
former. And on the 28th of the same Month Another about 9 in the Morning.

AND after several smaller ones in the Interval since, THIS LAST seems to be
the most dreadful of all.

AND now, When we hear what Desolations have been made by this terrible
Judgment in other Part of the Earth, and how often we have been threatened Here
with the same; How greatly do these things inhance our Deliverance? How
glorious should the Mercy and Patience of GOD appear this Day in our Eyes? How
high should it raise our Thankfulness to Him? How affectionately should we
rejoice in the LORD our Deliverer? And how loudly should we declare his
Greatness and Sing forth his Praises.

AND as for the other Occasions of this Solemnity; this great Deliverance
comprehends them all: Inasmuch as without it, we had never arrived to this
cheerful Day, nor had now the Season to take any Delight in our other numerous
Temporal Blessings.

HOWEVER, to see the astonishing Goodness of GOD in the midst of the Signs of
his Anger, Let us a little consider and compare them together.

A most Gracious Protestant KING removed by Death. June 11.
And yet ANOTHER with his most excellent PRINCESS advanced to the Throne in the
most peaceable manner, with the General Joy of their Subjects, and the
Preservation of the numerous BRANCHES of their most hopeful Family. A
surprising Change in the supreme Head of Government -- And yet the undisturbed
Continuance of the GREAT FRIENDS of the Nation in their Places of Power; with
the Enjoyment of our invaluable LIBERTIES both civil and sacred, and the joyful
Prospect of the Continuance of them. A Universal Disturbance among the Powers
of EUROPE -- and yet the appearance of a GENERAL PEACE, under his Majesty's
wise Administration and extensive Influence.

A very strange and general Sickness, with several awful sudden Deaths in the
Spring of the Year -- And yet in the most of our Towns a small Mortality. The
threatening Sword of War drawn by some distant and separate Indians -- and yet
the continuance of Peace in our Borders; with the Preservation of our Fishery,
Trade and Seafaring People from the Hands of rapacious and inhumane Pirates. A
very great Drought in the Summer -- and yet seasonable Rains with the
unexpected Springing of the Grass in Autumn, and a plentiful Harvest. SUCH
extreme long Heat Especially from July 28. to Aug. 7. both Day and Night
inclusively.
as has never been known among us, and therewith a raging Sickness in some of
our Towns -- and yet a merciful Abatement of it, and a general Health in
others. Extraordinary terrifying Thunder and Lightning, Particularly in the
Night between Aug. 1. and 2.
with their dreadful Strokes on the Earth in diverse Places, Houses struck and
Cattle killed -- and yet not a Soul destroyed. A most violent Tempest On Sept.
16. and the Night following.
as has been remembered among us, which has broke many Buildings -- and yet on
shore, but one Life lost; and our Shipping as far as we learn preserved at Sea.
How many times have our Houses began to Flame -- and yet not one consumed. And
finally, As the most remarkable of all these Dispensations of Heaven, a great
and universal Shake of the Earth; which has overturned Walls, removed Rocks and
racked our Dwellings -- and yet not one single House thrown down, nor one
Person wounded. I mention not the Damp in the Well, fatal to Two Men in Boston
July 19; Because I would not launch into Particulars, but only mention
Providence of a more General Nature.


ON the Account of such a great Variety of extraordinary Frowns and Smiles, of
threatening Judgments and of sparing Mercies; This seems to be one of the most
Remarkable Years that have rolled over us: wherein we have had the most
surprising Discoveries of the merciful Forbearance of GOD, in the midst of our
growing Offenses and in the fearful Tokens of his just Displeasure.

3. and lastly, FROM hence we learn the various Duties both of the present Time
and of our future Lives.

To GOD most high should we ascribe our continual Preservations. To Him should
we yield the Glory. His great Goodness should continually lead us to sincere
Repentance and Reformation.

HAS He spared our LIVES from eminent Death; we should now present both our
Souls and Bodies as living and constant Offerings, Holy and acceptable to Him
which is our most reasonable Service. Has He preserved our FAMILIES; we should
do our utmost that GOD may be feared, honored and served in them. Has He
preserved our HOUSES; all Iniquity should be purged from them, and they should
be the Dwelling Places of Righteousness and Holiness. Has He preserved our
SUBSTANCE; This should be devoted to Him; and more than ever employed in
Charitable and pious Uses. And has He shown us how uncertain all our EARTHLY
RICHES are, and that for ought we know they may quickly sink and perish with
us; O! How should we take off our Affections from them, carefully Improve them
while we have them, and be more concerned to make sure of Heavenly?

ARE our PLACES of Public Worship still continued; O! how ready should we be to
come and pay our Vows therein to our Great Preserver? Are his precious
ORDINANCES yet dispensed, and have we now a Season of waiting on them; O! How
highly should we prize them, how carefully attend them, and how speedy to
observe them all without Exception; least we never have an Opportunity more.
How should multitudes now press into the CHURCH of CHRIST which is yet opened
to them; and to his HOLY TABLE, which still is spread, and they are most
earnestly Invited, yea Commanded to without Delay.

O Delaying Sinners! Did you not seem to repent of these Neglects and of every
other Sin, and earnestly Desire the Opportunity you now enjoy, when the Angry
GOD was shaking you over the dreadful Pit? And if this does not awaken you;
what can you imagine will? And if now you wont perform your Vows, improve your
present Time, and return to GOD through CHRIST; what can you expect but that this
most awful Threatening should only serve to ripen you for the most sudden and
exemplary Vengeance and Destruction?

BUT alas! The most frightful Appearances will signify nothing to Change us,
unless the SPIRIT of GOD shall attend and speak in a sensible manner. Thus we
read, 1 Kings XIX. 11, -- 13. And behold the LORD passed by, and a great and
strong WIND rent the Mountains, and break in pieces the Rocks before the LORD;
but the LORD was not in the Wind: And after the Wind an EARTHQUAKE; but the
LORD was not in the Earthquake: And after the Earthquake a FIRE; but the LORD
was not in the Fire: And after the Fire a STILL SMALL VOICE: And it was so:
when ELIJAH heard that, then he wrapped his Face in his Mantle, etc. With these
terrible Works, Let us earnestly look and pray for the HOLY SPIRIT to follow
and speak in an effectual manner: That He may be Poured out as He was when the
Place was shaken where the Primitive Christians assembled, Acts IV. 31.

AND let us now have a care of thinking that the Bitterness of Death or our
Danger is past, when the Shakes of the Earth seem to be over. Let us beware of
returning to our former dangerous and vain Security. While we remain
disobedient to the Glorious GOD; we are even continually in as great an Hazard
as we were in the moment of the most threatening Convulsion. And to make us
sensible of this, He is yet continuing to shake the Earth in some Parts of the
Land: And how soon, how suddenly, and where He will give the dreadful Blow to
those that will not regard or be warned by Him -- He only knows. But utter
Confusion may come in a moment on us, as it has on others, either while we are
Sleeping; or if we are Awake, when He will no more hear our deceitful Cries and
Promises, no longer bare with such abusive Sinners, nor let us escape, nor have
one Minutes time to Repent, Believe in CHRIST, or prepare for the Judgment.

LET us therefore always bare in our Minds the Scriptural Threatenings of this
fearful Calamity, with the surprising Instances of their sudden Execution on
others. And let us remember the GREAT and TERRIBLE DAY of GOD is approaching
and how near we know not -- when the LORD of GLORY shall come down to shake the
Heavens and the Earth to pieces; to set this lower World on Fire, to refine it,
and to consume the Sinners out of it; that it may be a Place of Righteousness
and fit for his Dwelling. Then, though the Jews may have the destinguishing Grace
to mourn with Repentance, when they see Him they have pierced, yet the rest of
the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn with utter Despair. And then so
insufferable will his Brightness soon appear; that though at first they might fly
from the tottering Rocks and Mountains, they will quickly turn to fly under
them and wish them to fall and cover them from the Face of Him that sits on the
Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, Rev. VI. 12, -- c.

TO Conclude, LET us therefore now, this moment look to this only SAVIOR,
Receive Him in all his Offices, Give up our selves wholly to Him for ever: And
then live in the Exercise of every watchful Grace and Duty; with our Lips and
Lives continually Praise Him; and abound in the delightful Contemplations of
Him, till we come to long for that Glorious Appearance. And then We shall lift
up our Faces with an holy Joy and Confidence; our temporal Dangers will end in
Eternal Safety; our trembling Dwellings be changed for an unmovable Kingdom;
and our anxious Fears will vanish in perfect Quietness and Assurance for ever.

FOR of that Great Day we have the lively Description in Nahum I. 2, -- 8. GOD
is jealous and the LORD revengeth, the LORD revengeth and is furious, the LORD
will take vengeance on his Adversaries; and be reserveth wrath for his Enemies.
The LORD is slow to Anger, and great in Power, and will not at all acquit the
Wicked: the LORD has his way in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and the
Clouds are the dust of his feet. He rebukes the Sea, and makes it dry, and
dries up all the Rivers: (...) languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of
Lebanon languisheth. The Mountains Quake at Him, and the Hills melt, and the
Earth is burnt at his Presence, yea, the World, and all that dwell therein. Who
can stand before his Indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his
Anger? His Fury is poured out like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by Him.
The LORD is Good, a STRONG HOLD in the Day of Trouble, and he knows them that
Trust in Him. But with an overrunning Flood He will make an utter End of the
Place thereof, and Darkness shall pursue His Enemies.

The END of the Second SERMON.
The APPENDIX.
GIVING a brief Account of this Earthquake in OTHER PLACES.
THIS great Convulsion seems to have reached all over the Continent with the
neighbourbouring Islands from the Rivers DELAWARE in Pensilvania Southwestward
to KENNEBECK beyond Casco-Bay North Eastward; which is about 500 Miles Extent:
And not on the Seacoasts only, but as far within Land as there are English
Settlements; though not so terrible in some Places as others. The General Course
of the Tremor seems to have been about W. N. W. and E. S. E. And those Parts of
the Country that lie to the Westward seem to have had it a few Minutes sooner,
and those to the Eastward a few Minutes later than we at Boston.

AT Philadelphia they write of but one Shock, and this not so strong as Here.
At New York and Long Island they mention Two; the second more fierce than the
former, and much like ours. At Stratford and Guilford in CONNECTICUT, they
perceived it but a few Minutes after X of the Clock: And in the last Town it
tolled a Bell and shook down a Chimney. At New London a House rocked about Two
Foot over. At Dartmouth, the Roaring was plainly heard by the Rev. Minister
There, being then out of Doors, to come along with great Swiftness from the
Nor-westward and to pass off South-easterly. At Dorchester, the most terrible
Noise seemed to be among the Blew Mountains, which some then abroad, concluded
were sunk. The Vessels off at Sea against Casco-Bay, and in the Harbor at
Marblehead felt the First great Shock as if they had run on small Ballast, and
the Agitation of the Waters made them sheer and quiver: And in the last of
these Places, in about Nine or Ten Days after, the Rumblings were heard about
Thirty times.

BUT the Towns about MERRIMAK River have it seems been visited in a more awful
manner than others.

AT Hampton, upon their first hearing the Noise, a Flash of Light was observed
at the Windows, and a Blaze was seen to run along on the Ground, and then the
Shake began. The Brute Creatures run roaring about the Fields as in the
greatest Distress. A Spring of Water which had boiled over ever since it was
known, viz. for Fourscore Years, and never froze, was now so far sunk as they
were forced to dig to raise it, though they could not raise it to it is former
Height, and now it freezes in moderately Cold Weather.

AT Newbury, several Cellar Walls fell in: The Hearth of a lower Room sunk into
the Cellar and a Man with it. And in a low Ground the Earth broke in Three
Places, and cast up a considerable Quantity, and in one Place near 16 or 20
Cartloads of extreme fine bluish Sand, like the Ashes of burnt Brimstone.

AT Bradford, there were Two Wells that used to have 6 Foot Water, and had so
when the Shake came on: But ever since, the Springs are sunk and the Wells
dried up.

AT Andover, by the Road side, on a rising Ground; a spot in a firm dry Soil,
is become a very Springy Place, and such a great Quagmire now in the Road as
makes it dangerous Traveling.

IN the Towns on both sides the River, a vast deal of Stone Wall was thrown
down and the Tops of several Chimneys: The Houses built of Brick were very much
cracked and shattered: And there has scarce a Day passed ever since, wherein
they have not heard the fearful Noises and felt their Dwellings jarr and
tremble.

THE People are thereby thrown into the utmost Consternation. And so mightily
are many awakened with the Sense of their Danger and the Divine Displeasure, as
has produced a wonderful Reformation. Profanness, Drunkenness and other Vices
abandoned; the earnest Pursuits of the World discarded, the Places of Public
Religion vastly thronged; the Worship of GOD set up in Prayerless Families; and
great Numbers continually added to the flourishing Churches. Twenty, Thirty or
Forty on a Sabbath have offered either to make or renew their Dedication to the
Blessed GOD: In one Assembly above One Hundred and Fifty in Three Weeks time;
and of these about Fourscore in one Day.

WHAT a JOY is There, even as the Joy of Harvest, and as Men rejoice when they
divide the spoil! What an happy Effusion of the HOLY SPIRIT! And O! How should
this excite us not only to Glorify GOD for his great Goodness and his wonderful
Works among Them; but also earnestly to Desire and Pray that the same Grace may
be likewise shown to Us, the same SPIRIT Poured out on us and ours in the same
glorious measures! And how should their Examples stir us up to the wise and
happy Imitation! For the Fear of the LORD is the Beginning of Wisdom: and a
Good Understanding have all they that do his Commandments.

Boston, Nov. 30. 1727.
FINIS.

