Mr. Sewall's SERMON Occasioned by the DEATH of His late MAJESTY King GEORGE.

In Council, August 17. 1727.
Voted,

THAT Thomas Fitch, Esquire Jonathan Belcher, Esquire and Daniel Oliver, Esquire be desired
to give the Thanks of this Board to the Reverend Mr. Sewall, for his Sermon
Preached this Day, on the Occasion of the DEATH of His late Majesty KING GEORGE
of Blessed Memory, and to ask of him a Copy of the said Sermon for the Press.

Copy, Examined per J. Willard, Secr.

JEHOVAH is the King and Savior of his People.

A SERMON Preached at the BOSTON Lecture, August 17. 1727. Upon the awful
Tidings OF THE DEATH Of His late MAJESTY KING GEORGE, JUNE 11th.

By Joseph Sewall, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

Psalm cxlvi. 3.4, 10. Put not your trust in Princes -- His Breath goes forth,
-- in that very Day his thoughts perish. The Lord shall reign for ever, even
thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. BOSTON in New England: Printed by B.
Green, Printer to His HONOR the Lieut. GOVERNOR and COUNCIL; for Daniel
Henchman, at his Shop in Cornhill. MDCCXXVII.

JEHOVAH IS THE KING and SAVIOR OF HIS PEOPLE.
ISAIAH XXXIII. 22. FOR the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, he will save us.


THE Lord our GOD, who reigns King forever, is the hope of Israel and the
Savior thereof in time of Trouble: And he invites his People under Public
Calamities to come, and enter into the Chambers of his Protection till the
indignation be overpast; assuring us that he who dwells in the secret place of
the most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. And to encourage
us to fly to his Name as to our strong Tower, He exhibits himself to us as a
most suitable Object for our Trust, in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, GOD
Man Mediator. Being therefore called, though most unworthy, to deliver the Lords
Message to you, upon the great and mournful Occasion of this Day, I have chosen
this Text, in which we are encouraged to look to the Lord Jehovah as our Judge
and Lawgiver, our King and Savior. Jehovah is our Judge -- The Name Jehovah is
mentioned three times in the Original.
GOD is this, and much more to his People: He sustains these Offices for them
in an Eminent and Transcendent manner. And these words may in a particular
manner refer to the Second Person in the Godhead, to whom the Father has
committed all Judgment, and exalted to be a Prince and a Savior. I shall speak
to them under a fourfold Consideration as they lie in the Text.

PROP. I. THE Lord Jehovah is the Judge of his Church and People. PROP. II. THE
Lawgiver of his People. PROP. III. THE King of his People. PROP. IV. THE Lord
Jehovah will Save his People.
PROP. I. THE Lord Jehovah is the Judge of his Church and People.
THE Verb is observed to signify to Judge, to pass Sentence, and to execute
Judgment. The Power of a Judge is Executive, and his Business is to take care
that the Laws be duly Executed. As the Word is used in Scripture, and applied
to GOD, it signifies his pleading the Cause of his People, and delivering them
out of the hands of them that oppress them. GOD is the Judge of all Men, and
has appointed a Day in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that
Man whom he has Ordained. But then this is the peculiar Privilege of the
People of GOD, that their Lord is their Judge. Thus it is promised, Deuteronomy.
32.36. The Lord shall judge his People. Heb. 12.22. Ye are come unto Mount
Zion, to GOD the Judge of all. And indeed these words of our Text may look
forward as far as the last and general Judgment. The Servants of GOD commit
their cause unto him, and he does and will appear to do them Justice against
their oppressors. They have a gracious and favorable access to GOD's Judgment
Seat, and it is their strong Consolation that all Judgment is committed to the
Lord Jesus Christ, their Head and Redeemer: Having their Persons justified
through his Righteousness, and being sanctified by his Spirit; They may say, Job
13.18, 19. I know I shall be justified. Who is he that will plead with me? Here
to show what may be implied in GOD's being the Judge of his People. We may say,

1. THIS may imply, That GOD appoints and orders out to them the Judgments
inflicted on them in this Life.

GOD in his Providence chastises his People for their Iniquities in this Life;
but then he Corrects them with Judgment. He sometimes makes use even of wicked
Men, as the Rod of his Anger in this matter; however he sets bounds to their
Rage. There Is a vast difference between the Judgments GOD brings on his People,
and on impenitent Sinners, as to the ground of them, and their final Issue. GOD
loves his People while he chastens them; he designs their Good by their
Afflictions, and gives them reason to say, It is good for them that they have
been afflicted. 1 Cor. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world.

2. GOD will acquit his People, and declare their Righteousness.

IN this World their Judgment is often taken away. Their Right is turned away
before the most High, and their Cause perverted. Many a time have they been
misrepresented accused and condemned unjustly; but GOD will admit their Appeal,
and reverse these Judgments. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right?
Most certainly he will. The great Day will be the Revelation of the Judgment of
GOD, when all shall be able to discern between the Righteous and the Wicked,
and be obliged to own, There is a GOD who judges in the Earth. For then will
he give to his People the white Stone in the most Public manner, and pronounce
them Righteous before the whole World. Their Judgment shall be brought forth as
the light, and their Righteousness as the Noonday. Psalm. 96.10. -- He shall
judge the people righteously.

3. As their Judge, GOD will give his People a glorious Reward.

THE Lord JESUS CHRIST who has purchased the recompense of Reward by his
perfect Obedience in doing and suffering the Will of GOD, makes that gracious
Promise, Be thou saithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life Rev.
2.10.
. The SON OF GOD will Reward his People according to their Works, though all be
of free Grace. Some Rewards he gives his Disciples upon Earth as an Earnest:
There are temporal and spiritual Blessings, which they now receive, and in the
great Day of Judgment they shall receive a Crown of Righteousness. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give at that Day; and not to me only; but to all them
that love his appearing.

4. IT may imply, That GOD will execute Judgment on their implacable Enemies.

VENGEANCE is the LORD'S, and he will repay it. 2 These. 1.6. Seeing it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you,
GOD has often appeared for his People in the Judgments which he has executed
on their Enemies. Thus he appeared as the Judge of his People when he
over-threw Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea. Thus did he appear when he
raised up Judges who were Instruments in his hand of delivering his People, and
destroying their Enemies. Thus will CHRIST appear when he shall destroy
Antichrist, by the Brightness of his Coming. And thus in an eminent manner,
when he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire,
taking Vengeance on them that know not his Name, and obey not his Gospel 1 These
1.8, 9.
. For then shall those Enemies of GOD and his People, be punished with
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
Power.

USE 2. LEARN, That it is a very dangerous thing falsely to Accuse, and
wrongfully Condemn the People of GOD.

IT has been common for them to have things laid to their Charge they are not
guilty of. The Christians were a Sect every where spoken against, Acts 28.22.
They are often dressed up in Bear-skins that they may be baited. But Woe to such
as do in this way hinder them from doing or receiving Good: For GOD will plead
their Cause in the Day of Vengeance. And dreadful, very dreadful will their
Condemnation be who shall then be found guilty of this crying Sin.

2. THIS should Comfort GOD's People under all the Reproaches and Evils they
are loaded with in this World.

WHO is he that Condemns, it is GOD that Justifies? They may indeed for the
present be under great difficulties upon this account. Men may speak evil of
them, and they may be loaded with Curses; but GOD will Bless. They shall be
clothed in white Raiment, and CHRIST will not blot out their Names out of the
Book of Life; but will confess them before his Father, and the holy Angels.
They may now lie in the Dust; but they shall arise and shine; and the things
that now obscure them, shall be done away as the shades of the Night are chased
away before the rising Sun. Now this consideration should Comfort the faithful
Servants of GOD under Reproaches, and Encourage them to commit themselves to
him that Judges righteously. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4.3. -- With me it is a
small thing that I should be judged of you, or man's judgment. -- ver. 4. -- He
that judges me is the Lord. If we approve ourselves to the Lord, and obtain
his Euge, we are safe and happy: and in the believing Prospect of this, GOD's
People should now Rejoice.

3. LET us not rashly Judge and Condemn one another.

WE must take heed we do not rashly Censure others. Mat. 7.1. Judge not, that
ye be not judged. Not that all Judging is unlawful; but for Men without any
Call or Warrant from GOD to cite their Neighbor to their Bar, and pass
Sentence against him; this is a great Evil we should beware of, and that from
this Consideration, that the LORD is our Judge. Romans 14.10. Why do thou judge
thy brother? or why do thou set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. O let us look to our Hearts and Ways, that
our own Consciences may not condemn us! And not be hasty to condemn others. 1
Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come --.

PROP. II. THE Lord Jehovah is the Lawgiver of his People.
IT is GOD's Prerogative, who has made all things, to give Law to the whole
Creation. But in a peculiar manner GOD is a Lawgiver to the moral World of
Angels and Men, who are Causes by Counsel, and capable of understanding the
Rules according to which GOD will have them Act. GOD is a Lawgiver to all Men.
He has given them the moral Law which is of divine and unchangeable Right. And
though this Law which was at first written on Man's Heart in a fair Character be
dreadfully defaced by Sin, yet the most barbarous Nations have some knowledge
as of a Deity, so his Law, by the Light of Nature, Romans 2.14, 15.

BUT now, GOD is in a more appropriate sense a Lawgiver to his People, in that
he gives them his written Word, and writes his Laws in their Hearts by his
Spirit. Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation. GOD's ancient
People received from him the Moral Law. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 32.2. The Lord came
from mount Sinai -- from his right hand went a fiery Law for them --. It was
delivered out of the midst of the fire. The Ceremonial Law; containing the
Ordinances of GOD's Worship appropriated to the Church State under that
Dispensation. The Judicial Law; which was suited to their Civil Polity, in
which respect the Jewish Nation was a Theocracy. As to the Moral Law, our
Savior himself has said, I am not come to destroy the Law and the 'Prophets,
but to fulfill. As to the Ceremonial Law, this is abolished by CHRIST the Head.
Ephesians. 2.15. He abolished in his flesh the law of commandments contained in
ordinances. And now our SAVIOR as the only Head of his Church, and Lord of his
own House, has appointed those Laws and Ordinances whereby he will have his
professing People governed to the End of the World. Mat. 28.10, 20. Go ye teach
all Nations -- Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you --. He has given the most excellent Rules for regulating his People both
with respect to their inward and outward Man. And these bind the Conscience;
for they are His, who is the Lord of Conscience.

USE, I. LEARN the great Sin and Evil of Disobedience in a professing People.

DISOBEDIENCE to the Laws of GOD, our Maker and Sovereign, must needs be a
great Evil. This brought Disorder and Confusion into the World at first. The
Sins of the Heathen are provoking to GOD, and render them obnoxious to his
righteous Judgments. How much more heinous must be the Sin of those who have
the written Word of GOD, GOD Articl'd against his People of old that he had
written to them the great things of his Law, but they were counted as a strange
thing, Hos. 8.12. O let us take Care then to yield Obedience to CHRIST: For to
him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin, Jam. 4, 17. And
such may expect to be beaten with many stripes.

2. HOW happy are the Church and People of GOD who have GOD for their Lawgiver.

Deuteronomy. 4.7. What nation is there so great, that has Judgments so righteous, as
all this Law which I set before you. The Laws of GOD are all holy, just and
good. There Is nothing oppressive in them. CHRIST's Yoke is Easy -- None of his
Commands are grievous. Indeed the Lusts of Men make them uneasy under them; but
they are all suited to make his People holy and happy. O happy! thrice happy,
did we understand our Privilege in this respect. Blessed are you People of the
Lord! Let Greece boast in her admired Solon: And the Lucedemonians in their
celebrated Lycurgus. But O Zion do thou Rejoice in CHRIST JESUS thy Lawgiver,
who is infinitely Wise, infinitely Just, infinitely Good.

3. LET the People of GOD yield a cheerful Obedience to the Laws of GOD.

LET us have a great Regard to the weighty matters of GOD's Law, and esteem his
Judgments to be desired more than Gold, yea than much fine Gold. Let us hearken
to them, and diligently observe them; because it is our Life. Let us take Care
to keep the Worship of GOD pure and entire without Corrupt mixtures of Man's
Invention. For one great reason why our Forefathers lest their native Country,
and came into this Land was, that they might observe the Orders and Ordinances
of CHRIST, without the Inventions of Men. Let us then stand fast in that
Liberty wherewith CHRIST has made us free.

PROP. III. THE Lord Jehovah is the King of his People.
GOD is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: His Dominion rules over all. But
in an especial manner is he King in Zion. Isa. 44.6. Thus says the Lord, the
King of Israel. GOD governs the whole World, and makes the wrath of Man to
praise him; but it is his People that willingly submit to his divine Authority.
Isa. 63.19. We are thine, thou never barest rule over them, they were not
called by thy Name. Now GOD has set his SON at the Head of the whole Creation,
and Rules by Him. Unto the SON he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever, a
Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, Heb. 1.8. He who is in
the Form of GOD --. was made in the likeness of Men; and being found in fashion
as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross. Wherefore FOD has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is
above every Name Phil. 2.6, -- 11.
. He is gone into Heaven, and is on the right Hand of GOD, Angels, Authorities
and Powers being made Subject to him. The great GOD our SAVIOR makes his
Angels ministering Spirits, and by him Kings Reign. He removes Kings, and
serves up Kings, Dan. 2.21. Here, that we may a little illustrate this great
Truth, I shall very briefly consider these following particulars;

1. GOD has constituted and anointed his Son to he the King of his People.

As GOD, all Power is His Essentially. I and my Father are one, Job. 10.30. As
Mediator, He receives the Kingdom from his Father: The Father of Glory has
called him to this high Office, and invested him with it. Psalm. 2.6, 7. Yet
have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. The Lord has said unto me, Thou
art my Son --.

2. THE Son of GOD subdueth his People to himself, and sets up his Kingdom in
their Hearts.

THEY were all by Nature under the Dominion of Sin, and Tyranny of Satan, who
Rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience. Having rebelled against
their rightful Lord, they became the Slaves of this Usurper. But now our Lord
JESUS CHRIST casts down Satan from his usurped Throne, and sets up his Kingdom
in the Hearts of his People, 2 Gor. 10.4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. He has reconciled them that were Enemies in their Minds by wicked
Works Col. 1.21.
, bound the strong one, and spoiled him of his goods. When He pleases, in his
majesty he rides prosperously because of truth and righteousness: His arrows of
Conviction are sharp in the Hearts of his Enemies, and they fall down under
him, being subdued to the obedience of Faith.

3. THE People of GOD make Choice of CHRIST for their King.

THEY that belong to his visible Kingdom, own him as their King, and swear
Allegiance to him, receiving the Sacraments, by which their solemn Obligations
to be his faithful and obedient Subjects, are signed and sealed. And true
Believers swear with all their hearts. CHRIST is their Head and LORD by their
own voluntary Choice and free Election: for he inclines their Hearts to accept
of him by his victorious Power and Grace. When his Spirit comes upon them, they
say, Thine we are, O Son of David, and on thy side. O Lord our God, other Lords
have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name,
Isa. 26.13. Thus his People are willing in the day of his Power, Psalm. 110.3.
This King Reigns in their Hearts. Let the Title of earthly Princes be ever so
Just, yet sometimes their People are Rebellious, and will not do the Homage
which is their due. But when the Lord JESUS CHRIST takes to himself his great
Power and Reigns, there is a mighty Change made on the Hearts of his Subjects,
so that they bow down and submit to his equal Scepter, and that with a willing
Mind.

4. WHATEVER is done in the Church of CHRIST, must be done in his Name, and by
his Authority.

HE is the Lord of this spiritual House. Heb. 3.6. But Christ as a Son over his
own House: whose House are we --. He has made the Laws and Ordinances whereby
it is governed, as we have heard; and all that is done by the Officers of his
appointment, must be done in his Name, and according to his declared Will. They
act as Servants under him, and their Power is ministerial not lordly, 1 Pet.
5.3. Neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the
Flock. Col. 3.17. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to GOD and the Father by him.

5. THE Lord JESUS CHRIST governs all things in the Kingdom of 'Providence with
an especial regard to the Welfare of his People.

Ephesians. 1.22. And has put all things under his feet, and given him to be Head
over all things to the Church. The LORD governs the whole World with an Eye to
the Salvation of his People, Isa. 43.3. For I am the Lord thy GOD, the holy One
of Israel, thy Savior, I gave Egypt for thy Ransom.

6. The Lord JESUS CHRIST protects his People, and subdueth their Enemies for
them.

HE fights their Battles, and gives them the Victory -- Exodus 15.6. Thy right
hand, O Lord is become glorious in power: Thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed
in pieces the Enemy. Romans 8.37. In all these things we are more than
Conquerors, through him that loved us. But something further of this may be
considered under the last Proposition. I shall now in a word or two Improve
this Proposition.

USE 1. Is CHRIST the King of his People, We should then do our utmost that his
Kingdom may flourish and be established among us.

GREAT is our Privilege that his visible Kingdom is set up among us, and very
strong are our Obligations to submit to his Government our selves, and to
endeavor that it may flourish in the hearts of others. We are directed to
Pray, Thy Kingdom come; Now in this Kingdom GOD the Father Rules by his Son.
And it is spiritual. Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Let us then, in our
several Places, employ our Talents, that Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness
may be maintained and increased among us. And especially, Let such as are
vested with Authority be in all humility entreated to exert themselves mightily
for the Honor of GOD and the advancement of pure Religion. And O that there
were such a Spirit in us all! that we might unite as one Man in this great and
good Work: For GOD declares, that the work of righteousness shall be peace, and
the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever Isa. 32.17.
.

USE 2. THE People of GOD should Rejoice in their King.

HERE is matter of universal Joy: The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice. It is
owing to this, that there is any good Order and civil Peace among the Heathen,
though they know not GOD, as manifested in his Son JESUS CHRIST. How should Zion
then rejoice and triumph in her King! Zeph. 3.14, 15. Sing, O daughter of Zion,
shout O Israel, be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem
-- The King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee --. Certainly
these are good Tidings of great Joy, which may well Comfort those that mourn in
Zion, Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God reigns!

USE 3. LET us all Submit to the Lord JESUS CHRIST as our King.

THIS glorious King says, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if
any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with
him, and he with me. O let us then open our Hearts unto CHRIST! He now sits on
a Throne of Grace, and holds out his Scepter to us: Let us then draw nigh and
touch it by Faith, and he will grant us our Petition; yea he will give us a
Kingdom. But Woe, ten thousand Woes will be to us, if we finally reject him,
and refuse to have this Man to Rule over us; for he has not only a golden
Scepter to rule his willing People; but also a Rod of Iron to dash in pieces
his Enemies.

PROP. 4. THE Lord Jehovah will Save his People.
As they do Homage to Him; so he will protect them and beautify them with his
Salvation. GOD is the Savior of all Men; specially of those that believe: He
saves them to the uttermost, that trust in him and rely upon him. Happy art
thou O Israel. Who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the Shield of
thy Help, and who is the Sword of thy Excellency -- Beut. 33.29. The Title
given to GOD is that, O God of Israel, the Savior, Isa. 45.15. Sion may sing,
as Isa. 26.1, 2. We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for walls
and bulwarks. Open ye the Gates that the righteous Nation, which keeps the
truth may enter in. v. r. 3. Thou will heep him in perfect (...), whose mind is
stayed on thee; because he (...) in thee. GOD will be a Wall of Fire round
about his People, and the glory in the midst of them, and upon all their glory
will he create a defense. The Church is his Vineyard, and he will watch over it
night and day, that no man hurt it, Isa. 27.3. Such gracious Promises as these
are made to the Church and People of GOD. And as for all such as believe in
GOD, through JESUS CHRIST, He will give them Salvation with eternal Glory.

I would further say,

I. THE Lord will save his People from all their Enemies, and every Evil. He
redeems his Israel out of all Adversity. More particularly,

HE will deliver his People from Sin.

THIS is the worst of Evils, and the Cause of all Evil. But our Lord saves his
People from it, Matthew. 1.21. -- Thou shall call his Name JESUS: for he shall
save his people from their Sins. When the SON of GOD in our Nature suffered on
the Cross, He condemned Sin in the Flesh Romans 8.3.
For he was made Sin for us, who know no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.22. GOD laid upon him the Iniquities of
all his People, and he so bore them as to bear them away, by making full
Expiation to divine Justice for them, and purchasing a complete Deliverance
from this destroying Evil. And GOD has Exalted him with his right hand to be a
Prince and Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins, Acts
5.31. He delivers from the Guilt of Sin. There Is no Condemnation to them that
are in CHRIST JESUS Romans 8.1.
. And from the Dominion of it. Sin shall not have Dominion over you: for ye are
not under the Law, but under Grace Romans 6.14.
. In CHRIST there is a Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin and Uncleanness. His Blood cleanses from all
Sin, and by his SPIRIT does he apply the Virtue of it till his People become
whiter than Snow Psalm. 51.7.
. It is true, the Sanctification of GOD's People in this Life is imperfect, 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. However this work shall also be perfected in due time; Ephesians. 5.25
-- 27. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it; that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but
that it should be holy and without blemish.

Again. THE Lord will deliver his People from Satan.

AND this follows upon the former; By taking away Sin, the SON of GOD destroyed
the Works of the Devil, who usurped a power over Man by drawing him into a
Rebellion against his only Rightful Lord. The Devil is a formidable Enemy to
the sinful Children of Men. He is a destroyer, and as a roaring lion walks
about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. He is the old Serpent that stung
Mankind to Death even in Paradise by prevailing in his Temptation to Sin, and
so rendering them obnoxious to the Curse of the Law. But it was early promised
that the Seed of the Woman should bruise his head, -- Genesis 3.15. which Seed is
CHRIST, who was made of a Woman in an extraordinary manner, of the Virgin Mary,
the HOLY GHOST coming upon her -- Luke 1.35.
And took part of Flesh and Blood, that he might destroy him that had the power
of Death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2.14. He now bruiseth Satan under their feet;
and will at last shut him up in the bottomless Pit. The Angels which kept not
their first Estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day Jude ver.
6.
When our Savior was upon Earth he cast them out of many that were possessed;
and we read of Devils that cried out saying, What have we to do with thee,
JESUS thou SON of GOD? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? Mat.
8.29. They now indeed often tempt and vex GOD's People; but they shall not
destroy so much as one that puts his Trust in CHRIST: They shall not pluck them
out of his Hand. And the great Day of the Lord is coming, when they shall all
be cast into that everlasting Fire which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels Mat. 25.41.
. And then the People of GOD shall ascend to the heavenly Paradiee, into which
this Serpent can never enter to tempt, much less to destroy.

Again, THE Lord will deliver his People from the Men of this World.

THE Psalmist prays, Psalm. 17.13, 14 Arise O Lord, -- deliver my soul from the
wicked, which is thy Sword: From men which are thy hand, Lord, from men of the
World --. GOD, in his spotless Sovereignty, sometimes makes use of these to
chastise his People; but when the Lord has performed his whole work on mount
Zion, He will punish them Isa. 10.12.
. Though they associate themselves, and combine together against the faithful
Servants of GOD they shall be broken in pieces. In a little time the Servants
of GOD shall be taken to rest where the wicked cease from troubling, and in the
Morning of the Resurrection they shall have Dominion over them: For the Saints
shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. But I shall not enlarge here.

Again, THE Lord will Save his People from Death.

THE Wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. which in the large sense of the word,
comprehends all Evil; but take it in a more restrained sense, for temporal
Death, or the separation of the vital Union between Soul and Body, together
with the forerunners of it, as Sickness, bodily Pain, etc. And it is a fearful
Evil. The Scripture calls it the last Enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26. So it is to GOD's
Children; for the second Death has no power over them. And the Text but now
mentioned assures us, that even this shall be destroyed. Our Savior JESUS
CHRIST has abolished Death --, 2 Timothy 1.10. He has taken away the sting and
power of it, and will give his People a complete Victory at the Resurrection,
when the Bodies of the Saints shall be raised in Incorruption, in Glory, and in
Power; yea shall be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, Phil. 3.20, 21.

2. THE Lord will put his People into the full possession of all Good needed to
complete their Eternal Happiness.

THE Great GOD our Savior is not only a Shield to defend his People from Evil;
but also a Sun to supply them with Good. Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun
and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withold
from them that walk uprightly. GOD in Christ is their shield, and exceeding
great reward. Genesis 15.1.
The Lord Jehovah is the GOD of his People, which comprehends all God in it,
and as such he Blesses them with all the Blessings of the New and Everlasting
Covenant. Here I may say, The Lord Supplies his People with all needed temporal
Good. Godliness has the promise of the Life which now is, 1 Timothy 4.8. He gives
them their Daily Bread, that portion of the good things of this Life which is
most for GOD's Glory, and their truest Good; and his Blessing with it, which
makes even the little a rightous man has, better than the riches of many
wicked, Psalm. 37.16.

BUT especially does the GOD and Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST bless them
with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3.
This Salvation contains in it our Effectual Calling. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has
saved us and called us with an holy calling -- according to his Grace given us
in Christ Jesus. --

-- OUR Justification in the sight of Gone. Isa. 45.25. In the Lord shall all
the seed of Israel be justified -- They are accepted as righteous through the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and received by faith. Our Adoption,
or being received to the dignity and privileges of the Children of GOD, John
1.12. But as many as received him to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God --. Spiritual Peace and Joy. Peace with GOD, Romans 5.3. Peace of Conscience
and joy in the HOLY GHOST. By the SPIRIT who is the Comforter, they have sweet
Communications of Grace and Peace from GOD the Father, through the Son, our Lord
JESUS CHRIST --. Our progessive Sanctification. He that has begun a good Work
performs it to the Day of CHRIST.

IN a word, This Salvation contains in it the full and everlasting Possession
of Glory and Blessedness in Heaven. Their Salvation is begun here, it is
perfected in Heaven. When the SON of GOD shall appear the second time, it will
be without Sin to Salvation, Heb. 9.28. Then this great and good Work shall be
perfected forever. They shall obtain the Salvation which is in CHRIST JESUS
with eternal Glory Tim. 2.10.
.

AND thus I have in some imperfect manner considered these Four Heads
distinctly as they lie in the Text, though the Ideas they afford us, be in some
particulars much the same.

APPLICATION.
USE I. UPON the Whole; Here we see something of the Divine Majesty, and
Excelling Glory of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

THE words of our Text, as we have heard, may be applied to him, though not
excluding the other Persons, the Father and the Holy Ghost, which Three are One
GOD. Certainly then, our Savior appears to be very great, and most worthy to
receive Honor and Glory and Blessing. Rev. 5.12.
He is the King of Glory, the Lord Strong and Mighty. The Glory of this World
is a fading Flower. Death Reigns over Sovereign Princes, and lays their Honor
in the Dust. They Die like other Men; yea are often times not suffered to
continue so long as others by reason of Death. Of the Thirty Kings and Queens
which Reigned since William the Conqueror, not one completed 70 Years. We now
mourn the Death of One that was among the longest Livers of them.
But now the Son of GOD Lives and Reigns for ever. Indeed in the Execution of
his Office he died once; but then in our Nature he rose a Conqueror on the
Third Day, having abolished Death, and is set down at the right hand of the
Majesty on high. Let us then realize the Glory of this Divine Person, who is
our Judge and Lawgiver, King and Savior, and glorify him as GOD; for this is
the Father's design in investing his Son with these great Offices. John 5.22,
23. The Father judges no man; but has committed all judgment unto the Son:
That all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father.

2. Learn, THE Honor and Happiness of the Church and People of God.

THIS Honor have all the Saints, that Christ is their Lord and Savior, and
they are his friends and favorites. Joh. 15.15.
The Church is the Bride, the Lamb's wise. Rev. 21.9, 10. And is represented to
us as a Woman clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.1. For she shines in the borrowed
rays of her Lord and Husband Uxor fulget radiis mariti.
, who is the Sun of Righteousness. Indeed the Church may now complain she is
black, Cant. 1.5. both for her own sinful infirmities, and the persecution of
her enemies; but though she has lien among the pots, yet shall she be as the
wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, see
Psalm. 68.13. Zion shall arise, and shine with the Glory of GOD arisen upon her.
And at last shall be presented a glorious Church before Him. For Christ's work
is perfect. From hence also we may infer the safety and happiness of the
Church. Her Redeemer lives, and therefore the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her, Psalm. 46.5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved:
God shall help her, and that right early. And how great must her Blessedness
be, who is blessed in Christ Jesus, the Almighty Savior. Surely Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things
which GOD has prepared for them that love him 1 Cor. 2.9.
.

3. LET what has been said Direct and Comfort GOD's People under the great and
awful Bereavement which we lament before the Lord this Day.

THE Scriptures of Truth speak of Kings as the Breath of their Subjects
nostrils Lam. 4.20.
. Their People do in some sense Live and Breath in them. And therefore, when in
the Sovereign Providence of GOD, their Breath goes forth, it becomes their
People to humble themselves under GOD's mighty Hand stretched out against them.
Upon so great an Occasion as this, they may well take up that Lamentation, Lam.
5.16, 17. The Crown is fallen --. For this our Heart is faint, our Eyes are
dim. And it has been the commendable Practice of GOD's professing People to
Lament the Fall of such whom GOD had set at their Head, in the Civil
Government. Thus David lamented over Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.17. All Judah
and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.24.

Now then, The Lord of Life calls us to pay our tribute of Tears, and bear our
part in the public Sorrows of this mournful Day, in which the Light of our
Israel is quenched, in the very sudden and surprising Death of our late
gracious Sovereign KING GEORGE The KING died at Osnabrug after a short Illness,
being on his Journey to Hanover; on the Lord's Day, June, 11th 1727. In the
68th Year of his Age, and the 13th of his Reign.
, of glorious Memory. But is this important Life cut off! and that while in the
swift and successful pursuit of our Peace, and the Tranquillity of Europe It
deserves a thankful Remark, that through the goodness of GOD, the Peace was so
far brought forward before His Majesty's Death.
. LORD, We are dumb and open not our Mouths because thou have done it. Job
9.12. Behold he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, what
do thou? Let us then duly resent this awful Blow of GOD's hand, and relent
under it. Let us Weep over this Great Man; for the Beauty of Israel, the Mighty
is fallen. GOD has taken from us a KING Renowned for Wisdom and Council,
Courage and Firmness of Mind, Application to Business and Quick Dispatch; a
KING whose Accession to the British Throne was esteemed by Wise Discerners of
the times, as Life from the Dead to his Dominions, and the Protestant Interest;
a KING whom GOD has highly honored in the great Esteem he had given him at
Home and Abroad, in his very Extensive Influence, and the mighty things GOD had
done for him and by him. But I presume not to draw his Character; an attempt
too great and high for me. My main design is to make a Religious Improvement of
this surprising Providence: Has GOD removed our KING in this Critical
Juncture, when Affairs still look with a dubious Aspect, when the Eyes of so
many were upon him, and his People might be ready to say, under his shadow we
shall live. Let us then Cease from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils. The
Lord now speaks once, yea twice, in his Word and by his Providence, and his
Voice to us is that, Psalm. 146.3, 4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the
Son of Man, in whom there is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to
his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from Man,
whose breath is in his Nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of. All
Nations before GOD are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing and vanity. GOD holds the breath of the most Mighty Princes in his
hand, and can stop it in a Moment. And while they Live they can be no more to
us than he is pleased to make them. In vain is Salvation hoped for from these
Hills -- in the Lord our GOD is the Salvation of his People. And therefore
while we give them that honor which is their dne. We must look off from them,
not trusting in an Arm of Flesh. And on the contrary, We should look to our
Glorious Lord, who is King in Zion, and place our trust in him. This is our
Support that the Lord Omnipotent reigns. The Great GOD our Savior testifies,
Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am alive forever
more, Amen; and have the Keys of Hell Or the invisible World, Hades.
and of Death. O let us then lift up our Eyes unto him from whom comes our
help, and put our trust under his shadow. For of this King it may truly be said
as, Isa. 32.2. A man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest: as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land. O Afflicted People of GOD! fly for refuge to lay hold on
the Hope set before you in your Savior, who is the Mighty GOD, the Everlasting
Father, Isa. 9.6. For Blessed is the Man that has the GOD of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Lord his GOD Psalm. 146.5.
.

AND now, Let us Praise the Lord, who has not left his British-Israel, as
Sheep without a Shepherd. Here is light arising to us under our darkness: GOD
has Ordained a Lamp to his Servant, a Son and Successor, and that not a Child;
but a Prince in his full Strength for Council and Action. Blessed be GOD, the
Protestant Succession in the Illustrious House of HANOVER abides before him.
The KING lives in his SON, and we behold our rightful and lawful KING GEORGE
the Second, whom GOD long Preserve! peaceably seated on his Throne. amidst the
joyful Acclamations of his dutiful People; yea we hear Him declaring from the
Throne, That the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom are most dear to
Him. We also with pleasure behold him Blessed of GOD with a most gracious
QUEEN, who is truly a Crown to her Husband, and by whom He is strengthened with
a Royal Offspring, Our Hope, GOD grant they may be the Joy of Posterity. The
LORD build his Servant a sure House; make his Name better, and his Throne
greater, even than his Royal FATHER's Throne. The LORD pour out his SPIRIT upon
Him in all Princely Gifts and Graces. The LORD give his Servant an
understanding Heart to Judge his People, that he may go out and come in before
them, doing Justice and Judgment. The LORD make him truly the Defender of the
Faith, a nursing Father to his Church and People. The LORD preserve his Servant
from all secret Attempts and open Violence. Cloth his Enemies with shame; but
upon himself let his Crown flourish.

AND may his Subjects be of one heart to Fear GOD and honor the KING. In his
Days let the Righteous flourish, and abundance of Peace.

AND may the benign Influences of his Government reach his loyal People in
these Ends of the Earth, come down upon us like Ram upon the mown Grass: as
showers that Water the Earth. May we also sit under His shadow in the continued
Enjoyment of our Privileges Civil and Ecclesiastical, who have ever expressed
our Joy in the Prosperity of his most serene House. LORD we look unto thee who
have the KING's Heart in thy Hand. Save Lord, and let the King hear us when we
call.

MAY the most High choose our Changes in great Mercy, and give such from time
to time to Rule over us, as shall be Just, Ruling in the Fear of GOD: that
under them we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all godliness and honesty.
LORD we are Uuworthy; and when we consider our provoking Sins, and heinous
Transgressions, we may well tremble for fear of thee, and be afraid of thy
Judgments! But look upon the face of thine Anointed, and send now Prosperity, O
LORD, for thy Names sake, thy SON's sake: O Shepherd of Israel shine forth,
stir up thy strength, and come and Save us. Turn us again, O God of hosts,
cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

IN a word, Let Civil Rulers realize their Mortality, and Act under this view
that they must shortly be called to give up their Account to GOD the Judge of
all. Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said, ye are gods -- but ye shall die like Men. Be
entreated therefore to glorify that GOD in whose Hand your Breath is, and whose
are all your ways. Submit your selves to CHRIST, and Honor him with all your
Talents, that when your Service on Earth shall be finished, you may hear him
say to you, Well done good and faithful Servants, enter into the Joy of your
Lord. Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed ye
judges of the earth. Serve ye the Lord wieh fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

AND let us all be Exhorted to Accept of JESUS CHRIST as offered in the Gospel,
and to live in Obedience to his Laws; for HE is the Author of eternal Salvation
to them that obey him. Heb. 5.9. Let us sensible of our lost Estate by the
Fall, go out unto him; for there is Salvation in no other: There is none other
Name under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved Acts 4 12.
. Let us then quit our Refuges of Lies, and fly to his Name as to our strong
Tower. His Voice to us may be that, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thy help. Let us then look unto him, that we may be
saved, who is able to save to the uttermost. Then we may rejoice in him under
all the Changes of this Life, and say, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King he will save us. Yea at the Great Change of
Death, we may commit our Spirits into his hands, being persuaded he is able to
keep that which we have committed to him against that Day; And when CHRIST who
is our Life shall appear, we shall also appear with him in Glory. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the the only wise God, be
Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

