Mr. Prince's SERMON ON THE Uncertainty of Life.

Morning Health No SECURITY Against the Sudden Arrest OF DEATH before NIGHT.

A SERMON Occasioned By the very sudden DEATH of Two young Gentlemen in Boston,
on Saturday January 14th, 1726, 7.

Dedicated to the YOUTH of the Town.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church.

Jam. iv.14. For what is your Life? -- It is even a Vapor, that appears for
a little time, and then vanishes away.

BOSTON: Printed for Daniel Henchman, and Sold at his Shop, over against the
Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1727

DEDICATION.
To the Youth of the Town of Boston.
THE Subject of the following Sermon affecting You in an especial manner,
nothing can be more proper than to present it to your Service.

WHEN I Penned it, I had not the least Though It of making it more Public than the
delivering it in my own Auditory. Upon which account there are these
Inaccuracies in it, which I have no time now to mend, as were enough to make me
very averse at first to it is Publication. But the Representations of others,
that by the Seasonableness of it, while your Minds are awakened with the late
awful Instances of sudden Death among you, On January 14th Mr. Samuel Hirst,
Aet 22 and Mr. Thomas Lewis, Aet. 32 Besides these 2 that were the Occasion of
the Sermon, a 3d falls out this very Day, a Fortnight after, viz. Mr. Simon
Bradstreet, Aet. 20.
the Discourse may be more likely to do you good; have overcome my Backwardness
and made me willing to undergo any Censures for your Benefit.

NO doubt the Sight, and Rumor of these surprising Instances, as it quickly
run through the Town, did at first affect you with a lively Apprehension of
your own exceeding Frailty and impending Danger, the desperate Venture of
trusting to your Lives a Day, and the infinite Importance of being always ready
to appear before the Great and dreadful GOD.

BUT alas! The Allurements of this deceitful World do presently divert our
Minds: These Apprehensions quickly wear off again: We soon return to our former
Carelessness and Security; though the same awful Hazard still continues: and thus
our hopeful Impressions prove but as the morning Cloud, and as the early Dew,
that quickly vanishes away.

TO keep you therefore from Returning to such a Frame of Spirit; to preserve
alive the Apprehensions of your own Danger; to make you sensible there is the
same Reason for you to be continually apprehensive of it as much as when the
lively Instances appeared before your Eyes: and so to quicken you to a suitable
Conduct; is the Design of Publishing the following Sermon.

AND now, The great Request I have to make, and which is indeed the Summary of
every other, and the Purport of my whole Discourse, is this, -- That you would
every Morning as you awake and rise in Health, consider seriously that you may
be in the very Case of those Two young Gentlemen, whom you so lately saw, in
the midst of seeming Health, drop down and Die.

IF you would but every Morning spend a Thought in so just and wise a
Reflection; it would be most likely, through the Grace of GOD, to save you from
many Sins and Follies, and excite you so to Live as to be always ready for such
a sudden Change.

NOR will such a Course as this be any Hindrance to your solid Cheerfulness or
Pleasure. For if every Morning you do sincerely Give up your selves to GOD in
CHRIST, and then endeavor by his Help to please Him through the Day; you will have
a constant spring of Serenity and Cheerfulness in you: there are a thousand
lawful Pleasures you may freely taken -- Take them, and be thankful to the
bounteous Giver: while you moderately pursue the World, with the Esteem of
others, you will be approved of GOD, and make sure of Heaven. You will find
that this is the Path of Wisdom, Safety, Peace and Pleasantness: and if it
should be your Lot to Die at once, it will only without any previous Terror,
more easily and quickly usher you into a Life of endless Happiness.

THAT this may be the blessed Use and Issue of this Discourse, in Conjunction
with these awful and never to be forgotten Providence, is the earnest Prayer of

Boston, January 28th 1726, 7. Your Friend and Servant, T. Prince.

Morning Health no Security against the sudden Arrest of DEATH, before Night.
LORD'S DAY Morning, January 22.
PSALM. XC.5, 6. IN the Morning they are like Grass which grows up: in the
Morning it flourishes and grows up, in the Evening it is cut down and
withers.


BY the Title, this Psalm appears to be a Prayer to GOD, composed by Moses in
the Wilderness for the Use of Israel: and by the general strain it seems to
have been composed toward the End of their Journyings there. For after he had
therein drawn a most affecting Scene of those numerous Instances of human
Frailty, Mortality and Affliction which had passed among them; He toward the
Close lifts up his Heart in an hopeful Prayer, That GOD would now return in a
way of special Favor, satisfy them early with his Mercy, and make them glad
according to the Days wherein He had afflicted them and the Years wherein they
had seen Evil.

TO comfort and support Himself and that afflicted People in the sad Review of
those Destructions which had been made among them; he first raises up his Mind
and begins the Psalm with the Contemplation of GOD's own Eternity, and of his
being their Dwelling Place in all Generations; and then in the Description of
their Calamities, he begins with GOD as the sovereign Cause, he represents them
as the Fruits of his holy Displeasure, and then he traces out their Sins as the
sad Procurers.

BUT though the Psalm is written with a special view to the Mortalities and
Sorrows of that afflicted People; yet there are scarce any others here
described but what are common to the rest of Men.

AND here Moses, in the

1 st place, speaks of our universal Mortality and Dissolution, ascribing them
to the Efficiency of GOD; ver. 3. Thou turnest Man to Destruction. The last
Word strictly signifies to be bruised and broke to pieces. Pagnin, Mercer. etc.
i. e. By Bruising and Breaking his brittle Frame and Constitution, Thou do
grind and rend him into Pieces: or, Thou breakest him to pieces as a Potter's
Vessel* Nicholson.
And say Return ye Children of Men. In the Hebrew it is ye Children of Adam.
i. e. Return -- Your Bodies to the Earth, from whence they came; and your
Spirits to GOD who gave them. Genesis 3.19. Psalm. 146.4. Eccl. 12.7. Ains^.


2. HE then describes the Irresistibility of this Destruction; in the beginning
of the 5th ver. Thou carriest them away as with a Flood. i e. Thou overwhelmest
and barest them away as irresistibly and easily as a Flood of Water breaks out
and carries away all before it Dutch Annot.
. Death under the Divine Direction, is a sort of an invisible Deluge, Calv. in
Loc.
that sweeps away all before it, and none can resist or avoid.

3. THAT Insensibility we are by this Destruction bro't to; in the middle of
the same Verse. They are as a Sleep. i. e. As Men falling and fallen into a
deep Sleep, so Thou carriest them away, and so they Die. Like a Sleep
imperceptibly, so Death seizes on them: and having seized them, deprives them
of their sensitive Powers; and they lie like Men asleep, insensible of their
own Condition and of every thing about them.

4. THE unexpected and surprising Suddenness of their Destruction; as in our
Text. In the Morning they are like Grass which grows up: In the Morning it
flourishes and grows up, in the Evening it is cut down and withers.

THIS similitude may be taken either from some tender sort of Herbs, that very
suddenly fade away: though they flourish in the Morning, yet being heated by the
Sun at Noon, their Juice evaporates and they quickly wither. Or rather from the
cutting down of the flourishing Grass by the hand of the Mower. Moller.


IN the Morning, i. e.

(1.) IN their Infancy or Youth, in the morning of their Age* Gej, etc. in Pol.
Synops.
They are like Grass, or as an Herb, as all the ancient Versions render it.
Bib. Polyglo^ and. Pol. Synops.
That grows up, or changes or passes, as the Original may signify, and
several translate it. Bib. Polyglo^ and. Pol. Synops.
i. e. Like the springing Grass or Herb they rise, and quickly altering, they
grow in sprightliness and Beauty. In the Morning (...) flourishes and grows
up. Being sprouted out of the Earth, it becomes more fresh and flourishing^ It
shoots out with a pleasant Flower: It grows in Strength and Stature, and
hastens on toward it is Perfection. So the Children of Men, in the Morning of
Life, they flourish and grow like the Grass or tender Herb that has not felt
the Meridian Sun: But in the Evening it is cut down and withers Though it be
fresh in the Morning* yet by too sudden and intense an Heat, it soon changes,
flags and falls down to the Earth, Jackson.
: Or by the Scyth of the Mower, it is suddenly cut down and withers away.

IT signifys the hasty and sudden Change of the Sons of Men to Destruction:
They are scarcely Born and risen, but they are quickly cut down and perish.
Dutch Annot.
The space of Humane Life may be here compared to a single Day. The Birth and
Youth of Men is like the Morning, and their Death is like the Night or Evening.
And the Sense may be, -- That many die in the Prime of their Age, like a tender
Herb that cannot bear the least Heat of the Sun; and other Young Ones Live to
flourish, but by the Noon of Life they pass away. Muis in P. Synops.


(2.) THE Morning here may not only signify the Morn of Life, or our Youthful
Age, but also in a more Literal sense, the very Morning of an Artificial Day.
In this respect we may be like the Grass or Herb that in the Morning
flourishes and grows up: But in the Evening of the same Day may be cut down
and withered. And as this is applicable to every Age of Life, I shall in this
sense also, as well as the other, consider it, under this General DOCTRINE,

THAT though in the Morning of the Day we may be growing up and flourishing as
the Grass; yet in the Evening, whether we are Elder or Younger, we may be cut
down and withered.

FOR Illustration I shall endeavor these three Things, 1. TO describe
something of the Condition here signified, when we are growing and flourishing
as the Grass in the Morning. 2. SHOW that for all this, whether we are Elder or
Younger, we may in the Evening be cut down and withered. 3. and Lastly, THE
affecting Change and State we are then reduced to, when we are actually cut
down and wit^^^ed.


I. TO describe something of the Condition here signified, when we are growing
and flourishing as the Grass in the Morning.

THE Similitude being taken from the Grass or Herb of the Field; I might here
run out into a great Variety of Instances to show how fitly we may be compared
to it. Especially since the inspired Scriptures do several times make use of
this apt Allusion. Psalm. 103.15. Isa. 40.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1.24.
But I shall confine my self to this single Instance of it is flourishing State
in the Prime of the Day.

SEE then the Grass and Herbs in the Morning, being refreshed with Dew,
replenished with Moisture and enlivened with the rising Light of the Sun; How
fresh and gay they appear! They spring so fast as we are ready to think we see
them grow. They Change indeed at first as they quickly pass to further Degrees
of Eminence: They grow in Thickness, Strength and Stature: They branch out
their verdant Leaves* display their beauteous Flowers and hastily aspire to
their full Perfection. Then we see them flourishing in all their Verdure,
Strength and Flowers, briskly waving in the fluent Air, and showing all the
Signs of Life, Prosperity and Continuance.

AND this may give us some Resemblance of our flourishing Morning State:
especially in our young and growing Age.

AND this is when we awake and arise in Health, Strength and Vigor. When we
not only appear with a lively, hail and cheerful Countenance; but this arises
from the sense of Ease within, the Fullness of our Spirits, and the Freedom of
their Operations.

WHEN our Constitutions being unbroken, the Vessels whole and open, and the
Fluids free and regular in their Circulations through them. There Is no sense of
Pain, Uneasiness or Disorder: But an inward Pleasure running in every Vein of
the Body, and a secret Exultation rising in the Soul from the joyous Sentiments
of a universal State of Tranquillity and Health within us.

THEN we flourish as the Grass. And this is still more eminent in the Morning,
after a sufficient and refreshing Sleep in the Night. Having taken our full and
pleasant Rest, and Slept in Ease and Quiet, we find our Spirits then
replenished and renewed with Vigor: The Soul and Body seem to be in a perfect
Harmony together: There Is no Complaint between them: no suspicion of any Danger
of their parting quickly: nothing but a mutual Joy and Satisfaction. The Soul
is pleased to find the Body fit and ready for all it is Desires and Purposes:
and the Body pleased and active in the Execution of them.

IN the Womb of the Morning we have the Dew of our Youth* Then the Mind is full
of Strength and Vigor: The Spirits play with Pleasure: the Soul delighted with
it is present Mansion, and in the fair and undoubted Prospect of it is long
Continuance. The young Man then rejoices in his Youth and Health; the out
goings of the Morning are joyful to him: As a Bridegroom he comes out of his
Chamber; and rejoices as a strong Man to run a Race.

THIS is some brief Description of the State here signified when we flourish in
the Morning like the Grass.

AND now, how exceeding ready are we to glory in our morning Health and
Strength, and to depend and trust to the long Continuance. We cannot tell how to
think that in Evening we may be cut down and withered: and we could scarce
suppose it possible in Nature, were we not convinced of it by repeated and
known Examples.

WE therefore now proceed in the

II Place, TO show that yet for all this, whether we are Elder or Younger, we
may in the Evening be cut down and withered.

i. e. NOTWITHSTANDING the flourishing State of the morning Health we have been
describing, we are throughout the Day exposed to be suddenly cut down by the
stroke of Death, and all our Vigor, Strength and Beauty faded: and in the
Evening this may be our Portion.

NOW that in the midst of Health and Pleasure, we are continually exposed to
this, and that this may be our Case at Night, appears both from Observation and
the Knowledge of Nature, as well as from the Holy Scriptures.

FOR this has been the Case of multitudes of others: and it has been an
ancient, plain and universal Maxim among the Sons of Men, That, what has been
may be. There is nothing known in Nature to secure us from the same sudden
Destruction.

WE spring and rise from the same Original: We are composed of the same various
and dissolvable Principles: We are configured and formed after the same Model:
supported by the same corruptible and fleeting Aliments: subjected to the same
Laws of Nature: surrounded with and breath in the same changeable and noxious
Air: and therefore Live in the same natural Dangers, and are exposed to the
same quick and surprising Dissolution.

AND if yet we rise to higher Causes, there is still the same awful and
continual Hazard.

FOR we are all equally in the Hands of the Great GOD, the sovereign Ruler and
Upholder of the World. Psalm. 103.19. Dan. 4.35. Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3.
He has justly condemned us all to die for our original and joint Rebellion
against Him: and doubtless he takes Care to see his righteous Sentence
executed. He also sees every Personal Iniquity both in the Commission, Purpose
and allowed Inclination: and is infinitely offended with it. And as He has
continual Provocation, so He has Power enough with the greatest Ease to strike
and cut us down in a moment when ever He pleases.

HE has likewise all natural Causes both material and spiritual under his
actual and absolute Direction. He can employ his mighty Angels to destroy us in
an invisible manner at once: and as they excel in strength, so they rejoice to
do his will. Psalm. 103.20.
Or without them He does whatever He pleases, and nothing can interrupt or
hinder Him. Dan. 4.35.
Yea GOD upholds us in Life every moment, as much as a Man holds up a Stone
from falling down to the Ground: and He need not strike us, He need only
withold his vital Influence from us, and we immediately die and sink and return
to the Earth to which we are inclined, and from whence we came. In fine, we
continually provoke Him to this, and are therefore always exposed to such a
quick Destruction.

OUR most flourishing Morning Health and Vigor will no more therefore secure
us from being cut down in the Evening, than the Flourishing of the sprightly
Grass in all it is morning Strength and Beauty. Throughout the Day we are in
continual Danger of being cut down on a sudden by the irresistible stroke of
GOD, either immediately by his own Efficiency in an invisible manner, or through
the Agency of natural Causes, or by the mere witholding his vital and
supporting Influence from us.

I say, Cut down on a sudden: For this no doubt is signified by this allusive
Expression. For the cutting down of the Grass -- How quick and instantaneous is
it! It is done at once, in the Hight of all it is Flourish and Verdure. And thus
are many of the Sons of Men cut down at once in the midst of their Health and
Pleasure. As the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds that
are caught in the snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time when it
falls suddenly upon them, Eccl. 9.12.

TO this are we every Moment of the Day exposed, and in the Evening may
unexpectedly prove to be cut down and withered.

AND as this is a General Truth comprehensive of us all; it therefore includes
both Elder and Younger of every Age: and as the above mentioned Causes of
Danger are common, They equally show that no sort of Age is any Security from
such a sudden Destruction.

BUT inasmuch as it may more fully convince us, or at least more sensibly move
us, it may be convenient here to descend to Particulars.

AND,

1. THE Elder Ones that are flourishing in the Morning as Grass, may yet in the
Evening be cut down and withered.

IN the Elder Ones, their Lives, their Health, their Strength and Vigor, are
in a great measure sensibly wasted away. Their Constitutions of Body are either
broken or wounded: and their Lives on this account in more apparent Hazard. The
Wrinkles of their Skin, the loose Contexture of their Flesh, and the Coldness
of their external Parts do show, the vital Powers are decayed in them, and
unable now to create and send their usual supplies of Heat and Nourishment* And
their various Vessels having been extended to their utmost^ Limits, they have
thereby lost their springy Tenor and Strength, incline to relax, and so their
Powers of acting, which are the Powers of Nature, are failing and in a measure
gone already. From this Relaxation rises faint, unequal and irregular Actions
on their enclosed Fluids: and what numerous Dangers these produce -- I must
leave the Physicians to say.

I shall now only cite you to that lively Description of this State of the Body
which the inspired Solomon gives us, in Eccl. 12.3, 6. Now the Keepers of the
House, i. e. the Head and Hands begin to tremble: the strong Men, i. e. the
Legs and Shoulders to bow themselves; the Grinders, i. e. the Teeth, to cease
to do their office, because they are few: and those that look out of the
windows, i. e. the Eyes, to be darkened. Now, the Silver Cord, i. e. the whole
System of Nerves, whereby all the Instruments of Life are moved, they begin to
be loosened: and now you must expect that the Golden Bowl, i. e. the Vessel
that contains the Brain; the Pitcher at the Fountain, i. e. the Heart; and the
Wheel at the Cistern, i. e. the Lungs; that these, i. e. their Contextures and
Powers will be quickly broken: they will lose their moving drawing and
distributing Virtue; and so Blood and Spirits, and Heat and Sense and Motion
will all fail in the Body: Jackson.
And then this curious Arangement of finer Dust shall return to the Earth, in
which it lay dispersed, and from whence it was but a little while since
collected.

FROM these Considerations we may see something of the especial Hazard of the
Elder Ones among us, that are in the Morning flourishing as Grass, their
especial Hazard of being cut down in the Evening and withered.

BUT the Elder Persons have so often seen such Instances of this, that there is
lesser need of showing them their Particular Danger. They are the Younger Ones
that are much more hardly to be convinced: that cannot tell how to think of
being suddenly cut down by Death, while they are flourishing in Health and Joy,
and in the Morning of their Lives.

TO these including the strongest, healthiest and most unbroken Constitutions,
I shall therefore now apply my self and show

2. THAT even the Younger Ones, that are in the Morning flourishing as Grass,
may in the Evening also be cut down and withered.

AND have you not known Instances enough of this already, to convince you fully
of your continual Danger?

HOW many in their Youthful Days have lost their Lives at once by Drowning,
Falling, Shooting, by a Flash of Lightning, and by numberless other Accidents?

AND how many others -- by an unaccountable, unexpected and sudden Change in
their own Bodies? In the midst of seeming Health and Pleasure, they have been
at once bereaved of Sense, and have fallen down breathless on the Ground. To
mention now no other than the double awful Instances in one Day, in the same
Street, in the most public Part of the Town, and near the same Hour, about a
Week ago. How flourishing were they in Health and Ease in the Morning of that
fatal Day: but in the Evening we saw them cut down and withered. In the same
seeming State of Health as any of you now: and could no more think of being cut
down in the Evening than the liveliest among you.

AND are not these double Instances shocking to you, shocking to your vain
Confidence, and enough to make you sensible how exceeding Frail the healthiest
of you are: and tho? now this Morning you are flourishing in Health and
Cheerfulness, yet in the Evening of this very Day, you may like them be cut
down and withered.

AND this you would still be more clearly convinced of, if you could but know
your own inward Frame and Constitution. If you could but see the very slender
Threads your Lives are constantly depending on; you would be amazed, you would
be afrighted at your continual Danger; and greatly wonder how it comes to pass
that you have escaped ten thousand sudden Deaths already.

THE Blood and Vapors are continually ascending into the Brain: and if they
should rise too fast or in too great a Force or Quantity, as they may by
numberless Causes, you are in the utmost Danger: If they should get out of
their tender Vessels there, or by swelling them press on the more vital Parts
adjoining, so as to obstruct their Motions, you are gone in a Moment. If a
Cold, a Cramp, a sharp or a glutinous Humor should seize some of the necessary
Springs of Life; the Course of Nature stops immediately, and you die without a
Remedy. If some exceeding fine and tender Threads or Skins, which are in
continual Action, should break within you, you are destroyed at once without
Recovery. If by any sort of inward Surprise or Passion, or outward Impression
from the cold ambient Air, or other numerous Causes, the perspirable Matter or
any other Humors should suddenly strike inwards, and bare so much on the chief
Instruments of vital Motions as to overpower and stop them; you are killed as
suddenly, as if you were struck through the Heart with a Bullet.

YEA this very Heart of yours -- it continually Labors, though you feel nothing
of it, with an amazing Force to beat the Blood along it is Vessels and keep you
alive. It is found to send the Blood out of it with the Swiftness of above 50
Foot in a Minute, and with a Power of above 3000 Pound weight, which is vastly
more than the whole Body can raise directly from the Ground. And yet this Power
has more than 40 times greater a Resistance to overcome in sending the Stream
of Blood in (...) the Arteries.
And if it cease to move a few Minutes, you presently expire and die for all
the Art of Man to save you. But by the greatest Philosophers this amazing
Action of the Heart is found to rise, not merely from it is own Construction or
the mechanic Powers of Nature; but is even moved continually by some invisible
and mighty Agent, which no doubt is GOD himself. They are convinced it is not
the Soul that moves it: For the Soul knows nothing of it, and it moves and acts
with the same amazing Force when the Soul is at the greatest Rest and Ease in
the Time of Sleep, and when it is most unmindful of the Body and most attentive
on external Objects, as when we are awake and have nothing to divert us. The
Heart thus moves continually whether the Soul will have it or no: the Heart
goes on and regards it not: and the Soul can neither hinder nor continue one
single Action of the Heart a moment. It has no more Command of the Heart within
us, either to stop or move it, than of the Heart of another.

IN short it is no less than the Omnipresent and Almighty GOD that has it in
his immediate Hands and moves it for us. And thus they find those Scriptures to
be true in the strictest sense. Job 12.10. In whose Hand is the Soul, (or Life
as it is in the Margin) of every living Thing, and the Breath of all Mankind.
Psalm. 66.9. Which holds our Soul in Life: and Acts 17.28. For in Him we live
and move and have our Being. And now, if the Great and dreadful GOD, whom you
provoke by your Sins continually, should cease to move this wonderful Machine
of Life, you die immediately and wither away.

IN these respects are we very fearfully as well as wonderfully made Psalm.
139.14.
and preserved. And I might instance in a great many other dangerous
Circumstances of your mortal Bodies, that are almost infinitely frailer than
you can conceive. But methinks, this is enough to show you, that though in the
Morning you are flourishing as Grass, yet in the Evening you may be cut down by
Death and withered.

WE therefore go on in the

III and last place, to Consider briefly the affecting Change and State we are
then reduced to, when like the Grass we are actually cut down and withered.

NOW the Part of the Grass or Herb cut down, in that very moment looses all
it is Life and vital Power. It immediately falls and lies prostrate on the
Ground. The Circulation of it is Juices now are stopped. It has no strength to
draw in any Nourishment, to put forth any pleasant Flowers, or to wave in the
Air any more. And it quickly withers also. It looses all it is Sprightliness and
lively Colors: They presently die and fade away. It soon grows pale and wan,
till it turns to a more Earthy Hue, and then to Rottenness. And as the watery
Parts expire, it yet withers more, i. e. It shrinks and wastes away to Dust.

AND to such a piteous Case as this are we reduced, when like the Grass, we
(...) cut down and withered.

BEING cut down by the stroke of Death, our Liveliness and Strength are at once
entirely vanished. Like the Grass it self we fall down to the Earth, from
whence we sprang. As we are become insensible, so likewise utterly passive to
all about us. We are moved hither and thither, and disposed of just as they
please. The pleasant Looks and the beauteous Colors, they presently Change and
fade away. The white and ruddy Countenance grows wan and ghastly. The Corpse
soon turns to an Earthy Hue, like the dirty Elements of which it is formed. The
Comeliness quickly turns to Corruption: and as the Moisture constantly
evaporates, it withers more, and consumes to Dust.

THIS is the low, the abased State, which like the Grass of the Earth we come
to, when we are cut down and withered. Surely then, the People is Grass: and
all the Goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field: the Grass withers,
the Flower fades; because the spirit of the Lord blows upon it. Isa 40.6 --
8.
As for Man, his Days are as Grass: as a Flower of the Field so he flourishes:
For the wind passes over it and it is gone; and the Place thereof shall know
it no more. Psalm. 103.15, 16.


BUT Oh -- What is now become of that separate Spirit, which once in such a
wonderful manner enlivened, beautified, ruled and acted this curious and
compounded Frame of Dust and Water! Here we must leave the Parallel between
Grass and Man, which can hold no further; and search for that restless nobler
Part, than ever either Plants or Brutal Animals possessed: whose State at Death
is of infinitely greater moment for us to contemplate and know, than that of
our withered and mouldering Bodies.

THESE Parts of ours, our Souls -- they never die, nor wither away: But they
continue still the same for their Substance, Natures and Powers for ever, and
in the same moral Condition for Kind though not in Degree, as they were in when
they dwelt in the Body. Then the Eternal Sentence of GOD is pronounced upon
them -- He that is Holy, let him be Holy still; and He that is Filthy, let him
be Filthy still.

THEN, the Soul being released from the Body, is released from all it is Laws
and Influence. It subsists distinct in all it is essential Powers and Vigours.
It is awakened then from the insensible stupor of Death with which it was
overwhelmed for a moment while GOD was dissolving it is vital Tie with the Body.
And then it returns to the Presence of God who gave it. Eccl. 12.7.
It returns to GOD as it is Omniscient, holy and impartial Judge: It appears
before his Seat to be tried, and to be determined of for ever.

THERE every thing appears naked and open before the Eyes of Him with whom we
have to do. The Profaness, Hypocrisy and secret Enmity of the Unrenewed to GOD,
cannot be concealed: but they will appear in the most open Light to their utter
Confusion. And there the Repentance, Faith and Love of the Upright toward Him,
will break out and appear in all their Luster, to their inexpressible Joy and
Confidence in Him. Our several States will immediately discover themselves: the
Trial upon them will therefore quickly be over: and then comes on the
definitive, irrepealable Sentence: either to be bound and reserved with Devils
in chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the Great Day and the Public Trial of
all the Things we have done in the Body: 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. 2 Pet. 2.4, -- 6.
Jude 6, 7.
or else to be acquitted, justified and made perfectly Holy through CHRIST, to
pass into his delightful Presence, and there to remain till the Resurrection of
it is precious Dust to an immortal State of Life and Beauty.

AND now, In what manner are these various Spirits employed in their separate
State?

WHY -- The Condemned are filled and tormented with most dismal Apprehensions
and Horrors. They have a most awful View of the glorious Holiness, Justice,
Omniscience and Power of GOD. Being conscious of their inexcusable Guilt, they
reflect on the daring Sins they have committed against Him, and then they look
on forward to their endless and amazing Punishment. With the Devils they
believe it and tremble. They know there remains no more Sacrifice of Sins for
them, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation from
GOD, to devour them his implacable Enemies. With the condemned Ghosts of Sodom
and Gomorra, they have in their own Minds a most terrible Sense of suffering
the Vengeance of eternal Fire. And with further Horrors they dread the
Resurrection of their vile Bodies to complete their Misery.

BUT on the other hand, the justified and sanctified Spirits -- they enter into
that perfect and eternal Rest that remains for the People of GOD. And there
they are forever free and secure both from Sin, Temptation, Fear and Suffering.
They rejoice exceedingly that they are safely got through the dark Passage of
Death. They triumph in the pleasing Reviews of their momentany Trials on Earth,
their Perseverance through them, their Victories over them, and in the certain
Prospect of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory which they have
been working for them. They are happy in the Presence of GOD, in the Vision of
CHRIST, and in the delightful Society of numberless Angels and other perfected
Spirits, who most dearly love them and rejoice in their Happiness. In fine,
They are glad they are delivered out of the Prisons of their vile and sinful
Bodies: and they joy in the Prospect of their glorious Resurrection in the
Perfection of Beauty and Holiness, and with immortal Life and Vigor, to
partake of their new found Pleasures and complete their Felicity: To be
transported together to the celestial Paradise, never to be cut down or fade
any more, but to grow and flourish in their Perfection forever.

THESE are the various affecting Consequences of our being cut down by Death
and withered And thus have we seen some faint Illustration of this important
Doctrine. We must now Conclude with some

IMPROVEMENT.

AND,

1. WHEN we flourish in the Morning as Grass, let us then remember our
Grass-like Constitution and be greatly humble.

HOW apt are the strong to glory in their Strength, the healthy in their
Health, the sprightly in their Vigor, and the comely in their Comeliness. The
superficial Apprehensions of these corporeal Indowments, elate our Minds with
self-Conceit and Pride. But let us get a deeper View of our real Frame and
Composition; and we shall see enough to check this Vanity, and that we have no
such reason as we fondly imagine, to boast or glory.

FOR what is all this bodily Frame and Complexion, but a mere Contexture of
Dust and Water? It came but lately out of the Ground we tread on; and thither,
as to it is native Soil, it will quickly return again. Yea the very Filth and
Ordure of the Streets -- we may easily think of what vile Ingredients it is
composed -- It is carefully carried into our Fields and Gardens: There it
either descends in Roots, or rises into Grain or Herbs, or Grass and Flowers:
It soon comes into our hungry Bodies, turns into Blood and Flesh and vital
Spirits, and forms our Strength and Beauty.

AND what is Strength, but a more close Cohesion of the dusty Parts? and what
is Beauty, but such a Rangement of them in the Skin, as to reflect some
peculiar Rays of Light or Colors to the Eyes as please the Fancy? What is
Health, but the earthen Vessels not being broken or distorted, and the Thinness
of the Fluids rolling through them? and what is Vigor, but a greater Plenty of a
thinner or more springy sort of matter moving easily and swiftly in us?

IN short, The Substance is all the same in one as in another, Vile and Earthy.
In the Streets it is Filth and Putrefaction: In the Grass it flourishes: In the
living Face it shows the beauteous Colors of Light reflecting from it: and in
a little while it withers, and turns to a more loathsome Putrefaction than it
was before.

WELL may we therefore own in a literal Sense with Job in great abasement, Job
17.14.
I have said to Corruption, Thou art my Father: To the Worm, Thou art my Mother
and my Sister: and where is now my Hope? And where is now our Pride? We shall
go down to the Bars of the Pit and rest together in the Dust. We shall go down
and rest together: i. e. My Father, Mother, Sister, Corruption, Worms and We
together For as an Instance that we are in a measure in a State of Putrefaction
already; the very healthiest of us have always Millions of those vile Creatures
swarming in our Flesh and Blood: They constantly Live in and upon us: and as we
Live together, so we shall die and go down into the Pit together, only they
will a little outlive us, and there dissolve and rest together in the Dust.

2. WHAT Cause have we to admire GOD's distinguishing Power and Goodness in our
continual Preservation.

THE Union of Soul and Body and the Continuance of it can be ascribed to
nothing but his immediate and continual Influence. But the strength of the Soul
is limited and this noble and active Part is, in it is present State at least,
unable to move all the mighty Engines of Life in the Body: and they must be
moved continually, or we die in a moment. In a few Hours Action of the Limbs by
Labor, or of the Mind by Study; the Soul grows weary of moving them, and
requires to rest. But the vital Instruments in us must incessantly Labor with
an exquisite Nicety, and an Exertion of Force abundantly greater; and the mover
of them must never forget, must never be weary. The mighty and unfainting Power
of GOD does therefore here come in to Support us: and thus He keeps us in an
immediate and perpetual Dependence upon Him.

WITHOUT one moment's Intermission, He is continually putting forth his
wonderful Power, to move the necessary Springs of Life, to repair our wasting
Substance, and to preserve us alive. While He thus inwardly sustains and moves
us, He defends us from Millions of Evils that would easily and quickly destroy
us: And all this He has been constantly doing from the very moment that He
began to form us.

HOW devoutly should we admire this wondrous Work of His in thus upholding the
tender Life He has given us! and this in the midst of such numerous Dangers and
Enemies to it, both from without and within, by his mighty and never ceasing
Influence and Protection. Let us have a Care of ascribing this to the mere
Powers of Nature: But let us rightfully yield Him the Glory of his immediate
Work in his constant upholding and moving, as well as original forming and
quickening these earthy Bodies. In the grateful Sense of this, with the
excellent Job, let us acknowledge to GOD -- Job. 10.8, -- 12.
Thy Hands have made me and fashioned me together round about: Thou have
clothed me with Skin and Flesh, and have fenced me with Bones and Sinews: Thou
have granted me Life and Favor, and thy Visitation has preserved my Spirit.

IN fine, LET us also admire his distinguishing Goodness that he He should do
all this for us, while our Lives have been so vain and fruitless of Good, yea
so much abused to his Dishonor: and while numberless Multitudes have passed
away; and many cut down as the Grass, with a sudden Destruction. And let us
(...) be guilty of such a vile Ingratitude, such a vile Perversion of GOD's
kind and continual Operation in us and for us; as to employ it against Him in
Acts of Uncleanness, Drunkeness, or any other kinds of Wickedness, so extremely
contrary to his most pure and excellent Nature.

3. WHAT reason have we to be greatly afraid of sinning against the glorious
GOD, our continual Upholder.

SINCE we thereby run the desperate Venture of provoking Him to cease his
supporting Influence, and let us die in an Instant: that we may no longer abuse
his Power and Goodness, but be called to a strict Account and punished for it.

HOW great and fearful is the continual Hazard of every Sinner! How aggravated
are your Sins, and how high your Provocations! While the Blessed GOD has been
unceasingly working to support this brittle Frame of Life, you have employed
the Fruits of his immediate Influence in you, to the Gratification of your
filthy Lusts and his extreme Displeasure. While He has been working to create
and supply you with Nourishment, Health and vital Spirits; you have been vilely
perverting them to the foulest Actions. And thus as He expresses Himself --
Isa. 43.24.
Thou have made me to serve with thy Sins, Thou have wearied me with thine
Iniquities.

HOW extremely dangerous then must be your Condition! How can you expect that
GOD should any longer exert his mighty Power to support you in your detestable
Courses? To recruit you with Strength, that you may be strong to Sin? and to
supply you with Vigor, that you may be more violent in it?

AND since you have wearied Him with your Iniquities; what reason have you to
fear, that if you will venture to provoke Him again, his abused Patience may
end at once, and that dreadful Threatening be fulfilled upon you -- Isa. 30.12,
-- 14.
Wherefore thus says the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word and
trust in Deceit So Chald, Sept, Arab, in Bib Polyglot, Tremel, and Eng Marg.
and Perverseness, and stay thereon: therefore this Iniquity shall be to you as
a Breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall; whose Breaking comes
suddenly at an Instant: and he shall break it as the Potter's Vessel, that is
broken in Pieces: He shall not spare.

THIS O daring Sinner is your fearful Doom: This may be your speedy and
unexpected Portion: Of such a sudden stroke are you in continual Danger.

AND now, When you are about to Sin, CONSIDER, -- Now GOD Himself is working in
me: He is now upholding me: He is now supplying me with Blood, Strength and
Spirits: And shall I now wickedly pervert his Operation in me to worse than
brutish Actions! Shall I make the glorious GOD subserve my filthy Lusts! What
can be more shocking, horrid and provoking? And what a desperate Venture do I
run of being now deserted by his vital Influence, which I am going most
profanely to abuse and prostitute? Especially when I have been so often warned
of this dreadful Danger, both by his Word and Providence? and GOD himself has
declared Prove. 29.1.
He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without Remedy.

O Consider these things: and Sin if you dare -- Sin if you can.

4. HOW foolish, mad and sottish are we to depend and trust to so uncertain and
frail a Life.

ALAS! Is any thing more evident than that the most of us do so? and don't we
all experience upon the least Reflection, that we are extremely inclined to
this? Even the elder and more unhealthy Persons, that feel the Symptoms of
Mortality in them; are yet apt to please themselves in the groundless
Confidence of living sometime longer. How much more prone are they to depend on
Life, who are in the Bloom of Youth, or in the Verdure and Strength of Age? Who
is there in this great Assembly that does not trust upon his being alive to
Morrow?

EVEN the best of Men are very subject to this vain Presumption: and thereby
indulge themselves in the neglect of many precious Opportunities they would
else improve for the Glory of GOD and the Good of the World. But how greatly do
they fail in their Wisdom; to depend on that they know is not to be depended
on, but is absolutely uncertain to them?

BUT Oh! How inexpressibly greater is the Folly and Madness of impenitent
Sinners!

IN the midst of infinite Hazards, they trust to the Strength and Vigor of
Nature which they know may fail in a moment. And how amazing is this -- that
reasonable and foreseeing Creatures should thus continually run, without any
need, the most desperate and apparent Venture of droping into endless Ruin!
Everlasting Misery must be your unavoidable Portion; unless your Natures and
Lives are renewed, and you heartily turn from all your Sins, and receive and
submit to CHRIST as your Prince and Savior. But this you find is exceeding
hard and difficult: and yet you presumptuously persuade your selves, it may be
easily done when you come to Die, that the time is a great way off, and that
then you will have Leisure enough: though you likewise know there is not any
Certainty of it; but that this all a most dangerous Cheat you put on your
selves, and there can be no Dependence on these things you promise.

HOW self-evident and great is our destroying Folly! We have the most awful
Admonitions of Providence again and again repeated, in the surprising Deaths of
others: and yet alas! we go on with the same stupidity as millions have gone
before us; till we also find our selves irretrievably deceived at last, and are
made as awful, but neglected Warnings to those that follow. Oh the wonderful
Sottishness of the Sons of Men! They are destroyed from morning to evening:
they perish for ever, without any regarding it. -- They die without wisdom Job
4.20, 21.
. Yea, The Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil: and Madness is in their
Heart while they live, till they go down to the Dead. Eccl. 9.3.
.

5. WHAT reason have we then to live continually in the Expectation or
Supposition at least, of so sudden a Change.

OUR Danger of this, being so very great and constant; there is the utmost
reason to live in the continual Sense of it: as much reason to live in the same
habitual Apprehension of Danger as we had in our Minds upon the most awakening
Instances; or as they had reason to to have, the very Morning before they fell
down and died. Our Hazard being always as great as we apprehended it then to
be; and as far as we know, as great as theirs the very moment they were cut
down and withered.

LET us then always be sensible that we are hastily passing through an evil
World, that is ever full of Change and Hazard: and what an exceeding frail and
tender Composition are these mortal Bodies: These Houses of Clay we dwell in,
as Job describes them; whose Foundation is in the Dust, which are crushed
before the Moth -- as quickly and easily crushed and broken to pieces, as that
frailest of Insects, by a thousand Accidents.

O then let us have a Care of falling into such a vain Security, as ever to
think ourselves out of Danger of the sudden Seizure of Death: and so indulge
our selves in any Sin, the neglect of any Duty, or give a loose to any Vanity
that may make us unfit to Die. In our most joyful State of Health and
Prosperity, when we are ready to say with the vain rich Man in Luke 12.19.
Soul, -- Take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry -- Let us then be aware of
the moving Admonition our Blessed SAVIOR gives us to the following Verse --
But God said to Him, Thou Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be required of Thee!

IN the Morning of every Day and before we leave our Chambers; Let us then
consider what a speedy Death our outward Hazards, our inward Frailties, our
continual Dependence on GOD for Life, our Sins against Him and his Displeasure
with us, expose us to. That this may be the last Morning we shall ever see: The
last Opportunity we may have of Praying or Devoting our selves to our Great
Preserver. That some unexpected outward Accident, or sudden Turn within may
befall us, in the midst of our Diversion or Business, when we least look for
it; which may bereave us of Sense at once, and not give a moments Warning to
cry -- Lord have Mercy, or to employ one Thought to prepare for Eternity. In
the Hight of seeming Health and Jollity, We may be snatched away in an Instant,
and appear with Surprise and Trembling before the Throne of GOD. And there our
carnal Mirth and Pleasures will look like ancient Dreams; but that we may find
our selves to be most miserably deluded by them to our irrecoverable and
endless Ruin.

LET us carry the same Supposition with us throwout the Day. And then consider
the wisest Methods both for our present Ease and Cheerfulness, and our Eternal
Safety.

6. and lastly, WHAT need we then be diligent in Improving our uncertain Time,
that we may be certainly prepared for so sudden and momentous a (...).

OUR Lives being so extreme Uncertain, and upon their expiring the Judgment
immediately following, when our State shall be determined for ever; of what
vast Importance is it, that we apply our selves to make a certain Preparation
for it? This must needs be the greatest Concern of all. It is impossible that
any other (...) of Life should stand in Competition with it. One moment's
Entrance into Eternity will convince us fully of this. All other Matters --
Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Crowns and Empires, are mere Dreams and Trifles in
Comparison: For if we should be snatched away Unready; there is no Recovery --
We are Undone for ever.

IN particular,

(1.) WHAT need we get immediately into a Readiness for so surprising an Hour.

DEATH and Hell are open before us, eternal Destruction has no covering, and
now may be the only Season we may have to escape them. To morrow, yea to night
may be too late for ever. Yea you may Die within an Hour or Minute, for all
your present Health and Confidence. And then, O then, What will be the State of
your immortal Souls? -- How extremely dangerous is the least Delay?

O then let these things quicken you to get immediately into a Readiness for so
great a Change as may be just upon you. O! venture not to put this matter off
an Hour, a Moment: since your Eternal Safety may be now depending on your
improving the present Season; and if you don't, you may be lost for ever.

NOW therefore, Hearken to the Calls of GOD, and no longer dare to harden your
Hearts through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Now is the only certain accepted Time:
and Now, if you Improve it, is the certain happy Day, the Hour of your Eternal
Salvation. Now if you will hear the Voice of GOD; Hear it, and your Souls shall
live.

BUT what shall we Do, that we may be quickly Ready?

FOR this, I would say the same things to you, as if you had but 2 or 3 minutes
to prepare for Eternity.

NOW then freely yield to all the glaring Light, Convictions and Persuasions of
the Holy Spirit: Follow them diligently, and neglect them no longer. Now
mightily cry to GOD through his Son, to Renew, to Sanctify, to enable you to
Repent and Believe, and then to Forgive and Save you. Now do your utmost to
Renounce all your Sins, without the least Reserve: And to receive, submit to
and rely on CHRIST, as He is offered to you in all his glorious Offices of
Prophet, Priest and King; that He may be your perfect Savior. Now, Give up
your selves entirely to GOD, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in an everlasting
Covenant; To be possessed and governed by Him, and to honor and enjoy Him for
ever, as your highest End and Happiness. In fine, Do all this in deep Humility,
with all your Hearts, and in Faith of GOD's accepting you for the sake of his
Son, and according to his gracious Word: and then humbly Look for the Mercy of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST unto Eternal Life.

BUT then --

(2) WHAT need we also live in a continual Readiness.

THE Danger of Death and Judgment being continual; there is the most equal
Reason to live in a continual Preparation for them: To live in the constant
Views of that eternal World, we are suspending over by the frailest Threads, as
really as if we saw it with our bodily Eyes: and to live every Day, as it would
become us were it to prove, as it may, the very last of our Lives?

BUT how shall we do so?

TO this I Answer -- Having renounced our Sins, believed in CHRIST, and devoted
our selves to GOD, as above; Let us then apply our selves, through the Grace of
CHRIST to live agreeable to such a sincere Dedication.

LET us always make the Glory of GOD our highest Design, his Will our sovereign
Rule, his Service our principal Business. Let us always be watchful against
every Sin and Snare. Let us ever be studying and attending our incumbent
Duties. Denying all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts* let us live soberly,
righteously and piously in this evil World. Let us always exercise our selves
in this, to keep Consciences void of Offense, both toward GOD and Man. Let us
have a Care our Hearts be not overcharged with Eating, Drinking, or any other
sensual Pleasures or Cares of Life; least that awful Hour should come upon us
unawares. Let us be moderate in our Affections, Pursuits, Enjoyments of Earthly
things: While we are necessarily concerned and pleased with them; let us keep
our Hearts above them, and have our higher Aims and more delightful Views in
Heaven.

TO Conclude, LET us all be diligent in Redeeming our flying and uncertain
Moments: Doing Honor to the Blessed GOD, serving our Generation according to
his Will, working out our own Salvation, abounding in every Grace and Duty: And
though we may not come up fully to such a Life as this; yet let every Failing
humble and excite us to be more careful, and to repair afresh to CHRIST for
Pardon and Grace to help for Time to come. And Blessed is that Servant, whom
his Lord, when He calls, shall find so Doing. Wherefore, Brethren, Give
Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: For if ye do these things, ye
shall never fall: For so an Entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior (...) Christ -- To whom be
Glory Now and forever: AMEN.

FINIS.
A very hopeful young Scholar, upon hearing the foregoing Discourse; composed
and gave me the following ingenious POEM on the Subject; which I take leave to
commend to my Reader.
The Bloom of Life, fading in a happy Death.
I.
GReat GOD, how frail a thing is Man!
How swift his Minutes pass?
His Age contracts within a Span;
He blooms and dies like Grass.
II.
Now in his Breast, fresh Spirits dart,
And active Vigor reigns:
His Blood pours rapid from his Heart,
And leaps along his Veins.
III.
His Eyes their sparkling Pleasure speak,
Joy flutters round his Head;
While Health still blossoms on his Cheek,
And adds the rosey Red.
IV.
Thus the fond Youth securely stands,
Nor dreams of a Decay --
At once he feels Death's Iron Hands,
His Soul is snatched away.
V.
Down to the Earth the Body drops,
Whence it was framed at first,
Forgets it is former flattering Hopes,
And hastens to it is Dust.
VI.
No more we view the wonted Grace;
The Eye Balls roll no more*
A (...) Horror spreads the Face,
Where Beauty blazed before.
VII.
So the young Spring with annual Green
Renews the waving Grove;
And Riv'lets through the flowery Scene
In silver Mazes rove.
VIII.
By tuneful Birds of every Wing,
Melodious Strains are played:
From Tree to Tree their Accents ring,
Soft-warbling through the Shade.
IX.
The painted Meads and fragrant Fields
A sudden Smile bestow:
A golden Gleem each Valley guilds,
Where numerous Beauties blow.
X.
A thousand gaudy Colors flush
Each odorous Mountain's Side:
Lilies turn pale, and Roses blush,
And Tulips spread their Pride.
XI.
Thus flourishes the wanton Year,
In rich Confusion gay,
Till Autumn bids the Bloom retire,
The Verdure fade away.
XII.
Succeeding Cold withers the Woods,
While hoary Winter reigns,
In Fetters binds the frozen Floods,
And shivers over the Plains.
XIII.
And must my Moments thus decline!
And must I sink to Death?
To Thee my Spirit I resign,
Thou SOVEREIGN of my Breath.
XIV.
JESUS my Life, has died, has rose:
I burn to meet his Charms!
Welcome the Pangs, the dying Throws,
That give me to his Arms.

