THE Duty of a PEOPLE, TO Lay to Heart and Lament THE Death of a Good KING.

A SERMON Preached August 20th. 1727. The Lord's Day after the Sorrowful News
of the Death of Our Late King GEORGE I. Of Blessed Memory.

By Samuel Checkley, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Published at the earnest and repeated desire of many of the Hearers.

Psalm 82 6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most
High.

But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed for Benj. Gray, and Sold at his Shop in Newbury-Street.

THE Duty of a People TO Lay to Heart and Lament THE Death of a Good KING.
II. CHRON XXXV. 24. -- And he died, and was buried in one of the Sepulchers of
his Fathers: and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.


THE Books of the Chronicles are (as Expositors observe Pool, Henry.
) supposed on good grounds, to have been penned by Ezra, that ready Scribe in
the law of the LORD: And the time when he wrote them, to have been after the
Babylonish Captivity. This Second Book begins with the reign of Solomon, who
succeeded his Father David, and gives us the History of the reigns of the Kings
of Judah from him to the Captivity. This and the preceding Chapter give us an
account, of the reign of a very good and gracious King, viz. Josiah. They
inform us, at what age he came to the Throne, what great and good things he
did, after his advancement thereto, how suddenly he died, where he was
interred, and how universally lamented by his Subjects at his Death. This good
King came to the Throne, when he was young: See ver. 1. of the preceding
Chapter. Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign etc. And he was
advanced thereto, after two very wicked Kings, viz. his Grandfather Manasseh,
and his Father Amon: but yet he did not tread in their steps; for we read, that
he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of
David his father, and declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left: And
that in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek
after the God of David his father. See ver. 2, 3. of that Chapter. This young
King then went on to purge Judah and Jerusalem, from the high Places, and the
groves, the carved Images, and the molten Images; he also caused the altars of
Baalim to be broke down in his presence, and the Images that were above them to
be cut down; and also gave order, and took effectual care, for the repairing
the Temple etc. as we may see by reading that Chapter. And then in this
Chapter, in which is the text, we read of a Passover which this godly King kept
in the eighteenth Year of his reign; how he encouraged, and directed the
Priests and Levites in it; gave very liberally himself toward the charge of
it; and in a word, how very solemnly and exactly the whole of it was performed:
See ver. 1, -- 19.

AND now, how happy might it have been for his Subjects, could he have reigned
longer over them, and have been spared, to perfect the glorious things he had
begun? But it must be otherwise; and behold, as great and good as he is, yet he
is not suffered to continue, but is cut off in the midst of his days and
usefulness, and his Subjects surprised with the sudden and unexpected News of
it. His Death indeed was brought upon him, partly through his own rashness and
presumption; for when Necho King of Egypt, came up to fight with Carchemish by
Euphrates, Josiah would then go out against him; and though the King of Egypt
sent to warn him against the Enterprise, yet engage he would, and in person
fight the Egyptian Army, and in the engagement receives those wounds of which
he died: See ver. 20, -- 23. But yet it was not in wrath to him, (as one
observes, Mr. Henry.
) for his heart was upright before God, but in wrath to a sinful, and
hypocritical Nation, that God suffered their King to act thus. The King they
had was a good one, and one they did not prize eno', and God would let them no
longer enjoy him, but in anger takes him away from them. Now in the text we
read, that he was buried in one of the sepulchers of his fathers; and all Judah
and Jerusalem mourned for him. And just cause of mourning had they under such a
frown of Providence on them. The Death of such a Prince, and his being taken
away in the midst of his usefulness, called for the more general Lamentation.

THE DOCRTINE from the words may be this, viz.

DOCTRINE. THAT when God is pleased in his Providence, to remove by Death, from
a Nation or People, a good KING, and in the midst of his Usefulness, it is
their duty, duly to resent the same, and universally mourn therefore.

THERE are Five Propositions contained in this Doctrine, which may be briefly
spoken to, viz.

PROP. I. THAT Civil Rule and Government among Men, is what God would have
upheld, and maintained in the World. PROP. II. SUCH at are in the highest
Places of Power, and Trust, even Kings and Princes themselves, must die. PROP.
III. SUCH are sometimes taken away in the midst of their Service and
Usefulness. PROP. IV. WHENEVER such are thus removed, it is GOD who in his
holy, and all wise Providence, orders and appoints it. PROP. V. THE removal of
such by Death, from a Nation or People, is what they ought duly to resent, and
universally mourn for.
TO each of these briefly.

PROP. I. CIVIL Rule and Government among Men, is what GOD would have upheld
and maintained. GOD is the Maker and Governor of the World. He reigns King
for ever. The Kingdom is his, and he is governor among the Nations, Psalm.
22.28.
And it is his will and pleasure that Government be maintained in the World:
And it is (says one) Mr. Henry.
an instance of God's wisdom, power, and goodness, in the management of
Mankind, that he has disposed them into such a state, as distinguishes such as
govern from such as are governed; and has not left them like Fishes in the Sea,
where the greater devour the lesser. And without this Rule and Government among
Men, what Anarchy and Consuon would fill the World? How would Mankind pray
upon, injure, and wrong one another? And every one do that which is right in
his own eyes without any danger (I mean in this Life) of soffering, or being
called to an account? Yea, without this how soon would the World be turned
upside down? Now that God would have Civil rule upheld among Men is plain from
what we read in the Sacred Oracles. Thence God assures us that it is by Him
that Kings reign. Prove. 8.15.
There it is said, Romans 13. begin.
Let every Soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but of
God: the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: -- Will thou then not be afraid of the
power? -- for he is the minister of God, etc. There have been various forms of
Civil Government among Men: such as Aristocracy, which is the Government of a
common Wealth by Nobles; Democracy, which is a government whose Magistrates are
chosen from among, and by the People: and Monarchy, which is me government of a
people by a Monarch, one Plan, or Woman only ruling: and though particular
Nations and Countries, as to which of these forms they are under, are very much
governed according to their various Constitutions; and every Nation has a
liberty to chose what kind and form of Government humane Prudence shall direct
them to, as most agreeable to, and commodious for the People; Burkitt.
and God himself has not said what sort of government he would have; yet that
he would have such a thing as government is very plain: hence we are exhorted
in his word 1 Pet. 2.13.14.
, to Submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the
King as supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that were sent by him --
Hence also we are commanded Romans 13.7.
to render to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: and such as are of a
levelling Spirit, are to be locked upon as seditious and open enemies to a
state. But this for the first Proposition, viz. That Civil Government among
men, is what God would have upheld and maintained.

Pass we to the second Proposition, viz.

PROP. II. THAT such as are in the highest places, of power, and trust, even
KINGS and Princes themselves must Die. Upon the fall of our first Parents, from
that innocent and happy state, in which they were made, both they and their
posterity became Mortal. By their fall, and apostasy, Death came into the
World, and must now pass upon all, because all have sinned. Eccl. 8.8.
There is now no man, that has power over the Spirit, to retain the spirit,
neither has he power in the day of Death, and there is no discharge (for any)
in that was. That all Men must Die, is a Statute of Heaven, never to be
Repealed. It is appointed unto men once to Die, Heb. 9.27.
and such as sit at the upper end of the World, can have no Discharge in that
war. Death is the King of Tetrors, a bold and mighty Conqueror; no more afraid
of the Palaces of Kings, than of the Cottages of Beggars; and a King, who
sooner or later will make all the Kings of the Earth bow, and bea^ a surrender
to him. Such an enemy is he as that the greatest Prince cannot by any riches
bribe, power overcome, or wisdom and policy contrive an escape from him. Nay
goodness itself will be no security at all to them. David, Solomon, Hezekiah
and Josiah were good Kings, but yet the Died as well as others. The greatest
King that ever lived, was never yet a match for Death; nor could resist him
when he came. Earthly Crowns are all fading, and must sooner or later be laid
aside, by those that wear them. Kings though a Superior order of Men, yea though
they bear the title and character of Gods, are yet made of Dust; and must as
well as others return to Dust again. Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said ye are God's, and all of you are children of the most high. But ye
shall Die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. They may now sit on their
Thrones, judging others, and have many stand ready to obey them; but yet the
time is coming, when their breath shall go forth, and they return to their
earth. Princes are but Dust as well as other Men; and what state soever they
take upon them, what honors soever are invested with, what treasures soever
possess, yea how great and flourishing soever their dominions are, yet they
must lay aside their royal robes; and be covered with dust and worms. Job 30.23.
The Grave is the house appointed for all living: Kings as well as others. Read
the History of the many Kings, which we have on sacred record; and we find at
last, that they died. Where are all the Kings and Princes of the Earth, who in
their day conquered all before them, and made Nations, great and powerful, to
tremble for fear of them? Where the Roman Emperor's? yea where the Monarchs who
have swayed the British Scepter? but dead and in the dust? --

BUT what need we go back so far for instances to prove the truth before us,
and show that Princes must die as well as others? Is not God, in whose hands
the times of all men are, this day reading us a loud Lecture, on their frailty
and nortality, in the Death of a great and excellent King, who l^^ely sat on
the British Throne; and under whose just, and mild administration, we hoped to
have far much longer still. We see now that Kings, though called God's, yet must
die like men; and that neither the greatest Princely qualifications in them,
nor love and loyalty in their Subjects to them, nor their most fervent Prayers
for them, can ward off the stroke of Death.

BUT this for the Second Proposition, viz. That such as are in the highest
places of Power and Trust, even Kings and Princes themselves must Die.

TO make a reflection or two, before we proceed, --

1. INFER we from hence, how fading and short lived the greatest Worldly
Honors are. Honor is what Men are fond of, and pursue; and who have more and
greater Honors conferred upon them, than the Kings of the Earth? But now, must
they die as well as others, how short lived then are the greatest Honors here
below? Of these may it be said they also are vanity. 2. SEE what little reason,
the greatest Men have, to boast or be proud on the account of their worldly
grandeur. How apt is worldly grandeur to make men giddy? and what danger, of
being too much elevated, are persons often in, when perhaps they have but those
honors paid them, that are justly due to them? But now, what a mortifying
consideration should this be to the greatest of Men, to remember that
notwithstanding all their worldly grandeur, yet er'e long they must die like
meaner men, and be laid with others in the silent Grave? 3. WHAT we have heard
should teach us, not to put too much trust in, nor expect too much from, the
greatest of Men whatsoever. Are they all mortal? must they die as well as
others, and even Kings not escape? then sure, we should cease from man whose
breath is in his nostrils; and not put our trust in Kings, nor in the son of
man, in whom their is no help, since his breath will in a little while go
forth, and he return to his earth. 4. WHAT we have heard, might afford a loud
call to all such as rule over men, to diligence and fidelity in their work. The
work of Civil Rulers is great and weighty: and what can be a greater excitation
to them, to answer the Character they bear, and faithfully, and diligently
improve all they have for the honor of God, and good of them, over whom they
rule, than this consideration, viz. That they must die as well as others? This
should make them just, ruling in the fear of God.
I come now to

PROP. III. THAT Kings and Princes are sometimes removed by Death, in the midst
of their Service and Usefulness. God, who sets up Kings, and who has appointed
rule and government among men, has done this, for the use and service of his
people. Such are to serve the People, over whom they are placed; and therein do
they serve God, who has so dignified, and advanced them. And this God, who has
set them up, can when he pleases, put them down again Dan. 2.21.
. He changes the times and seasons; he removes Kings, and he sets up
Kings. Now Death sometimes calls these off, in the midst of their Service, and
Usefulness; and when the greatest things are expected from them. They may seek
the real welfare of their Subjects, and be exerting themselves to the utmost,
for their peace and security; and in the midst of all these, Death may put an
end to their purposes and designs. So have some of the Kings of God's ancient
People been taken away, and especially that good one, of whom our text speaks;
his Predecessor was his father Amon, and he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
as his father Manasseh before him had done, he sacrificed to all the carved
Images, which Manasseh his father had set up; But when this King Josiah came to
the throne, he quickly began a Reformation; he repaired the House of the Lord,
which had lain waste, and many other things: but yet in the midst of all this,
is he snatched away. And thus have some of the Kings of England been taken
away. Thus was King WILLIAM the Third removed by Death, in a critical juncture,
when the Nations hopes and expectations from him were greatly raised. But not
to go back so far; how was our late KING, of blessed Memory, taken from us in
the midst of his Service and Usefulness; he Died indeed in an advanced Age In
the 68th Year of his Age.
; but yet in the midst of his Serviceableness; and when his Dominions, who for
near. Thirteen Years had been happy under him, hopd to have been so still; and
had their expectations in and from him greatly raised: How was he pursuing the
Peace and Tranquillity of Europe, when to our inexpressible grief, the tidings
of his decease Which was on the Lord's Day June 11th. about Three in the
Morning at His Brother the Duke of York's Palace at Osnabrug
are brought to us? We see then that Kings and Princes may die in the midst of
their Service and Usefulness? Which was the Third Proposition.

PROP. IV. THAT whenever such are thus removed by Death, it is God that in his
holy, and allwise Providence orders and appoints it. That the World is governed
by God, is as true as that He made it; and nothing is there comes to pass in
it, but what is of his ordering. Chance and Fortune are but fancies and
delusions, and nothing can be more absurd, than to suppose or imagine the World
to be governed by them. And this God, who thus governs the World, is holy, just
and wise, in all the dispensations of his Providence. Now, whatever Changes
there are in Nations Kingdoms or Countries, they are all ordered by him. Indeed
GOD generally makes use of Instruments and second Causes, in bringing about his
purposes and designs; but then, he is himself the prime Efficient of all, and
he don't reckon it beneath him, to concern himself even with the smallest
matters: For our Savior has assured us Mat. 10.29, 30.
that not so much as a sparrow falls to the ground without him, and that the
very hairs of our head are all numbered. God orders the time both of every ones
birth, and also death. The times of all, of Princes and Subjects are in his
hands. Kings must and shall die, but not before God's time. They may die
suddenly, in the midst of their days, before their own, and their People's
time, but not before God's. He orders their Death, whither it be more
lingeringly, or suddenly, at home, or abroad, in their bed, or in the field; he
orders the sickness, accident, or the like, by which a period is put to their
lives. He sent pining sickness on Hezekiah; and he directed the arrow which
wounded Josiah, so that he died. But this for the Fourth Proposition.

AND now, is it thus, with what silence and submission does it become both our
Nation, and Land, to bear the rebuke of God's Providence, in the Death of our
late rightful and lawful King? His removal is certainly an awful rebuke both on
them and us, and will as such be resented by every true Protestant, -- but what
shall we say -- Lord! thou who have given have also taken away; and we would be
dumb, and not open our mouths to complain.

I come now to

PROP. V. THAT the removal by Death of such Kings from a Nation or People, is
what they ought duly to resent and mourn for. Such a dispensation calls for
sorrow and lamentation, for weeping, and girding on of sackcloth.

Consider here briefly,

GOOD Kings are great Blessings to their Subjects; and therefore their Death to
be lamented. They seek the good of the People they are set over, and are indeed
Benefactors to them. Such Kings, as they expect love, honor and loyalty from
their Subjects, so they endeavor to be themselves nursing fathers unto them,
which was the great blessing God promised his People of old, that they should
have in their Kings. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing
mothers etc. Isai. 49.23.
They are their Subjects Patrons and Protectors, always tender of their
interests and liberties, and ready to defend them from all invasions. And what
great blessings are such Kings to a People, and their Death of consequence to
be lamented by them?

AGAIN, the Death of a good King is certainly a frown of Heaven on a People,
and to be lamented by them. When God frowns on a People they ought to mourn:
and he does so in the removal of such a King from their Head. At such a time it
is a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness with
a People: and sure not to resent such a Dispensation would be stupidity in them.

AGAIN, The Death of a good King, and in the midst of his Usefulness, is
sometimes a forerunner of sore Judgments coming upon a People. GOD, when about
to bring his Judgments upon a sinful People, usually gives warning, and makes
to appear the evident Prognostics of them; and sometimes the Death of a good
King may be the forerunner of dreadful Judgments coming upon a People. The
Prophet says Isai. 57.1.
that the Righteous one is taken away from the evil to come. So may a good King
be taken away, and we find GOD promising to defer bringing on Judah and
Jerusalem, those Judgments which they deserved. 'till that Godly King Josiah
was gathered to his Fathers. 2 Kin. 22.15. to the end of the Chap. And she said
unto them, thus says the GOD of Israel, tell the man that sent you to me, thus
says the Lord, behold. I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the
inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the King of Judah
has read. Because they have forsaken me and have burnt incense unto other
gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands:
therefore my wroth shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be
quenched. But to the King of Judah, which sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus
shall ye say to him, thus says the Lord God of Israel as touching the words
which thou have heard; because thine heart was tender, and thou have humbled
thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place,
and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a
cause and have rent thy clothes, and wept before me: I also have heard thee
says the Lord. Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou
shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the
evil that I will bring upon this place. And one great reason why the Prophet
Jeremiah so lamented the Death of Josiah as we see he did, in the verse
following our text, was because he was sensible of the evil which was apace
hastening upon God's sinful People. And it was not a great while after King
Josiah's Death, before we find Judah and Jerusalem in ruins. There were but
four Kings reigned, and two of them but three months each, before Judah and
Jerusalem were destroyed by the Chaldeans, the House of God burnt with fire,
and all the Vessels of it carried into Babylon; as we may see by reading the
36th. Chapter of this 2d. Book of Chronicles. Thus is the Death of a good King
sometimes the presage and forerunner of approaching Judgments and Calamities,
and therefore to be Lamented.

AGAIN, To mourn for and lament the Death of a good King is one mark of the
Subjects love and loyalty to him. As good Kings are a great blessing of Heaven
to a People, so it is no less a favor to a godly Prince when the Subjects
under his Dominion are ready on all occasions to express their love and loyalty
to him; when under him they lend quiet and peaccable lives in all godliness and
honesty, are careful to maintain his honor and dignity, and ready to venture
both their estates and fives, if called thereto in his defense. Now one mark of
the Subjects love and loyalty to their Prince, is to mourn heartily at his
Death.

AGAIN, Thus to mourn at the Death of a good King is a piece of honor justly
due to him. Honor is due to Kings; and we are bid to honor them in God's
word. See 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor the King. And especially is this honor due to
such as are nursing fathers to their People. And this honor is due to them
both while living, and at their death. The memory of such should be had in an
honorable and lasting remembrance. When Hezekiah died, we read how his
Subjects did him honor at his Death. See 2 Chronicles. 32.33. And Hezekiah slept
with his fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchers of the
sons of David: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at
his death. Doubtless (says one on the text) part of the honor which they did
him then was to mourn for him. Subjects honor their deceased King at his
Death, when they mourn and lament his removal from them.

AGAIN, To lament and mourn at the Death of a good King has been the practice
of God's People both in former and latter ages. So have the People of God done
in former times: and what an inftance of this have we in our text, and the
foregoing verse. -- All Judah and Jerusalem lamented for Josiah; and all the
singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations. And we
find that when Abijah died, who was Jereboam's Son, and in whom there was found
some good thing toward the Lord of Israel; and who was also heir apparent to
the Crown, all Israel mourned for him. See 1 Kin. 14.18. And they buried him
(i.e. Abijah) and all Israel mourned for him according to the word of the Lord
etc. Thus has it been the practice of God's People in ancient times. -- And
thus it has been in latter ages also. So has the Death of a good King
sometimes put our whole Nation into Mourning, witness the decease of that
glorious King, WILLIAM the Third, of glorious Memory; the lamentations made at
whose Funeral are not forgot to this day.

I might go on and say,

THAT the Death of a good King oftentimes gives such as are enemies to the
State great advantages against them; and is therefore to be lamented. But I
need not insist here, these things considered, may serve to show that it is the
duty of a People to resent and lay to heart the Death of a good King: and so
for clearing the Fifth and last Proposition.

HERE then for the Use and Improvement of it I shall only say,

USE. IS it as we have heard? THEN sure GOD is this Day calling both our
Nations at Home, and ourselves in this Land, to lay to heart and be suitably
affected with the Death of our late Good and Gracious KING.

WE have had brought us the last Week, the heavy tidings of the Death of one of
the best of Princes; our late rightful and lawful King GEORGE. News, very
melancholy and surprising to us, and because of which we mourn this Day.

I am very sensible, how vain it would be in me to imagine my self capable of
giving the just Character of so great a Prince, nor shall I attempt it; but yet
I think Duty to GOD by whom he reigned, and Loyalty to my King oblige me to say
-- That doubtless he was a KING richly furnished with Princely gifts and
qualifications, a true Protestant, and indeed a Defender of the Faith; -- a
KING meek and mild, wise and prudent, steady and unwearied, of quick dispatch
in all public Business, and who scorned to do any thing mean, and unbecoming
the high Character that he bare -- a KING, who had the good and welfare of his
Subjects always near his heart, and who has many a time from the Throne (and
not only in word but deed also) expressed the same. -- a KING, under whose just
and mild administrations his Subjects were all easy, unless a few unreasonable
men, whom nothing would content, but such things as would destroy the
Constitution, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and bury the Nation in Popery,
blood and ruin. -- And sure then the Death of such a Prince is an awful frown
of Heaven both on our Nation and Land; and God is this Day calling both us and
them to weeping and to mourning. It is but a few Years, since our hearts were
filled with gladness, at the joyful News of his Accession to the British
Throne. And how did we then hope to sit under his shadow for a long season? But
alas! our hopes are dashed and gone; the breath of our nostrils is stopped; the
anointed of the Lord taken, and conquered by Death that cruel enemy. And is he
gone? Is that royal Head which once shined so gloriously under England's Crown,
now laid in the Dust? Can those Hands and Feet which once were so ready to
serve us, be no more employed for our welfare and good? Is that royal Body now
become a lifeless Corpse, and nothing but a lump of cold clay? Must it be laid
in the Dust, and we see that face no more? -- Lament then and weep all ye his
dutiful and loyal Subjects, -- Weep ye British Isles, the Crown is fallen from
your Head, for this let your Heart be faint, for this let your eyes be dim. --
Weep also ye American Plantations, -- and ONEW-ENGLAND! let not thy Tears be
wanting on this solemn Occasion. -- Weep all ye who bare Rule under him. -- Let
the Priests also the Ministers of the Lord be clothed in sackcloth on this
Oceasion. Yea let every one be suitably affected with this loss, and hearken to
the voice of God in this Providence which loudly utters it self to us in that
language, Psalm. 146.3, 4. Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man
in whom there is no help: his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in
that very day his thoughts perish. And that, Isai. 2.22. Cease from man whose
breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of. God is now
showing his People how vain it is to put too much confidence in the best of
Princes, which perhaps is what we have sometimes been ready to do. And now to
stir up our grief, let us but consider, what a critical Juncture of Affairs he
is snarch'd away in. There have been of late Months great Commotions in Europe,
Wars and rumors of Wars among the Nations, and dark Clouds hanging over them.
This (with other things) called his Majesty abroad; and behold, while he is in
pursuit of the Peace and Tranquillity of his People, is he taken away from them;
and though he or they little thought that their parting a few days before would
be a final farewell; yet so it proved, and well may they now sorrow, because
they must see his face no more.

TO conclude then, --

1. LET us bless GOD for him, and the great things he has done for his People
in and by him. Let us not forget how seasonably God advanced him to the Throne;
and what dark Clouds, which hung over no small part of God's Church, were
scattered at his happy Accession thereto; -- Let us bless God, who continued
his Servant on the Throne, notwithstanding all the cursed designs of such as
were enemies to his Person and Government to the contrary: and for the favor
which we our selves have found before him. 2. AND to have done, Let us Pray for
his SUCCESSOR, our present rightful and lawful KING. As dark a Day as it is,
yet we ought not to despond, or be discouraged; yea were it darker still, in
this should we rejoice, that the LORD who is our Lawgiver, our Judge, and our
King, yet lives, and can save us. We have also this to rejoice in, that though
our late most gracious KING is taken from our Head, yet He has left behind him
a Successor that is of his own illustrious House and Family. -- It was lamented
over Jerusalem of old, that she had none left that had right or were fit to
rule. Ezekiel. 19.14. Fire is gone out of a rod of her branches which has devoured
her fruits, so that she has no strong rod to be a scepter to rule: this is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. But blessed be God, it is not so
in our Nation. We have at this day a strong Rod to be a Scepter to rule: -- a
Protestant Prince, in his full strength, and the SON of our late most gracious
Sovereign, is now Proclaimed KING over us. And now, as we in this Land have
been ready on all occasions to express our dutifulness and loyalty to his Royal
FATHER, so let us be to him; and let our fervent Prayers be continually going
up to Heaven for him.
MAY GOD then bless his Servant GEORGE the Second, our now rightful and lawful
KING. May he be endowed from above with all Princely qualifications, and the
Honor of Him by whom Kings reign, lie near his Heart at all times. May his
reign over us be long and prosperous; and all his Dominions lead under him
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty -- And as for such as
are either secret or open enemies to his Person, Crown and Dignity, and would
gladly bring in, and advance a Popish Pretender to the Throne. May they all be
confounded; and O God who sit in the heavens, do thou laugh at them, have
them in derision, and make them to know that they imagine a vain thing.

MAY GOD give the King his judgments, and his righteousness to his Son. May he
judge the people in righteousness, and break in pieces all oppressors -- In his
days may the righteous flourish; and there be abundance of peace -- may prayers
be continually made for him, and his name endure for ever.

MAY also his Royal Consort, our Gracious Queen CAROLINE, be a Nursing Mother
to GOD's Church and People; and the Succession abide in their Illustrious
House. The Lord build up the House of his Servants, and speak well of it for
many Days and Years yet to come -- And may we in this Land ever find favor in
their eyes. Save us O Lord, and let the King hear us when we call.

AND now to these Petitions let us every one join our hearty AMEN, and say, So
be it. OLORD.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
[Taken from the London Journal, June 17. 1727.]
THE Mortality of Princes is a Subject that demands seriousness from the
lightest Minds: Who is vain and careless enough, to be able to expel sadness
from his Heart, when the sacred Head of Majesty is laid low in Dust? The
ordinary Consolations of Reason and Philosophy are ineffectual to chastise the
first Transports of Grief in a pious People, mourning for their King and
Father. All that we can think, and speak, and write, is too little to express
the Passion in the Soul; and Extravagance it self does not mean half enough.
Those Considerations only that are taken from the Necessity of Submission to
the Divine Will, which is eternally moved by infinite Wisdom and Goodness, are
of Force to restrain the Rage and Intemperance of the Mind, when it finds it
self wounded in its tenderest Part, and throbs in the first Agonies of
desperate Sorrow. What strange, what secret Charms are there in hopeless Grief,
when the Heart is grown wilful to its own Affiction, and refuses Comfort? Will
the Reader therefore indulge the Passion of an honest Mind, which delights to
linger on the melancholy Scene, and mingle his Affliction with that of a whole
People.

A Thousand unwelcome Expresses have ever this published through all Europe,
that GEORGE THE GOOD AND JUST, is now no more a King; in whose Loss Britain
bewails her common Parent, and every Good Man a Friend and Patron. He is fallen
from the most exalted Height of human Greatness; from the Power of redressing
Wrongs, of protecting Innocence, and raising fallen Virtue; and is gone to the
Tribunal of the Almighty KING, to be himself judged, and to render an exact
Account of his Vicegerency on Earth: his sacred Person is already beginning to
resolve it self to common Clay, its first Original: Who now shall rejoice in
his Smiles, or stand silent in his Anger? Where is that majestic Face, which
has ever awed his Foes, and cheered his willing faithful Servants? That
Sceptered Hand, which Crowds of kneeling Subjects lately kissed, how remiss is
it now in Death! How sudden, how awful is this Change! Scarce had we passed the
Solemnities for the Anniversary of his auspicious Birth, but we are called to
pay our filial Sorrows over his Tomb. Who that had beheld the Splendour that
filled the Court and this whole Metropolis on that happy Night, could have
imagined so speedy, so severe a reversal of our Joys? We then beheld our King
in a seeming firm Health, in full Vigor, and so sanguine and florid a
Complexion, as promised many more Years than he had yet attained. But we shall
behold him now no more for ever! Vanity is the just Inscription on all humane
Happiness; and the reflection of the inspired Writer on the natural frailty of
Princes, ought for ever to correct those towering and splendid Expectations,
which we form from their Virtue and Wisdom; I have said ye are Gods, and all of
ye are children of the most high, but ye shall die like men, and fall like one
of the Princes.

REST for ever Royal Spirit, and possess what thou art no longer sensible of,
the Praises and Blessings of a grateful People, who shall transmit the Story of
thy gentle clement Reign, for the Example and Instruction of future Kings, and
the Admiration of all Posterity.

FAR be it from our present Design to draw at large the amiable Character of
his late Majesty. Alas! as Mark Anthony said, We come to bury Caesar, not to
praise him. But that Writer who shall be honored with so great a Task
hereafter, will run no hazard of offending Truth, when he shall enumerate the
great Qualities that have distinguished the best and happiest of our English
Princes, and unite them in the Person of GEORGE the First: Yet even this shall
fall short of his real Merit, and the public Praise shall make the Panegyric
little.

THERE seem to be four Particulars in the Character of the late King, which
distinguish him from all the Princes his Predecessors, and shall for ever
endear his Memory to this Nation. The first was the absolute want of all
Ambition which might possibly endanger the Liberties of his Subjects: A Rock on
which the greatest Kings have frequently miscarried; but which was always so
carefully avoided by him, that in an Administration of Thirteen Years, the most
jealous Patriots have not been able to form one reasonable Fear concerning it.
The second was his inflexible Constancy and Resolution in those Measures, which
upon mature Deliberation he had embraced: This added extremely to the
Importance of his Councils, by creating and strengthening the Dependence and
Confidence of his Allies abroad, as well as his Friends and Servants at home;
and seems to have been, next to the distinguishing favor of Heaven, the
principal Cause of all that Success that ever attended his Affairs. The third
Particular in his Character was the indelible Remembrance he preserved of the
Services and Fidelity of his Friends: He was a Master, that no Time, no
Accidents, not scarce even Injuries could disoblige; so that it was no wonder
that he was happy in Servants, whom no Advantages, no Interests, no future
Prospects could seduce from him. The last that I shall now mention, for I
hasten over so painful and uneasy a Subject, was his most graceful and obliging
Condescension to all: The King was every where to be known by his Goodness. Who
can recollect his affable Deportment, his gracious bending to Distress, without
being overwhelmed and lost in Sorrow! -- I add no more.

LET us now with one Heart transfer our whole Faith and Loyalty to the Person
of our present Sovereign; and paying him all that Fealty and Allegiance which
is due to his undoubted Title, we may with the firmest Confidence expect that
Favor and Protection which good and gracious Princes extend to a loyal and
obedient People.

BRITANNVS.


