Mr. Prince's SERMON On the DEATH of King GEORGE I. AND Accession of his
present MAJESTY King GEORGE II.

In the House of Representatives,
Veneris Die 25. Augusti, A. D. 1727. A. M.
VOTED,

THAT the Representatives of the Town of Boston, be desired to wait on the
Reverend Mr. Thomas Prince, with the Thanks of the House for his Sermon
Preached Yesterday, on the sorrowful Occasion of the DEATH of His late Majesty,
and the happy ACCESSION of His present Majesty; and desire a Copy thereof for
the Press.

Wm. Dudley, Speaker.

A SERMON On the sorrowful OCCASION OF THE DEATH Of His late MAJESTY King
GEORGE Of Blessed Memory, AND THE Happy Accession Of His present MAJESTY King
GEORGE II. to the THRONE.

Delivered at the Public LECTURE in BOSTON N. E. Aug. 24th 1727. In the
Audience of the Great and General Assembly of the PROVINCE: And Published at
the Desire of the Honorable HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed for Daniel Henchman at his Shop over against the Brick-Meeting
House in Cornhill. MDCCXXVII.

A SERMON On the Death of King GEORGE I. AND Accession of King GEORGE II.
1 CHRONICLES. XXIX. 26, 28. THUS David the Son of Jesse reigned over all Israel. --
And he dyed in a good old Age; full of Days, Riches, and Honor: and Solomon
his Son reigned in his stead.


THE Words are an historical Transition from the Reign of David to that of
Solomon. And as it has just now pleased the most high GOD, in whose right Hand
are all our Changes, to take away by Death from the Head of our British ISRAEL,
a great and most gracious KING like David, and happily to advance his SON to
his Father's Throne, whom we hope to prove another Solomon; I have chose the
Text as a proper Subject of our Meditations on this great Occasion. And in
discoursing on it, shall endeavor these two things, 1. To consider the words
in their original Importance. AND then,

2. APPLY them to the great Event of Providence before us.


1. TO consider the words in their original Importance; as they respect the
Reign and Death of DAVID, and the happy Succession of his Son SOLOMON.

AND this I shall endeavor with a special view to those Events and Characters
that are mostly applicable to the Case before us.

AND here are these three things in General, 1. A conclusive Epitome of the
Character and Reign of DAVID. 2. HIS Decease and the peculiar Circumstances of
it. 3. and lastly, THE happy Accession of his Son SOLOMON to his Throne after
him.


1. A conclusive Epitome of the Character and Reign of DAVID. Thus David the
Son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.

THE Person spoken of, is the renowned David the Son of Jesse. A Person of an
illustrious House, of the Lyon-like Tribe of Judah; though the first of his
Family that came to the Throne.

HIS Ancestor of the third ascent was BOAZ; who is said to have been a mighty
Man of wealth in Bethlehem Ruth II. 1 -- 4.
. And the second above Him was NAHSHON; who is said to be the head of the House
of his Father, yea a renowned Person of the Congregation, a Prince of the Tribe
of his Father, and one of the Heads of the Thousands in Israel, Numb. I. 4, 7,
16. And in the following Chapter, we find him at the Divine Appointment
pitching by his own Standard, with the Ensign of his Father's House, on the
Eastern side of the Tabernacle, as Captain of the Children of Judah, and Head
of his Host of above 70 Thousand Men: to defend that Sacred and Divine
Pavilion, as it marched through the Wilderness Numb. II. 1, -- 4.
. And on the same day that Moses had fully set up the Tabernacle, this great
Captain was the very first of the twelve Princes of Israel, Heads of the House
of their Fathers, who were the Princes of the Tribes, and were over them that
were numbered; who brought their rich and liberal Offerings before the Altar:
and he made his Offering the first day as the Prince of the Tribe of Judah
Numb. VII. 1, 2, 10, -- 17. and 1 Chronicles. II. 10.
.

THIS was David the Son of Jesse's nearer and illustrious Pedigree. He was one
of the most Princely Families in Israel: not to mention Three of his Warlike
Brethren, whom we find as Volunteers in King Readiness Armies, Fighting against
the Philistian Enemies, those implacable haters of their Nation and pure
Religion.

As for his own Personal Indowments -- He was of a beautiful and ruddy
Countenance and goodly to look to: a comely Person, prudent in matters, a Man
of War, a mighty valiant Man, and the Lord was with him 1 Samuel XVI. 12, 18. and
Chapter XVII. 42.
. This is the Character we have of David, even when he was a Youth, while he
dwelt at his Father's House, and before he came into any prospect of the Crown
of Israel. He was every way accomplished to defend and rule so great a People,
and to make them happy.

BUT how came the Son of Jesse to ascend the Throne of Israel?

FOR he was neither the eldest Branch of Jacob, nor of Judah, nor of his
Grandson Hezron, nor yet of his own, Father Jesse; and there were great numbers
of prior Lines by Birth Surviving: So that if the Senior Branch were to be
indefeasably preferred, he could never have had a Right or Hope of ascending to
so much as the Principality of his own single Tribe: And yet the Text observes
that he came to Reign over all Israel

REUBEN was the first born of Jacob: And so the Birthright was by Nature his,
and would have descended so to his eldest offspring. But for his signal
wickedness, he both forfeited the Privilege for Himself and the Intail for his
Posterity. His Father Jacob therefore by Divine direction justly cut him off:
Declaring that though Reuben was his first born, his might and the beginning of
his strength, the excellence of Dignity and the excellence of Power; yet for
his great unworthyness, he should be as unstable as water, he should not
excel: And then the Patriarch gave away the Birthright of Inheritance to
Joseph and the Power to Judah, his younger Children Genesis XLIX.
. Agreeable to this, the Writer of this Book observes, in the 5th Chap. at the
beginning; That though REUBEN was the first born, yet his Birthright was given to
the sons of JOSEPH, the son of ISRAEL: And the Genealogy is not to be reckoned
after the Birthright: For JUDAH prevailed above his Brethren, and of him came
the chief Ruler, but the Birthright was JOSEPH'S.

THIS no doubt was a special work of GOD: with whom it is as equal to raise
those Children he brings forth later into the World, to an higher Power and
Dignity, as to bring forth others into the World before them. But who is there
that does not admire the Wisdom, Justice, Holiness and Goodness of his Conduct
in this matter? And is not this Divine Example written for our Admonition also,
on whom the ends of the World are come? And wherefore should it be recorded,
but to teach us; That in Imitation of the like Perfections, Parents, and much
more Kings and Kingdoms for a greater and more necessary Good, may set aside
those elder Branches that have rendered themselves utterly unworthy to excel,
and bestow the Inheritance and Rule on younger? That so the Senior Branches,
especially of more Public Families, may be more careful of their Principles
and Conduct, and may not forfeit their Succession: And in case they should --
that the Junior Ones may by the same means secure their own Reversion to the
forfeited Inheritance.

BUT to return --

As the most wise and righteous GOD was pleased to choose the younger Tribe of
Judah for the Principal Seat of Power in Israel; so he likewise chose his
Servant David a younger Branch of the Princely line to be Ruler of his People
Israel 2 Samuel VII. 8 Psalm. LXXVIII 68, -- 71.
. Agreably to this he afterward declared in a Great Assembly of all the
Princes of the Tribes, with the Captains, Officers and mighty Men of Israel, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 4. Howbeit, the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the House
of my Father, to be King over Israel for ever: for he has chosen Judah to be
the Ruler; and of the House of Judah, the House of my Father; and among the
Sons of my Father, He liked me to make me King over all Israel.

GOD had indeed, before, instated Saul of another Family in this Royal Dignity.
But upon his great Folly, Rashness, Prevarication and Rebellion against the
LORD, who had so highly exalted him; it is said, The LORD repented that He had
set him up to be King 1 Samuel XV. 11, 35.
: And because that Saul had rejected the word of the LORD, therefore the LORD
had rejected him from Reigning over Israel Ver. 23, 26 and Chap. XVI. 1.
. Yea the Prophet Samuel plainly tells him, 1 Samuel XV. 28. The Lord has rent
the Kingdom of Israel from thee this Day, and has given it to a Neighbor of
thine that is better than Thou. And though King Saul had left behind him both a
legitimate Female and Male Posterity; yet they were entirely excluded with Him,
and their entail to the Crown cut off for ever. The poor rejected King seems
indeed at length convinced of his Sin and Foolishness 1 Samuel XV. 24 -- 30.
: But his Repentance was alas too late to preserve the Kingdom and it is
Succession to his Royal Family: For the Prophet tells him; that the Strength of
Israel would not lie, nor Repent: i e. The Great GOD would not alter his
declared Resolution in this matter.

BUT this better Neighbor was the excellent young DAVID the Son of Jesse. For
now the Divine Decree breaks forth concerning Him: And Samuel is quickly sent,
even while Saul was yet alive, to the House of Jesse, to anoint his Son and
signify his certain designation to the Kingly Dignity.

BUT his Ascent to this was Gradual, and through a great variety of surprising
Turns and strenuous Oppositions.

HE was quickly called forth by Providence, into Public Service. And then he
gave a fair and charming Specimen of the Glory and Felicity of his future
Government.

HE began with a most Heroic Act of Zeal and Courage in the Cause of GOD and
Israel Chap. XVII.
. And whithersoever he went he behaved himself wisely and prospered. Being set
over the Men of War, he was accepted in the sight of all the People, and even
also in the sight of Saul's Servants, 1 Samuel XVIII. 5. At the 13th Verse, we
read, that being made a Captain over an Army, He went out and came in before
the People, He behaved himsel wifely in all his ways, and the LORD was with
him. And at the 30 v. That he behaved himself more wifely than all the.
Servants of Saul; so that his Name was much set by.

SAUL indeed for this grew very jealous and fearful of him; and became his
inveterate and perpetual Enemy 1 Samuel XVIII 15, 28, 29.
: and so did Doeg the Edomite, who was set at the head of Readiness Servants Clap
XXII. 9 and Psalm. LII
, and other of his close Adherents: But they were generally such as gave no
Reputation to their Cause or Opposition. In the 2 Samuel XXII. 5. He styles
them, The Floods of ungodly Men; or the Floods of Belial, as the Hebrew and the
Margin have it. But all Israel and Judah loved DAVID 1 Samuel XVIII. 16
. The Generality of the Nation loved him, and had their Eyes upon him, even
when they dare hardly show it through the Violence and Rancour of his reigning
Enemies. And what is usual in such a case, their Enmity and Fear excited them
to such a Train of violent Proceedings, as extremely weakened their own Esteem
and Interest, increased his, and even helped to pave the way for that
Succession, which they did their utmost to prevent for ever.

IN the mean while, his Conduct was so exact and perfect, that even Saul
himself acknowledged that DAVID was more Righteous than he Chap XXIV. 17.
. Abigail declares that evil had not been found in him all his days Chap. XXV.
28.
And even Achish the King of Gath was so charmed with him; as he solemnly
protested, that DAVID had been upright in his eyes, that he had found no evil
in him, but that he was good in his sight even as an Angel of GOD Chap XXIX. 3
-- 9.
. Yea so great a Love had many, even of the very Tribe of Saul for him; that in
the most dangerous conjuncture which threatened his Person and Succession, they
ventured to go over to him; protesting as in 1 Chronicles. XII. 18. Thine are we
DAVID, and on thy side thou Son of Jesse: Peace, Peace be to Thee: and Peace be
to thy Helpers; for thy God helps thee.

Now all this was during the Life of Saul. And then afterward -- for many
Years before his Accession to the Throne of Israel, and in the Reign of Readiness
Successor, he gave a bright Example of an happy Government, while he ruled over
his own Tribe of Judah only. He ruled them with such Superior Wisdom, Equity
and Lenity, as exceedingly endeared him to all his Subjects, in creased his
Fame, and yet further recommended him to the other Kingdom: And so consummate
was all his Management, that it is said in 2 Samuel III. 36. Whatsoever the King
did, pleased all the People.

IN fine; As there was a pretty long Contest between the House of Saul and the
House of DAVID; The House of DAVID waxed stronger and stronger, and the House
of Saul weaker and weaker: 'Till with the dying Struggle in the Reign of his
Successor, the Power of the House of Saul dwindled away. And at the Death of
Ishbosheth came all the Tribes of Israel, with all their mighty Men of Valor,
and their famous Men for understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought
to do, They came to make DAVID King over all Israel. And as he made a solemn
Compact with them before the LORD, they anointed him King over all their united
Tribes: and there was Joy in Israel 2 Samuel V. ^. -- 3. and 1 Chap. XII. 23. --
40.
.

THUS did the most high GOD provide himself a King among the Sons of Jesse 1 Samuel XVI. I.
. By a wonderful Train of various Providential Changes did he carry and advance
him to the Throne: a great number of elder Branches of his Princely Family were
passed by; and another Family before him in Possession set aside, in great
Honor to him and in abundant Favor to that distinguished Nation. Thus did he
chcose DAVID his Servant, and took him from his Father's House: He brought him
to seed Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance Psalm. LXXVIII. 70, 71.
.

AND thus he reigned over all Israel --. But how or in what particular Manner
did He reign over them?

BY this Historical Expression at the Close of His Royal Life, there seems to
be represented a short Review of the Manner of it. Thus he reigned, i. e. Thus
as we have above described; thus Courageously and Wifely, thus Righteously and
Graciously; thus kindly, gently, successfully and happily.

THIS Illustrious Person did not then change the Tenor of his happy
Government, or disappoint the raised Expectations of the Tribes of the other
Kingdom, when they had unanimously called him to the Head of Empire. With his
increased Power, He extended his happy Influence to the utmost Reach of his
Dominions. He sed his People according to the Integrity of his Heart and guided
them by the Skilfulness of his hands Psalm. LXXVIII. 72.
.

BY the Books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles, as also by the Psalms, it
appears he had many Enemies both Foreign and Domestic; and not only before but
also after his Accession to the Throne. And they in their Turns created him a
deal of Trouble, and often interrupted the Calmness of his Reign. But in the
Depths of his Distress, the Earth shook and shook, because the LORD was wroth.
And HE bowed the Heavens and came down -- And HE rode upon a Cherub and did fly
-- HE was seen upon the wings of the Wind -- And HE sent out Arrows and
discomfited and scattered his Enemies. HE sent from above -- HE took and drew
Him out of many Waters -- HE delivered Him from them that hated Him -- HE bro't
Him forth into a large Place. -- And then He sang with Triumph in the Day when
the LORD delivered Him from the Hand of all his Enemies -- 2 Samuel XXII.


HE sets me upon my High Places -- Thou have also given me the shield of thy
Salvation: and thy Gentleness has made me Great. Thou have enlarged my steps
under me. I have pursued mine Enemies and destroyed them: and turned not again
till I had consumed them -- I have wounded them, that they could not arise: Yea
they are fallen under my Feet. For thou have girded me with Strength -- Them
that rose up against me, have Thou subdued under me. Thou have also given me
the necks of mine Enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me -- Then did I
beat them as small as the Dust of the Earth, and did spread them abroad. Thou
also have delivered me from the strivings of my People: Thou have kept me to be
Head of the Nations. Strangers shall submit themselves to me: As soon as they
hear, they shall be obedient -- They shall fade away, and be afraid out of
their close Place. It is GOD that avengeth me, and that brings down the People
under me: and that brings me forth from mine Enemies. Thou also have lifted
me up on high above them that rose up against me -- Therefore, I will give
Thanks unto Thee, O LORD, among the Nations, and I will sing Praises to thy
Name. He is the Tower of Salvation for his KING: and shows Mercy to his
anointed; unto DAVID, and to his Seed for ever more.

THUS He Triumphed over all his own and his Kingdom's Enemies. And He went on
and grew Great, and the LORD GOD of Hosts was with him: He established him King
over Israel, and exalted his Kingdom for his People Israel's sake 2 Samuel V. 9,
-- 12.
. And the LORD was with Him wheresoever he went: He cut off all his Enemies out
of his sight; and made him a great Name, like to the Name of the great Men that
are in the Earth Chap. VII. 9.
. And the Fame of DAVID went out out into all Lands: And the LORD bro't the
Fear of Him upon all Nations 1 Chr. XIV. 17.
.

WHILE He defended the remotest Borders, He enlarged and beautified the Capital
of his wide Empire. He protected the Good and Virtuous: He preserved and
countenanced the pure Religion: He executed Judgment and Justice unto all his
People 2 Samuel IX. 15.
. He abounded in acts of Royal Clemency and Bounty among them: He appeared
their common Guide and Father: The Kingdom greatly flourished under his
Auspicious Management, as it never had done before: And so dear he grew on the
account of his easy wise and happy Government; that at length they would not
suffer him to go out to Battle, least he should thereby quench the Light of
Israel 2 Samuel XXI. 18.
. And in fine, among his last words, he very lively described his own excellent
Reign and Spirit, 2 Samuel XXIII. 1 -- 4. He that rules over Men must be just,
ruling in the Fear of God: and he shall be as the Light of the Morning when the
Sun rises, over a Morning without Clouds; as the tender grass springing out of
the Earth by clear shining after Rain.

THIS was DAVID the Son of Jesse, the Man who was raised up on high, the
anointed of the GOD of Jacob: This he said, and thus he Reigned over all Israel.

BUT we must now come to consider,

2. KING DAVID'S Dying, and the peculiar Circumstances of it. And he died in a
good old Age; full of Days Riches and Honor.

AND must this Light of Israel at last be quenched! Must an End be put to such
an happy Reign! And must so Great and Excellent a Prince, the Beauty of Israel
be cut off by Death! Alas! how fading is the Glory of the Highest and Best of
Men on Earth! The time must come when He must live no longer to be the great
Delight and Blessing of his Subjects. Even the most consummate King DAVID
himself must give up the Ghost, and leave his most affectionate People.

BUT then, he died In a good old Age; full of Days, Riches and Honor.

SINCE he must inevitably decline and die; it is in some respects desirable
and a comfortable circumstance both to Himself, his Royal Relatives, and his
loving People, that he should Die in his advanced Age, and in a Plenitude of
Glory. On these accounts he seems to prosper even in Death it self: He prospers
to the utmost Point of his Existence here: And even the Moment that puts a
Period to it, is the very Moment that upon his own account he could in Wisdom
wish for.

HE Dies in a good old Age --

KING DAVID Died in his 70th Year. His Strength and Vigor both of Mind and
Body were beginning to Decay: And if He had lived longer, his Royal Life would
have grown less pleasant and easy to Him. For the Days of our Years are
threescore Years and ten: and if by reason of Strength they be fourscore Years;
yet is that Strength of theirs but Labor and Sorrow, Psalm. XC. 10.

THE words in Hebrew signify, -- A good and happy old Age Buxtorf. Lexic.
Chaldaic, Talmudic, and Rabinic.
. And in short; It was as Old an Age, as a mortal, frail, good Man, would upon
his own account desire to Live to; and as Good an Age as He would choose to Die
in.

HE Died Full of Days, Riches and Honor.

HE had lived as many Days as rendered Life delightful and easy to Him: And He
was full of Days to his entire Content and Satisfaction. As Eliphaz expresses
it, -- He comes to his Grave in a full Age, as a Shock of Corn comes in, in his
Season, Job V. 26. In short, He was fully satisfied with Life, and with the
great Abundance of his Wealth and Glory Septuag, Sir, Arab, and Moat in Bib
Polyglot; Osiand, in Pol Sy^ops; and Jun and Trem
. For his prodigious Riches -- His Preparations for the Temple amounted to
above 850 Millions Sterling 1 Chronicles. XXII. 14. According to Dr Cumberland's
manner of Comparation.
. And he accounted he had Lived enough for his own Comfort and Renown: That he
could not propose to acquire any more of either by living longer, and that he
had nothing now to do but Die and enter into an infinitely happier and more
glorious Kingdom.

IN fine, He began to feel the Impairs of Nature growing on him: And he wifely
foresaw their hastening Advances, when he should Live with lower Comfort and
Reign with lower Honor to himself, and less Advantage to his People. And just
as he arrives to such a view as this -- at such a Point he Dies. As a most wise
and foreseeing Man could wish; that had filled his Days with Service, had
performed his part with Honor, and was fully ripe for the Rewards of Heaven --
He now goes off the Stage, in the Fullness of his Earthly Splendour: And he
leaves his Kingdom and this lower World, as the Sun sometimes goes down,
shining in his Strength and Brightness, just before he enters into a dark and
sad Eclipse, that would soon have covered all his Glory.

THUS Prosperously King DAVID Reigned, and thus he also Died.

HOWEVER, the Light of such a King is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is to us,
to see so bright and feel the Influence of so warm a Sun, as long as possible.
His happy People cannot but wish a longer Day: And for themselves they cannot
but mourn when it comes to an end. With reluctant Sorrow they then remember how
greatly they Rejoiced and Flourished in his benign Light and Influence for so
short a Season. Their Pangs of Grief will rise, their Springs of Tears will
flow, and a sad and gloomy Night will overshade their Minds.

LET us therefore hasten on in the

3 And last Place, To the Happy Succession of SOLOMON his Son to his Fathers
Throne. And SOLOMON his Son Reigned in his stead.

KING DAVID had a most hopeful Son appointed to succeed Him in the Kingdom: and
this was SOLOMON.

FOR the Crown of Israel was not only settled on DAVID, but also on his
POSTERITY after Him; and this on certain Conditions for ever, 2 Samuel VII. 12,
-- 16. And when thy Days be fulfilled, and Thou shall sleep with thy Fathers; I
will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy Bowels; and I
will establish his Kingdom: He shall build an House for my Name, and I will
establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever, etc. And of the immediate
Offspring of DAVID, we find Him declaring in a General Assembly of all the
Princes and Nobles of Israel, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 4, -- 7. The Lord has chosen
SOLOMON my Son to set on the Throne of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel --
Moreover I will establish his Kingdom for ever; IF HE BE CONSTANT to do my
Commandments and my Judgments as at this Day.

UPON SOLOMON therefore, were the Eyes of the Nation fixed. And upon his Royal
Father's Demise, He peaceably ascended the Throne. With great Gladness did they
make Him King; and anointed him unto the Lord, to be the chief Governor. Then
SOLOMON sat on the Throne of the Lord, as King instead of DAVID his Father, and
prospered, and all Israel obeyed Him. And all the Princes and the mighty Men --
submitted themselves to SOLOMON: Chap. XXIX 22, -- 24.
And his Kingdom was established greatly 1 Kings II. 12.


IT would be beyond the Scope of our Text to extend our views very far into
SOLOMON'S Reign. I shall only mention the excellent and dying Charge of his
Father, and the famous History of his own wise Petition in the Entrance of it:
which was the auspicious Occasion of his extraordinary Wisdom, and of all the
admired Glory and Happiness that were consequent on it.

THE excellent Blessing and Charge of his Father is in these remarkable words,
2 Chronicles. XXII. 11, 12, 13. Now my Son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou,
and build the house of the Lord thy God, as he has said of thee. Only the Lord
give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel,
that thou may keep the law of the Lord thy God. Then shall thou prosper, if
thou take heed to fulfill the statutes and judgments, which the Lord charged
Moses with, concerning Israel: Be strong and of good courage, dread not, nor be
dismayed.

AND the History of his pious Petition is in the Chapter immediately succeeding
our Text, from the 7th to the 12th verse -- In that night did God appear to
SOLOMON, and said unto him, ask what I shall give thee. And SOLOMON said to
God, Thou have showed great mercy to DAVID my Father, and have made me to reign
in his stead. Now, O Lord God, let thy promise to DAVID my Father be
established: for thou have made me King over a People, like the dust of the
earth in multitude. Give me now Wisdom and Knowledge, that I may go out and
come in before this People: for who can judge this thy People that is so great?
And God said to SOLOMON, Because this was in thine heart and thou have not
asked riches, wealth or honor, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet have
asked long life; but have asked Wisdom and Knowledge for thy self, that thou
may judge my People, over whom I have made thee King: Wisdom and Knowledge is
granted to thee, and I will give thee Riches and Wealth, and Honor, such as
none of the Kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the like.

THIS was SOLOMON the Son of DAVID, that Reigned in his stead. And the Kingdom
quickly saw that the Wisdom of GOD was in him to do Judgment 1 Kings III. 28.
. And also Hiram King of Tire, who was ever a Lover of his Father DAVID, and
his firm and faithful Allie, Rejoiced greatly and said, Because the Lord has
loved his People, he has made Thee King over them: And Blessed be the Lord
this Day, which has given to DAVID a wise Son over this Great People. 2 Chronicles.
II. 11. and 1 Kings V. 7.


AND thus have we considered the words in their First Importance; as they
respected the Reign and Death of DAVID, and the Happy Succession of his Son
SOLOMON.

WE now Proceed in the II. Place, TO Apply them to the Great Event of
Providence before us; in the late Reign and Death of our most Gracious
Sovereign KING GEORGE the I, of ever Glorious Memory, and the Happy Succession
of his Son KING GEORGE the II, our present rightful Sovereign, to his Fathers
Throne.

BUT you are doubtless very sensible, that I have in a great Measure prevented
my self from enlarging much on this parallel and illustrious Argument. And
surely you could not but think, that I have been all this while treating in a
figurative sort of manner; not of DAVID and SOLOMON alone, but of These Two
Great British Kings, who fill our Hearts with the mingling Passions of Grief
and Joy, this Day.

AND I must confess my self both incapable, and unprovided of Materials also,
to pretend to draw with any Accuracy their transcendant Characters. Since I had
the Happiness to see them, which was about 10 Years ago, I have not been able
to procure any other than broken and interrupted hints of their Royal History.
I must therefore wholly rely on these, with what I have learnt concerning them
before my returning Hither, together with that happy Influence of theirs which
has reached these far distant Shoars since my Arrival. And it is but a very small
part of these, that I have either Time to recollect or lay before you.
Something in Gratitude and Honor to them, we may briefly touch, under those
Three consentaneous Heads we have been Discoursing on.

1. THE Character and Reign of our late Blessed Sovereign. 2. HIS Decease, and
the Circumstances of it. 3. THE Happy Succession of his Son to the Throne.
1. THE Character and Reign of our late Blessed Sovereign KING GEORGE the I.

WE all doubtless know, that he was the Son of Nobles. He by Both his Parents
descended of a Race of Ancient Princes, both in Germany and Britain. His
immediate Father was one of the most Powerful Princes of the Empire: And his
immediate Mother, was in the latter part of her Life, the nearest of any
Protestant Royal Blood, to the Crown of Great Britain.

HE was of a comely, florid Countenance, like DAVID. Of great Wisdom, Courage,
Resolution, Steadiness, Integrity and Clemency. Well versed in the Art of War;
but naturally of Peaceful inclinations: which mixture of Qualities, is agreed,
as one observes, by the Experience of all Ages, to make the best and most
glorious Princes. So remarkable for a strict Regard to Justice; that agreeable
to his own Judgment and Disposition, his MOTTO was -- That The Glory of a
Prince consists in doing Justice.

A Person that appeared always to have a mighty Sense of the Public Interest;
and of the great Duty incumbent on him, in his High Station, to promote the
Welfare of the World. His Eyes were always fixed on the Affairs of his own
Dominions, and of the Nations round about him. -- Close and Indefatigable in
his Application to Public Business -- Steady to his Friends and Allies --
Resolute to maintain the Faith of Treaties -- Frugal of the Public Moneys --
Temperate and Sober -- and in all his Economy exactly Regular.

FOR Religion -- a through Protestant -- Full of Christian Charity and
Genorosity -- An utter Enemy Christian Charity and Genorosity -- An utter Enemy
to Slavery and Persecution -- Zealous for the true Religion, and the Cause of
Civil and Religious Liberty. In this Noble Cause he often exposed his Person, at
the Head of Armies, and in his Earlier Days, in diverse Parts of Europe.

WHILE he ruled in his own Electorate; He showed the Excellence of his
Political Spirit, Principles and Conduct; in the Shining Prudence, Equity and
Mildness of his Administration: That he was though it to be the most beloved by his
Subjects, of any Prince in the whole World. He looked on their Wealth and
Happiness, as the Source and Basis of his own. There were no Divisions or
Factions among them, by reason of his Impartial Destinction of Merit: And
instead of Murmuring against him, they would be always telling Instances of his
exemplary Justice and Moderation.

HE was even then accounted without a Rival, the Wisest Prince of Germany. And
seemed to be the Person ordained and prepared by Heaven, for the raising Great
Britain to that high Rank and Dignity, which it should always have in the
World: Which is to be the Tutelar Head of the Reformed Interest every where,
and to hold the Balance of Power in Europe.

IN Short, HE was every way accomplished for the Government of this Great and
Mighty Kingdom. And both before, and after the Decease especially, of his most
Excellent MOTHER; To HIM were the Eyes of the better part of the Nation turned,
for the Security of their Precious Liberties and pure Religion; And in these of
all that is dear to them both as Men and Christians.

THROUGH a great variety of Revolutions, the Crown came to be, in a most Firm and
Solemn manner, intailed on him, and on his Protestant Posterity for ever. And
through many Violent and Mighty Oppositions, He came at last, by a Surprising
Turn of Providence, to take the Possession of it.

IN that Gloomy part of the preceding Reign; when the Foundations of the Earth
seemed to be out of Course, and the Enemies of his Succession to prevail and
triumph over all Opposition: We were ready then to say with the Mournful
Prophet Lam. Ill. and IV.
The LORD has led and bro't us into Darkness, and not into Light. He has
builded against us, and compassed us with Gall and Travel. He has set us in
dark places as they that are Dead of old. He has hedged us about, that we
cannot get out. He has made our chain heavy. He has enclosed our ways with
hewn Stone: He has made our Paths crooked. He has filled us with Bitterness:
And we said, our Strength and our Hope is perished from the LORD. Thou have
made us the Offscouring and Refuse in the midst of the People. All our Enemies
have opened their Mouths against us. Fear and a Snare is come upon us;
Desolation and Destruction. The Light of our Eyes, the Breath of our Nostrils,
the anointed of the LORD is taken in their Pits; of whom we said, under his
Shadow we shall live among the Heathen!

THEN the LORD turned again the Captivity of Zion; and we were like them that
dreamed. Our Mouth was filled with Laughter, and our Tongue with Singing. Then
said they among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them. -- The
LORD has done Great things for us, whereof we are Glad. Psalm. XXVI. 1.-3
.

AND for my Part -- I shall never forget the Joy that swelled my Heart; when in
the Splendid Procession at his Coronation, preceeded by all the Nobles of the
Kingdom, and then his Son and Heir apparent, our other Hope, with their Ermine
Robes and Coronets -- That Royal Face at length appeared, which Heaven had in
that Moment sent to Save these Great Nations from the Brink of Ruin. Nor do I
speak it as my case alone, but as what appeared to be the equal Transport of
the Multitudes round about me. The Tears of Joy seemed to rise and swim in
every' Eye: And we were hardly able to give a Shout, through the laboring
Passions that were swelling in us.

AND how did he Begin and carry on his expected Reign? -- With the same steady,
wise and benign Tenor, as he used to Rule in his other Empire.

HE began with an open Declaration of his Resolution to maintain our Religion,
Properties, Laws and Liberties: And as He was never known to deceive; He has
all along made Good his Royal Word.

BY industrious Applications and wise Treaties, He soon retrieved the Nation's
Commerce, which is it is very Strength and Soul; and that had been miserably
given away by Articles, at the Close of the foregoing Reign. He brake the
Chains of his distressed loyal Subjects. He appeared constantly to be their
affectionate and common Father. He ever chose the wisest and most approved
Counselors: such as He knew had shown themselves the Nation's steady Friends
in the darkest and most trying Times: And He ever carefully improved their
Advices for the Public Welfare. He never acted against the known Laws or
Customs, but ever strictly made them the Rule of Government.

FIRM and resolute to assert the Rights and Honors of the Kingdom; He was
neither ambitious of larger Empire Abroad, nor of greater Power at Home. He
asked no more of his People's Treasures, than what they themselves should think
were needful for their own Advantage and Preservation. And what is one of the
distinguishing Glories of his Reign; He never differed from or displeased his
Parliament. He accounted them his greatest Council: And it was wonderful to see
the constant mutual Affection and Harmony between them. I don't remember that
He ever made any Proposal to them which they did not cheerfully comply with,
excepting one, which was to lessen his own Prerogative. And yet never had a
British King a greater Power among his Subjects. As an Argument of their
highest Value for Him, and their most perfect Confidence in his Equity and
Goodness; they desired and enacted that, for a certain Time, when the Public
Safety required it, He should have a greater Power over them than any of the
Kings before him. His Reign is an illustrious Instance; That the most Indulgent
Princes are the most Powerful; while the Ambitious raise their People's
Jealousies, destroy their Confidence, and grow weak and impotent.

HE most wisely improved the Naval Power of the Kingdom: and has carried it to
an higher Pitch of Glory than the Seas have ever seen. By this has He spread a
Terror through the World: with a single Blow prevented bloody and expensive Wars,
and put a Period to them in the very Moment, and by the very Action that began
them. Hereby has He encouraged, protected and strengthened his Allies;
disappointed the Designs of invading Enemies; broken pernicious Leagues; held
the Balance among the Nations; and preserved them in Order and Tranquillity.

IN short, HE was in some respects a Father to the Kings of the Earth; or at
least a powerful and decisive Moderator and Umpire among them. The Eyes of the
greatest Princes were turned to Him: To Him they gave Ear, and waited: they
kept silence at his Councils: And their public Resolutions were suspended upon
his Determinations.

AND as for us in these far distant Ends of his Dominions -- We have in a great
measure felt the Influence of his happy Reign.

THROUGH his safe Protection we still enjoy those precious Charter-Privileges,
which our Forefathers left their Native pleasant Land, and came over hither
into a miserable Thicket to procure; which were Solemnly confirmed to us by the
Glorious KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY of Eternal Memory Psalm. CXII. 6.
; and are comprehensive of every thing on Earth that is Dear and Valuable to us.

WHEN we contended in the dark, even about what was though it his own Prerogative
-- while he knew we did it out of no Disaffection to Him, but from a Difference
of Judgment only; He like a Tender Father gently overlooked our Infirmities: He
confirmed our Liberties, and disappointed the earnest Expectations of our
envious Enemies. And though they daily misrepresent our Actions, and exaggerate
every petty Fault among us; they could never make any Impressions on Him to our
Disadvantage. He had been well informed that there is not a single Person of
our Denomination Here, who did not earnestly desire His Accession to the Throne
and the Continuance of it in his Serene House for ever.

THUS Lived and Reigned this Greatest and most Admired of Princes in his Day:
The Darling and Protection of his People: The great Support of the Reformed
Interest: And the Arbiter of Europe.

AND thus does it become a grateful People, at the Sorrowful Conclusion of the
Reign of so Great and Good a KING, to reflect upon the signal Wisdom, Goodness,
and Happy Influence of his Royal Care and Government: That they may mention.
Him with deserved Honor and preserve a dear and precious Memory of his Happy
Reign. But in all these Great Vircues and Actions, we must behold that
SUPERIOR BEING, by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice; and ascribe to
HIM the Praise and Honor of all the Excellence that appeared in our late
incomparable Sovereign, and of all the Great and Happy things that were
performed by him for his People.

AND we must now come to consider

2. HIS Decease, and the Circumstances of it.

THOUGH Kings are as Gods on Earth; yet even the Greatest and Best must Die like
Men, and fall to the Dust as Humane Princes. And how has the LORD covered the
Daughter of our Zion with a Cloud in his Anger! How has he cast down from
Heaven to the Earth the Beauty of Israel! He has made our Strength to f! In the
midst of all his prosperous Designs and Labors for the Public Peace and
Welfare; His Breath goes forth at once: He returns to his Earth: In that
very Day his Tho'ts perish.

AND yet he Died, like King DAVID, In a Good old Age, but Two Years short of
His; and both full of Days, Riches and Honor. He died in the Hight of Wisdom,
Strength and Usefulness. What a wonderfully Flourishing and Wealthy Kingdom has
he left behind him? And their unmeasurable Riches were as devoted to him as if
they were all his own. In fine, How full of Honor? -- How fresh was his Glory
in him? In the Perfection of his Reign, and in the full Respect and Honors of
his People, and of all the Nations round about; He goes off the Stage of Life
before he fades, and leaves them to bewail his Loss with an answerable Fullness
of Regret and Sorrow.

IT becomes us to Lament his Leaving us -- who was our Best and Greatest Friend
on Earth: And especially at such a Time as this; when he was the Soul and
Center of that Great Alliance, which preserves the Nations from Confusion; and
was just a Settling their universal Tranquillity. Let our Eyes run down with
Rivers -- For the Joy of our Heart is ceased: Our Dance is turned into
Mourning: And the Crown is fallen from our Head; even the Crown of our Glory!
And with our Lamentations for the ROYAL HEAD of Government; Let us also Mourn
the Loss of that Excellent and Honorable Person of His Council Here, who bare
so much of His Authority among us, and is this last Monday gone to the
Generation of his Fathers also -- Colonel PENN TOWNSEND, Esquire who Deceased in
the 76th Year of his Age. A great and steady Lover of our Country; a firm
Friend to the Civil and Sacred Privileges of it: An Espouser of our pure
Scriptural Religion. Who, ever affectionately embraced our Ministers: Most
readily and generously sought the Common Welfare: Passed through a great variety
of Public Posts with Honor: And was greatly Accepted and Beloved among the
Multitude of his Brethren.


BUT for our Support and Comfort, Let us now divert our Eyes from this Gloomy
Prospect; and Consider

3. THE Happy Succession of his Son to his Throne.

A PRINCE of a Winning Countenance, and of a Manly Aspect and Deportment. Who
has a considerable Treasure of useful Learning: And is a great Master of
History, especially of his own Kingdoms; whereby he is happily furnished with
the Knowledge of the best Examples, and above all his Royal FATHER's, to Rule
them with mutual Glory and Satisfaction.

A PRINCE of Great Life and Courage: Who has high notions of the Wisdom, Power
and Goodness of the British Government: Who ascends the Throne in the Fullness
of his Strength and Vigor: And has had a vast advantage to observe the State
and Genius of his People; and from his FATHER's Admirable Pattern to learn to
rule them.

IN short, a PRINCE of the greatest Hopes, to preserve those Essential
Principles of Public Liberty, upon which his own Succession is happily
introduced and stands: And on which depends the Welfare, and even all that is
Dear and Sacred to these Mighty Nations.

AND in HIM -- a most admirable PRINCESS -- the Reigning Glory of Her Sex; for
Beauty, Knowledge, Wit, Discretion, the Sweetest Temper; the most Cheerful,
Affable and Engaging Countenance and Carriage; and for every charming Virtue.
In fine, Who in her Bloom of Youth preferred her Chaste Religion to all the
Glories of the Imperial Family, and became the Love and Admiration of every
Protestant.

AND Both These Blessed with a Numerous and most Hopeful Offspring --

HAPPY art thou O Israel! Who is like unto Thee, O People saved by the Lord!
Who is the shield of thine help! and the Sword of thine excellence! And thine
Enemies shall be found Liars to Thee: And thou shall tread upon their High
Places.

AND thus have we finished our Discourse on the Heads proposed.

AND now what Remains -- But that we continue, as there can be no doubt we
shall, the same Affectionate and Loyal Subjects to KING GEORCE the II, as we
have always been to his ROYAL FATHER.

AND that we earnestly and continually Pray for HIM.

THAT the GOD of all Grace and Blessing, would pour into his Royal Heart, even
a double Portion of his FATHER's Spirit. That he would give him Wisdom as an
Angel of GOD, as he did to SOLOMON; and a Largeness of Heart, as the Sand on
the Shores of his extended Empire. That he may Reign in Righteousness and Mercy
over all his Subjects, and make them happy in his equal and benign Influence.
That the LORD would Strengthen his Kingdom for Him: Magnify him exceedingly, as
he did King SOLOMON, in the sight of all his People; and bestow upon Him such
Royal Majesty, as has not been on any before him in the British Israel.

THAT Himself and his Posterity may for ever send us in these American Ends of
the Earth, those to Govern, that are of Sober Conversation, wise in Conduct,
and of generous Principles in Religion; who will value our Constitution, and
own our Ministry and Churches, to be true and valid, as we do theirs. And that
Himself and They may for ever continue Sacred our Precious CHARTER; which with
the PROTESTANT SUCCESSION, the Two inestimable Legacies of King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY, will render their Names most Blessed to all Posterity. And as they
Both come and stand on the same Foundation; may they together abide before the
LORD for ever: under Him the joint Protection and Security of all that is
valuable to us, against those that envy and seek to strip us of those Precious
Things, which we and our Fathers have so Dearly Purchased, through a world of
Peril, Labor, Toil and Hardship, Sweat and Blood, most Cruel Sufferings from
Heathens, and the Lives of Multitudes of our Dearest Friends and Relatives.

IN fine -- THAT GOD would give the KING and QUEEN his Judgments, and his
Righteousness to their ROYAL OFFSPRING. That He may Judge his People with
Righteousness, and his Poor with Judgment. That He may save the Children of the
Needy, and break in pieces the Oppressor. That He may come down upon us, in his
gracious Influence, like Rain on the mowen Grass, and as Showers that water the
Earth. That in his Days the Righteous may flourish; and abundance of Peace, so
long as the Moon endures. That He may preserve his Dominions also from Sea to
Sea; and from the River to the Ends of the Earth. That we who dwell in the
Wilderness may be happy in Bowing before Him; and his Enermies may lick the
Dust. That He may deliver the Needy when He cries; the Poor also and him that
has no helper. That He may redeem our Souls from Deceit and Violence; and that
our Privileges, which are as dear as our Blood, may be precious in his sight.
That He may live; and may daily be Praised: And that his Name may be continued
as long as the Sun; that Multitudes may be Blessed in Him; and that all the
Nations and Countries of his mighty Empire may call Him Blessed.

AND now -- Blessed be the LORD GOD, the GOD of Israel; who only does wondrous
things! and Blessed be his GLORIOUS NAME for ever! and let the Whole Earth be
filled with his GLORY! AMEN, and AMEN.

FINIS.

