A POEM On the DEATH Of His late MAJESTY King GEORGE, Of glorious Memory: AND
THE ACCESSION Of our present SOVEREIGN King GEORGE II. To the British THRONE.

By Mr. BYLES.

Ergo agite, et cuncti laetum cel^bremus ho^orem^
Poscamus ventos, atque haec mea sacra quotannis
Urbe velit posita templis sibi far dicatis.
Virg. Aen. v. A POEM On the Death of King GEORGE I. AND ACCESSION of King
GEORGE, II.
SAY, mournful Muse, declare thy rising woe;
What heaves thy heart; and whence thy sorrows flow;
Why in thy face such anxious grief appears;
And over thy eye balls swim the speaking tears.
O GEORGE, thy death my flowing numbers mourn,
Thy sacred ashes, and distinguished urn:
Thee every muse, and every grace deplores,
From Thame's banks, to these Atlantic shores;
Each bard, his grief in gliding accents shows,
And fairest eyes distill their crystial dews.
O! were my breast flushed with an equal fire,
Vast as my theme, and strong as my desire!
Then, mighty GEORGE, then should my notes arise,
And spreading music echo round the skies;
Thy name, in tuneful measures lead along,
Should dance, harmonious, through my flowing song;
The raptured muse thy awful form reveal,
Describe thy counsels, and thy actions tell;
Bid dying sounds thy ravished life bemoan,
Or shouting nations hail thee to thy throne;
Each varying scene, with various numbers crowned,
Should earth, and sea, and air, and heaven resound!
LONG e're his Albion triumphed in his reign
His sword glar'd dreadful over the Hungarian plain
Witness, ye troops, through whose wide ranks he ran,
Roused the fierce war, and called the tumult on:
Say, how divinely then his aspect showed,
What conduct shone, what dauntless courage glowed,
When man to man, and smoke opposed to smoke,
Flames flashed at flames, at thunder thunder broke,
When death, indignant, drove his iron car,
Through the dire havoc of the raging war:
Even now, behold! the intrepid Hero flies
To meet the monster with undaunted eyes:
Till smiling victory, and immortal peace,
Hung over his head, and bid the battle cease.
RECORD, O heavenly Muse, the illustrious day
When joyful Britain owned the sovereign sway;
Concealed for ever, lie the acts that stain
The last black months of ANNA's gloomy reign;
When secret treason worked, when justice fled,
And loud destruction threatened over our head:
'Twas then, by heaven ordained, his happy hand,
From ruin rescued the devoted land;
The storm was hushed, the clamorous factions laid,
And peaceful olive spread its wealthy shade.
So when dark clouds hang heavy over the main
And, bellying down, distend with floods of rain;
To heave them on, the winds their forces try,
While they, slow-sailing, labor up the sky;
The thickning volumes spread the heavenly dome,
And as they pass, project a solemn gloom:
Disolving now, a drizling dew distills,
Dampens the vales, and sprinkles round the hills;
Still, gathering strength, the airy sluices lower,
And on the fields, descends a copious shower,
Last, furious grown, down rush the rapid rains,
And pour impetuous, spattering on the plains.
If then the sun breaks out, the shadows fly,
And the gay rainbow arches over the sky.
HAIL, happy ALBION! heavens peculiar care,
See thy Deliverer to thy shoars repair!
Flourish ye fields, ye groves exalt your heads,
Where Thames's current murmurs over the meads:
And thou, AUGUSTA, sparkling in my eyes,
Let thy tall towers, and shinning turrets rise;
Where riches glitter; mirth for ever sings;
And smiling plenty spreads her golden wings;
For thee, Peru her beamy face displays;
For thee the orient shores of Ganges blaze;
A thousand pleasures crown thy flowery plains,
While GEORGE divinely over thy kingdom reigns.
BUT oh! at once the heavenly scenes decay,
And all the gaudy visions fade away.
He dies! -- my Muse, the dismal sound forbear:
In every eye debates the falling tear:
A thousand passions over my bosom roll,
Swell in my heart, and shock my inmost soul.
He dies! -- let nature own the direful blow,
Sigh, all ye winds, with tears, ye rivers, flow,
Let the wide ocean, loud in anguish, roar,
And tides of grief pour plenteous on the shore;
No more the spring shall bloom, or morning rise,
But night eternal wrap the sable skies.
ENOUGH, my Muse, give all thy tears away;
Break, ye dull shades; and rise the rosey day:
Quicken, O Sun, thy chariot dazling-bright,
And over thy flaming empire pour the light:
O Spring, along thy laughing lawns be seen
Fields always fresh, and groves for ever green:
Let Britain's sorrow cease, her joys enlarge,
The First revives within the Second GEORGE.
Hail! mighty Prince, O shining Sovereign hail!
Fain would the Muse lisp her prophetic tale;
In mystic lays, thy future years relate,
And sing the records of unripen'd fate;
Bid Thee, in fame's triumphant chariot ride,
And CAROLINA glitter by thy side.
Fair Princess, Thou! in whose majestic eyes
Dawn heavenly beauties, and immortal joys;
By thee, shall Albion future triumphs own,
And a long race of Hero's grace her throne:
Here, FREDERICK in the bloom of years shall stand;
Here youthful WILLIAM blossom over the land;
Thou ANNA, here, with charms celestial crowned
And all thy heavenly Sisters flame around.
EVEN our far shores confess the big delight,
Where the faint sun rolls down his golden light;
The dancing billows leap along the main,
Proud of the extent of GEORGE's happy reign;
Applauding thunders shake the air around,
Waves shout to waves, and rocks to rocks resound;
Each human breast glows with resistless fire,
And every Angel strikes his sounding lyre.
O live, auspicious PRINCE! live, radiant QUEEN!
Long let your influence guild the glorious scene:
And you, fair Offspring, formed for high command,
Flourish, ye blooming Honors of the land!
But when from the dim courts below you fly,
To the bright regions of the upper sky,
Where trees of life, by living riv'lets team,
Wave their talls heads, and paint the running stream,
May round your heads, crowns flash celestial-bright,
And regal purple change for robes of light;
Taste charms still new, and joys without decay,
While endless years in raptures roll away.

