Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ.



Mr. JOHN BUNYAN. Aetatis suae 60.

Come and Welcome TO Jesus Christ. Or, a Plain and Profitable DISCOURSE On John
VI. Verse xxxvii. SHOWING, The Cause, Truth and Manner of the Coming of a
Sinner to JESUS CHRIST; with his Happy Reception, and Blessed Entertainment.

Written by JOHN BVNYAN, Author of the Pilgrim's Progress.

And they shall come which were ready to Parish,

Isaiah xxvii. 13. The Twelfth Edition.

BOSTON, Reprinted, and are to be sold at the BIBLE in Cornhill. 1728.

COME and WELCOME TO JESUS CHRIST.
JOHN VI. xxxvii. All that the Father gives Me, shall come to Me, and him that
comes to Me, I will in no will wise cast out.


A Little before in this Chapter, you may read. That the Lord Jesus walked on
the Sea, to go to Capernaum, having sent his Disciples before in a Ship, ^ but
the Wind was contrary, by which means the Ship was hindered in her Passage. Now,
about the fourth watch of the Night* Jesus came walking upon the Sea, and
overtok them* at the sight of whom they were afraid,

Note, When Providence are black and terrible to God's People, the Lord Jesus
shows himself to them in a wonderful Manner; which sometimes they can as little
bear, as they can the things that were before terrible to them. They were
afraid of the Wind and Water; they we^e also afraid of their Lord and Savior,
when he appeared to them in that state.

(...) he said, Be not afraid, it is (...).

Note, That the End of the appearing of the Lord Jesus unto his People, (though
the manner of his appearing be never so terrible) is to allay their Fears and
Perplexities.

Then they received him into the Ship, and immediately the Ship was at Land
whither it went.

Note, When Christ is absent from his People, they go on but slowly and with
great difficulty; but when he joineth himself unto them; Oh! how fast they
steer their Course; how soon are they at their Journeys end.

The People now, among whom he last Preached, when they saw that both Jesus was
gone and his Disciples, they also took Shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking
for Jesus. And when they had found him, they wondringly asked him, Rabbi, When
came thou hither? But the Lord Jesus slighting their Complement, answered,
Verily, verily, ye seek me not, because ye saw the Miracles, but because ye did
eat of the Loaves, and were filled.

Note, A People may follow Christ far, for base Ends, as these went after him
beyond Sea for Loaves: A Man's Belly may carry him a great way in Religion;
yea, a Man's Belly will make him venture far for Christ.

Note again, They are not feigning Complements, but gracious Intentions, that
crown the Work in the Eye of Christ: Or thus, It is not the Toil and Business
of Professors, but their Love to him, that makes him approve of them.

Note again, When Men shall look for friendly Entertainment at Christ's Hand,
(if their Hearts be rotten) even then will they mee^ with a Check and Rebuke,
Ye seek me not because ye saw the Miracles, but because ye did eat of the
^oaves and were filled.

Yet observe again, he does not refuse to giv^ (...) these, good Counsel; he
bids them Labou^ (...) Meat that endures to eternal Life. O (...) would Jesus
Christ have even those Professor that come to him with Pretenses only, come to
him sincerely, that they may be saved.

The Text, you will find, is after much more Discourse with, and about this
People; and it is uttered by the Lord Jesus, at the Conclusion of the whole;
and intimates, that since they were Professors in Patience only, and therefore
such as his Soul could not delght in, as such, that he would content himself
with a Remnant that his Father had bestowed upon him. As if he should say, I am
not like to be honored in your Salvation; but the Father has bestowed upon me
a Peeple, and they shall come to me in Truth, and in them will I be satisfied.
The Text before may be called Christ's Repose; in the fulfilling whereof he
rested himself content, after much Labor, and many Sermons spent, as i^ were
in vain. As he says by the Prophet, I have labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for n^ught, and in vain, Isa. 49.4.

But as he says there, My Judgment is with the Lord, and my Work with my God:
So in the Text he says; All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and
him that comes to me, I will in no wise c^^^ out. By these Words therefore,
the Lord Jes^^ comfort himself under the Consideration of the Dissimulation
of some of his Followers. He also thus betook himself to rest under the
Consideration of the little effect that his Ministry ^ad in Capernaum, Corazin
and Bet^sa^da* I thank once, O Father, said he, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
because thou have hid these things from the Wise are Prudent, and have revealed
them to Babes, even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy fight. Mat. 11.25.
Luke 10.31.

The Text, in the general stands of two parts and has special respect to the
Father and the Son; as also to their joint Management of the Salvation of the
People. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and he that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out.

The first part of the Text (as is evident) respects the Father, and his
Gift; the other part, the Son, and the Reception of his Gift.

First, For the Gift of the Father, there is this to be Considered; to wit,

The Gift it self; and that is a Gift of certain Persons to the Son. The Father
gives, and that Gift shall come: And him that comes: The Gift then is of
Persons; The Father gives Persons to Jesus Christ.

Secondly Next you have the Son's Reception of this Gift, and that it shows
it self in these Particulars.

1. In the hearty Acknowledgment of it to be a Gift: The Father gives me.

2. In his Resolution to bring them to Himself; All that the Father gives Me,
shall come to Me.

3. And in his determining, that not any thing shall make him dislike them in
their coming: And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

These things might be spoken to at large, as they are in this Method presented
to view; but I shall choose to speak to these Words;

1. By way of Explication.

2. By way of Observation.

First, By way of Explication; ( All) that the Father gives me. This Word All
is often used in Scripture, and is to be taken more largely, or more strictly,
even as the Truth or Argument, for the sake of which it is made use for, will
bear: Wherefore, that we may the better understand the mind of Christ in the
use of i^ here, we must consider, that it is limited and restrained only to
those that shall be saved, to wit, to those that shall come to Christ, even to
thos^ whom he will in no wise cast out. Thus also the Words All Israel is
sometimes to be taken; (though sometimes it is taken for the whole Family of
Jacob) And so All Israel shall be saved. Romans 11. By All Israel here he
intends not All of Israel in the largest sense; for they are not All Isra^^
which are of Israel, neither because they are (...) the Seed of Abraham, are
they all Children; B^ in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; that is, they wh^^ are
the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of God, but the Children
of the Promise are counted for the Seed. Romans 9 6, 7,

The word ( All) therefore, must be limited enlarged, as the Truth and
Argument, for the sak^ of which it is used, will bear; else we shall abuse
Scriptures, and Readers, and our Selves, and All. And I, if I be lifted up from
the Earth, sai^ Christ, will draw All Men after Me. John 12.3^ Can any Man
imagine that by all, in this place he should mean all and every individual Man
in the World; and that not rather that all i^ consonant to the scope of the
Place? And if b^ being lift up from the Earth, he means as it should seem his
being taken up into Heaven; and if, by drawing all Men after Him, he meant a
drawing them into that Place of Glory: then must be mean by all Men, those and
only those that shall in Truth be eternally Saved from the Wrath to come: For
God has concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all,
(...) 11.52. Hence again you have all and all, two alls; but yet a great
desparity between the (...) made mention of in the first place, and that all
made mention of in the second. Those intended in this Text are the Jews, even
all of them, by the S^^^ (all) that you find in the Words. The second all does
also intend the same People; but yet only so many of them as God will have
Mercy upon. He has concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy
upon all. The all also in the Text is likewise to be limited and restrained to
the Saved, and to them only. But again.

The Word ( gives) or has given, must be restrained after the same manner, to
the same limited Number. All that the Father giventh Me; ^o^ all that are
seven. If you take the Gift of (...) Father to the Son in the largest sense;
for ^ that sense, there are many given to him, ^ot shall never come unto him;
yea, many we given unto him, that he will cast out. I ^all therefore first show
you the Truth of ^is, and then in what sense the Gift of the Text must be taken.

First, T^^^ all things are given to Christ, if o^ take the Gift of the Father
to him in the ^rgest sense, cannot be intended in the Text, ^ evident.

1. Because then all the Men, yea, all the things in the World must be saved
All things, Faith he, are delivered unto me by the Father, Mat. 11.17. This I
think, no rational Man in the World will conclude. Therefore the Gif^^^^ended
in the T^^s, must be restrained ^o some to a Gift that is given by way of
speciality by the Father to the Son.

2. It must not be taken for all that, in any sense, are given by the Father to
him; because the Father has given some, yea, many to him to be dashed in
pieces by him. Ask of me said the Father to him, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy
Possession. But what must be done with them? Must he save them all? No, Thou
shall break them with a rod of Iron; thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potter's Vessel, Psalm. 2. This Method he uses not with them that he saves by
his Grace, but with those that Himself and Saints shall rule over in Justice
and Severity, Rev 2.26, 27. Yet, as you see, they are given to him. Therefore
the Gift intended in the Text, must be restrained to some; to a Gift that is
given by way of specialty by the Father to the Son.

In Psalm 18 He says plainly, that some are given to him, that he might destroy
them; Thou have given me the Necks of mine Enemies, that I might destroy them
that hate me, ver. 40. These therefore cannot be of the Number of those that
are said to be given in the Text; for those, even all of them, shall come to
him, and he will in no wise cast them out.

3. Some are given to Christ, that he by them might bring about some of his
high and deep Designs in the World. Thus Judas was given to Christ, viz That by
him, even as he was determined before, he might bring about his Death, and so
the Salvation of his Elect by his Blood. Yea, and Judas must so manage this
Business, as that he may lose himself for ever in bringing it so to pass:
Therefore the Lord Jesus, even in his losing of Judas, applies himself to the
Judgment of his Father, if he had not in that thing done that which was right,
even in ^^^^ring Judas so to bring about his Masters D^^ch, as that he might by
so doing bring about his own eternal Damnation.

Those said he, that thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is lost but
the Son of Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, John 17.12. Let us
then grant that Judas was given to Christ, but not as others are given to him;
nor of those made mention of in the Text; for then he should have failed to
have been so received by Christ, and kept to eternal Life. Indeed he was given
to Christ, but he was given to him to lose him in the way that I have mentioned
before; he was given to Christ, that he by him might bring about his own death,
as was before determined, and that in the overthrow of him that did it. Yea, he
must bring about his own Death, as was before determined; and that in the
overthrow of him that did it: Yea, he must bring about his Dying for us, in the
loss of the Instrument that betrayed him; that he might even fulfill the
Scripture in his Destruction, as well as in the Salvation of the rest. And none
of them is lost, but the Son of Perdi^^on* that the Scripture might be
fulfilled.

The Gift therefore in the Text must not be taken in the largest Sense, but
even as the Words will bear, viz. For such a Gift as he accepts, and
promises to be an effectual means of Eternal Salvation to. All that the Father
gives Me, shall come to Me; and him that comes to Me, I will in no wise cast
out. Mark! They shall come that are in special given to Me; and they shall by
no means be rejected; For this is the Substance of the Text.

Those therefore intended, as the Gift in the Text, are those that are given by
Covenant to the Son; those that in other places are called the Elect, the
Chosen, and the Sheep, and the Children of the Promise, etc.

These be they that the Father has given to Christ to keep them; those that
Christ has promised eternal Life unto; those to whom he has given his Word,
and that he will have with him in hi^ Kingdom, to behold his Glory.

This is the Wall of the Faather that has sent me, that of those that he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last Day, and I
give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never Perish; neither shall any man
pluck them out of my Hand. My Father that gave them me, is greater than all;
and no Man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand. As thou have given him
power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as many as thou have
given him. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
Word: I Pray for them: I Pray not for the World, but for those that thou have
given me, for they are thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I
am Glorified in them.

Keep through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me, that they may be
one as we are Father, I will that those wh^r^ thou have given me* may be with
me where I am; that they may be, hold my Glory which thou have given me; for
thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World, Joh. 6.39 Chap. 10 28.
Chap. 17.26 9 10 24.

All these Sentences are of the same in port with the Text; and the Alls and
Manys. These They, etc in these their several Sayings of Christ, are the same
with all the Given in the Text. All that the Father gives.

So that (as I said before) the Word all, as also other Words, must not be
taken in such sort as our foolish Fancies, or groundless. Opinions will prompt
us to; but do admit of an Enlargement, or Restriction, according to the true
Meaning and Intent of the Text. We must therefore diligently consult the
meaning of the Text, by comparing it with other the Sayings of God; so shall we
be better able to find out the Mind of the Lord in the Word which he has given
us to know it by.

As that the (Father) gives.

By this word ( Father) Christ describes the Person giving; by which we may
learn several useful things: 1. That the Lord God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is concerned with the Son, in the Salvation of his People. True, his
Acts, as to our Salvation, are diverse from those of the Son; he was not
capable of doing that, or those things for us, as did the Son; he Died not, ^e
spilt not his Blood for our Redemption, as the Son; but yet he has a Hand, a
great Hand in our Salvation too. As Christ says, The F^ther himself loves
you, and his love is manifest in choosing of us, in giving us to his Son; yea,
and in giving his Son also to be a Ransom for us. Hence he is called, The
Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comforts* For here even the Father has
himself found out and made way for his Grace to come to us, th^^ the Sides and
the Heart's Blood of his well beloved Son, Col. 1.12. The Father therefore is
to be remembered and adored, as one having a chief Hand in the Salvation of
Sinners: we ought to give Thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; for the Father sent the
Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 John 4.14. Col. 1.2. As also we see in
the Text, the Father gives the Sinner to save him.

Secondly, Christ Jesus the Lord, by this word Father, would familiarize this
Giver to us; Naturally the Name of God is dreadful to us, especially when he is
discovered to us by these Names that declare his Justice, Holiness, Power, and
Glory: But now this word Father, is a familiar Word, it frighteth not the
Sinner, but rather inclines his Heart to Love, and be pleased with the
Remembrance of him Hence Christ also when he would have us to pray with godly
Boldness, puts this word Father into our Mouths; saying. Our Father which art
in Heaven; concluding thereby, that by the Familiarity that by such a Word is
intimated, the Children of God may take more Boldness to pray for, and to ask
great Things. I my self have often found, that when I can say, but this word
Father it does me more good, than when I call him by any other Scripture Name.
It Is worth your noting, that to call God by his Relative Title, was rare among
the Saints in Old Testament Times; seldom do you find him called by this Name;
no sometimes not in three or four Books; but now in New Testament Times, he is
called by no Name so often as this, both by the Lord Jesus himself, and by the
Apostles afterward. Indeed the Lord Jesus was the first that made this Name
common among the Sun's, and that taught them both in their Discourses, their
Prayers, and in their Writings, so much to use it; it being more pleasing to,
and discovering more plainly our Interest in God, than any other Expression;
for by this one Name we are made to understand, the all our Mercies are the
Offspring of God, and that we also that are called, are his Children by
Adoption.

All that the Father (gives)

This Word ( gives) is out of Christ's Ordinary Dialect; and seems to
intimate at the first sound, as if the Father's Gift to the Son was not an Act
that is past, but one that is present and continuing; when indeed this Gift was
bestowed upon Christ, when the Covenant, the eternal Covenant was made between
them before all Worlds. Wherefore in those other places, when this Gift is
mentioned, it is still spoken of as an Act that is pass: As, All that he has
given me? To as many as thou have given me: Thou gave them me, and these
which thou have given me. Therefore of necessity this must be the first and
chief sense of the T^xt. I mean of this (gives) otherwise the Doctrine of
Election, and of the eternal Covenant which was made between the Father and the
Son (in which Covenant this Gift of the Father is most certainly comprised)
will be sh^ken, or at leastwise questionable by erroneous and wicked Men: For
they may say, That the Father gave not all those to Christ that shall be saved
before the World was made; or that this Act of giving is an Act of Continuation.

But again, this word (gives) is not to be rejected; for it has its proper
Use, and may signify to us;

First, That though the Act of Giving among Men does admit of the Time past, or
the Time to come, and is to be spoken of with Reference to such Time; yet with
God it is not so. Things past, or things to come, are always present with God,
and with his Son Jesus Christ: He calls things that are not, (that is to us)
as though they were. And again, Known unto God are all his Works from the
Foundation of the World. All things to God are present, and so the Gift of the
Father to the Son, although to us, as is manifest by the Word, it is an Act
that is past, Romans 4.17. Acts 15.10.

Secondly, Christ may express himself thus, to show that the Father has not
only given him this Portion in the Lump, before the World was; but that those
he had so given, he will give him again, that he will bring them to him at the
time of their Conversion; for the Father brings them to Christ, John 6.44.

As it is said, She shall be brought unto the King in Raiment of Needle Work;
that is, in the Righteousness of Christ; For it is God that imputes that to
those that are saved, Psalm. 45.14. 1 Cor. 1.

A Man gives his Daughter to such a Man first in order to Marriage, and this
respects the time past, and he gives her again at the Day appointed in
Marriage: And in this last Sense, perhaps the Text may have a meaning; That is,
That all that the Father has (before the World was) given to Jesus Christ, he
gives them them again to him, in the Day of their Espousals.

Things that are given among Men are oft-times, best at first, to wit, when
they are new; and the reason is* because all earthly Things wax o^d; but with
Christ it is not so: This Gift of the Father is not old nor deformed, and
unpleasant in his Eyes; and therefore to him it is always new. When the Lord
spoke of giving the Land of Canaan to the Israelites, he says not that he had
give, or would give it them ^ but thus, The Lord thy God gives thee this good
Land, Deuteronomy. 9 6. Not but that he had given it to them while they were in the
Loins of their Fathers, Hundreds of Years before. Yet he says now, he gives
it to them: as if they were now also in the very Act of taking Possession, when
as yet they were on the other side Jordan. What then should be the meaning?
Why, I take it to be this: That the Land should be to them always as new, as
new; as if they were taking Possession thereof but now. And so is the Gift of
the Father mentioned in the Text, to the Son; it is always new, as if it were
always new.

All that the Father gives (Me)

In these Words you find mention made of Two Persons, the Father and the Son;
the Father giving, and the Son receiving, or accepting of this Gift. This then
in the first place, clearly demonstrateth, That the Father and the Son, though
they, with the Holy Ghost are One and the same Eternal God; yet as their
Personality are distinct. The Father is One, the Son is One, and the Holy
Spirit as One. But because there is in this Text mention made but of Two of the
Three, therefore ^ word about these Two The Giver and Receiver cannot be the
same Person in a proper sense, in the same Act of Giving and Receiving He that
gives, gives not to himself, but to another; the Father gives no^ not to the
Father, to w^t, to himself; but to the Son: So when the Father gives
Commandment, he gives it not to himself, but to another; as Christ says, He
that gives me Commandment, John 12.49 So again, I am one that bears Witness
of my self and the Father that sent me bears Witness of me, John 10 18.

Further, Here is something implied that is not expressed, to wit, that the
Father has not given all Men to Christ; that is, in the sense as is intended
in the Text; though in a larger, as was before, He has given him every one of
them; for then all should be saved: He has therefore disposed of some another
way. He gives some up to Idolatry; he gives some up to Uncleanness, to vile
Affections, and to a Reprobate Mind. Now these he disposes of in his Anger,
for their Destruction; ( Acts 3.42. Romans 1.24.26.28) That they may reap the
Fruits of their Doings, and be filled with the Reward of their own Ways. But
neithet has he thus disposed of all Men; he has even of Mercy reserved some
from these Judgments, and those are they that he will pardon; as he says, For
I will pardon them whom I reserve, Jer. 50.20. Now these he has given to Jesus
Christ by Will as a Legacy and Portion. Hence the Lord Jesus says, This is the
Father's Will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but should raise is up again at the last Day, John 36 29.

The Father therefore, in giving of them to him to save them, must needs
declare unto us these following Things:

1. That he is able to answer this Design of God, viz. To save them to the
uttermost Sin, the uttermost Temptation, etc. Heb. 7.25. Hence he is said to
lay help upon one that is mighty mighty to save: And hence it is again, That
God did even of old promise to send his People a Savior, a great one, Psalm.
9.16. Isa 63 1. To save is a great Work, and calls for Almightiness in the
Undertaker: Hence he is called, The mighty God, the wonderful Counsell^r, etc.
Sin is strong, Satan is also strong, Death and the Grave are strong, and so is
the Curse of the Law; therefore it follows, that this Jesus must needs be by
God the Father accounted Almighty, in that he has given his Elect to him to
save them, and deliver them from these, and that an despite of all their Force
and Power.

And he gave us Testimony of this his Might, when he was employed in that part
of our Deliverance, that called for a Declaration of it. He abolished Death; he
destroyed him that had the Power of Death; he was the Destruction of the Grave;
he has finished Sin, and made an end of it, as to its damning Effects upon the
Persons that the Father has given him; he has vanquished the Curse of the
Law, nailed it to his Cross, triumphed over them upon his Cross, and made a
show of these things openly, 2 Timothy 1 10. Heb 2 14 15 Hos 13.14. Dan 9 24. Gal.
^ 13 Co^. ^ 15, 19 Yea, and even now, as a sign of his Triumph and Conquest. He
is alive from the Dead, and has the Keys of Hell and Death on his own keeping.
Rev. 1.18.

The Father's giving of them to him to save them, declares unto us, that he is,
and will be faithful in his Office of a Mediator* and that threfore they shall
be secured from the Fruit and Wages of their Sins, which is eternal Damnation,
by his faithful Execution of it. And indeed it is said, even by the Holy Ghost
himself, That he is faithful to him that appointed him, that is to this Work of
saving those that the Father has given him for that purpose; as Moses was
faithful in all his House; yea, and more faithful too: for Moses was faithful
in God's House, but as a Servant; but Christ as a Son, over his own House, Heb
3.

And therefore this Man is counted worthy of more Glory than Moses, even upon
this account, because more faithful than he, as well as because of the Dignity
of his Person. Therefore in him and in his Truth and Faithfulness, God rested
well pleased, and has put all the Government of his People upon his shoulders.
Knowing that nothing shall be wanting in him, that may any way perfect this
Design. And of this He, to wit, the Son has already given a proof; for when
the time was come, that his Blood was, by Divine Justice required for their
Redemption, Washing and Cleansing, He as freely poured out of his Heart, as if
it had been Water out of a Vessel; not sticking to part with his own Life, that
the Life which was laid up for his People in Heaven, might not fail to be
bestowed upon them And upon this Account (as well as upon any other) it is that
God calls him his Righteous Servant, Isa. 53. for his Righteousness could
never have been complete, if he had not been to the uttermost faithful to the
Work he undertook: It is also, because he is faithful and true, that in
Righteousness he does judge, and make Work for his People's Deliverance He will
faithfully perform this trust reposed in him: The Father knows this, and has
therefore given his Elect, unto him.

Thirdly. The Father's giving of them to His to save them, declares that he is,
and will be gentle and patient toward them, under all the^^ Provocations and
Miscarriages. It is not to ^ imagined the Trials and Provocations that t^^ Son
of God has all along had with these People, that have been given to him that
save them: Indeed he is said to be a tried Stone for He has been tried, not
only by the Devil, Guilt of Sin, Death, and the Curse of the Law, but also by
his People's Ignorance, Unruliness, falls into Sin, and declining to Errors in
Life and Doctrine. Were we but capable of seeing how the Lord Jesus has been
Tried, even by his People, ever since there was one of them in the World, we
should be amazed at his patience and gentle Carriages to them. It is said
indeed, The Lord is very Pitiful, slow to Anger, and and of great Mercy: And
indeed if He had not been so, He could never have endured their Manners as he
has done* from Adam hitherto. Therefore is his Pity and Bowels toward his
Church, preferred above the Pity and Bowels of a Mother toward her Child. Can
a Wom^^ forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassi^n on the
Son of her Womb? Yea, they may forget; yet I will not forget thee, siaith the
Lord, Isa. 49 15

God did once give Moses, as Christ's Servant, an Handful of his People, to
carry them in his Bosom, but no farther than from Egypt to Canaan; and this
Moses, as it is said of him (...) Holy Ghost, was the merkest Man that was then
to be f^und on the Earth; yea, and he loved the People at a very great R^^^,
yet neither would his Meckness nor Love hold out in this Work; he failed and
grew passionate, even to provoking his God to Anger under this Work. And Moses
said unto the Lord, Wherefore have thou Afflicted thy Servant? But what was the
Affliction? Why the Lord had said unto him, Carry this People in thy B^som, as
a musing Father bears the sucking Child, unto the Land that he swear unto
their Fathers. And how then? Not I, says Moses; I am not able to bear all this
People, because it is too heavy for me: If thou deal thus with me, kill me, I
pray thee, out of hand, and let me not see my wretchedness, Number. ^1 11, 12, 13,
14. God gave them Moses, to carry them in his Bosom, that he might show
gentlen^ss and patience toward them, under all the Provocations wherewith they
would provoke him from that time, till he had brought them to their Land: But
he failed in the work, he could nor exercise it, because he not the sufficiency
of Patience toward them: But now it is said of the Person speaking in the
Text. That he shall gather his Lambs with his Arms; shall carry them in his
Bosom; and shall gently lead them that are with young. Isa. 40 10 11.
Intimating, that this was one of the Qual^fications that God looked for, and
knew was in him, when he gave his E^ect to him to save them.

Fourthly. The Father giving of him to save them; declares, that he has a
S^fficiency of Wisdom, to wage with all those D^ffic^lties that would attend
him in bringing of his Sons and Daughters unto Glory, 1 Cor. 1 30. He has made
him to us to be Wisdom; yea, he is called Wisdom it self, And God says
moreover, That he shall deal prudently, Isa. 52.13. And indeed, he that shall
take upon him to be the Savior of the People, had need to be wise, because
their Adversaries are subtle above any. Here they are to encounter with the
Serpent, who for his Subtilty, outwitted our Father and Mother, when their
Wisdom was at highest, Genesis 3. But if we talk of Wisdom, our Jesus is wise,
Wiser than Solomon, Wiser than all Men, Wiser than all Angels; He is even the
Wisdom of God. Christ the Wisdom of God, (Col. 1.1.) And hence it is He turns
Sins, Temptations, Perscutions, Falls, and all things for good unto his People,
( Rom 8

Now these things thus concluded on, do show us also the great and wonderful
Love of the Father, in that He should chose out one, every way so well prepared
for the Work of Man's Salvation.

Here indeed perceive we the Love of God. Hiram gathered, That God loved
Israel* because he had given them such a King as Solomon, (2 Chronicles. 2.11.) But
how much more may we behold the Love that God has bestowed upon us, in that he
has given us to his Son, and also his Son for us.

All that the Father gives me (shall come.)

In these last words, there is closely inserted, an Answer unto the Father's
End, in giving of his Elect to Jesus Christ. The Father's End was, that they
might come to him, and be saved by him; and that says the Son, shall be done;
neither Sin nor Satan, neither Flesh and World, neither Wisdom nor Folly, shall
hinder their coming to me. They shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out.

Here therefore the Lord Jesus positively determines, to put forth such a
sufficiency of all Grace, as shall effectually perform his Promise* They shall
come: that is, he will cause them to come, by infusing of an effectual Blessing
in to all the means that shall be used to that end. As was said to the evil
Spirit, that was seen to persuade Ahab to go and fall a^ Ramoth G^lead; Go,
thou shall persuade him, and prevail also? go forth, and do so, 1 Kings 22.22.
So will Jesus Christ say, to the means than shall be used, for the bringing of
those to him that the Father has given him. I say, he will bless it
effectually to this very end* it shall persuade them, and shall prevail also.
Else, as I said, the Father's end would be frustrate: For the Father's Will is,
that, of all that he has given him, he should lose nothing, but should raise
it up at the last Day, in order next unto himself, Christ the first Fruits,
afterward those that are his, at his Coming, (1 Cor. 15.) But this cannot be
done, if there should fail to be a Work of Grace effectually wrought, though
but in any one of them. But this shall not fail to be wrought in any one of
them. But this shall not fail to be wrought in them, even in all that the
Father has given him to save. All that the Father has given me shall come to
me, etc. But to speak more distinctly to the Words, They shall come; Two things
I should show you from these Words.

First, What it is to come to Christ.

Secondly, What force there is in this Promise, to make them come to him.

First, I would show you what it is to come to Christ. This word Come, must be
understood Spiritually, not Carnally; for many came to him Carnally, or Bodily,
that had no saving Advantage by him: Multitudes did thus come unto him in the
days of his flesh, yea, innumerable Companies. There is also at this day a
formal Customary coming to his Ordinances, and ways of Worship, which avails
not any thing; but with them I shall not now meddle; for they are net intended
in the Text. The Coming then intended in the Text, is to be understood of the
Coming of the Mind to him, even the moving of the Heart toward him, I say, the
moving of the Heart toward him, from a sound sense of the absolute want that a
Man has of Him for his Justification and Salvation.

This Description of Coming to Christ, divides it self into Two Heads.

First, That Coming to Christ, is a moving (...) the Mind toward Him.

Secondly, That it is a moving of the Min^ toward Him, from a sound Sense of
the absolute want that a Man has of Him for his Justification and Salvation.

To speak to the first, That is a moving o^ the Mind toward him. This is
evident, because Coming hither or thither, if it be voluntary, is by an Act of
the Mind or Will; (...) Coming to Christ is, through the inclining* the Will,
Thy People shall be willing, Psalm. 1^ ^. This willingness of heart is it which
se^ the Mind a moving after, or toward Christ by the moving of her Bowels. My
Belo^^ put (...) his Hand by the Hole of the Door, and (...) Bowels were moved
for him. Song 4 5. My Bo^els; the Passion of my Mind and Affection^ which
Passions of the Affections are expe^^ by the yearning and sounding of the
Bo^els, the yearning or passionate working ^ them, the sounding of them, or
their makin^ noise for me, Genesis 43 30. 1 Kings 3 26. Isa 16 ^

This then is the coming to Christ, even a moving toward him with the Mind.
And it shall come to pass, that every thing that lives, which moves
whithersoever the Water shall come, shall live, Ezekiel 47.9.

The Water in this Text, is the Grace of God in the Doctrine of it; the living
things are the children of Men, to whom the Grace of God, by the Gospel is
preached. Now, says he, every living thing which moves whithersoever the
Waters shall come, shall live. And see how this Word (moves) is expounded by
Christ himself, in the Book of the Revelations; the Spirit and the Bride say,
Come, and let him that hears say come, and let him that is athirst, Come; and
whosoever will, that is willing let him take the Water of Life freely, R^ 22.17.

So that to move in thy Mind and Will after Christ, is to be coming to him.
There are many poor Souls that are coming to Christ, that yet cannot tell how
to believe it, because they think that coming to him is some strange and
wonderful thing, and indeed so it is. But I mean, they overlook the Inclination
of these Will, the moving of their Mind, and the sounding of these Bowels after
him; and count these none of this strange and wonderful thing; when indeed it
is a work of greatest wonder in this World, to see a Man who was sometimes dead
in Sin, poss^ssed of the Devil, an Enemy to Christ, and to all things
spiritually good: I say, to see this Man moving with his mind after the Lord
Jesus Christ, is one of the highest Wonders in the World.

Secondly, It is a moving of the mind toward him, from a sound Sense of the
absolute want that a Man has of him for his Justification and Salvation Indeed
without this Sense of a lost Condition without him, there will be no moving of
the mind toward him: A moving of their Mouth there may be; With their mouth
they show much Love, Ezekiel 33.31. Such a People as this will come as the true
People comes; that is, in show and outward Appearance; and they will sit
before God's Ministers, as his People sit before them; and they will hear his
Words too, but they will not do them; that is, will not come inwardly with
their Minds; For with their Mouth they show much Love, but their Heart (or
Mind) goes after their Covetousness. Now all this is, because they want an
effectual sense of the Misery of their State by Nature; for not till they have
that, will they in their Mind move oftener to him. Therefore thus it is said
concerning the true Comers. At that Day the Trumpet shall be blown, and they
shall come that were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts
of the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in his holy Mountain at
Jerusalem, Isa. 17.13. They are then, as you see, the Outcasts, as those that
are ready to perish: that have their Minds effectually moved to come to Jesus
Christ. This sense of things was that which made the Three Thousand come; that
made Saul come; that made the Go^ler come; and that indeed makes all others
come, that come effectually, Acts 21.8.16.

Of the true coming to Christ, the three Lepers were a famous Semblance, of
whom you read, Kings 7 3, etc. The Famine in those days was sore in the Land,
there was no Bread for the People, and as for that Sustenance tha^ was, which
was Asses Fresh and Doves Dung, that was only in Samaria; and of these the
Lepers had no share, for they were thrust without the City. Well now they sat
in the Gate of the City, and Hunger was, as I may say, making his last Meal of
them; and being therefore half dead already, what do they think of doing? Why,
first they display the dismal Colors of Death before each others Faces, and
then resolve what to do, saying, If we say we will go into the City, then the
Famine is in the City, and we shall dye there; if we sit still here, we dye
also; now therefore come, let us fall into the Host of the Syrians; if they
save us alive we shall live; if they kill us, we shall but dye Here now was
Necessity at Work, and this Necessity drove them to go thither for Life,
whither else they would never have gone for it. Thus it is with them that in
truth come to Jesus Christ; Death is before them, they see it and feel it; he
is feeding upon them, and will eat them quite up if they come not to Jesus
Christ; and therefore they come even of Necessity, being forced thereto by that
sense they have of their being utterly and everlastingly undone, if they find
not safety in him.

These are they that will come; indeed these are they that are invited to come.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,
Mat. 11.28

Take two or three things to make this more plain; to wit, that coming to
Christ flows from a deep Sense of the absolute need that a Man has of him as
before.

1. They shall come with weeping and with Supplication will I lead them; I will
cause them to walk by the Rivers of Waters, in a plain way, wherein they shall
not stumble, Jer 31.9, Mind it! They come with weeping and Supplication; they
come with Prayers and Tear^ Now Prayers and Tears are the effects of ^e ^ig^^
Sense of the Need of Mercy. Thus a sensele^^ Sinner cannot come, he cannot
pray, he cannon cry, he cannot come sensible of that he see not, nor feels. In
those days, and at that time the Children of Israel shall come; they and the
Child of Judah together, going and weeping ^ they shall seek the Lord their
God; they shall ask the way to Zion, with their Faces thitherward, saying ^
Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord on a perpetual Covenant that shall
not be forgotten, Jer 50.4.

Secondly, This coming to Christ, it is called ^ Running to him; as flying to
him; a flying (...) him from the Wrath to come. By all which Terms, is set
forth the sense of the Man th^^ comes, to wit, That he is affected with the
sens^ of his Sins, and the Death due thereto; that he is sensible that the
avenger of Blood pursue^ him, and that therefore he is cut off, if he makes not
speed to the Son of God for Life Mat. 3.7. Psalm. 143 9 Flying is the last Work
o^ a Man in Danger, all that are in danger, do not ^^y; no, not all that see
themselves in danger; flying is the last work of a man in danger; all that hear
of danger will not fly. Men will consider, if there be no other way to escape
before they fly. Therefore, as I said, flying is the last thing. When all
Refuge fails, and a Man is made to see that there is nothing left him (...)
Sin, Death and Damnation, unless he flies (...) Christ for Life, then he flies,
and not till them

Thirdly, That the true Coming is from a sen^^ of an absolute need of Jesus
Christ to save, (...) i^ (...) the outcry that is made by the ^ to come, even
as they are coming to him, Mat. 14.30. Acts 2.37. Acts 16.30. Lord, save, or I
perish. Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
and the like. This Language does sufficiently discover, that the truly coming
Souls, are Souls sensible of their need of Salvation by Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, It is yet farther evident, by these few things that follow: It is
said that such are Pricked in their Hearts, that is, with the Sentence of Death
by the Law; and the least prick in the Heart kills a Man. Acts 2.37. Such are
said, as I said before, to weep, to tremble, and to be astonished in themselves
at the evident and unavoidable Danger that attends them, unless they fly to
Jesus Christ* A^ts 9.16.

Fifthly, Coming to Christ is attended with an honest and sincere forsaking all
for him. If any Man comes unto me, and hates not his Father, and Mother, and
Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he
cannot ^e my Disciple; and whosoever* does not bear his Cross, and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14 26, 27.

By these and the like Expressions else where, Christ describes the true
Comer, or the Man that indeed is coming to him: He is one that that cast^^h off
all, he hates all things that would stand in his Way to hinder his coming to
Je^us Christ. There* are a great many pretended ^omers to Jesus Christ in the
World; and they ^re much like to that Man that you read of in Mat. 21.30. that
said to this Father bidding, I go Sir, and went not. I say there are a great
many such Comers to Jesus Christ; they say when Christ calls by his Gospel, I
come Sir; but still they abide by their Pleasure and carnal Delights They come
not at all, only they give him a courtly Compliment; but he takes notice of it,
and well not let it pass for more than a Lie. He said, I go Sir, and went not;
He Dissembled and Lied. Take heed of this you tha^ flatter your selves with
your own Deceivings* Words will not do with Jesus Christ: Coming is coming, and
nothing else will go for Coming with him.

Before I speak to the other Head, I shall answer some Objections that usually
lie in the Way of those that in truth are coming to Jesus Christ.

Object. 1. Though I cannot deny but my mind suit after Christ, and that too as
being moved thereto from a sight and consideration of my lost Condition, (for ^
see without Him I perish) yet I fear my ends an^ not right in coming to him.

Quest. Why, what is thine End in coming to Christ?

Answ. My End is, that I might have Life, and be saved by Jesus Christ.

This is the Objection. Well let me tell thee, that to come to Christ for Life,
and to be saved, although at present thou have no other end, is a lawful and
good coming to Jesus Christ. This is evident, because Christ propounds Life
(...) the only Argument to prevail with Sinners t^ come to him, and so also
blames the^ because they come not to him for Life. And (...) will not come to
me that ye might have Life, Joh. 5 3. Besides there are many other Scriptures.
whereby he allureth Sinners to come to him, in which he propounds nothing to
them but their safety. As, he that believes in him, shall not perish; he that
believes is passed from Death to Life. He that believes shall be saved. He
that believes on him, is not condemned. And believing and coming are all one.
So that you see to come to Christ for Life, is a lawful coming, and good.

1. In that he believes that he alone has made Atonement for Sin, Romans 2.

And let me add over and above, that for a Man to come to Christ for Life, though
he come to him for nothing else but Life, is to give much Honor to Him.

First, He honors the Word of Christ, and consents to the Truth of it; and
that in these two general Heads.

1. He consents to the truth of all those Sayings that testify that Sin is
most abominable in it self, dishonorable to God* and damnable to the Soul of
man For thus says ^he Man that comes to Jesus Christ, Jer. 44.4. Romans 2.23.
Chap. 6.23. 2 These. 2.12.

2. In that he believes, as the Word has said, that there is in the World's
best things, Righteousness and all, nothing but Death and Damnation; for so
also says the Man that ^omes to Jesus Christ for Life, To. 7.24, 25. chap. ^
2.3. 2 Cor. 6 7, 8.

Secondly, He honors Christ's Person, in that he believes that there is
Life in him. and that he is able to ^ave him from Death, Hell, ^he Devil and
Damnation; for unless a Man ^elieve this, he will not come to Christ for ^^fe.
Heb. 7 24, 25.

Thirdly, He honors him, in that he be^^^veth that he is Authorized of the
Father, ^ give Life to those that come to him for ^ Joh. 5.11, 12. chap. 17.1,
2, 3.

Fourthly, He honors the Priesthood ^ Jesus Christ.

2. In that he believes that Christ has n^ Power to save from Sin, by the
Sacrifice tha^ has offered for it, than has all the Law, ^^vils, Death, or
Sin to condemn. He that ^^lieves not this, will not come to Jesus C^ for Life,
Acts 13 38. Heb. 2 14, 15 Rev 1.17 18

Thirdly, In that h^ believes, that Christ acc^^ing to his Office, will be most
faithful and m^^ciful in the Discharge of his Office. This (...) be included in
the faith of him that comes ^ life to Jesus Christ, 1 John 2.1, ^ 3. Heb. 2.17,
1^

Fourthly, Farther, he that comes to J^ Christ for life, takes part with him
against ^ and against the ragged and unperfect Righteous^ of the World; yea,
and against false Christ's, ^ damnable Errors, that set themselves against ^
Worthiness of his Merits and Sufficiency: The evident, for that such a Soul
singleth Christ ^ from them all, as the only One that can sav^

Fifthly, Therefore, as Noah at Gods Comma^ thou preparedst this Ark for the
saving of ^ self, by the which also thou condemnest ^ World, and art become
Heir of the Righte^^^ness, which is by Faith, Heb. 11.17. Wh^^^fore, coming
Sinner, be content, he that co^^ to Jesus Christ, believes too that he is will
to show Mercy too, and have Compassion t^ him (though unworthy) that comes to
him life: And therefore thy Soul lies not only ^^der a special Invitation to
come, but under Promise too, of being accepted and forgiv^ Mat. 11.28,

All these particular Parts and Qualitie^ Faith are in that Soul that comes to
J^ ^^^^st For Life, as is evident to any dif^^^^nt Judgment.

^or, will he that believes not the Testimony Christ, concerning the Baseness
of Sin, and the ^^fficiency of the Righteousness of the world, ^e to Christ for
Life? No.

^e that believes not the Testimony of the ^rd, comes not. He that believes
that there ^ife any where else, comes not He that ques^^^^s whether the Father
has given Christ ^ver to forgive, comes not: He that thinks ^ there is more
in Sin, in the Law, in Death, ^he Devil to destroy than there is in Christ to
^e, comes not. He also that Questions his faith^ management of his Priesthood,
for the Sal^^^ion of Sinners, comes not.

Thou then that art indeed the coming Sin^^^, believe all this? True, perhaps
thou do ^ believe with that full Assurance, nor ^ thou leisure to take notice
of thy Faith as ^hese distinct Acts of it; but yet all this Faith (...) him
coming to Christ for Life. And the ^th that thus works, is the Faith of the
best ^ purest kind: Because this Man comes alone ^ Sinner, and as seeing that
life is to be had on^ in Jesus Christ.

Before I conclude my Answer to this Objection ^e into thy Consideration these
Two Things.

First, That the Cities of Refuge were erected ^ those that were dead in the
Law, and that yet (...) live by Grace, even for those that were (...) hither
for Life from the Avenger of Blood (...) pursues after them. And it is worth
your ^ing, that those that were upon their flight ^ther* are in a peculiar
manner, called the Peo^^^ of God. Cast ye up, cast ye up, says God, prepare ye
the way: Take up the stu^bling-block out of the way of my people Isa. 57.14
This is meant of preparing the (...) to the City of Refuge, that the Slayers
mi^^ escape thither; which flying Slayers are he by way of specialty called the
People of God even those of them that escaped thither for Lif^

Secondly, Consider that of Ahab when Benha^ad sent to him for Life, saying;
Thus says t^^ Son Benhadad, I pray thee, let me Live Thou^^ Benhadad had
sought the Crown and Kingdom, ye^ and also the Life of Ahab; yet how
effectual^^ does Benhadad prevail with him. Is Benhadad y^^ alive? said Ahab.
He is my Brother; yea, ^ ye bring him to me. So he made him Ride ^ his Chariot,
1 Kings 20.

Coming Sinner, What think thou? If ^^sus Christ had as little Goodness in
him as Ah^^ he might grant an humble Benhadad Life. Th^^ neither beggest of him
his Crown and Digni^^ Life, eternal Life will serve thy turn. H^^ much more
then, shall thou have it, since t^^ have to deal with him who is Goodness and
Me^ it self! yea, since thou art called upon, y^^ greatly encouraged by a
promise of Life, ^ come unto him for Life? Read also these Scr^^tures, Numb.
35.11. Joshua 20.1.2. Heb. 6. ^

Object. 2. When I say, I only seek my se^^ mean I do not find that I do design
God's G^^ in mine own Salvation by Christ, and that m^ me fear I do not come
aright.

Answ. Where does Christ Jesus require s^ Qualification of those that are
coming to ^ for Life? Come thou for Life, and tr^^ not thy Head with such
Objections against ^ self; and let Christ and God alone to Gl^^ themselves in
the Salvation of such a Worm as thou art. The Father says to the Son, Thou art
my Son, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. God pronounces Life to Sinners,
as the Argument to prevail with them to come to him for life; and Christ says
plainly, I am come that ye might have Life, John 12.10. He has no need of thy
Designs, though thou have need of his Eternal Life. Pardon of Sin, and
Deliverance from Wrath to come, Christ propounds to thee, these be the things
that thou have need of: Besides God will be gracious and merciful to Worthless,
Undeserving Wretches; Come then as such an one, and lay no stumbling blocks in
the Way to him, but come to him for Life, and live John 5.24. Chapter 3.36. Mat.
1.21. Pro 8.36, 37 ^ These. 11. John 11.25.26.

When the G^a^er said, Sits, what must I do to ^e saved? Paul did not so much
as once ask him that is your End in this Question? Do you de^ign the Glory of
God, in the Salvation of your ^oul? He had more wit: He knew that such
^uestions as these, would have been but as Fools ^a^bles, instead of a
sufficient S^lve to so weigh^^ a Question as this. Wherefore since this poor
Wretch lacked Salvation by Jesus Christ, I mean (...) saved from Hell and
Death, which he knew ^ now) was due to him for the Sins that he ^^d committed;
Paul bids him like a poor con^emned Sinner* as he was, to proceed still in ^ is
way of Self-seeking. Believe on the Lord Jesus ^^rist, and thou shall be saved,
Acts 16 30 31, 32. I ^now, that afterward thou will desire to glo^^fie Christ,
by walking in the way of his ^ecepts; but at present thou want Life; ^^e
Avenger of Blood is behind thee, and the Devil like a roaring Lion is behind
thee. Well come now, and obtain Life from these; and when thou have obtained
some comfortable Persuasion that thou are made a Partaker of Life by Christ,
then, and not till then, tho^ wilt say, Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that
is within me, bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all
his Benefits; wh^ forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all the Diseases;
who redeemeth thy Life from Destruction and crowns thee with loving
Kindnesses, and tender Mercies, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Object. 3. But I cannot believe that I a^ come to Christ aright, because
sometimes I at apt to question his very Being and Office to sav^

Thus to do is horrible; but may th^^ not judge amiss in this matter.

How can I judge amiss, when I judge ^ I feel? Poor Soul! Thou may judge
ami^^ for all that. Why, says the Sinner, I thi^ that these Questions come
from my Heart.

Answ. Let me answer: That which com^ from thy Heart, comes from thy Will ^
Affections, from thy Understanding, Judgm^^^ and Conscience, for these must
acquiesce^ thy questioning; if thy questioning be (...) thy Heart. And how
say thou (for to n^ no more) do thou with thy Affection ^ Conscience, thus
question?

Answ. No my Conscience trembles w^ such Thoughts come into my Mind; and ^
Affections are otherwise inclined.

Then I conclude, that these things ar^ ^ther suddenly injected by the Devil,
or ^ are the Fruits of that Body of Sin and D^ ^^at y^^ dwells within thee, or
perhaps ^ (...) together.

If they come wholly from the Devil, as they seem, because thy Conscience and
Affections are against them; or if they come from the Body of Death that is in
thee, (and be not thou curious in enquiring from whether of them they come, the
safest way is, to lay enough at thy own Door) nothing of this should hinder thy
coming, nor make thee conclude, thou come not aright.

And before I leave thee, let me a little query with thee about this matter.

First, Do thou like these wicked Blasphemies;

Answ. No, no, their presence and working kills me.

Secondly, Do thou mourn for them, pray against them, and hate thy self
because of them?

Answ. Yes, yes, but that which afflicts me is, I do not prevail against them.

Thirdly, Do thou sincerely choose (might thou have thy choice) that thy
Heart might be aff^cted, and taken with the things that are best, most Heavenly
and Holy.

Answ. With all my Heart, and Death the next Hour (if it were God's Will)
rather than thus to Sin against him.

Well then, thy not liking of them, thy mourning for them, thy praying against
them, and thy loathing thy self because of them, with thy sincere choosing of
those Thoughts, for thy Delcetation, that are Heavenly and Holy, clearly
declares, that these things are not countenanced either with thy Will,
Affections, Understanding, Judgment, or Conscience; and so, that thy Heart is
not in them, but that rather they come immediately from the Devil, of arise
from the Body of Death that is in thy Flesh; of which thou ought thus to
say, now then it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me Romans 7.16,
17.

I will give thee a pertinent Instance: I^ Deuteronomy. 22. thou may read of a
betrothed Damsel, one betrothed to her Beloved, one that ha^ given him her
Heart and Mouth, as thou has^ given thy self to Christ; yet she was met with as
she walked in the Field, by one that force^ her, because he was stronger than
she. Well, what Judgment now does God, the righteou^ Judge pass upon the Damsel
for this? The Man only that lay with her, says God shall die; bu^ unto the
Damsel thou shall do nothing; the^^ is in the Damsel no Sin worthy of Death.
F^^ as when a Man rises against his Neighbor, (...) slays him, even so is
this matter; he foun^ her in the F^eld, and the betrothed Damsel crie^ and
there was none to save her, Deuteronomy. 22.27, 29*

Thou art this Damsel the Man that forc^ thee with these Blasphemous thoughts
is t^^ Devil; and he lights upon thee in a fit plac^ even in the Fields, as
thou art wandering aft^^ Jesus Christ; but thou cryedst out, and by t^^ cry,
did show that thou abhotrest such wick^^ Lewdness Well, the Judge of all the
Earth wi^^ do right: he will not lay the Sin at thy Do^^ but at his that
offered thee Violence: and for (...) Comfort, take this into Consideration,
that ^ came to heal them that were oppressed with (...) Devil, Acts 10.38.

Obj 4. But says another, I am so heartless, ^ slow, and as I think, so
indifferent in my comin^ that, to spea^ truth, I know not whether makin^ of
coming ought to be called a coming to Christ

Answ. You know that I told you at first, that coming to Christ is a moving of
the Heart and Affections toward him.

But says the Soul, my Dullness and Indifferency in all holy Duties,
demonstrate my heartlessness in Coming; and to come, and not with the Heart,
signifies nothing at all.

Answ. The moving the Heart after Christ is not to be discerned (at all times)
by the sensible affectionate Performance of Duties; but rather by those secret
Groanings and Complaints which thy Soul makes to God against that Sloth that
attends thee in Duties

Secondly, But grant it be even as thou say it ^s, that thou come so
slowly, etc. yet since Christ bids them come that comes not at all, ^urely they
may be accepted that come, though ^ttended with those Infirmities, which thou
at ^resent groanest under. He says, And him that ^ometh: He says not, if they
come sensible, so ^^st. But, and him that comes to me, I will in no ^ise cast
out. He says also in the Eight of the ^^overbs, As for him that wants
Understanding, ^ that is, an Heart; for oftentimes the Under^^anding is taken
for the Heart) Come eat of my ^read, and drink of the Wine that I have mingled.

Thirdly, Thou may be vehement in thy Spirit in Coming to Jesus Christ, and
yet be plagued ^ith sensible Sloth. So was the Church, when ^e cried, Draw me,
we will after thee; ^ Pa^^, ^hen he said, When I would do good, evil is present
^ith m^, (Song 14. Rom 7. Gal. 5.19) The Works, ^truglings and Oppositions of
the Flesh, are more ^anifest than are the Works of the Spirit in our ^^arts,
and so are sooner felt than they. What ^hen, let us not be discouraged at the
sight of our own infirmities, but run the faster to J^su^ Christ for Salvation,

Fourthly, Get thy Heart warmed with the swe^ Promise of Christ's Acceptance of
the Comin^ Sinner, and that will make thee make more hast^ unto him.
Discouraging Thoughts, they a^ like to cold Water, they benumb the Senses, a^
make us go ungainly about our busi^ess; b^ the sweet and warm Gledes of
Promise, are lik^ the comfortable Beams of the Sun, which en^veneth and
refreshes. You see how little ta^ Be and Fly do play in the Winter, Why, the
Cold hinde^s them from it; but when the Win^ and Sun is warm, who so busy as
they.

Fifthly, But again, he that comes to Christ flie^ for his Life. Now there is
no Man that fl^ for his Life, that thinks he speeds fast enoug^ on his Journey;
no, could he, he would w^^lingly take a mile at a step O my slothful ^
heartless Soul^ ^ay'st thou, Oh that I had W^ like a Dove, for then would I
fly away, and be ^ rest! I would hasten my escape from the windy Si^ and
Tempest, Psalm 65, 6, 8

Poor coming Soul, thou art like the Man the would ride full Gallop, whose
Horse will har^ly Trot; now the desire of his Mind is not ^ be judged by the
sl^w pace of the dul^ J^de b^ rides on, but by the Hitching, and Kicking, ^
Spurring, as he sits on his Back. Thy F^esh is li^^ this dull Jude, it will not
gallop after Christ ^ it will be backward, though thy Soul and Heaven ^i^ at
Stake: But be of good Comfort, Christ judges not according to the fierceness
of ou^ward Motion, Mark 10.17. but according to the^^ Sincerity of the He^^^
and inward Parts, John ^ 47. Psalm. 5.1. Mat. 20.41.

Sixthly Z^ba, in appearance came to David much faster than did Mephibosheth;
but yet his Heart was not so upright in him to David, as was his. It Is true,
Mephibosheth had a Check f^o^n David; for said he Why we^rest not thou with me,
Mephibosh^^h? But when David came to remember Mephibosheth was lame (for that
was his Plea) Thy Servant is lame, 2 Samuel 2.10. he was content, and concluded he
would have come after him faster than he did: And Meph^bosheth appealed to
David, who was in those Days as an Angel of God to know all things that are
done in the E^^th If he did not believe that the reason of his ba^kwardness lay
in his lameness, and not in his Mind. Why, poor coming Sinner, thou can not
come to Christ with that outward Swiftness of Career, as many others do? But
does the reason of thy Backwardness lie in in thy M^nd or Will, or in the
Sl^ggishness of the Flesh? Can thou say sincerely. The Spirit ^^uly is
willing, but the Flesh is weak, Mat 26.41. Yea can thou appeal to the Lord
Jesus, who ^noweth perfectly the very inmost thoughts of ^hy Heart, that this
is true? Then take this for ^hy Comfort: He has said, I will assemble her ^^at
halteth, I will make her that halteth a Remnant, and I will save her that
halteth, Much. 4 6 Z^ph 3.

What can thou have more from the ^weet Lips of the Son of God? But,

Seventhly, I read of some that are to follow christ in Chains: Thus says the
Lord, the Labor ^ Egypt, and the Merchndize of Ae^^^^pi^, and the ^^beans, Men
of Stature, shall come over unto thee, ^d they shall be thine: They shall come
after thee; in ^ains they shall come over, and they shall fall down un^^r thee,
saying: They shall make Supplication unto them, saying, Surely there is none
else to save. Isa. 4.14 Surely they that come after Christ in Chains, come to
him in great D^fficulty, because their Steps by the Chains are straightened.

And what Chains so heavy, as those that discourage thee? Thy Chain which is
made up of Guilt and Filth, is heavy; it is a wretched Bond about thy Neck, by
which thy Strength does fail, Romans 1.14. Ch 3 27 But come, though thou come
in Chains: It Is Glory to Christ that (...) Sinner comes after him in Chains The
chi^ing of thy Chains, though troublesome to thee are not, for can be any
Obstruction to thy Salvation: it is Christ's Work and Glory to save thee from
thy Chains, to enlarge thy steps, and set thee at Liberty. The blin^ Man though
called, surely could not com^ apace to Jesus Christ: But Christ could stan^
still, and stay for him. True, He rides upon the Wings of the Wind: but yet he
is long suffering, and his long suffering is Salvation ^ him that comes to
him, Mat. 10.49. Pet. 3 9.

Eighthly, Had thou seen those that come t^ the Lord Jesus in the day of his
Flesh, ho^ hoblingly they came unto him, by reason t^ their Infirmities, and
also how friendly, and kindly, and graciously he received them, and gav^ them
the desire of their Hearts, thou would^ not, as thou do, make such O^jections
against thy self in coming to Jesus Christ.

Object. 5. But say^ another, I fear I come t^ lat^; I doubt I have staid too
long, I am afra^^ the Door is shut.

Answ Thou can never come too late to Jesus Christ, if thou do come. This
is manifest by two Instances.

First, By the Man that came to him at the E^eventh Hour. This Man was idle all
the Day ^ong: He had a whole Gospel day, to come in, and he played it all away
save only the last Hour thereof; But at last at the Eleventh hour he came, and
goes into the Vineyard to work along with the rest of the Laborers, that had
^orn the Burden and Heat of the Day. Well, ^ut how was he received of the Lord
of the Vineyard; Why, when Pay-day came, he had even as much as the rest, yea,
had his Money first. True, the others murmured at him; but what did the Lord
Jesus answer them? Is thine ^e Evil, because mine is good? I will give unto
this (...), even as unto thee, Mat. 20.

Secondly, The other Instance is, The Thief ^ on the Cross; he came late also,
even at an ^our before his Death; yea, he stayed from ^^sus Christ as long as
he had Liberty to be a ^hief, and longer too; for could he have de^^ded the
Judges, and by his lying words esca^^d his just Condemnation, for ought I know,
^ had not come as yet to his Savior: But be^^g convicted, and condemned to
die; yea, sast^^ed to the Cross, that he might die like a Rogue ^ he was in his
Life; behold the Lord Jesus, ^hen this wicked one, even now desires Mer^^ at
his Hands, tells him, and that without the ^^st Reflection upon him for his
former mif^^ent Life; To Day thou shall be with me in Pa^d^ce, Luke 23.43.

Let no Man turn this Grace of God into Wantonness; my Design is now to
encourage ^he coming Soul.

Obj. But is not the Door of Mercy shut against ^ me before they die?

Answ* Yea, and God forbids that Prayer sho^ be made to him for them, Jer.
7.16. Jude ^

Quest. Then why may not I doubt that I ^ he one of these?

Answ By no means, if thou art coming to ^^sus Christ; because when God shuts
the D^ upon Men, he gives them no Heart to com^ Jesus Christ. None comes but
those to w^ it is given of the Father: But thou co^ therefore it is given to
thee of the Father.

Be sure therefore, if the Father has ^ thee an Heart to come to Jesus Christ,
the ^ of Mercy yet stands open to thee: For it s^ not with the Wisdom of God to
give stre^ to come to the Birth, and yet to shut ^ Womb Isa. 66.9. To give
Grace to com^ Jesus Christ, and yet shut up the Doo^ his Mercy upon thee.
Incline thine Ear, ^ he, and come unto me; hear, and your Soul^ live: and I
will make an everlasting Covenant you, even the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 52.

Obj. But it is said that some Knocked wh^ Door was shut.

Ans. Yes But the Text in which these K^ers are mentioned, are to be referred
unto day of Judgment* and not to the coming the Sinner to Christ in this Life.
See the ^ Mat. 25.11 Luke 13 24, 25

These therefore concern thee nothing at that art coming to Jesus Christ, thou
art co^ now, Now is the accepted time, behold now ^ Day of Salvation, 2 Cor 6.2
Now God is upon Mercy seat, now Christ Jesus si^^ by, con^^ly pleading the
Victory of his Blood for ^ners; and now even as long as this W^ lasts, this
Word of the Text shall be still ^ ^ fully fulfilled, and him that comes to Me,
^ll in no wise cast out.

^inner, the greater Sinner thou art, the great^ ^eed of Mercy thou have, and
the more will ^st be glorified thereby: Come then, come ^ try: Come taste and
see how good the Lord ^o an undeserving Sinner.

Obj. But says another, I am fallen since I be^ ^ to come to Christ; therefore
I fear I did not ^ aright, and so consequently, that Christ will ^ receive me.

^nsw Falls are dangerous, for they Disho^r Christ, wound the Conscience and
cause ^ Enemies of God to speak reproachfully. ^ it is no good Argument, I am
fallen, there^ I was not coming aright to Jesus Christ David and Solomon, and
Peter had thus objec^ against themselves, they had added to their ^efs; and yet
at least as much cause as thou. ^ Man whose Steps are ordered by the Lord, ^
whose goings the Lord delight in, may yet ^vertaken in a Temptation that may
cause ^ to fall, Psalm 37 23, 24 Did not Aaron fall; ^ and Moses himself? What
shall we say of ^ekiah and Jeh^shaphat? There are therefore ^s and Falls: Falls
pardonable, and Falls ^ardonable: Falls unpardonable are Falls a^ (...) Light,
from the Faith to the despising of ^ trampling upon Jesus Christ, and his bles^
Undertakings, ( Heb 6.2.3.4, 5 Ch 10 28, 29.) ^w as for such there remains no
more Sacri^ for Sin: Indeed, they have no Heart, no and, no Desire to come to
Jesus Christ for ^e, therefore they must perish. Nay, says ^ Holy Ghost, It Is
impossible that they should be ^newed again unto Repentance. Therefore these
God has no compassion for, neither ought w^ but for other Falls, though they
be dread^ (and God will Chastise his People for then ^ they do not prove thee a
Graceless Man, ^ not come to Jesus Christ for Life.

It is said of the C^ild in the Gospel, T^^ while he was yet a coming^ the
Devil thr^^ him down, and tore him, Luke 9.4.

Dejected Sinner, it is no wonder that t^ have got a Fall in coming to Jesus
Christ; ^ not rather to be wondered at, that thou have ^ had before this, a
Thousand times a Thous^ Falls? Considering,

1. What Fools we are by Nature,

2. What Weaknesses are in us.

3. What mighty Powers, the Fallen An^ ^ our implacable Enemies are.

4. Considering also, how often the Con^ Man is benighted in his Journey, and
also ^ Stumbling-blacks do lie in his way.

5. ^^so his Familiars ( that were so bes^ now watch for his Halting, and seek
by ^ means they may, to cause him to Fall by ^ Hand of their strong Ones.

What then? Must we, because of these Te^tations, incline to Fall? No; must we
^ fear Falls? Yea, let him that thinks be stan^ take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor
10 12. Yet let ^ not utterly be cast down: The Lord upo^eth all that Fall, and
raises up those tha^ bowed down. Make not light of Falls: ^ have thou fallen?
Ye have, said Samuel, done this Wickedness; yet turn not aside from ^lowing the
Lord; but serve him with a ^fect Heart, and turn not aside, for the ^ will not
forsake his People, (and he co^^ ^he Coming Sinner one of them) because ^t has
pleased the Lord to make you his People, (1 Samuel 12.20.)

(Shall come to Me.)

Now we come to show what Force there is in this Promise to make them come to
him. All that the Father gives Me, shall come to Me.

I will speak to this Promise.

First, In General.

Secondly, In Particular.

In General. This Word (shall) is confined to these (All) that are given to
Christ. All that the Father gives Me, shall come to Me. Hence I conclude,

First, That coming to Jesus Christ aright, is an effect of their being (of
God) given to Christ ^^fore. Mark! They shall come: Who? Those that are given:
They come then, because they were given. Thine they were, and thou gave them
(...). Now this is indeed a singular Comfort to them that are coming in truth
to Christ, ^ think (...) the reason why they come, is, beca^se they ^^re given
of the Father before to him. Thus ^^^n may the coming Soul reason with himself
^he comes. Am I coming indeed to Jesus ^^rist? This coming of mine is not to be
attri^^ted to me, or my Goodness, but to the Grace (...) Gift of God to Christ;
God gave first my ^son to Him, and therefore has now given ^ a Heart to come.

^econdly, This Word (shall come) make thy ^^ming, not only the Fruit of the
Gif^ of the ^^^her, but also the Purpose of the Son; for ^se words are a divine
Purpose; they show us ^ Heavenly Determination of the Son. The ^^^her has
given them to me, and they shall, yea, they shall come to Me. Christ is as full
an his Resolution to save those given to him as is the Father in giving of
them. Christ prized the Gift of his Father, He will lose nothing of it; he is
resolved to save it every whit by his Blood, and to raise it up again at the
la^^ Day; and thus He fulfils his Father's Will, ^ accomplisheth his own
Desires, John 6 30.

Thirdly, These Words (shall come) makes thy coming to be also the Effect of
an absolute Promise; coming Sinner, thou art concluded in ^ Promise; thy coming
is the Fruit of the Faithfulness of an absolute Promise. 'Twas this Promise, by
the virtue of which thou at first rece^vedst strength to come: And this is the
Pr^mise, by the Virtue of which thou shall be ^^fectually brought to him. It
was said to Ab^^ham, At this time will I come, and Sarah shall be ^ a Son. This
Son was Isaac. Mark! Sarah sha^^ have a Son: There is the Promise; and S^ had a
Son: There was the fulfilling of the P^^mise: And therefore was Isaac called
the Ch^ of the Promise, Genesis 17.19, chapter 18.10 Romans 9 9.

Sarah shall have a Son: But how if Sarah be p^ Age? Why still the Promise
continues to ^ Sarah shall have a Son. But how if Sarah ^ Barren? Why still the
Promise says, Sarah ^ have a Son But Abraham's Body is now de^ why the Promise
is still the ^am^* Sarah ^ have a Son. Thus you see what Virtue ther^ an
absolute Promise: It carries enough ^ its own Bowels to accomplish the thing
proc^^sed, whether there be means or no to effect ^ Wherefore this Promise in
the Text being ^ absolute Promise, by Virtue of it, not by ^ ^n^ of our selves,
or by our own Induceme^^ do we come to Jesus Christ, for so are the Words of
the Text; All that the Father gives Me, shall come to Me.

Therefore is every sincere Come^ to Jesus Christ called also the Child of the
Promises. Now my Brethren, as Isaac was, so are we the Children of the Promise,
Gal. 4.28. That is, we are the Children that God has promised to Jesus Christ,
and given to him; yea, the Children that Jesus Christ has promised shall come
to him. All that the Father gives me shall come.

Fourthly, This Word (shall come) engages Christ to communicate all manner of
Grace to those thus given him, to make them effectually come to him, They shall
come; that ^s, not if they will, but if Grace, all Grace, ^f Power, Wisdom, a
new Heart, and the Holy Spirit, and all joining together, can make them come. I
say this Word (shall come) being absolute has no Dependence upon our own Will,
or Power, or Goodness; But it en^^geth for us, even God himself, Christ
himself, the Spirit himself. When God had made ^^at absolute Promise to Abraham
that Sarah should have a Son, Abraham did not at all look ^t any Qualifications
in himself, because the ^romise looked at none; but as God had, by ^he Promise
absolutely promised him a Son, so (...) considered now, not his own Body now
^ead, nor yet the Barrenness of Sarah's Womb. ^e staggered not at the Promise
of God through ^nbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to ^od, being
fully persuaded, that what he had pro^^sed, he was able to perform, Romans 4. He
had ^romised, and had promised absolutely Sarah shall have a Son: therefore
Abraham looks th^^ He, to wit, God, must fulfill the Condition ^ it. Neither is
this Expectation of Abraham d^ approved by the Holy Ghost, but account^ good
and laudable; it being that by which ^ gives Glory to God. The Father also has
g^ven to Christ a certain number of Souls ^ him to save; and he himself has
said, ^ shall come to him. Let the Church of God the live in a joyful
Expectation of the utm^ Accomplishment of this Promise; for assure^ly it shall
be fulfilled, and not one Tho^^sandth part of a Tittle thereof shall f^ They
shall come to Me.

And now before I go any farther, I ^ more particularly enquire into the Nature
^ an Absolute Promise.

First, We call that an absolute Promi^ that is made without any Condition: or
m^ fully, thus; that is an absolute Promise ^ God, or of Christ, which makes
over ^ this or that Man any saving spiritual I sing, without a Condition to be
done on part, for the obtaining thereof. And this have in hand is such an one.
Let the ^ Master of Arts on Earth show me, if he ^ any Condition in this Text,
depending ^ any Qualification in us, which is not ^ same Promise concluded,
shall be by ^ Lord Jesus effected in us.

Secondly, An absolute Promise therefore as we say, without if, or and; that is
requires nothing of us that it self might accomplished. It says not, They
shall, [if] will; but, They shall: not, They shall, if ^ use the means; but,
They shall. You ^ see that a Will, and the use of the Means, is supposed,
though not expressed. But I answer, No, by no Means, that is as a Condition of
this Promise, if they be at all included in the Promise, they are included
there, as the Fruit of the absolute Promise, not as if it expected the
Qualification to arise from us. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy
Power, Psalm. 110.3. This is another absolute Promise: But does that Promise
suppose a Willingness in us, as a Condition of God's making us willing? They
shall be willing, if they are willing; or they shall be Willing if they will be
willing. This is ridiculous; there is nothing of this supposed. The Promise is
absolute as to us, all that it engages for its own accomplishment, is the
mighty power of Christ, and his Faithfulness to accomplish.

The difference, therefore, betwixt the ab^^lute and conditional Promise is
this;

First, They differ in their Terms. The Ab^^lute Promise says, I will and you
shall a ^ other, I will, if you will; or, Do this, ^ thou shall live, Jer.
38.31, 32, 33. Ezekiel. 36. ^ 25. etc. Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. etc. Jer. 4.1. Ezekiel. 18.30,
^ Mat 19 21.

Secondly, They differ in their way of com^^nicating good things to Men; the
absolute ^s communicate things freely, only of Grace; ^ other, if there be that
Qualification in us ^ the Promise calls for, or not else.

Thirdly, The absolute Promises therefore en^e God, the other engages us, I
mean God ^y, us only.

Fourthly, Absolute Promises must be fulfil^ Conditional may, or may not be
fulfilled. The Absolute o^e m^^t be fulfi^^ed, because of the Faithfulnes^ of
God; the other may not, because of the Un^aithfulness ^ Men.

Fifthly, Absolute Promises have therefore sufficiency in themselves, to bring
about the own Fulfillings; the Conditional have not ^ The Absolute Promise is
therefore a big-belly Promise, because i^ has in it self a Fullness all desired
things for us; and will when ^ time of that Promise is come, yield to us
M^tal^, that which will verily save us; yea, and m^tis capable of answering the
Demands of ^ Promise that is Conditional Wherefore thou^ there be a real, yea,
an eternal D^fference^ these things (wi^h others) betwixt the Con^^tional and
Absolute Promise; yet again in o^ Respects, there is a blessed Harmony betw^^^
them; as may be seen in these Particulars.

First, The Conditional Promise calls for ^^pentance, the Absolute gives it,
Acts 5 30, 31

Secondly, The Conditional Promise calls* Faith, the Absolute Promise gives it,
Zep^ 12. Rom 15.12.

Thirdly, The Conditional Promise calls ^ new Heart, the Absolute Promise gives
it; ^zek 36.

Fourthly, The Conditional Promise calls Holy Obedience, the absolute Promise
gives or causes it, Ezekiel. 37.27.

And as they Harmoniously agree in this* again, the Conditional Promise
blesses the^ who by the absolute Promise, is endued with Fruit, as for
Instance;

First, The absolute Promise makes Men right, and then the Conditional
follows, sa^ Blessed are the Undefiled in the Way; that walks in the Law of
the Lord, Psalm 119 1.

Secondly, The absolute Promise gives to this Man the Fear of the Lord and
then the Conditional so loweth, saying. Blessed is every one that fears the
Lord, Psa^m 128 1.

Thirdly, The absolute Promise gives Faith, and then this Conditional follows,
saying. Blessed is be that bel^eveth, Ze^h 3 12 Luke 1 45.

Fourthly, The absolute Promise brings free Forgiveness of Sins; and the
Condi^ional says, Blessed are they whose Transgressions are forgiven, and whose
sin is covered, Rom 4 7.8

Fifthly, The absolute Promise says, that God's Elect shall hold out to the
End; then the Conditional follows with this Blessing; He that shall endure to
the End, the same shall he saved, ^ Pet. 1.4, 5, 6. Mat. 24.

Thus do the Promises gloriously serve one another and us, in this their
Harmonious Agreement.

Now the Promise under Consideration is ^ absolute Promise; All that the Father
gives ^, shall come to Me.

This Promise therefore, is, as it is said* a Big ^ly'd Promise, and has in it
self all those ^ngs to bestow upon us, that the Conditional ^leth for at our
Hands. They shall come! ^ll they come? yes, they shall come. But ^w if they
want those things, those Graces, ^wer, and Heart, without which they cannot
^ne? Why, shall come answers all this, and all ^ngs else that may in this
Matter be objected. and here I will take the Liberty amplify ^ngs.

Obj. 1. But they are dead, dead in Trespasses and ^; how shall they then come?

Answ Why shall-come can raise them frot^ this Death. The Hour is coming, and
now is, the the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God; ^ they that hear
shall live. Thus therefore is the Impediment by Shall-come removed out of t^
way? They shall hear, they shall live.

Obj. 2. But they are Satan's Captives; he to them Captives at his Will, and he
is stronger t^ they: How can they come?

Ans, Why, Shall come has also provided ^ help for this. Satan has bound that
Daugh^ of Abraham so, that she could by no means (...) up her se^f; but yet
Shall come sit her for both in Body and Soul. Christ will have the turned from
the Power of Satan unto God. ^ what must it be, if they turn themselves, o^
something to merit of him to turn them? ^ he will do it freely, of his own good
Will. A^ Man, whose Soul is p^ss^ssed with the Devil, turned whithersoever the
Governor lists* taken Captive by him, notwithstanding its? ^^tural Powers,
at his Will; but what will ^ do? Will he hold him when Shall-come ^ forth it
self, (will he then let him) for com^ to Jesus Christ? No, that cannot be; his
Po^ is but the Power of a Fallen Angel, but S^ come is the Word of God;
therefore Shall co^ must be fulfilled, and the Gates of Hell ^ not prevail
against it.

There were seven Devils in Mary Magda^ too many for her to get from under the
p^ of; but when the time was come, that ^ come was to be fulfilled upon her,
they ^ place; fly from her; and she comes (in^e^ to Jesus Christ: According as
it is written, ^ that the Father gives me, shall come to me.

The Man that was poss^ss^d with a Legion, ^ark 5. was too much by them
captivated, for ^m, by Humane Force, to come; yea, had he ^d (to boot) all the
Men under Heaven to ^p him; had he that said, he shall come, with^^ld his
mighty Power: But when this Pro^ise was to be fulfilled upon him, then he
comes; ^r could all their power hinder him from ^o^ng. It was also this Shall
come that preser^^d him from Death, when by these evil Spi^ he was hurled
hither and thither; ^d it was by the virtue of Shall come, that at ^ he was set
at Liberty from them, and enabled ^deed) to come to Christ. All that the Father
^eth me shall come to me.

Obj. 3. They shall, (you say;) but how if they ^ not? And if so, then what can
Shall come do?

Answ. True, there are some Men say, We are ^ds, we will come no more under
thee, Jer. 2.31. ^ as God says in another case (if they are ^concerned in Shall
come to me) They shall know ^se Word shall stand, mine or theirs, Jer. 44.28.
^e then is the case, we must now see who ^ be the Liar; he that says, I will
not; or that says, he shall come to me. You shall ^he, says God: I will nor
come says the ^er. Now, as sure as he is concerned in this ^ come, God will
make that Man eat his own ^rds; for I will not is the unadvised Con^^^^ion of a
crazy headed Sinner, but shall come ^ spoken by him, that is of Power to
perform ^ word. Son, go work to day in my Vineyard; said ^ Father; but he
answered and said, I will not ^e. What now, will he be able to stand to ^
Refusal? Will he pursue his desperate De^? No; he afterward repented and went.
But how came he by that Repentance? Wh^ was wrapped up for him in the absolute
^^^mise; and therefore, notwithstanding he s^ will not, he afterward repented
and went ^ this Parable Jesus Christ sets forth the O^cy of the Sinners of the
World, as to ^ their coming to him; they will not come threatened, yea, though
Life be offered ^ upon condition of coming.

But now, when shall come, the abs^lute ^^^mise of God, comes to be fulfilled
upon ^ then they come; because by that Prom^ Cure is provided against the
Rebellion of Wills: Thy people shall be willing in the D^y Power, Psalm. 110.3.
Thy People, What Poeple? ^ the People that thy Father has given ^ The
Obstinacy and Plague that is in the ^ of that People, shall be taken away, and
the be made wiling; Shall come will make the^ ^ling to come to thee.

He that had seen Paul in the midst ^ Outrages against Christ, his Gospel, and
^ would hardly have thought that he would have been a Follower of Jesus Christ,
esp^ since he went not against his Conscie^ persecuting of them. He thought
veril^ he ought to do what he did. But we m^ what Shall come can do* when it
comes ^ fulfilled upon the Soul of a Rebellious S^ he was a chosen V^ssel,
given by the Fa^ the Son; and now the time being com^ Shall come was to take
him in hand, behol^ over mastered, astonished, and, with trea^ and reverence in
a Moment become will be obedient to the Heavenly Call, Acts 9.

And were they not far gone (that yo^ Acts 2.) who had their hands and Hearts ^
the Murder of the Son of God; and ^ew their resolvedness never to repent of ^
horrid Fact, said, His Blood be on us and our ^en? But must their Obstinacy
rule? Must ^ be bound to their own Ruin, by the Re^^on of their stubborn Wills:
No, not (...) of these the Father gave to Christ; before at the times appointed
shall come ^s in among them; the absolute Pro^ takes them in hand; and then
they come ^deed, crying out* Peter, and the rest of the ^postles, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? No ^ornness of Man's Will (...) stand, when ^ has
absolutely said the contrary; shall ^ can make them come as Doves to their
^dows, that had before resolved never to ^ to him.

^he Lord spoke unto Manasseh, and to his ^le, (by the Prophets) but world he
hear? He would not: But shall Manasseh come off ^? No, he shall not. Therefore,
he being ^ of those whom the Father had given to the ^ and also falling within
the bounds and reach ^all come; at last shall come takes him in hand, then he
comes indeed: He comes bowing ^pending; he humbles himself greatly, and ^
Supplications to the Lord, and prayed ^ him; and he was entreated of him, and
had ^ upon him, 2 Chronicles. 3.33.

^he Thief upon the Cross, at first did rail ^ his Fellow upon Jesus Christ;
but he was ^ that the Father had given to Him, and there^ shall come must must
handle him, and his ^ious Will. And behold, so soon as he is ^ withal, by
Virtue of that Absolute Promise, how soon he buckleth; leaves his rail^ falls
to Supplicating of the Son of God ^ Mercy, Lord, says he, Remember me when the
most into thy Kingdom, Mat. 27.44. Luke 23.40.

Objt 4. They shall come, say you; but how if ^ be blind, and see not the way?
For some are ^ off from Christ, not only by the Obstinacy of ^ Will, but by the
Blindness of their Minds. N^ they be blind, how shall they come?

Answ. This Question it not, Are they b^ But, are they within the Reach and
Power shall come? if so, that Christ that said, They come, will find them Eyes,
or a Guide, or ^ to bring them to himself. Must is for the ^ If they shall
come, they shall come, no ^diment shall hinder.

The Thessalonians Darkness did not ^ them from being the Children of Light; ^
come, said Christ, that they that see not, might And if he says, See ye blind
that have eyes; ^ shall hinder it? Ephesians. 5.8. John 9.39. Isa. 3^ chap. 43.8.

This Promise therefore is, as I said, a ^ bellied Promise, having in the
Bowels of ^ things that shall occur to the complete ^ ^ling of it self; they
shall come. But 'ti^ ^jected, that they are Blind: Well, Shall ^ still the
same, and continues to say, The come to me: Therefore he says again, ^ bring
the Blind by a way that they know ^ I will lead them in Paths that they know ^
I will make Darkness Light before them ^ crooked things straight: These things
^ do unto them, and not forsake them, Isa. ^

Mark! I will bring them, though (...) blind; I will bring them by a Way th^^ ^
now not; I will; I will; and therefore they shall come to me.

Obj. 5. But how if they have exceeded many ^ Sin, and so made themselves far
more abomina^? They are the Ring-leading Sinners in the ^ountry, the Town or
Family.

Answ. What then? Shall that hinder the ^xecution of Shall-come? It is not
Transgres^^ons, nor Sins, nor all their Transgressions ^ all their Sins, (if
they by the Father are ^ven to Christ, to save them) that shall hin^^r this
Promise, that is should not be fulfil^^d upon them: In those days, and at that
time, ^^th the Lord, the Iniquities of Israel shall be ^^ght for, and not be
found, Jer. 31 30. Not that ^^ey had none; (for they bounded in Trans^^essions,
2 Chronicles. 39 9 Ezekiel. 16.48.) but God should pardon, cover, hide, and put them a^
^y by Virtue of his absolute Promise, by ^^ich they are given to Christ to save
them: ^^d I will cleanse them from all their Ini^^ity whereby they have sinned
against me; (...) I will pardon all their Iniquity, whereby ^y have
transgressed against me. And it ^ll be to me for a Name of Joy, a Praise, (...)
an Honor before all the Nations of the ^rth, which shall hear of all the good
I do ^o them; and they shall fear and tremble ^ all the Goodness, and all the
Prosperity ^ I procure to it, Jer. ^^.8, 9.

Obj 6 But how if they have not Faith and ^^pentance? How shall they come then?

Answ. Why, he that says, they shall come, (...) he not make it out? If they
shall come, (...) shall come; and he that has said, they (...) come, if Faith
and Repentance be the way to come, as indeed they are, then Fa^ and Repentance
shall be given to them; ^ Shall-come must be fulfilled on them.

First, Faith shall be given them; I will so leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted ^ poor People, and they shall trust in the Na^^ of the Lord. There
shall be a Root of J^ and He shall rise to reign over the Gent^ and in Him
shall the Gentiles trust, Zaph. 3. ^ Romans 15.12.

Secondly, They shall have Repentance: is exalted to give Repentance; They
shall ^ weeping and seeking the Lord their God. ^ again, With Weeping and
Supplication will l^ them, Acts 5.30, 31. Jer. 31.9.

I told you before that an absolute P^ has all conditional Ones in the Belly ^
and also Provision to answer all those ^lification^ that they propound to him
the ^eth for their Benefit: And it must be ^ for if shall-come be an absolute
Promise, ^ ^deed it is, then it must be fulfilled o^ very of those concerned
therein. I (...) must be fulfilled, if God can by Grace his absolute Will
fulfill it: Besides, sin^ ^ming and believing is all one, (accor^ John 6.3) He
that comes to me shall net^ ^ger, and he that believes in me shall never the

Then when he says, they shall com^ as much as to say, they shall believ^
consequently repent, to the saving of (...) So then the present want of Faith a
^^pentance cannot make this Promise ^ of none effect, because that this Promis^
in it, to give what others call for and ^ I will give them all Heart; I will
gi^^ my Spirit^; I will give them Repentance; I will give them Faith. Mark
these Words! If my man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. But ^ow came he to
be a new Creature, since none ^an create but God? God indeed does make them new
Creatures. Behold says he, I will make all things new. And hence then it
follows, even after he had said they are new Creatures; And all things are of
God; that is, all this new Crea^ion stands in the several Operations, and
special Workings of the Spirit of Grace, who is God, 2 Cor. 5 17 18.

Obj 7. But how shall they escape all those dange^ous and damnable Opinions,
that like Rocks and Quick^^nds, are in the way in which they are going?

Answ. Indeed, this Age is an Age of Errors, if ^ver there was an Age of Errors
in the World, ^ut yet the Gift of the Father, said claim to, by ^he Son in the
Text, must needs escape them* and ^ Conclusion come to him. There are a com^any
of shall comes in the Bible that does secure them. Not but that they may be
assaulted by them; yea, and also for the time, entangled and ^etained by them
from the Bishop of their Souls; ^ut these Shall comes will break those Chains
and ^etters, that those given to Christ are entangled (...), and they shall
come, because He has said, ^hey shall come to Him.

Indeed, Errors are like that Whore of whom (...) of in the Proverbs, that
sits in her sea^, ^ ^^e High Places of the City, to call Passengers, why ^
right in their Way, (Prove 9 13, 14.) But the (...), that by the Father are
given ^o the Son to save them, are sit one time or ^the^, to be se^u^ed by
shall come to me.

And therefore of such it is said, God will guide them with his Eye, with his
Counsel, his Spirit, and that in the way of Peace; by Springs of Water, and
into all Truth, Isal. 8. Psalm. 73.24. Joh. 16.13 Luk 1.79. Isa. 47 10, then, He
that has such a Guide, (and all* the Father gives to Christ shall have it)
shall escape those Dangers, he shall not e^^ the way; yea, though he be a Fool,
he ^ not err therein. ( Isa 35.) for of every such one it is said, Thine ears
shall hear a Word b^ thee, saying, This is the Way, walk in it, when ye t^^ the
Right Hand, and when ye turn to the Left, Isa 3^

There were Thieves and Robbers before Ch^ Coming, as there are also now; But
sait^ the Sheep did net hear them.

And why did they not hear them; But be ^ they were under the Power of Shall
come; ^ absolute Promise, that had the Grace in i^ to bestow upon them, as
could make the^^ rightly to distinguish his Voice, My Sh^^^ my Vioce: But how
came they to hear it? ^ to them it is given to know and to hear, and
distinguishly, Joh. 10.8, 16. chapter 5.25 Ephesians. 5.14.

Father] The very plain Sentence of the makes Provision against all these
things; says it, All that the Father gives me, shall to me; that is, shall
not be stopped, or be red to take up any where short of me; nor they turn aside
to abide with any besides m^

Shall come (to me.)

To me.] By these Words there is farther ^nuated (though not expressed) a
double ^ of their coming to him.

First, There is in Christ a Fullness of All ^ficiency of all that, even of all
that which is ^ful to make us happy.

Secondly, Those that indeed come to him, do ^^erefore come to him, that they
may receive it ^ his Hand.

For the first of these, There is in Christ a ^ulness of All Sufficiency of all
that even of all ^^at which is needful to make us happy Hence ^ is said, For it
pleased the Father, that in him ^^uld all Fullness dwell. And again, Of his
Fullness ^ have all received, and Grace for Grace, Col. 1.19. ^^h 1.16. It is
also said of him, that his Riches ^^e unsearchable; The unsearchable riches of
Christ, ^oh. 3.8. Hear what he says of Himself; Riches ^^d Honor are with me,
even durable Riches and ^^ghteousness: My Fruit is better than Gold; yea, ^^an
fine Gold, and my revenue than cho^ce Silver: I ^^d in the way of
righteousness, in the midst of the ^^^ht of Judgment, that I may cause them
that love ^ to inherit substance. And I will fill their cre^^^^es, Prove. 18.19.

This in General. But more particularly.

First, There is that Light in Christ, that is ^^fficient to lead them out of,
and from all that ^arkness in the midst of which all others, but ^^em that come
to him stumble, and fall, and ^^rish; I am the Word says he; He that fol^^weth
me, shall not abide in Darkness, but ^^all have the light of life, Joh. 8 12
Man by Na^^re is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness, and ^^o^eth not whither
he goes, for Darkness has ^^i^ded his eyes; neither can any thing, but ^^sus
Christ, lead Men out of this Darkness: ^atural Conscience cannot do it; the Ten
^ommandments, though in the Heart of Man, (...) ^o it. This Prerogative belongs
only (...) Jesus Christ.

Secondly, There is Life in Christ, that is to be found no where else, Joh.
5.40 Life is a Principle in the Soul, by which it shall be acted (...) enabled
to do that, which through Him is ple^ (...) to God; He that believes in, o^
comes to me, (...) He, (as the Scriptures have said) out of his (...) shall
flow rivers of living water. Jon 7 38. With this Life a man is dead, whether he
be bad, whether he is good; that is good in his own ^ other men's esteem. There
is no true and eter^^^ Life, but what is in thee (Me) that speaks ^ the Text.

There is Life for those that come to him, ^ he had by Faith in his F^esh and
Blood; ^ that eats me, shall live by me, Joh. 4.57.

And this is a Life against that Death (...) comes by the Guilt of Sin, and the
Curse of t^^ Law, under which all men are, and for (...) must be, unless they
eat (me) that spe^^ the Text; Whosoever finds me, says he, finds (...)
Deliverance from that everlasting Death a^ Destruction, that without me he
shall be devoured by, Prove. 8.

Nothing is more desirable than Life, to him that has in himself the Sentence
of Condemnation; and h^re only is Life to be found: This Life, to wit, Eternal
Life, This Life is in the Son: that is, in Him that faith in the Text, All that
the Father has given me, shall come to me, 1 John v. 10.

Thirdly, The Person speaking in the Text. i^ He alone, by whom poor Sinners
have Admittance to, and Acceptance with the Father, because of the Glory of his
Righteousness, by, and in which He presents them amiable and spotless in his
sight, neither is there any way besides Him, so to come to the Father; I am
(...) ^y, (says he,) the Truth and the Life; no Man ^^eth to the Father, but
by Me, John 14.6. All ^^her ways to God are dead and damnable; the ^estroying
Cherubims stand with flaming Swords, ^^rn,ng every Way to keep all others from
his ^resence* ( Gen 3.34) I say all others, but them ^^at come by Him.

I am the Door; by me, says he, if any man enter ^ he shall be saved; John 10.9

The Person speaking in the Text is He, and ^ly He, That can give stable and
everlasting ^eace; therefore, (says he.) My Peace I give ^^to you: My Peace,
which is a Peace with ^OD, Peace of Conscience, and that of an e^erlasting
Duration. My Peace, Peace that ^^nnot be matched. Not as the world gives, give
unto you; for the World's Peace is but carnal ^ transitory, but mine is Divine
and Eternal. (...) it is called the Peace of God, that passes Understanding.

^^urthly, The Person speaking in the Text ^ enough of all things truly
spiritually good, ^^tisfie the desire of every longing Soul; jesus stood, and
cried, saying,, If any man thirst, ^ come unto me and drink. And to him that i^
^ I will give of the Fountain of the Water* of ^^ely, John 7.37. Rev. 21.6.

^^^^ly, With the Person speaking in the Text, ^ver to perfect, defend and
deliver thos^ ^ come to him for Safeguard. All Power, ^ He, in Heaven and Earth
are given to Me, ^ 28.18.

^hus might I multiply Instances in this Na^^^e in abundance. But,

^ixthly, They that in truth do come to Him, ^ therefore come to Him, that they
may receive it at his Hand; they come for Light, ^ come for Eight, they come
for Life, they ^ for Reconciliation with God; they also ^ for Peace, they come
that their Souls may ^ satisfied with spiritual Goods, and that they ^ be
protected by him against all spiritual ^ eternal Damnation; and he alone is
able to ^ them all this, to the filling of their joy ^ full, as they also find
when they come to ^

This is evident;

First, From the plain Declaration of those ^ already are come to him; Being
justified by ^ we have Peace with God through ^ur Lord Jesus C^ by whom also we
have access with Boldness un^^ Grace wherein we stand, and rejo^ce in the Hope
^ Glory of God, Rom 5.

Secondly, It Is evident also, in that while ^ keep their Eyes upon him, they
never desi^^ change him for another, or to add to thems^^^^ some other thing,
together with him, to ma^^ t^eir spiritual Joy; God forbid, said Pa^l. ^ should
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus C^ Yea, and I account all things but
loss, for the E^^^^lency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord* whom I have
suffered the loss of a^l thin^s, a^count then but Dung, that I may w^n Christ,
an^ found in him, not having m^ne own Righteous^^^^ which is of the law; but
that which is through ^ ^aith of Christ the Righteousness which is of G^^
^aith, Phil 3.7.8.9.

Thirdly, It Is evident also, by their earnest ^ sa^es, that others might be
made Partakers ^ their Bl^ss^dness Brethren, said Paul, my He^ Desire, and
Prayer to God for Israel is that they (...) he saved. That ^ay that he expected
to be ^^ed himself. As he says also to the Galatia^ ^^ethren, says he, I
beseech you be as I am, for I am ^e are; that is, I am a Sinner as ye are. Now
^eseech you seek for Life, as I am seeking of ^ as who should say. For there is
a Sufficiency ^ the Lord Jesus, both for me and you.

Fourthly, It Is evident also, by the Triumph ^t such men make over all their
Enemies, ^^^h bodily and ghostly: Now thanks be to God, ^ Paul, who causest us
always to triumph in Jesus ^, who shall separate us from the Love of Christ ^
Lord: And again, O Death, where is thy Sting? ^ Grave, where is thy Victory?
The Sting of Death ^in, and the strength of Sin is the Law, but thank^ ^^to
God, who gives us the Victory through our ^ ^^^us Christ, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans
8.35. 1 Cor. 5.5^

Fifthly, It Is evident also, for that they are ^^de by the Glory of that which
they have found ^ him to suffer and endure what the Devil and ^ll it self has,
or could invent, as a means to ^^^arate them from him. Again, Who shall
fe^a^^^e us from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, ^ Distress, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness. ^ Peril, or Sword? (As it is written, For
they sak^ ^ are killed all the day long; we are accounted as ^eep for the
slaughter) Nay, in all these things we ^ more than Conquerors, through Him that
loved us. For (...) persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor ^^el^, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things ^ ^ut, nor things to come, nor Height,
nor Depth, (...) other Creature shall be able to separate (...) the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus, (...). 8.

Then come (to me) O! the Heart attracting ^^ry that is in Jesus Christ, (when
He is ^^^^vered) to draw those to Him that are (...) to Him of the Father!
Therefore those that came of old rendered this as the cause their coming to
him. And we beheld the G^^ of the only begotten of the Father, John 1.14. the
reason why others come not, but peri^^ their Sins, is for want of a sight of
his G^^ of your Gospel be hid, it is hid to them the l^st; ^n whom the God of
this World has (...) the M^nds of them that believe not, lest the ^rious Light
of the Gospel of Christ, who is ^mage of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. ^

There is therefore heart-pulling Glory ^^sus Christ, which when discovered
draw^ man to him; wherefore by shall come to ^ Christ may mean, when his Glory
is disc^^^n they must come, then shall they com^ me. Treasure as the true
Comers come ^ weeping and relenting, as being sensible of ^ own Vileness; so
again it is said, that the ^ som^d of the Lord shall return and come to ^ with
Singing and everlasting Joy upon ^ Heads; they shall obtain Joy and Gladness*
Sorrow, and Sighing shall fly away: That ^ the sight of the Glory of that
Grace, that ^ it self to them now, in the Face of our Lord ^^sus Christ, and
the Hopes that they may ^ have of being with him in the Heavenly ^^bernacles.
Therefore it says again, With ^ness and (...) shall they be brought; the^
enter into the Kings Palace, Isa. 35 10. ch 5. Psalm. 14 15.

There is therefore, Heart attracting G^^ the Lord Jesus Christ, which when
dis^ subjects the Heart to the Word, and man come to Him.

It Is said of Abraham, that when he dwel^ Mesopotamia, the God of Glory
appeared ^ (...), ( Acts 7.2) saying, Get thee out of thy ^ntry. And what then?
Why, away he ^t from his House and Friends, and all the ^^rld could not stay
him. Now as the Psalm. ^ says, Who is the King of Glory? He ^^^wers, The Lord
mighty in Battle. And (...) was that but He that spoiled Principalities ^
Powers, when he did hang on the Tree, ^mphing over them thereon? And who was
(...), but Jesus Christ, even the Person speaking ^he Text, Therefore he says
of Abraham, He ^ his Day; Yea says he to the Je^^s, your Fa^^^^ Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, ^ was glad, Psalm. 24 8 Col 2 14 Ja. ^.8
J^h 8 56. ^ndeed the carnal man says (at least) in his ^^^rt, Isa 53 2. there
is no form or comeliness ^ Christ; and when we shall see him, there is ^ Beauty
that we should desire him: But he ^; this he speaks, as having never seen him,
^ they that stand in his Word, by the he^p of ^ holy Spirit, they will tell you
other things. ^ we, say they, all with open face, beholding ^ a Glass, the
Glory of the Lord, are chan^ in the same Image, from glory to glory, ^. 3 18
They see glory in his Person, glory ^is Undertakings, glory in the Merit or his
^od, and glory in the Perfection of his Righ^^^usness; yea, heart affecting,
heart sweetning, ^ heart changing glory

^ndeed his Glory is veiled, and cannot be seen, ^ as discovered by the Father,
Mat. 11.27 It ^a^l'd with Flesh, with meanness of Descent ^n the Flesh, and
with that Ignominy and ^ we that attended him in the Flesh, but they ^ can, in
God's Light, see through these things, ^ shall see glory in him, yea, such glory
as will draw and pull their Hearts unto ^

Moses was the adopted Son of Pharoah's D^^^^ter, and for ought I know, had
been Kin^ last, had he then conformed to the present ^nities that was there at
Court; but he ^ not, he would not do it. Why, what wa^ matter? Why, he saw more
in the wo^^ Christ, (bear with the Expression) than h^ in the best of all the
Treasures of the La^^ Egypt. He refused to be called the Son o^ ^^roah's
Daughter; choosing rather to suffer ^tion with the People of God, than to enjo^
Pleasures of Sin for a season; esteemin^ reproach of Christ greater riches than
the ^sures of Egypt: For he had respect to the ^compence of Reward. He forsook
Egyp^ fearing the wrath of the King. But wha^ boldened him thus to do? Why, he
e^^ (for he had a fight of the Person speak^ the Text) he endured, as seeing
him (...) invisible. But I say, would a sight of ^ have thus taken away Moses's
Heart for Crown, a Kingdom, had he not by that ^ seen more in him, than was to
be se^^ them? Heb 11.24.

Therefore when he says, Shall come ^ he means they shall have a discovery ^
Glory of the Grace that is in him; ^ Beauty and Glory of that, is of such ^
that it constrains and forces with that ^ Violence, the Hearts of those that
are (...) him.

Moses of whom we spoke before, was n^^ when he was thus taken with the be^
Glory of his Lord; he was Forty Years ^ so consequently was able, being a Man ^
^isdom and O^portunity as he was, to make ^^e best judgment of the things, and
of the Good^^ss of them that was before him in the Land of ^^ypt. But he, even
he it was, that set that low ^eem upon the Glory of Egypt as to count it ^t
worth the m^dling with, when he had a ^ht of this Lord Jesus Christ. This
wicked ^orld thinks, that the Fancies of a Heaven, and Happiness hereafter, may
serve well enough ^ take the Heart of such as either have not the ^orld's good
things to delight in; or that are ^^ols, and know not how to delight themselves
^^rein: But let them know again, that we have ^ Men of all Ranks, and
Qualities, that have ^n taken with the Glory of the Lord Jesus, and ^e left all
to follow him: As Abel, Seth, Enoch, ^h, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Samuel,
David, ^mon, and who not, that had either Wit ^ Grace to favor heavenly
things? Indeed, ^e stand off from Him, nor any longer ^^d out against Him, to
whom he reveals ^ glory of his Grace.

And him that comes to me, (I will in no wise cast out.) ^y these Words, our
Lord Jesus does see ^h yet more amply, his great Goodness of ^ Nature toward
the coming Sinner. Be^ he said, They shall come; and he declares ^ with Heart
and Affections he will re^e them. But by the way, let me sp^ak ^ Word or two to
the seeming Condition ^ of this Promise, wi^h which I have ^ to do. [ And him
tha^ comes ^o me, I ^an no wise cast out] Where it (...) evident, ^y some say)
that Christ's receiving us ^^orcy depends upon our coming, and so our Salvation
by Christ is conditional. If ^ come, we shall be received; if not, we sh^^^
not; so that is fully intimated by the word^ The Promise of Reception is only
to hi^ that comes. And him that comes I answe^ that the Coming in these words
mentioned, ^ a condition of being received to life, is t^ which is promised,
yea, concluded to be ^^fected in us by the Promise going before In those latter
Words, coming to Christ, ^ implicitly required of us; and in the Wor^ before,
that Grace that can make them co^^ is positively promised to us [ All that ^
Father gives me, shall come to me, and ^ that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out] He^ we come to Christ, because it is said, We (...) come; because it
is given us to come So ^ the Condition which is expr^ss^d by Christ these
latter Words, is absolutely promised ^ the Words before. And indeed, the co^^
here intended, is nothing else but the effect ^ Shall come to me. They shall
come, and I ^ not cast them out.

( And him that come^h)

He says not, and him that is come, but ^ that comes.

To speak to these Words, 1. In General. 2 More Particularly.


In General: They suggest unto us (...) Four things:

F^rst, Th^^ Jesus Christ does build upon that since the Father gave his People
to ^ (...) be enabled to come unto him. ^ (...) comes: As who should say, I
(...) ^^nce they are given to Me, they sh^^ enabled to come unto Me. He says
not, if they come, or I suppose they will come; but, and him that comes. By
these words therefore he shows us that he address^th himself to the receiving
of them whom the Father gave to hims to save them: I say, He addresseth himself
or prepares himself to receive them: By which, as I said, He concludes or
buddeth upon it, that they shall indeed come to Him. He looks that the Father
should bring them unto his Bosom, and so stands ready to em^race them

Secondly, Christ also suggesteth by these words, that He very well knows who
are given to ^im, not by their coming to Him, but by their ^^ing gives to Him.
All that the Father gives ^e, shall come to me; and him that comes, etc. ^his
(Him) He knows to be one of them ^^at the Father has given Him; and
therefore ^e receives him even because the Father has ^ven him to him. J^h 10
I know my Sheep, says (...): Not only those that already have know^^^ge of
Him; but those too that yet are igno^^^t of Him. Other Sheep have I, said He,
that ^ not of this Fold: Not of the Jew^sh Church; ^t th^se that lie in their
Sons, even the rude and ^^^barous Gentiles. Therefore, when Paul was ^s afraid
to stay at Corinth, from a supposi^i^^ that some mischief might befall him
there; ^ not afraid, (says the Lord Jesus to Him.) ^ speak, and bold not thy
Peace, for I have much ^^le in this City, Joh. 10.16. Acts 18 9, 10. The ^ple
that the Lord here speaks of, were not ^his time accounted his, by reason of a
work ^ Conversion that had already passed upon ^n, by virtue of the Gift of the
Father, for He had given them unto Him; therefore ^ Paul to stay here, to speak
the word of ^ Lord to them, that by his speaking, the H^ Ghost might
effectually work over the Souls, ^ the ca^sing them to come to him, who was
(...) ready with Heart and Soul to receive them.

Thirdly, Christ by these Words also suggeste^ That no more come unto Him than
indeed ^ given Him of the Father; for the Him in ^ place is one of the (All)
that by Can ^ mentioned before. All that the Father gives ^ shall come to
me; and every Him of that ^ I will in no wise cast out. This the Apostle
s^^uate^h, where He says, He gave some A^tles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and ^ Pastors, and Teachers for the perfecting of ^ Saints, for
the Work of the Ministry, for the e^ing of the Body of Christ; 'till we come i^
Unity of Faith, and in the Knowledge of the So^ God, unto a perfect Men unto
the Measu^^ the S^ature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4

Mark! as in the Text, so here he speake^ (all;) Until we a I come: We (all!)
All ^ Doubtless all that the Father gives unto C^ This is farther insi^ua^ed,
because He (...) this all, the Body of Christ, ^h^ M^asure o^ Stature of the
Fullness of Christ: By which ^ means, the universal N^mber given, to wit^ true
elect Church; which is said to be his ^ and Fullness, Ephesians 1.22 23.

Fourthly, Christ Jesus by these Words ^ suggesteth, that He is well content
with the of the Father to Him, All that the Father ^ me, shall come to me; and
him that comes ^ I will in no wise cast out. I will heartily, w^ ^ly, and with
a great content of mind receive^

They show us also, that Christ's Love in receiving, is as large as the
Father's Love in giv^ng, and no larger. Hence He thanks Him for his Gift; and
also thanks Him for hiding of him and his things from the rest of the Wicked,
Mat 9.25 Luke 10.21.

But Secondly, and more particularly, And (him) that comes And (Him!) This
Word (Him;) ^y it Christ looks back to the Gift of the Father, not only in
the lump and whole of the Gift, but to the very him of that Lump. As who should
say, I do not only accept of the ^ift of my Father in general, but have a
spe^^al regard to every of them in particular; and ^^ill scare not only some of
the greatest part, ^^t every him, every do: Not an hoof of ^ All) shall be
lost, or left behind. And, indeed, in this He consents to the Father's ^ill;
which is, That of (All) that He has ^ven Him, He should lose nothing, Joh. 6
39.

And him) Christ Jesus also, by his thus divi^^ng the Gift of the Father into
(him^) and by ^ speaking of them in the singular Number, ^ews what a particular
Work shall be wrought ^ each one, at the time appointed of the Fa^^er. And it
shall come to pass in that Day, ^^th the Prophet, that the Lord shall beat off
from ^ Channel of the River, to the Streams of Egypt; ^ ye shall be gathered
one by one, O ye Children of ^el. Here are the (Hims) one by one to be ^hered
to Him by the Father Isa. 35 ^^.

He shows also hereby, that, that no Lineage, ^^tired, or Relation, can at all
be profited ^^y ^ Outward or Carnal Union with the Pe^^^n ^ the Father has
given to Christ* It Is only ^ he given him, the coming him, that the intends
absolutely to secure. M^^ make ^ great ado with the Children of Believers! ^ O
the Children of Believers! But if the Chi^^ of the Believer is not the Him
concerned ^ the absolute Promise, it is not these Men ^ great Cry, nor yet what
the Parent or Chi^^ can do, that can interest him in the Prom^^^ of the Lord
Christ; this absolute Promise.

And him ^) There are diverse sorts of Persons that the Father has given to
Je^^^ Christ; they are not all of one Ra^k, of ^ Q^ality. Some are High, some
Low; so^^ are Wise, some F^ols; some are m^re ci^ and complying with the Law,
some are m^ and averse to him and his G^spel. N^w si^ those that are given to
him* are in (...) sense to diverse; and again* since he yet s^ And him that
comes, etc He by that does (...) us to understand, that he is not as Men, ^
picking and c^^sing, to take a B^st and (...) a Worst; but he is for him that
the F^^ has given him, and that comes to him, will not alter nor change it; a
Good f^^ Bad, or a Bad for a Good, ( Lev 27.9) ^ will take him as he is, and
well save his ^

There is many a sad Wretch given by ^ Father to Jesus Christ; but not one of
the all in despised, or fl^ghted by Him

It is said of those that the Father has ^ to Christ, That they have done
worse that ^ Heathen: That they were Murderers, Thie^ Drunkards, unclean
Persons; and what (...) But he has received them, washed them, ^ saved them. A
fit Emblem of this sort is ^ wretched Instance mentioned in the Sixte^^ of the
^^iel, that was cast out in a stinking ^ ^ion, that no E^e p^tied, to do any of
the ^ngs there mentioned unto it, or to have ^mpassion upon it: No Eye, but his
that ^ak^^h in the Text.

And him) Let him be as red as Blood, let (...) be as ^e^ as C^imson. Some Men
are ^^d^red Sinners, Sinners of a double Dye, ^^p'd and dipped again, before
they come to ^^^us Christ, A^^ thou tha^ ^eadest these Lines ^n an one? Speak
o^t Man, are thou such ^ one? And a^^ thou now coming to Jesus ^^^ist for the
Mercy of Justification, that thou ^^gh^est be made While in his Blood, and be
(...) with his Righteousness? Fear not; for ^ much as this thy coming
betokens* that thou ^ of the Number of them that the Father has (...) to
Christ, so he w^ll an no wise cast thee ^ Come now, says Christ, and let us
reason ^ them; though your Sins he as sca^let, they shall ^s white as snow;
though they be as red as ^^^son, they shall be as Wool Isa 1 18.

And him) There was many a strange him ^e to Jesus Christ, in the Day of his
Fresh, ^he received them all, without turning any ^y. Speaking unto them of the
Kingdom of ^, and healing such as had need of healing, ^ 9.11 chapter 4 40 These
words a (...) him, are before words to be wondered at. That not ^ of them, who
by virtue of the Father's ^ and Drawing, are coming to Jesus Christ; ^, that
not one of them, whatever they have ^, should be rejected, or set by, but
admit^ ^o a Share in his saving Grace. It Is said ^^k^, That the People wondered
at the gracious ^ that proceeded out of his Mouth. Luke 4 12. ^ this is one of
his gracious Words; These Words are like Drops (...) H^ney, as it is ^ Prove.
16.24. Pleasant Words are as an Honey ^ sweet to the Soul, and health to the
Bones T^ ^^e gracious Words indeed, even as full ^ ^^ithfu^ ^igh Priest could
speak them. (...) says, When Christ speaks, he has a Mou^^ made a^ Heaven
and Earth. That is, to speak ^ (...) to the Encouragement of every sinful ^
(...) coming to Jesus Christ. And that ^ (...) is certain, hear how himself
confi^m^ ^ ^eaven and Earth (says He) shall pa^s (...) and shall not pass
away, Isa ^3 1 Mat. ^^

It is also confirmed by the Testimony e^ ^ou^ Evangel^sts, who gave faithful
Relation his loving Reception of all so^^s ^f coming ^^ers whether they were
Publicans, Hariots, The possessed of Devils B^^ll^^^s, and what not? ^ ^9.^.
Mat. 21.21. Luk 15. and chapter 23.4. Mark ^ chap. ^ 1.

This then shows us,

1st The greatness of the M^^^^s of Ch^i^^

2dly, The w^llingness of his Heart to im^ them for Life to the great, if
coming Sinne^

3. This shows us the greatness of the (...) of Christ; for it must not be
supposed, the wo^ds are bigger then his worthiness. (...) strong to execute. He
can Do as well as (...) He can do c^^ceding abundantly more than (...) or
think, even to the uttermost and outside (...), Ephesians. ^ 20.

Now then, since he concludes any com^ (...), at must be concluded, that he
can (...) that uttermost sin, any coming to him.

Do you think, I say, that the Lord Jesus (...) before he spoke? He speaks
(...), and (...), by his (...) ^e to judge how mighty be (...) to save. Isa 6^
1. ^ He speaks in Righteousness, in very Fa^th^^lness, when he organ to build
his blessed G^s^^l Fabric, the TEXT; it was for that he had ^^st sat down and
counted the Cost; and f^^ ^^at ^ knew he was able to finish What, Lord, any ^m!
Any him that comes to Thee! This is ^ Christ worth looking after; This is a
Christ ^orth coming to

This then should learn us diligently to consi^^^ the natural force of every
Word of God; and ^ judge of Christ's Ability to Save, not by our ^^ns, or our
shallow Apprehensions of his Grace, (...) by his word which is the true Measure
of ^ace. And if we do not judge thus, we shall ^horour his Grace; lose the
Benefit of his Word, ^^d needlessly fright out s^ves into many Discou^^gements
through coming to Jesus Christ Him, (...) him that comes, has sufficient from
this lord of Christ to feed himself with Hopes of ^^^vation. As thou art
therefore coming, Oh, (...) coming Sinner, judge thou whether Christ (...) save
thee, by the true Sense of his Words: ^^^ge, coming Sinner, of the Efficacy of
his and, of the Perfection of his Righteousness, and ^ the Prevalency of his
Intercession by his Word, (...) him, says he that comes to me, I will in ^
w^se cast out. In no wise that is for no Sin; ^ge therefore by his Wor^, how
able he is to (...) thee. (...) is said of God's Saying to the ^^^ldren of
Israel, There failed not ought of any (...) thing which the Lord had spoken to
the House of (...); ah came to ^ass And again. Not one thing ^ failed of all
the good thins which the Lord your (...) spoke concerning you; all are come to
pass; and ^ one thing has sailed thereof, Josh. 21.^5. ch 23.

Coming Sinner, What Promise thou finde^^ the Word of Christ strain is whither
thou^^ so thou do not corrupt it, and his Blood ^ Merits will answer all what
the Word say^ any true C^ns^q^ence that is drawn there ^ that we may ven^u^e
upon: As here in the ^ he says, [ and him that cometh] indefinitely, ^ out the
least intimation of the Rejecting of ^ though never so great, if he be a coming
Si^ Take it then for granted, That thou, wh^ thou art, if coming, art intended
in these W^ neither shall it injure Christ at all, if, as ^dad's Servants
served Ahab, thou shall ca^c^^ at his Word. Now says the Text, the M^
diligently observe whether any thing (...) come from him (to wit any word of
Grace ^ did hastily, catch it. And it happened the ^hab had called Benhadad his
B^o^her. The ^ replied therefore, Thy Brother Benhadad! ^ing him at his Word, 1
Kings 20 33. Si^ coming Sinner, serve Jesus Christ thus, a^ will take it kindly
at thy Hands. When in his Argument, called the Canaanitish ^ man Dog, she
caught, him at it, and ^ Truth, Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the Crumbs the from
their Masters^^s Table. I say, she caught ^ thus in his Words, and he took it
kindly, ^ing, O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto ^ even as thou will, Mat.
15.26. Catch him, c^ Sinner; catch him in his Words, sure^^ will take it
kindly, and will not be O^^ at thee.

2dly, The other thing that I told you, ^ed from these Words, is this, The
Wi^ness of Christ's Heart, to impute his ^cies for Life, to the great, if
coming (...) ^ him that comes to Me, I will in no wise ^ out.

The awakened coming Sinner, does not so ^y Question the Power of Christ, as
his Wil^ness to save him; Lord, if thou w^lt, thou ^, said one, Mark 1 40 He
did not put the If (...) his Power, but upon his Will. He con^ed he could, but
he was not fully perswa^ that He would. But we have the same ^und to believe He
will, as we have to believe ^an; and indeed Ground for both, is the ^rd of God.
If he was not willing, why did ^ Promise? Why did he say, He would re^ ^e the
coming Sinner? Coming Sinner, take ^ce of this; we use to plead practices with
^, and why not with God l^kewise? I am ^ we have no more Ground for one than ^
other; for we have to plead the Promise ^ fa^thful God. Jacob took him the^^;
Thou ^ (said he) I will surely do thee good, Genesis 32. ^ For, from this Prom^se
he con^^^^ed that it ^wed in Reason, He must be willing.

^he Text also gives some Ground for us to (...) the same Conclusions; And him
that com^ ^o me, I will in no wise cast out. Here is ^illingness asserted, as
well as his Power; ^ested. It Is worth your Observation, that ^ham's Faith
considered rather God's Power, ^ his Willingness; that is he drew his Con^ ^on,
I shall have a Child, from the Power ^ was in God, to fulfi^ the Promise to
him, ^e concluded he was willing to give him ^ else He would not have promised
one. He ^red not at the Promise of God through Unbelief, ^ns strong in Faith,
giving Glory to God; being ^ persuaded, that what he had promised, he was ab^e
to perform. Romans 4.20, 21 But was not ^ Faith exercised or tried, about his
Willing ^ too? No, there was no show of Reason for ^ because he had promised
it: Indeed, had he ^ promised it, he might have lawfully doubted ^ but since he
had promised it, there was left ^ ground at all for doubting, because his
Willness to give a Son, was demonstrated in his ^mising him a Son. These words
therefore ^ sufficient Ground to encourage any coming ^ner, that Christ is
willing, to his power, r^ceive him; and since he has power also t^ what he
will, there is no Ground at all le^^ the coming Sinner, any more doubt, but to
(...) in full Hope of acceptance, and of being ^^ved unto Grace and Mercy. And
him that ^^meth) He says not, And him that is come, and him that comes; That
is, And him (...) Heart begins to move after me, who is a^ all for my sake;
Him, who is looking out, ^ is on his Journey to me. We must the^ distinguish
between coming, and being co^^ Jesus Christ. He that is come to him, bu^ tain'd
of him more sensibly what he felt (...) he wanted, than he has, that is but yet
(...) to him.

A Man that is come to Christ, has the ^vantage of him that is but coming to
hi^ that in Seven Things.

First, He that is come to Christ, no^ ^ him, than he that is but coming to
him; ^ that is but coming to him, is yet in some ^ at a distance from him; as
it is said of ^^ming Prodigal. And whole he was yet (...) way of Luke 15. Now,
that that is ne^^ him has the best Sight of him, and so i^ ^ make the best
Judgment of his most wonderful Grace and Beauty; as God says, Let them come
ear, then let them speak. And as the Apostle ^ohn says,; And we have seen, and
do testify, that ^od sent his Son to be a Savior of the World, Isai^ 1 1. 1 John 4 14. He that is not yet come, though ^e is coming, is not fit, not being
indeed capa^^e to make that Judgment of the Worth and ^lory of the Grace of
Christ, as he is that is ^^me to him, and has seen and beheld it* therefore,
Sinner, suspend thy Judgment till ^^ou art come nearer.

Secondly, He that is come to Christ, has the ^dvantage of him that is but
coming, in that he ^eased of his Burden, for he that is but coming, ^ not eased
of his Burden, Mat 11.28 He that ^ come, has cast his Burden upon the Lord, ^
Faith he has seen himself released thereof* (...) he that is but coming, has
it yet, as to Sens^ (...) Feeling, upon his own Shoulders Come un^^ me, all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, implies, (...) their Burden, though they are
coming, is ^ upon them, and so will be, till indeed they ^ come to Him.

Thirdly, He that is come to Christ, has the ^^vantage of him that is but
coming, in this ^, namely, he has drank of the sweet and Soul^eshing Water of
Life; but he that is but co^^^g, has not. If any man thirst, let him come ^ me
and drink.

^ack He must come to him before he drinks, ^^^^rding to that of the Prophet,
Ho? every one ^ thirsts, come ye to the Waters He drinks ^ as he comes,
but when he is come to ^ Waters, Joh 7.34. Isa 45.1.

^ourthly, He that is come to Christ, as the Advantage of him that as yet is
but coming, ^ this also, to wit, He is not terrified with ^ Noise, and as I may
call it, Hue and Cry wh^ the Avenger of Blood makes at the Heels ^ him that is
yet but coming to him. W^^ the Slayer was upon the flight to the City of ^
Refuge, he had the noise or fear of the Ave^ of Blood at his Heels; but when he
was c^^ to the City, and was entered thereinto; the N^ ceased. Even so it is
with him that is com^ to Jesus Christ: He hears many a drea^ Sound in his
Ear; sounds of Death and D^^^nation, which he that is come, is at pre^ freed
from. Therefore He says, Come, (...) will give you ^est; and so he says agin,
^ that have believed, do enter into rest, as he ^ etc. Heb 4.

Fifthly, He therefore that is come to (...) is not so subject to those
Dejections and ^^mings down by reason of the Rage and Al^ of the evil One, as
is the Man that is ^ coming to Jesus Christ, (though he has T^^^tations too) and
while he was yet com^ the Devil threw him down, and tore him, Lu^^ 42. For he
has (though Satan still roareth (...) him) those experimental Comforts and
Ref^^^ments; to wit, in his Treasury, to p^^ himself with, in times of
Temptation and Co^^ which he that is but coming, has not.

Sixthly. He that is come to Christ, h^ ^dvantage of him that is but coming
(...) in this also, to wit, he has upon hi^ Wedding Garment; but he that is
comi^^ not. The Prodigal, when coming home to ^ther, was clothed with nothing
but (...) were tormented with an empty Belly, ^hen he was come, the best Robe
is brought ^ut; also the Gold Ring, and the Shoes, yea, ^^ey are put upon him
to his great rejoicing. The fatted Calf was killed for him; the Music ^as
struck up to make him merry: And thus To the Father himself sung of him. This
my ^n was dead, and is alive again, was lost, and ^ found, Luk 15.18.

Seventhly, In a ^o^d, he that is come to Christ, ^s Groans and Tears, his
Doubts and Fears are ^^rned into Sings and Praises; for that he has ^ow
received the Atonement, and the Earnest (...) his Inheritance; but he that is
but yet com^^g, has not these Praises, nor Songs of Deli^^rance with him, nor
has he as yet received ^^e Atonement and Earnest of his Inheritance, which is
the sealing Testimony of the Holy ^ost, through the Sprinkling of the Blood of
christ upon his Conscience; for he is not come, ^^m 5 11. Ephesians 1.13. Heb 12.22

And him that (comes.)

There is farther to be gathered from thi^ lord ( comes) these following
Particulars.

First, That Jesus Christ has his Eye upon, and ^^kes notice of the first
moving of the Heart of ^ Sinner after him. Coming Sinner, thou can ^t move
with desire after Christ, but he sees ^e work of those Desires in thy Heart.
All my (...) said David, are before thee, and my groanings (...) not hid from
thee, Psalm 38 9. This he spoke, as (...) w^ coming, (after he had
back-slidden,) (...) ^^e Lord Jesus Christ. It Is said of the Prodi^^l, that
while he was yet a great way off, his ^^ther saw him, had his Eye upon him, and
^^on the going out of his Heart after him, (...) 15.20.

When Nathaniel was come to Jesus Christ, the Lord said to them that stood
before him, b^hold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guilt ^ But
Nathaniel answered him, Whence know the me? Jesus answered, before that
Philip cal^ thee, when thou wast under the Fig Tree, I j^ thee. There I
suppose, Nathaniel was pouri^^ out his Soul to God for Mercy, or that (...)
would give him good Understanding abo^^ the Messiah to come. And Jesus saw all
t^^ workings of his honest Heart at that the John 1.47.

Zacheus also had some secret movings (...) Heart, such as they were toward
Jesus Christ when he ran before and climbed up the T^^ to see him; and the Lord
Jesus Christ b^ his Eye upon him. Therefore when he (...) come to the place, he
looked up to him, (...) him come down; For to day said he, I (...) ^^ide at thy
House. To wit, in order to (...) ^^rther completing the Work of Grace (...)
^^is Soul, Luke 19.1, etc. Rememember the coming Sinner.

Secondly, As Jesus Christ has his Eye upon so he has his Heart open to
receive the ^^ming Sinner: This is verified by the T^^ [ And him that comes to
me, I will in no wise ^ out.] This is also discovered by his prepari^^ the Way,
in his miking of it easy (as it (...) be) to the coming Sinner, which
preparation ^ manifest by them blessed Words, I will in ^ wise cast out. Of
which more when we ca^ to the p^ace. And while he was yet a (...) way off, his
Father saw him, and had compassion ^ him; and ran and fell on his Neck and
(...) him, Luke 15.20. All these Expressions (...) strongly prove, that the
Heart of Christ is open to receive the coming Sinner.

Thirdly, As Jesus Christ has his Eyes upon, and his Heart open to receive, so
he has resolved already that nothing shall alienate his Heart from receiving
the coming Sinner. No Sins of the coming Sinner, nor the length of the Time
that he has abode in them, shall by any means prevail with Jesus Christ to
reject him. Coming Sinner, thou art coming to a loving Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, These Words are therefore dropped from his blessed Mouth, on purpose
that the coming Sinner might take Encouragement to continue on his Journey,
till he come indeed to Jesus Christ. It was doubtless a great Encouragement to
blind Bartimeus, that Jesus Christ stood still and called him, when he was
crying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have me^cy upon me! Therefore it is said, He
cast away his Garment, ^ose up, and came to Jesus, Mark 10 46, etc. Now, ^f a
Call to come has such Encouragement in ^t, what is a Promise of receiving
such, but an Encouragement much more? And observe it, ^ho' he had a Call to
come, yet not having a Promise, his Faith was forced to work upon a mere
Consequence, saying, He calls me; and sure^y since he calls me, he will grant
me my Desire. Ah but coming Sinner, thou have no need to ^o so far about, as to
draw (in this matter consequences) because thou have plain Promises; And him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out* Here is full, plain, yea what
Encouragement ^ne can desire. For suppose thou were submit^ed to make a Promise
thy self, and Christ should attest that he would fulfill it upon the Sinner that
comes to him; could thou make a b^^ter Promise? Could thou invent a more for
free, or larger Promise? A Promise that loo^ (...) the first moving of the
Heart after Jes^^ Christ! A Promise that declares, yea that eng^ges Christ
Jesus to open his Heart to receive (...) coming Sinner: Yea farther, a Promise
t^ demonstrates that the Lord Jesus is resolv^ freely to receive, and will in
no wise cast (...) nor means to reject the Soul of the coming S^^ner. For all
this has, fully in his Promise, (...) does naturally flow therefrom Here th^^
need not make use of far fetched Conseque^ces, nor strain thy Wits, to force
encouragi^^ Arguments from the Text. Coming Sinner, (...) Words are plain. [
And him that comes unto (...) It will in no wise cast out.]

( And him that comes)

There are two sorts of Sinners that (...) coming to Jesus Christ.

First, Him that has never, till of late, ^ all began to come.

Secondly, Him that came formerly, and aft^^ that went back, but has since
bethought himself, and is now coming again.

Both these sorts of Sinners are intended (...) the Him in the Text, as is
evident; beca^^ both are now the coming Sinners.

And him that comes

For the first of these; The Sinner that has mover, while of late began to
come; his W^^^ is more easy; I do not say, more plain and open to come to
Christ, than is the other, (those la^^ having the ^log of a guilty Conscience
for the Sin of ^ac^sli^^ing hanging to their Heels (...) But all the
Encouragement of the Gospel, with that Invitations are therein contained to
co^ing Sinners, are as free and as open to the ^he as to other; so that they
may with the ^^me Freedom and Liberty as from the Word, ^oth alike claim
Interest in the Promise. All ^^ings are ready. All things for the coming
^acksliders, as well for the orders. Come to the Wedding. And let him that is
athirst come, Mat. 2 1, 2. Rev 22 17

B^t having spoken to the first of these alrea^^, I shall here pass it by; and
shall speak a Word or two to him that is coming, after Back-^^^ding, to Jes^s
Christ for Life.

Thy way, O thou Sinner of a double Die, any Way is open to come to Jesus
Christ. I ^ean thee, whose Heart after long Backsliding, ^oes think of turning
to him again. Thy way, ^ say, is open to him, as is the way of the other ^^rt
of Comers, as appears by what follows.

First, Because the Text makes no Exception against thee: It does not say, And
any Him ^ut a Backslider, any him but him. The Text ^oes not thus object, but
indefinitely opens ^ide its golden Arms to every coming Soul without the least
Exception, therefore thou ^ayst come. And take heed that thou shut ^ot that
Door of Unbelief which God has ^pen'd by his Grace.

Secondly, Nay the Text is so far from Ex^epting against thy coming, that it
strongly sug^esteth, that thou art one of the Souls intended. (...) thou coming
Backslider; else what need that ^lauses have been so inserted, I will in no
wise ^^st out? As who should say, Though those that ^ome now, are such as were
formerly Back-^^dden, I will in no wise cast away the Fornicator, the Covetous,
the Rule^, the Drunkar^ or other common Sinners, nor yet the Backsli^^^ neither.

Thirdly, That the Backslider is intended, ^ evident.

First, For that he is sent to by Name, Go^ has D^sciples, and Peter, Mark.
16.7. But Peter (...) a godly Man. True but he was also a Bac^slider, yea, a
desperate Backslider. He had a^med his Master once, twice, thrice, cursing ^
swearing that he knew him not. If this was (...) Backsliding, if this was not
an high and emine^^ Backsliding, yea a higher Backsliding than the art capable
of, I have thought amiss.

Again, When David had Backslidden, and h^ committed Adultery and Murder in
his Bac^sliding, he must be sent to by Name And s^^ the Text, The Lord sent
Nathan to David, and ^ sent him to (...) him after he had brought hi^ to
unfeigned acknowledgment; The Lord h^^ also put away or forgiven thy Sin; 2 Samuel 1 1.

This Man also was far gone. He took ^ Man's Wife, and killed her Husband, and
endeavored to cover all with wicked Dissimulation ^ He did this, I say, after
God had exalted him ^ and showed him great Favor; wherefore (...)
Transgressions was greatned also by the Prophet with mighty Aggravations; yet
he was accep^ed, and that with gladness, at the first step (...) took in this
returning to Christ. For the fir^^ step of the Backslider's return, is to say
sensibl^ and unfeignedly, I have sinned. But he had (...) sooner said thus, but
a Pardon was produc^^ yea, thrust into his Bosom. And Nathan s^^ unto David,
The Lord has also put away thy Sin.

Secondly, As the Person of the Backslider (...) ^ention'd by Name, so also as
the Sin; that if ^ossible, the Objections against thy returning to first may be
taken out of the way: I say, thy ^n also mentioned by Name and mixed, as
^ention'd with Words of Grace and Favor, ^ill heal their Backsl^ding, and love
them freely, ^s. 14 4. What say now Backslider?

Thirdly, Nay farther, thou are not only men^^^ned by Name, and thy Sin by the
Nature of (...) but thou thy self, who art a Returning ^^cksl^de^, put

First, Amongst God's Israel: Return, O back^^^ding Israel says the Lord, and
I will not cause my ^^ger to fall upon you; for I am merciful* says the ^^rd,
and will not keep anger for ever, Jer. 3 12.

Secondly, Thou art put among his Children, ^^ong his Children to whom he is
Married: ^n O backsliding Children, for I an Married ^o you; Verse 14, 15.

Thirdly, Yea, after all this, as if his Heart ^s so full of Grace for them,
that he was ^^ssed until he had uttered it before them: He ^s, Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will (...) your backsliding.

Fourthly, Nay further, The Lord has con^^^ered, that the shame of thy Sin
has stopped ^ Mouth, and made thee almost a Prayerless ^^n; and therefore he
says unto thee, Take ^h you words, and turn unto the Lord, and say ^o him,
Take away all Iniquity, and receive us ^ciously See his Grace, that himself
should (...) Words of Encouragement into the Heart of ^ackslider; as he says
in another place, I ^^ght Ephraim to go, taking him by the Arms, ^ is i^
teaching him to go indeed, to hold him ^ by the Arm, by the Chin, as says
Hosea 14. ^ chapter 11.3.

From what has been said, I conclude, (...) as I said before, That the Him in
the Text ^ Him that comes, includes hoth these for ^ Sinners, and therefore
both should freely (...)

Quest. But where does Jesus Christ, in (...) Word of the New Testament,
expressly speak (...) returning Backslider with words of Grace and Po^ For what
you have urged as yet, from the ^ Testament, is nothing but Consequences drawn
^ the Text. Indeed, It is a fall Text for (...) ignorant Sinners, that come;
but to me, ^ am a Backslider, it yields but little Relief*

Answer First. How! but little Incour^^^ment from the Text, when it is said, I
wi^^ no wise cast out. What more could have ^ said? What is here omitted, that
might ^ been inserted, to make the Promise more ^ and free? Nay, take all the
Promises (...) Bible; all the free Promises: with all the ^riety of Expressions
of what Nature or (...) whatsoever, and they can but amount t^^ Expressions of
this very Promise, I will i^ wise cast out: I will for nothing, by no m^^ upon
no Account, however they have (...) however they have backslidden, however ^
have provoked, Cast out the coming Si^ But,

Secondly, Thou say, Where does (...) Christ, in all the Words of the New
Testa^^^^ speak in a returning Backslider with we^^ Grace and Peace? That is
under the Name ^ Backslider.

Answer, Where there is such plenty of ^^^ples in receiving Backsliders, there
is t^^ need of express words to that intent (...) Promise, as the Text is with
the Exi^ ^ are annexed, are instead of many Promises. ^ besides I reckon that
the act of receiving ^ as much, if not of more Incouragment, than ^^are Promise
to receive; for Receving is as ^romised and the Fulfilling of it too. So that
(...) Old Testament thou have the Promise and ^^e New, the fulfilling of it;
and that in ^^s Examples.

^^^st, In Peter, Peter Denied his Master, once, ^e, thrice, and that with an
open Oath; yet ^st received him again, without any the least ^tation or stick.
Yea, he slips, stumbles, ^ again in down tight Dissimulation, and that ^he Hurt
and Fall of many others; but ^^er of this does Christ make a Bar to his
^^^^ion, but receives him again at his return, ^he knew nothing of the fault,
Gal. 2.

^^condly, The rest of the Disciples, even all ^^em Backslide, and leave the
Lord Jesus in ^ greatest Straits. Then all the Disciples ^^ok him and fled;
They returned ( as he ^oretold) every One to his Own, and left ^ alone: But
this also he passes over as a ve^ ^^ght Matter; not that it was so indeed in ^
^f, but the abundance of Grace that was in ^ did lightly roll it away; for
after his Re^^^^^ction, when at first He appeared unto 'em, ^ gives 'em not the
least Check for their per^^^s Dealing with Him, but salutes them ^ Words of
Grace, saying, All Hail, be ^fraid, Peace be to you: All Power in ^en and Earth
is given unto me. True, ^ebuk'd them for their Unbelief; for the ^ which, thou
deservest the same; for it is ^elief that alone puts Christ and his Benefits
(...), Mat 26.56. Joh. 16.52. Mat. ^8.9, 10, 18. ^ ^6.99. Mark 16.14.

Thirdly, The Man that* after a large Pa^sion, lay with his Father's Wife, come
^ a high Transgression, even such an one (...) that Day was not heard of; no
not amon^ Gentiles, Wherefore this was a desperate ^sliding; yet at his Return,
he was received ^ accepted again to Mercy, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. 2 Cor. 2. ^

Fourthly, The Thief that stole, was bi^^ steal no more; Not at all doubting,
but ^ Christ was ready to forgive him this Ac^ Backsliding, Ephesians. 4 28.

Now all these Examples are particular ^^stances of Christ's readiness to
receive the ^sliders to Mercy; and observe it, Examples ^ Proofs that He has
done so, are to our ^^lieving Hearts stronger Encouragements ^ bare Promises,
that so he will do* But against Lord Jesus has added to these, for the
^^couragement of returning Backsliders to (...) to Him.

First, A Call to come, and He will (...) them, Rev. 2.1, 2 etc. chap. 3.1, 2
etc. When ^ New Testament Backsliders have encourageme^^ come.

Secondly, A Declaration of readiness to (...) them that come, as here in the
Text, a^ many other places, is plain: Therefo^^ up these Marks, make thee these
High (...) (of the Golden Grace of the Gospel) set ^ Heart toward the Highway,
even the ^ that thou wentest (when thou did bac^^ turn again O Virgin of
Israel; turn a^^ these thy Cities, Jer 31.21.

And Him that (comes) He says not ^ him that takes, that professes, that
no^ show, a Noise, or the like; but Hi^ ^^eth. Christ will take leave to judge,
who a^ong the many that make a Noise, they be that ^^aced are coming to Him. It
is not him that ^ith he comes; but him that Christ himself ^ all say does
come; that is concerned in the ^ext. When the Woman that had the Bloody ^sue
came to him for Cure, there were others ^ well as she, that made a great Bustle
about ^^m, that touched, yea thronged him; ah, but christ could distinguish
this Woman from them (...). And he looked round about upon them all, (...) see
her that had done this thing, Mar. 25.26. ^c.

He was not concerned with the thronging, ^ touching of the rest; for theirs
were but ^^cidental, or at best void of that which made (...) Touch acceptable.
Wherefore Christ must ^ Judge who they be that in Truth are co^ing to Him.
Every man's way it right in (...) own eyes, but the Lord weighs the Spirits:
^ stands therefore every one in hand to be ^^rtain of their coming to Jesus
Christ; for ^ thy Coming is, so shall thy Salvation be: ^ thou come indeed,
thy Salvation shall be ^^deed: But if thou come but in outward ^ppearance, so
shall thy Salvation be. But ^ Coming, see before, as also afterward in ^^e Use
and Application.

And him that comes (to Me.)

These Words (to me) are also to be well ^eded: For by them; as he secureth
those ^^r come to him, so also he shows himself ^ concerned with those that in
their coming ^ short to turn aside to others: For you (...) know that every one
that comes, comes (...) to Jesus Christ. Some that come, come to Moses and to
his Law, and then take upon Life; with these Christ is not concerned; (...)
with these, this Promise has nothing to as ^ Christ is become of none effect
unto you ^ Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye ar^ fallen from Grace,
Gal. 5 3 4. Again, some tha^ came, came no farther than the Gospel Ordinances,
and there stay; they came not through them to Christ: With these neither is He
concerned; nor will the Lord! Lord! avail the^ them any thing in the great and
dismal D^^ A Man may come to, and also go from t^^ Place and Ordinances of
Worship, and yet (...) be remembered by Christ. So I saw the Wic^ed buried,
(says Solomon) who had come (...) gone from the Place of the Holy, and they
wi^^ forgotten in the City, where they had so d^^. ^ This is also vanity, Eccl
8.10.

(To me) These Words therefore are by ^^sus Christ very varily put in, and
serve for ^^tion and encouragement: For Caution, lest ^ take up in our coming
any thing short of Chr^^^ and for Encouragement to those that shall ^ their
coming, come past all, tiil they co^^ to Jesus Christ. And him that comes to
me ^ will in no wise cast out.

Reader, If thou love thy Soul, take (...) Caution kindly at the Hands of
Jesus Ch^^^ Thou see thy Sickness, thy Wound, thy ^^cessity of Salvation:
Well, go not to Kin^ ^^cob, for he cannot Heal thee, nor cure th^^ thy Wounds,
Hos. 5.13. Take the Caution ^ I^st Christ, instead of being a Savior unto ^
becomes a Lion, a young Lion to tea^ ^ and go away, Verse 4.

There is a coming, but not to the (...) High: There is a coming, but not with
the Heart; but as it were feignedly: Therefore take the Caution kindly, Jer
30.10 Hos. 7.16.

And him that comes (to me) Christ as (...) Savior, will stand alone, because
his own Arm alone has brought Salvation unto Him: He will not be joined with
Moses, nor suffer John Baptist to be Tabernacled by Him; I say they must
vanish, for Christ will stand alone, Luke 9.28 36) Yea, God the Farther will
have it so (...) therefore they must be parted from him, and (...) Voice from
Heaven must come to bid the Disciples hear, only the beloved Son. Christ will
not suffer any Law, Ordinance, Statute, or Judgment, to be Partners in the
Sinner to come; I say, not to be Partners in the Sinner. Nay, he says not, And
him that comes to my Word but and him that comes to Me. The Words of Christ,
even his most blessed and free Promises, such as this Text, are not the Savior
of the World; for that is Christ himself, Christ himself only. The Promises
therefore are but to encourage the coming Sinner to come to Jesus Christ, and
not to rest in 'em short of Salvation by him.

And him that (comes to Me) the Man therefore that comes aright, casts all
things behind his Back, and looked at (nor has his Expectation from ought but)
the Son of God alone, as David said, My Soul, wait thou only upon God, for my
expectation is from him: He only is my Rock, and Salvation; He is my Defense, I
shall not be moved, Psalm. 92 5. His Eye is to Christ, his Heart is to Christ,
and his Expectation is from him only. Therefore the Man that comes to Christ,
is one that has had deep Considerations of his own (...) slighting Thoughts of
his own Righteous^^^^ and high Thoughts of the Blood and Right^ousness of Jesus
Christ; yea, he sees, as I h^^ said more Virtue in the Blood of Christ, to
(...) him, than there is in all his Sins to Damn h^^ He therefore sets
Christ before his Ey^ there is nothing in Heaven or Earth he kno^ that can save
his Soul, and secure him from (...) Wrath of God, but Christ; that is, nothing
(...) his Personal Righteousness, and Blood.

And him that comes to Me, I will (in no wise) (...) out. In no wise: By these
Words, there is some thing expressed, and something implied; Th^^ which is
expressed, is Christ Jesus; his uncha^geable Resolution to save the coming
Sinner; ^ will in no wise reject him, or deny him (...) Benefit of my Death and
Righteousness. Th^^ Word is therefore like that which he speaks ^ the
everlasting Damnation of the Sinners ^ Hell Fire, he shall by no means depart
thenc^ that is, Never! Never come out again! (...) not to all Eternity! Mat
5.25 ch 25.46. So (...) as he that is condemned into Hell sire, has ^ ground
of Hope for his Deliverance thence; ^ him that comes to Christ, has no ground
(...) fear that he shall ever be cast in thither.

Thus says the Lord, if Heaven above can ^ measured, and the Foundations of
the Earth s^ched out beneath, I will also cast off all the ^ of Israel, for all
that they have done, says ^ Lord, Jer 31 37.

Thus says the Lord, If my Covenant be ^ with Day and Night, and if I have not
appoi^^ the Ordinances of Heaven and Earth, then (...) cast away the Seed of
Jacob. But Heaven c^^ ^^e measured, n^^ the Foundations of the Earth sear^hed
out beneath; h^s Covenant is also with Day and Night; and he has appointed the
Ordinan^es of Heaven; therefore he will not cast away the ^^ed of Jacob, w^o
^ne the coming Ones; b^^ will ^ertainly save them from the dreadful Wrath to
^^me, Jer. 33 24 26. ch 50 4.5. By this therefore ^is manifest, that it was not
the greatness of ^in, nor the ^ong continuance in it, no nor yet (...)
B^cksl^^ing, not the Pollution of the Nature, that can put a B^^ in against, or
be an ^in^rance of the Salvation or the coming Sin^er. For, if indeed this
could be, then would (...) most solemn and absolute Determination ^f the Lord
Jesus, of it self fall to the Ground, and be made of none effect: But his
Counsel ^ha^l stand and he will do this Pleasure; that ^, his Pleasure in this;
for all Promise, this ^ reversible conclusion arises of his Pleasure; ^e will
stand to it, and will fulfill it, because ^ is his Pleasure.

Suppose that One Man had the Sins, or as ^any Sins as an Hundred; and another
should ^^ve an hundred times as many as he; yet if ^^ey come; this Word I will
in no wise cast out, ^ cures them both alike.

Suppose a Man has a desire to be saved, and ^ that purpose is coming in truth
to Jesus ^^rist, but he, by his debauched Life, has Damn^ many in Hell; Why,
the Door of Hope is ^ these Words for as open for him, as it is for ^n that
has not the Thousandth part of his ^^ansgressions: And him that comes to me,
I (...) in no wise cast out.

Suppose a Man is coming to Christ to be Sa^^, and has nothing but Sin, and an
ill spent Life to to bring with him; why, let him com^ and welcome to Jesus
Christ; and he will m^s^ cast him out, Luke 7 41. Is not this Love that p^^seth
knowledge? Is not this Love the Wonderment^ Angels? And is not this Love worthy
of all accept^tion at the Hands and Hearts of all coming Sinners.

2dly, That which is implied in this Word*

First, The coming Souls have those that continually lie at Jesus Christ, to
cast them off

2dly, The coming Souls are afraid, that tha^ will prevail with Christ to cast
them off

For these Words are spoken to satisfy us ^ to stay up our Spirits against
these two Dangers; I will in no wise cast out

First, For the First Coming Souls have tho^ that continually lie at Jesus
Christ to cast 'e^ off.

And there are Three things that thus ^en^ themselves against the coming Sinner.

First, There is the Devil, the Accuser of t^ Brethren, that accuses them
before God Day ^ Night, Rev. 12.10. This Prince of Darkness, ^ unwearied in
this Work; He does it, as ye^ see, Day and Night; that is, without ceasing He
continually puts in his Caveats against the^ if so be, he may prevail. How did
he ply ^ against that good Man Job, if possible he mig^^ have obtained his
Destruction in Hellfire? ^ ob^ected against him that he served not God for
nou^^ and tempted God to put forth his Hand against hi^ urging, that if he did
it, he would Curse him t^ Face; and all this as God witnesses, he did with^^
Cause, Job 19, 13* 14. chapter 2 4, 5. How did he ply ^ with Christ, against Joshua
the High Prie^^ And he showed me Joshua said the Prophet the ^ Priest, standing
before the Angel of the Lord, ^ ^tan standing at his Right hand to resist him,
Zech.

To resist him; that is, to prevail with the lord Jesus Christ to resist him;
objecting the ^ncleanness and unlawful Marriage of his Sons ^ith the Gentiles;
for that was the time that ^^tan laid against them, Ez^a 10.18. Yea, and ^r
ought I know, Joshua was also guilty of the ^ct; but if not of that, of Crimes
no whit in^^riour; for he was clothed with fi^thy Garments, as ^ stood before
the An^el: Neither had he one word ^ say in vindication of himself against all
that this ^^cked One had to lay against hi^ But notwithstan^^ng all that, he
came off very w^ll, but he might ^^ank a good Lord Jesus for it, because he did
not ^si^t him; but contrariwise, took up his Cause, ^eading against the Devil*
excusing his Infir^ity, and put Justifying Robes upon him be^^re his
Adversaries Face.

And the Lord said unto ^acan. The Lord rebuke thee, ^ Satan even the Lord that
has chosen Jerusalem, ^uke thee. Is not this a Brand plucked out of the ^? And
he answered, and spoke to those that stood ^e him, saying. Take away the fi^thy
Garment from ^; and to him he sa^d, Behold I have caused thine ^^uities to pass
from thee, and I will cloth thee ^ change of Raim^nt.

^gain. How did Satan ply it against Peter, ^ ^n he desired to have him that he
might sift ^ as Wheat. That is, if posible, to sever all ^ce from his Heart,
and leave him nothing ^ Flesh and Filth, to the end he might make ^ Lord Jesus
loath and abhor him. Simon, ^on (says Christ) Satan has desired to have ^ that
he might sift you as Wheat. But did ^revail against him? No; but I have Prayed
^ thee, that thy Faith fail not. As who should ^^y; Simon, Satan has desire me
(...) would give thee up to him and not only (...) but all the rest of thy
Brethren (for that ^ word You, imp^^^s) but I will not leave thee ^ his Hand, I
have prayed for thee, thy Fa^ shall not fail; I will secure thee to the heaven
Inheritance, L^ke 22.30 31, 32.

Secondly. As Satan so every Sin, of the c^^ing Sinner, comes in with a Voice
against hi^ if, pa^^^ps they may prevail with Christ to ca^^ off the Soul. When
I^real was coming out Egypt to Canaan, h^w many Times had t^ Sins thrown them
out of the mercy of G^ has not Moses as a Type of Christ, stood in ^ Breach, to
turn away his Wra^h from the ^ Psalm. 106.23 Our I^^quities testify against ^
and would ce^tainly prevail against us, to ^ utter R^jection and Damnation, had
we (...) Adv^ca^e with the Father, Jesus Christ ^ righteous, 1 John 2.1, 2.

The Sins of the old World, cried them d^ to Hell; the S^ns of So^om fetched
upon the Fire from H^aven, which devouted them; ^ Sins of the Egyptians ca^ried
them down to^ because they came not to Jesus Christ for L^ Coming Sinner, thy
Sins are no what less t^ any. Nay, perhaps, they are as big as all the^ Why is
it then, that thou live when they ^ Dead; and that thou have a Promise of
Pard^^ when they had not? Why, thou art co^ to Jesus Christ, and therefore Sin
shall n^ thy Ruin.

Thirdly, As Satan and Sin, so the Law^ Moses, as it is a perfect holy Law,
has a V^ against you before the Face of God. The^ one that accuses you, even
Moses's Law, ^ 5. Yea, it accuses all Men of Transgres^ ^at have sinned
against it; for as long as Sin is ^, there will be a Law to accuse for Sin: But
^is Accusation shall not prevail against the ^^ming Sinner, because it is Christ
that dyed, and ^t ever lives to make Intercession for them that come ^ him by
him, Romans 8 Heb 7 25.

These things I say, do accuse us before Christ ^^sus; yea, and all to our own
Faces, if per^^ps they might prevail against us. But these ^ords. I will in no
wife cast out, secure the com^^g Sinner from them all.

The coming Sinner is not saved, because there ^ none that comes in against
him; but because ^ Lord Jesus will not hear their Accusations; ^ll not cast out
the coming Sinner,

When Shimei came down to meet King Da^^^, and to ask Pardon for his Rebellion,
up ^rts Abishai, and puts in his Caveat, saying; ^ll not Shimei Die for this?
This is the Case ^ him that comes to Christ: He has his Abi^^^i, and that
Abishai, that presently steps in a^^inst him, saying, Shall not this Rebel's
Sin de^^ him in Hell? Read farther; But David an^^ered, What have I to do with
you, ye Sons of Zer^^h, that you should this Day be Adversaries to me? ^ll
there any Man be put to Death this Day in Is^^? For do not I know, that I am
King this ^ over Israel? 2 Samuel 19 16, 17, 18 etc.

This is Christ's Answer by the Text, to all ^ accuse the coming Shimei's. What
have I to ^ith you, that Accuse the coming Sinners to me? ^^unt you Adversaries
that are against my showing ^^cy to them. Do not I know that I am exalted ^ Day
to be King of Righteousness, and King of ^ce? I will in no wise cast them out.

Secondly, But again, These Words do closely imply, that the coming Souls are
afrai^ these Accusers will prevail against the^ is evident, because the Text is
spoken their Relief and Succor. For that need be, if they that are coming,
were not s^ to Fear, and Despond on this account. A^ there is a Guilt, and the
Curse lies upon Conscience of the coming Sinner.

Besides: he is conscious to himself, w^ Villain, what a Wretch he has been
ag^ God and Christ. Also he now knows by ^ful Experience, how he has been at S^
B^ck, and at the motion of every Lust* his now new Thoughts of the Holiness, ^
Justice of God. Also he feels, that he ^ not fo^bear sinning against him For
the ^tions of Sin, which are by the Law, do^^ Work in his Members, to bring
for^^ unto Death. Rom 7. But n^ne of this ne^ sin^e we have so good, so tender
Hearted ^ so faithful a Jesus to come to; who wi^^ ^ther overthrow Heaven and
Earth, than s^ Tittle of this Text to fail: And him the ^meth to Me, I will in
no wise cast out.

Now we have yet to enquire into two ^ that lie in the Words, to which there
ha^ nothing said: As,

1. What it is to Cast out?

2. How it appears that Christ has Power ^ or Cast out?

For the first of these, What it is to ^ To this I will speak,

1. More generally.

2. More particularly.

More generally.

First. To Cast out, is to slight or des^ ^emn; as is said of Readiness Shield, It
was vile^ ^st away: that is slighted and contemned. ^s it is with the Sinners
that come not to ^s Christ. He flights. despises, and contemns

That is, Casts them away, 2 Samuel 1 2.

^^condly, Things Cast away, are reputed as ^struous Gloaths, and as the Dirt
of the street, ^ 22. Psalm. ^8 42. Mat. 5 13. chapter 15.17 And ^ it shall be with
the Men that come not to ^ Christ; they shall be accounted as men. ^us, and as
the Dirt in the Streets.

^^irdly, To be Cast out or off, is to be abhor^ not to be pitied; but to be
put to a perpe^ shame, Psalm 49 9 Psalm 89 38. Amos 1 1^.

^ut more particularly, to come to the T^xt, ^ Casting out here mentioned, is
not limited ^his or the other Evil; therefore it must be ^nded to the most
extreme and utmost Mi^ Or thus:

^ that comes to Christ, shall not want any ^g that may make him Gospelly
happy in ^ World, or that which is to come; nor ^ he want any thing that comes
not, that ^ make him spiritually and eternally Misera^

^t further, As it is to be generally taken, so ^ ^pecteth Things that shall be
hereafter.

^or the Things that are now, they are either,

^ More General.

^ Or more Particular.

^^st, More General Thus,

^ is to be cast out of the Presence and Favor ^ God.

^ins was Cain cast out, Thou have driven (or ^ ^^me out this Day, from thy
Face, (that is, ^m thy Favor) shall I be hid. A dreadful Complaint! but the
Effect of a more dre^ Judgment! Therefore here is the Mercy of ^ that comes to
Christ, He shall not be le^^ wander at Uncertainties. The Lord Jesus C^ will
keep him as a Shepherd does his S^ Psalm. 23. Him that comes to Me, I will i^
wise Cast out.

Thirdly, To be Cast out, is to be deni^ place in God's House, and to be left
as Fugi^ and Vagabonds, to pass a little Time awa^ this miserable Life, and
after that to go ^ to the Dead, Gal 4.30. Genesis 4.13, 14, ^ 21:10. Therefore
here is the Benefit of ^ that comes to Christ, He shall not be deni^ place in
God's House. They shall not be left ^ Vagabonds in the World. Him that com^ me,
I will in no wise cast out, See Prove. ^ Isa. 56.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.19, 20. 1 Cor.
3.1^, 22

Fourthly, In a Word, to be cast out, is ^ Rejected as are the fallen Angels:
For ^ eternal Damnation began at their being down from Heaven to Hell. So then
not cast out, is to have a Place, a House, and ^tation there; and to have a
share in the ^ ledges of elect Angels.

These Words therefore, I will not cast ^ will prove great Words one Day, to
the^ come to Jesus Christ, 2. Peter 2.4. John ^ Luke 20.35.

Secondly. And more Particularly.

First, Christ has everlasting Right^ to cloth them with, that come to him, ^
shall be covered with it as with a Garm^ the rest shall be found in the filthy
Rags ^ own stinking Pollutions, and shall be w^^ in them as in a Winding Sheet,
and so be^ ^ame before the Lord, and also before the An^^ls, Dan. 2.24 Isa. 57.
2. Rev. 3 4, 18 chapter 15.16.

^hirdly. Christ has precious Blood, that like ^ open Fountain, stands free
for him to wash in, ^at comes to him for Life. And he will in no ^se cast him
out. But they that come not to ^m, are rejected from a share therein, and are
^t to ireful Vengeance for their Sins, Zech. 13 ^ 1 Pet. 1.11, 19 John 13 8
chap. 3, 36.

Fourthly, Christ has precious Promises, and ^ey shall have a share in them
that come to ^m for Life. For he will in no wise cast them ^t: but they that
come not, can have no share ^ them, because they are true only in him: For ^
him, and only in him, all the Promises are ^ea and Amen. Wherefore they that
come ^t to him are no whit the better for them, Psalm. ^ 16. 2 Cor. 1.20, 21.

Fifthly, Christ has also fullness of Grace in ^mself, for them that come unto
him for Life. ^d he will in no wise cast them out. But those ^ come not unto
him, are left in their grace^ State, and as Christ leaves them, Death, Hell* ^
Judgment finds them. He that finds Me, ^ith Christ) finds Life, and shall
obtain ^ our of the Lord. But he that Sins against Me, ^ngeth his own Soul. All
that hate Me, ^e Death, Prove. 8.33, 34, 36.

^ixthly, Christ is an Intercessor, and ever ^eth to make Intercession for them
that come ^ God by him. But their Sorrows shall be ^^iplied, that hasten after
another (or other) ^s, (their Sins and Lusts.) Their Drink-Of^ ^^s will he not
offer, nor take up their Names ^ his Lips, ^sal. 16 4. Heb. 7.25.

^eventhly. Christ has wonderful Love, Bowels, and Compassion for those that
come to him: For he will in no wise cast them out. By the rest will find him a
Lion rampant; b^^ will one Day tear them in pieces. Now consider this (says
he) ye that forget God, lest ^ tear you in pieces, and there be none to del^t^
you, Psalm 50.22.

Eighthly, Christ is known by, and for who ^ sake, those that come to him, have
their Persons and Performances accepted of the F^ther: And he will in no wise
cast them out B^^ the rest must fly to the Rocks and Mountai^ for shelter, but
all in vain, to hide them from his Face and Wrath, Rev. 6.15.

But again, These Words ( cast out) have ^ special Look to what will be
hereafter eve^^ at the Day of Judgment For then, and no^ till then, will be the
great Anathema a^ Casting out, made manifest, even manifest ^ Execution.
Therefore here to speak as ^ this, and that under these two Heads. As,

1. Or the casting out it self.

2. Of the Pla^^^ into which they shall ^ cast, that shall then be cast out.

First, The Casting out it self stands ^ Two Things.

1. In a Preparatory Work.

2. In the Manner of executing the Act

The Preparatory Work stands in (...) Three Things.

First, It stands in their Separation ^ have not come to him, from them that
^ at that Day. Or thus: At the Day of ^ great Casting out, those that have not
^ come to him, shall be separated from ^ that have; for them that have, he will
^ cast out When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels
with him then ^e shall be (...) the Throne of his Glory, and before him shall
^e (...) Nations, and he shall se^^rate them (...) another, at the Shepherd
di^ideth the Sh^^p (...) the Goats, Mat 25.31, 32.

This dreadful (...) on therefore shall then ^e made betwix^ them that (now)
come to Christ, and them that come not. And good Reason; for since they would
not with us, ^ one to him, now they have Time; why should they stand with us,
when Judgment is come

Secondly, They shall be placed before him according to their Condition; they
that have come to him in great dignity, even at the Right Hand, for He will in
no wise cast 'em ^ut: But the rest shall be set at his Left ^and; the place of
Disgrace and Shame; for ^hey did not come to him for Life.

Distinguished also shall they be by fit Terms. those that come to him he
calls Sheep, but ^e rest are frowish Goats. And he shall se^arate them one
from another, as the Shepherd ^^videth the Sheep from the Goats; and the ^heep
will be set on his Right Hand (next ^eaven Gate, for they came to him) but the
^oats on the Left, to go from him into Hell, because they are not of his Sheep

Thirdly, Then will Christ proceed to Con^^^ion of those that came not unto
him; and ^ill say, I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in, or (...) not come
unto me. Their Excuse of them^^^ves* he will slight as Dirt, and proceed to
^^eir final Judgment Now, when these wretch^^ Rejecters of Christ, shall thus
be set before him, and Convicted; this is the Preparat^^^ Work, upon which
follows the Manner of e^curing the Act, which will be done.

First, In the Presence of all his Holy Ange^

Secondly, In the presence of all them that their Life time came to him, by
saying un^^ them, Depart ye Cursed, into everlasting F^^ prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, with a Reason annexed to it: For you were cruel^^ me and mine,
particularly discovered in the Words; For I was an Hungered, and ye gave ^ no
Meat: Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink, was a Stranger, and ye took me not in;
Nak^^ and Clothed me not; Sick and in Prison, and ^ visited not me, Mat 25,
41, 42 etc.

Lastly, Now it remains that we speak of ^ Place into which these shall be
cast, which ^ the General, you have heard already, to ^ the Fire prepared for
the Devil and his Ange^ But in Particular, it is thus described.

First, I^ is called T^phet; For Tophet is orde^ed of old, yea, for the King
(the Lucifer) it prepared, he has made it deep and large, the P^ thereof is
Fire and much Wood, and the Brea^^ of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone do^
kindle it, Isa. 30.32.

Secondly, It is called Hell. It is better for th^^ to enter into Life, halt or
lame, than having two F^^ to be cast into Hell. Mark 9 45

Thirdly, It is called the Wine Press of ^ Wrath of God: and the Angel thrust
in ^ Sickle into the Earth and gathered the Vi^^ the Earth (that is them that
did not come ^ Christ) and Cast them into the great Wi^^ Press of the Wrath of
God, Rev. 14.19.

Fourthly, It is called a Lake of Fire: ^ whosover was not found Written in the
Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire, Rev. 10.15.

Fifthly, It is called a Pit. Thou have said in thy Heart I will ascend into
Heaven, I will ^ealt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will it also upon the
Mount of the Congregation, in ^he sides of the North. -- Yet thou shall be
^rought to Hell to the sides of the Pit, Isa, 14. ^3.14, 15.

Sixthly, It is called a Bottomless Pit, out of which the Sm^ak and the Locust
came, and into which the Dragon was cast; and it is called Bottomless, to show
the Endlesness of the fall that they will have in it, that come not in the
^cceptable time to Jesus Christ Revelations 9.11. Chap 10.3.

Seventhly, It is called Outer Darkness: Bind ^im Hand and Foot, and ^^st him
into Outer Darkness, and cast ye the Unprofitable Servant unto utter Darkness,
there shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 22.^3. chapter 15.13.

E^ghthly, It is called a Furnace of Fire. At ^^erefore the Tares are gathered
and burned in ^^e Fire, so shall it be in the end of the World* ^he Son of Man
shall send forth has Angels, and he ^ll gather out of his K^ngdom all things
that offend, ^d them that do Iniquity, and shall cast them into a ^^rnace of
Fire there shall be w^^ling and gnashing (...) teeth: And again, So shall ^t be
in the End of ^^e World* the Angels shall come forth, and s^ver the ^icked from
the J^st, and shall ^ast them into a Fur^^ce of Fire; there shall be wa^ling
and gnashing of ^^eth, Mat. 13 41, 42, 43 4^ 4^ 5^.

Lastly, It may not be (...) if in the Conclu^^on of this, I show in a few
Words to what ^ things that Torment them in this (...) are compared. Indeed
some of them have been occasionally mentioned already; as, That they are
compared.

First, To Wood that burns.

Secondly, To Fire.

Thirdly, To Fire and Brimstone. But,

Fourthly, It is compared to a Worm, a gnawing Worm, a never dying Gnawing Worm
They are cast into Hell, where their Wo^^dieth not, Mark 9.44.

Fifthly, It is called Unquenchable Fire: H^ will gather his Wheat into his
Garner; But will bur^ up the Chaff with Unquenchable Fire, Mat. 3 1^ Luke 3.17.

Sixthly, It is called everlasting Destructions ^ The Lord Jesus shall descend
from Heaven with h^ mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance o^ them
that know not God; and they that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall be punishe^ wit everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord
and from the Glory of his Power, 2 These. 1 7, 8, ^

Seventhly, It is called Wrath with out mi^ture, and is given them in the Cap
of his Indignation. If any man worship the Beast, and his Imag^ and receive his
Mark in his Forehead, or in h^s han^ the same shall drink of the Wrath of God,
which i^ poured out without mixture in the Cup of his Indignation; he shall be
tormented with Fire and Brimston^ In the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the Presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14 19

Eighthly, It is called the second Death. (...) Death and Hell were cast into
the Lake of Fire, the is the second Death Blessed and holy i^ be that (...)
part in the first Resurrection, on such the second D^^ has no power, Rev
12.1^. ch ^.6.

Ninthly, It is called Eternal Damnation. (...) ^ that shall blaspheme against
the Holy Ghost, ^ never Forgiveness, but is in danger of e^^^nal Damnation.

^a! These Three Words!

^verlasting Punishment!

^^ernal Damnation!

and for Ever and Ever!

^ow they will Gnaw and Eat up all the Ex^ation of the End of the Misery of the
Cast^ ^y Sinners. And the Smoke of their Torment of^ ^d up for ever and ever,
and they have no rest ^o^ night, etc. Rev 11 11.

Their Behavior in Hell is set forth by Four ^gs, a I know of.

^ By calling for help and relief in vain.

^ By Weeping.

^. By Wailing.

^ By G^^shing of Teeth.

and now we come to the second thing that ^ be enquired into; namely,

^ow it appears that Christ has power to ^ or to cast out: For by these Words.
I will ^o wise cast out, he declares that he has ^r to do both.

^ow this Enquiry admits us to search into ^ things.

How it appears that he has power to save.

How it appears that he has power to cast (...)

that he has Power to save, appears by that ^ follows.

^^rst, To speak only of him as he is Media^ (...) was Authorized to this
blessed Work, ^ ^ather before the World began. Hence ^postle said, He has
chosen us in him, before ^^dation of the World, with all those things that
effectual, will produce our Salvation

Read the same Chaptre, with 2 T^m 19.

Secondly, He was promised to our first ^^rents, that he should in the Fullness
of T^^ Bruise the Serpent's Head; and as Paul expo^^ it, redeem them that were
under the Law. He^^ since that time, he has been reckoned as s^ for our Sins;
by which means all the Fat^^ under the first Testament were secured from ^
Wrath to come; hence He is called. The (...) stain from the Foundation of the
World, Rev. 1^ Gen 3 15 Gal 4 4, 5.

Thirdly, Moses gave Testimony of Him ^ the Types and Shadows, and bloody
Sacrif^^^ that he commanded from the Mouth of G^^ to be in use to the
Supporters of his Peop^^ Faith, unt^l the time of Reformation; when was the
time of Jesus his Death, Hebrews 9.^ Chapters.

Fourthly, At the time of his Birth, 't^^ testified of Him by the Angel, That
He (...) save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1 20.

Fifthly, It is Testified of Him in the Day ^ his Fresh, that he had power on
Earth to ^ give Sins, Acts 30 31.

Sixthly, In a Word, This is every w^ Testified of Him, both in the Old
Testam^^^ and the New,

And good reason that he should be ackn^^ledged and trusted in as a Savior.

1. He came down from Heaven to ^ Savior, John 6 38, 39.

2. He was anointed when on Earth to ^ Savior, Luke 3.22.

3 He did the Works of a Savior: A^, ^

First, He fulfilled the Law, and becam^ ^ of it for Righteousness, for them
that be^^ in him, Rev 10 3, 4.

^econdly, He laid down his Life as a Savi^^^; He gave his Life at a Ransom for
many, ^ 20.28. Mark 10 45 1 Timothy 2.6.

Thirdly, He has abolished Death, destroyed ^ Devil, put away Sin, got the
Keys of Hell ^ Death, is ascended into Heaven; is there ^epted of God, and bid
to sit at the Right ^^d as a Savior; and that because his Sa^^^^ice for Sins
pleased God, 2 Timothy 1.10. Heb. 2* ^ Ephesians. 4 7. Joh 16.10. Acts 15.30, 31. Heb
10.12.

Fourthly God has sent out and Proclaimed ^n as a Savior; and tells the
World, that ^ have Redemption through his Blood, that he ^ll justify us, if we
believe in his Blood, ^d that he can faithfully and justly do it. ^, God does
beseech us to be reconciled to ^ by his Son; which could not be, if he ^e not
appointed by him to this very end, ^ also if his Works and Undertakings were ^
accepted of him, as considered a Savi^^^, Romans 3.2 4, 25. 2 Cor. 5.18.19, 20,
21.

^ifthly, God has already received Millions ^ Souls into his Paradise, because
they have ^ived this Jesus for a Savior; and is resolved ^^ut them off, and to
cast them out of his ^sence, that will not take him for a Savi^^^* Heb 12.22,
23, 24, 25, 26.

(...) intend brevity here; therefore a Word to ^ second, and so I conclude.

How it appears that he has power to cast (...).

^his appears also by what follows.

^^st, The Father, (for the Service that he ^ done him at a Savior) has made
him Lord of all, even Lord of Quick and ^ For to this end Christ both died, and
arose^ revived that he might be Lord both of the ^ and Living, Rom 14 9.

Secondly, The Father has left it with ^ to quicken whom he will, viz. with s^
Grace, and to cast out whom he will, for ^ Rebellion against him, Joh. 5 21.

Thirdly, The Father has made him ^ of Quick and Dead, has committed all Ju^^
to the Son, and appointed that all should honor Son, even as they honor the
Father, Joh. 22 5.

Fourthly, God will Judge the World by ^ Man; the day is appointed for
Judgment, ^ he is appointed for Judge. He has appoin^ day in the which he will
Judge the world with ^teousness by that Man, Acts 17 31, 32.

Therefore we must all appear before the Judg^ Seat of Christ: that every one
may receive for things done in the Body, according to what they ^ done. If they
have closed with him, Heaven Salvation; if they have not, Hell and Da^tion.

And for these Reasons he must be Judge.

First, Because of his Humiliation, because his Father's Word he humbled
himself, an^ became obedient unto Death, even the D^ of the Cross; Therefore
God has highly ^ alted him, and given him a Name above e^ Name, that at the
Name of Jesus every ^ shall bow; both of things in Heaven and ^ on Earth, and
things under the Earth; ^ every Tongue should confess, Jesus Christ ^ Lord, to
the Glory of God the Father.

This has respect to his being Judge, and ^ sitting in Judgment upon Angels
and* ^ Phil. 2.7, 8.

^^condly, That all Men might honor the ^ as they honor the Father, for the
Father ^eth no Man, but has commit^ed all Judg^^^^ unto the Son; that all Men
should ho^^^^ the Son, even as they honor the Father, ^ 5.22, 23.

^hirdly, Because of his Righteous Judgment, ^ Work is fit for no Creature; it
is only fit ^ the Son of God. For he will reward every ^ according to his ways,
Rev. 2.2.

^^urthly, Because he is the Son of Man, He ^ given him Authority to execute
Judgment ^ because he is the Son of Man, Job. 5.27.

^hus have I in brief passed through this Text ^way of Explication; my next
Work is to ^ to it by way of Observation? But shall ^lso as b^^^f in that, as
the nature of the ^g will admit.

(...) that the Father gives me, shall come to ^ and him that comes to me, I
will in no ^ cast out, Joh. 6 37.

^ow come to some Observations, and a little ^ly to speak to them, and then
conclude ^ whole.

^e words thus explained, afford us many; ^ of which are these.

^^^st, That God the Father, and Christ his ^ are two distinct Persons in the
God. Head.

^^^^ndly. That by them (not excluding the ^ Ghost) is contrived and determined
the (...) of fallen Mankind.

^^^^dly, That this Contrivance, resolved it unto a Covenant between these
Persons in (...) Head, which stands in giving, on (...) ^er's Part; and
receiving on the Sons. ^ the Father gives me, etc.

Fourthly, That every one that the Father ^ given to Christ (according to the
Mind of ^ in the Text) shall certainly come to him.

Fifthly, That coming to Jesus Christ is th^^^fore not by the Will, Wisdom; or
Power Man: but by the Gift, Promise, and dra^ of the Father. (All that the
Father givet^ shall come).

Sixthly, That Jesus Christ will be care^ receive* and will not in any wise
reject ^ that come, or are coming to him. And him ^ comes to me. I will in no
wise cast out.

There are beside these some other Truth ^plyed in the Words As,

Seventhly, They that are coming to ^ Christ are oftimes* heartily afraid he
will ^ receive them.

Eighthly, Jesus Christ would not have t^ that in truth are coming to him, once
^ that he will cast them out.

These Observations lie all of them in ^ words, and are plentifully confirmed
by ^ Scriptures of Truth; but I shall not at ^ time speak to them all, but
shall pass by ^ first, second, third, fourth and sixth part, be ^ I design
brevity, and partly because they ^ touched upon, in the Explicatory part o^
Text. I shall therefore begin with the ^ Observation, and so make that the
first i^der, in the following Discourse.

First then, coming to Christ is not ^ Will, Wisdom or Power of Man, but ^
Gift, Promise, and drawing of the Father ^ Observation consists of two Parts.

First, That coming to Christ is not ^ Will, Wisdom, or power of Man.

Secondly, But by the Gilt, Promise, and draw^^g of the Father.

That the Text carries this Truth in its Bo^, you will find it if you look
into the Expli^^^ion of the first part thereof before. I shall ^refore here
follow the method propounded, ^ show, tha First coming to Christ it not by the
(...), Wisdom, or Power of Man: This is true, ^^^ause the Word does positively
say, it is not.

First, It denies it to be holy by the Will of ^n. Not of Blood nor of the
Will of the Flesh, ^ of the will of man. Again, it is not of ^ that wills nor
of him that runs, ^ 1.13. Rom 9.10.

^econdly, It denies it to be the Wisdom of ^n, is manifest from these
Considerations.

First, In the Wisdom of God it pleased him, ^t the World by Wisdom would not
know ^ Now if by their Wisdom they cannot know ^ it follows by that Wisdom,
that they can^ come unto him; for coming to him is not ^^ore, but after some
knowledge of him, 1 Cor. 1. ^ Acts 13.2. Psalm. 9 10.

Secondly, The Wisdom of Man, in God's ^ount, as to the Knowledge of Christ is
reck^ Foolishness: Has not God made foolish ^ Wisdom of this World And again,
The ^dom of this World, is Foolishness with God ^ God has made Foolish the
Wisdom of ^ World; and again, If the Wisdom of this ^ld is foolishness with
him, then verily it is (...) ^ely, that by that, a sinner should become ^r^dent
as to come to Jesus Christ; especially, (...) consider,

^^^^dly, That the Doctrine of a crucified ^ and so of Salvation by him, is the
very thing that is counted Foolishness by the Wisdom of the World. Now if the
very Doctrine of ^ crucified Christ be counted Foolishness by the Wisdom of
this World it cannot be* that by the Wisdom a Man should be drawn out in his
Sou^ that comes to him, 1 Cor. 1.20. Chap. 2.^. Chap. 3.19. Chap 1.28, 29.

Fourthly, God counted the Wisdom of the World one of the greatest enemies,
therefore ^ that Wisdom no Man can come to Jesus Christ For it is not likely
that one of God's great^^^ Enemies, should draw a Man to that which b^ of all
pleases God, as coming to Christ do ^ Now that God counts the Wisdom of t^^
World one of his greatest Enemies, is evide^^

First, For that it casts the greatest conten^ upon his Son's Undertaking, as
before is prov^ In that he counts his Crucifixion Foolishne^^ Though that be one
of the highest Demonstration of divine Wisdom, Ephesians. 1.7, 8.

Secondly, Because God has threatened to ^^stroy it, and bring it to naught,
and cause the to close with Jesus Christ. Isa. 29 14 Cor 1.19.

Thirdly, He has rejected it from helping ^ the Ministry of his Word, as a
fruitless ^^ness, and a thing that comes to no^^ 1 Cor. 2.4, 12.

Fourthly, Because it causes to perish, (...) that seek it, and pursue it, 1
Cor 2.18.

Fifthly, And God has proclaimed, that i^ ^ Man will be wise in this World, he
mu^^ fool in the Wisdom of this World, and th^^ way to be wise in the wisdom of
God. ^ man will be wise in this world, let him become ^ that he may be wise,
for the wisdom of this ^ is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3.18.

Sixthly, Coming to Christ is not by the Power of man This is evident, partly

First, From that which goes before For man's Power in the putting forth of it
in this matter, is either stirred up by Love, or sense of Necessity; but the
Wisdom of this World neither gives man Love to, or a Sense of a Need of Jesus
Christ, therefore his Power lie^ still, as from that.

Secondly, What Power has he that is dead, (as every natural man is) even
spiritually dead in Trespasses and Sins; dead, even as dead to God's New
Testament things, as he that is in his Grave, dead to the things of this world;
what Power has he then whereby to come to Jesus Christ? Joh. 5.25. Ephesians. ^. 1.
Col. 2.13.

Thirdly, God forbids the mighty man's Glory in his Strength, and says
positively, by strength shall no man prevail; and again Not by might, nor by
power but my Spirit, says the Lord* Jer. 9.23, 24. 1 Samuel 2.2. Zech 4, 6. 1
Cor 27 28.

Fourthly, Paul acknowledges, that Man, na^ converted Man, of himself, has not
a sufficiency of Power in himself, to think a good thought if not to do that
which is least; for to think it less than to come, then no man by his own power
can come to Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 3.5.

Fifthly, Hence we are said to be made willing to come by the Power of God, to
be rained from a state of Sin, to a state of Grace, by the Power of God; and to
believe, that is, to even through the exceeding Workings of his mighty Power,
Psalm. 11.1 Col. 2.11. Ephesians. 1.18, 20 ^ee also Job. 49.14.

But this needed not, of either Men (...) Power or Will to come; or so much as
^^^ciously to think of being willing to co^^ (of themselves) to Jesus Christ.

I should now come to the Proof of ^ second part of the Observation, but that ^
occasionally done already, in the Explicat^^ Part of the Text, to which I refer
the R^^der; for I shall here only give thee a T^ or two more to the same
Purpose, and ^ come to the Use and Application.

First, It is expressly said, No, man can come ^ me, except the Father which has
sent me draw (...) In this Text there is not only insi^ua^e^ that in Man is
want of Power, but a so W^ to come to Jesus Christ; they must be draw ^ they
come not, if they be not drawn. A^ observe it is not Man, no nor all the A^gels
in Heaven that can draw one Sinner ^ Jesus Christ. No man comes to me, except
^ Father which has sent me draw him, Joh. 44.

2dly, Again: No man can come to me, excep^ it be given him of the Father, Joh.
6.65. It i^ an heavenly Gift that makes man come ^ Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Again, it is written in the Prophets, They shall be all taught of
God, every o^ therefore that has heard, and learned of the (...) the^, comes
to me, John 6.45.

I shall not enlarge, but make some (...) and Application, and so come to the
(...) Observation.

First Is it so? Is coming to Jesus Christ not by the Will, Wisdom, or Power of
(...) but by the Gift, Promise, and drawing of (...) Father? Then they are to
blame that (...) (...) the Will, Wisdom, and power of Man, ^^ngs sufficient to
bring Men to Christ.

There are some Men who think they may ^ot be contradicted when they plead for
the Will, Wisdom, and Power of Man in Refe^ence to the things that are of the
Kingdom ^f Christ: But I will say to such a man, he ^ever yet came to
understand that himself is that the Scripture teaches concerning him: Neither
did he ever know, what coming to Christ is, by the Teaching Gift, and drawing
of the Father. He is such a one that has set up God's Enemy in Opposition to
him, and that continues in such Acts of Defiance; and what his End without a
New Birth will be, the Scriptures teach also: But we will pass this.

Secondly, Is it so? Is coming to Jesus Christ, by the Gift, Promise, and
drawing of the Father, then let Saints here learn to ascribe their coming to
Christ, to the Gift, Promise and drawing of the Father. Christian Man, bless
God who has given thee to Jesus Christ, by Promise; and again, bless God for
that he has drawn thee to him. And why is it thee? Why not another? O that the
Glory of Electing Love should rest upon thy Head, and that the Glory of the
Exceeding Grace of God should ^ake hold of thy Heart, and bring thee to Jesus
Christ

Thirdly, Is it so? That coming to Christ is by the Father as before said? Then
this should teach us to set a high esteem upon them th^^ are indeed coming to
Jesus Christ; I say no ^ign esteem on them for the sake of him, by (...) of
whose Grace they are made to come (...) Jesus Christ.

We see, that when Men by the help of h^mane Abilities do arrive at the
knowledge of, ^ bring to pass that which when done, is a Wonder to the World;
how he that did it is esteemed and commended. Yea, how are his wit^ and
industry, and unweariedness in all admired; and yet the Man, as to this is but
of the World, and his Work the effect of nature Ability: The things also
attained by hi^ and in Vanity and Vexation of Spirit Farthe^ Perhaps in the
pursuit of these his Achievements, he sins against God, wastes his ti^^
vainly, and at long run, loses his Soul (...) neglecting better things: Yet he
is admired ^ But I say, If this Man's Parts, Labor, Diligence, and the like,
will bring him to suc^ Applause and esteem in the World, what (...) esteem
should we have of such an one that i^ by the Gift, Promise, and Power of Go^
coming to Jesus Christ?

First, This is a Man with whom God is, i^ whom God works and walks; a Man,
whose motion is governed and steered by the might^ Hand of God, and the
effectual working of (...) Power; Here Is a Man.

Secondly, This Man by the Power of God^ Might, which works in him, is able
to cast ^ whole World behind him, with all the Lusts ^ Pleasures of it; and to
charge through all ^ difficulties that Men and Devils can set agai^^^ him.
Here Is a Man!

Thirdly, This Man is Traveling to Mo^^^ Zion, the Heavenly Jerusalem; the
City of the (...) God, and to an innumerable Company of Angels; ^ the ^pirits
or Just Men made perfect, to God the (...) of (...), and to Jesus. Here Is a Man!

^^urthly, This Man can look upon Death ^ Comfort. can laugh at Destruction
when ^meth; and long to hear the sound of the Trumpet, and to see the Judge
coming in Clouds of Heaven; Here Is a Man!

^et Christians then esteem each other as such. ^ know you do, but do it more.
And that you ^, consider these two or three things.

first, These are the Objects of Christ's Esteem, ^.12.48. chap. 25 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28. Luke ^.

Secondly, These are the Objects of the Esteem ^ Angels, Dan. 9.12. Chap.
10.11. Chap 12 ^ Heb. 1.14.

Thirdly, These have been the Objects of the esteem ^ Heathens, when convinced
about them, Dan 5 10. ^ 5.15. 1 Cor. 14.24.

Let each of you then esteem each other better than ^ selves, Phil 2.2.

Fourthly, Again, Is it so, That no man comes ^ Jesus Christ, by the Will,
Wisdom, and Power ^ man; but by the Gift, Power and Drawing of ^ Father? Then
this shows us how horrible ^o^ent of this such are, who make the Man ^o is
coming to Christ, the Object of their Contempt and Rage, These are also
unreasonable ^ wicked men, in whom is no Faith. 1 These. 3 2.

Sinners, did you but know what a blessed (...) it is to come to Jesus Christ,
and that (...) ^ help and drawing of the Father, they do (...) come to him, you
would hang and burn (...) a thousand Years, before you would ^ our Spirits as
you do, against him that (...) drawing to Jesus Christ, and also against God
that draws him.

(...) faithless Sinners, let us a little expostulate the matter. What has
this Man done ag^ thee that is coming to Jesus Christ? Why do ^ make him the
Object of thy Scorn? Does his (...) to Jesus Christ offend thee? Does his
forsaking Sins and Pleasures offend thee?

Poor coming Man! Thou sacrificest ^ Abominations of the Egyptians before ^
Eyes, and will they not stone thee? Exo^

But I say, why offended at this? Is he ^ the worse, for coming to Jesus
Christ, or his loving and serving of Jesus Christ? O^ he ever more a Fool, for
flying from that which drown thee in Hell Fire, and so seeking eternal (...)
Besides, pray Sirs consider it, this he does (...) himself, but by the drawing
of the Father. C^ let me tell thee in thine Ear, thou that will not ^ to him
thy self; and him that would, thou hinder

First, Thou shall be judged for one that h^ Hared, Maligned and Reproached
Jesus Chr^^^ to whom this poor Sinner is coming.

Secondly, Thou shall be judged too, for (...) that has hated the Father, by
whose power drawing the Sinner does come.

Thirdly, Thou shall be taken and judge ^ one that has done despite to the
Spirit of Cr^^ in him that is, by its help, coming to Jes^^ Christ. What say
thou now; Will thou st^^ by thy doings? Will thou continue to con^^ and
reproach the Living God? think (...) that thou shall weather it out well
enough (...) Day of Judgment? Can thy Heart endure o^ thy hands be strong, in
the days that I ^ deal with thee, says the Lord? Jo^^ ^^, 19. etc Jude 11.16 1
These. 4 Ezekiel 21.

Fourthly, Is it so, that no Man comes to ^ Christ, by the Will, Wisdom and
Power (...) ^ by the Gift, Promise, and Drawing of the ^ther? Then this shows
us, how it comes to (...), that weak means are so powerful as to ^g Men out of
their Sins, to a heavy pur^ after Jesus Christ: When God bid Moses ^^k to the
people, he said, I will speak (...) thee Exodus 19 When God speaks, when ^d
works, who can let it? None, none. ^en the work goes on. Elias threw the Mantle
^n the shoulders of Elisha: And what a wonderful ^k followed! When Jesus fell
in with the crowing (...) Cook, what work was there! O when God is in ^ ^leans,
(be it never so neak and contemptable in self) it works wonders, 1 King. 19 10.
Mat. 26.74, ^ Mat 14.71. Luke 2.60.

The World understand not nor believe that ^e Walls of Jericho will full at the
sound of (...) Horns. But when God will speak, the ^ans must be effectual. A
word weakly ^^ken, spoken with difficulty, in the Tempta^^^n, and in the midst
of great contempt and ^en works wonders: If the Lord thy God ^ll say so too.

(...) it so? Does no man come to Jesus Christ, ^ the Will, Wisdom and power of
Man; but ^ the Gift, Promise, and Drawing of the Fa^^^r? Then there is room for
Christians to (...) and wonder at the effectual working of (...) Providence,
that he has made use of, as ^eans to bring them to Jesus Christ.

(...) although Men are drawn to Christ by the (...) of the Father; yet that
Power puts (...) it self in the use of Means; and tha^ (...) is diverse;
sometimes this, sometimes ^ for God is at Liberty to work, by which, ^^en, and
how he will; but let the means be what it will, and as contemptible as (...)
yet God that commanded the Light to ^ out of Darkness; and that out of weakne^^
make strong: can, nay does oft-times (...) of very unlikely means to bring
abo^^ Conversion and Salvation of his People ^fore you that are come to Christ
(and ^ likely means) s^ay your selves and wonde^ ^^^ndering, magnify Almighty
Power, ^ work of which, the means has been effec^ bring you to Jesus Chaist

What was the Providence that God ^ use of as means, either more remote or ^
near, to bring thee to Jesus Christ? Wit^ Removing of thy Habitation, the Cha^^
thy Condition; the Loss of Relations, ^ or the like? Was it the casting of this
^ upon some good Book; the hearing ^ Neighbors talk of Heavenly things, the
holding of God's Judgmen^s as executed ^ others, or thine own Deliverance from
^ or thy being strangely cast under the M^ of some Godly Man? O take notice
(...) Providence or Providence! They were fe^ managed by mighty Power to do
that ^ God himself I say has joined himself ^ Chariot: Yea, and so blessed it,
that it ^ not to accomplish the thing for which ^ it.

God blesses not to every one his Pre^^ in this manner: How many Thousa^^
there in this World, that pass every d^ the same Providence? But God is not ^
to do that Work by them as he has (...) thy poor Soul, by his effectual
workin^ ^ them. O that Jesus Christ should me^ ^ ^rovidence, that Dispensation
or the other ^^^nces! This is Grace indeed! At this ^ere, it will be thy Wisdom
to admire, and ^ to bless God.

^e me leave to give you a taste of some of ^ Providence that have been
effectual, thro^ ^anagement of God, to bring Salvation to ^^uls of his People.

^st: The first shall be that of the Woman ^^ari^. It must happen that she must
needs ^t of the City to draw Water (not before after, but) just when Jesus her
Savior was ^ from far and set to rest him (being wea^ upon the Well: What a
blessed Providence ^ this: Even a Providence managed by the ^ighty Wisdom and
Almighty Power; to ^ Conversion and Salvation of this p^or Crea^ which her
Savior brought about; that ^ blessed work might be fulfilled upon the ^an,
according to the Purpose before deter^ ^ by the Father, John 4.

^^condly, What a Providence was it, that ^ should be a Tree in the way for
Zacheus (...), thereby to give Jesus Opportunity to ^ that Chief of the
Publicans home to himself ^ before he came down therefrom Luke 19.

^^irdly, Was it not also wonderful, that the (...), which you read of in the
Gospel, should (...) Providence of God be cast into Prison, (...) condemned,
even at that Sessions that ^ himself was to die; nay, and that it should (...)
to, that they must be han^ed together, (...) Thief might be in Hearing and
observing (...) in his last Words, that he might be ^ed by him before his
Death. Luke 23.

^^^rthly, What a strange Providence was it, and a^ strangely managed by God,
that Omus, when he was run away from his Man should be taken, and I think cast
into that ^ Prison, where Paul lay bound for the Wo^^ the Gospel, that he might
be by him conver^^ then sent home again to his Master Phile^^ Behold all things
work together for good, to them ^ love God; to them who are the called
accordin^ his Purpose. Romans 8

Nay, I have my self known some that ^ been made to go hear the Word preached
against their wills; others have gone not to b^ but to see and be seen; nay to
jeer and flout oth^^ as also to catch and carp at things. Some ^ to feed their
Adulterous Eyes with the sigh^ beautiful Objects, and yet God has made ^ of
even these things, and even of the (...) and sinful Proposals of Sinners, to
bring (...) under the Grace that might save their Sou^

Does no Man come to Jesus Christ, but ^ the Drawing of the Father? Then let me
(...) caution those poor Sinners, that are Spect^^ of the change that God has
wrought on (...) that are coming to Jesus Christ, not to attri^^^ this work and
change to other things and c^^

There are some poor Sinners in the W^ that plainly see a Change, a mighty
Chang^ their Neighbors and Relations, that a ^^ming to Jesus Christ: But as I
said, they ^ ignorant, and not knowing whence it (...) nor whither i^ goes; for
so is every one that ^ of the Spirit, John 3.8

Therefore they attribute this Change to ^ Causes: As, 1. Melancholy. 2. To
sitting alone. ^. To overmuch Reading. ^. To their going to too many Sermons.
^. Too much studying and musing on what ^ hear.


^lso they conclude on the other side,

first. That it is for want of merry Company.

^econdly, For want of Physic, and therefore ^ advise them to leave off
Reading, going to ^mons, the C^mpany of sober People; and ^e merry go a
Gossipping, to busy them^^^^es in the things of this World, not to sit ^ing
alone, etc.

^ut come poor ignorant Sinner, let me deal ^h thee; It seems thou art turned
Counselor ^ Satan. I tell thee, thou know not what ^u do. Take heed of
spending thy Judg^^nt after this manner; thou judge foolish^ And say in
this, To every one that passes (...); (...) art a Fool.

What! count Convictions for Sin, Mourning ^ Sin, and Repentance for sin,
Melancholy* ^t is like those, that on the other side said, ^ Men are drunk
with New Wine, etc. O^ as that said, Paul was mad, Acts 2 23. ch 26.24. ^^or
ignorant Sinner, can thou j^dge no ^er. What! Is sitting alone; pensive under
^'s Hand; Reading the Scriptures, and ^^ing of Sermons, etc. the way to be un^?
The Lord open thine Eyes, and make ^ to see thine Eoror; Thou have set thy ^
against God, thou have despised the Open (...) of his Hand, thou attemptest to
mur^ souls. What, can thou give no better ^^sel touching those whom God has
woun^ than to send them to the Ordinances of ^ for Help? Thou bidst them busy
themselves in the things of this World; but o^ thou not know, that the Lord
bids, Seek ^ the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness the of? Mat. 3:36.

Poor, Ignorant Sinner, hear the Counsel ^ God to such, and learn thy self to
be wis^ Is any afflicted? let him pray; Is any merry? ^ him sing Psalms.
Blessed is he that hears ^ and hears for time to come. Save your s^ from
this untoward Generation. Search the S^^^tures, give attendance to Reading. It
is better (...) to the House of Mourning. Jam. 5.13. Prove. 8* 33. Acts 2 40.
Joh. 3 39, Tim 4.13 Eccl. 7.1, 2, 3.

And will thou Judge him that does thu^ Art thou almost like E^ymas the
Sorcerer, t^ sought to turn the Deputy from the Fait^ Thou seek to pervert
the right ways of ^ Lord: take heed lest some heavy Judgment ^vertake thee,
Acts 14.8, 9.

What? Teach Men to quench Convicti^^ to ^ake Men off from a serious
considerat^^^ of the evil of Sin, of the Terrors of ^ World to come, and how
they shall esc^ thee same. What! Teach Men to put Go^ his Word out of their
Minds, by running ^ merry Company; by running to the We^ by Gossiipping, etc.
This is as much (...) bid them say to God, Depart from us, for ^ desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; Or, (...) the Almighty, that we should serve him? Or, ^
profit have we, if we keep his ways? Here ^ Devil in grain! What, bid Men walk
a ^ing to the course of this world, according to ^ Prince of the power of the
Air; the Spirit ^ now works in the Children of Disobedience, ^

Obj. But do we not know that such are (...) ^ Jesus Christ: Truly we wonder at
them, and (...) they are Fools.

Answ. First, Do you not know that they ^ coming to Jesus Christ? Then they may
^ coming to Him for ought you know? ^d why will you be worse than the Brute, ^
speak evil of the things you know not? that? are ye made to be taken and
destoy^ Must ye utterly perish in your Corrup^^^ns? 2 Pet 2.1.

Secondly, Do you not know them? Let ^m alone then. If you cannot speak good ^
them, speak not bad. Refrain from these ^n, and let them alone* for if this
Counsel, or ^s Work, be of Men, it will come to naught; (...) if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, lest ^ly ye be found even to fight against God, Acts ^
38, 39.

Thirdly, But why do you wonder at a ^ork of Conviction and Conversion? Know ^
not that this is the Judgment of God ^en you, ye Despisers, To behold, and
wonder, ^ perish? Acts 15.30

Fourthly, But why wonder and think they ^ Fools? Is the way of the Just an
Abo^^nation to you? See that passage, and be ^amed; He that is upright in the
way, is an ^mination to the wicked, Prove. 29.27.

Fifthly, Your wondering at them, argues ^ you are strangers to your selves, to
Con^^^^ion for sin, and to hearty desi^es to be fa^ ^ as also to coming to
Jesus Christ.

Obj But how shall we know that such Men are, ^ing to Jesus Christ.

Answ. Who can make them see, that Christ ^ made blind, ( John 23.9.)
Nevertheless because I endeavored by Conviction, Cov^^ on and Salvation?
Consider,

1. Do they cry out of Sin, being burden with it, as of an exceeding bitter
thing?

2 Do they fly from it as from the Face ^ deadly serpent?

3. Do they cry out of the Insufficiency ^ their own Righteousness, as to
Justification ^ the sight of God.

4. Do they cry out after the Lord Jesus ^ save them?

5. Do they see more Worth and Merit in ^ drop of Christ's Blood to save them,
than in ^ the Sins of the World to damn them?

6. Are they tender of sinning against ^^sus Christ?

7 Is the Name, Person, and Undertak^^ more precious to them than the Glory ^
the World?

8. Is the Word more dear unto them?

9. Is Faith in Christ (of which they ^ convinced by God's Spirit of the want
of, (...) that without it they can never close w^ Christ) precious to them?

10. Do they favor Christ in his Word ^ do they leave all the World for his
sake. A^ are they willing (God helping them) to ^ Hazzards for his Name, for
the Love they b^ to him?

11. Are his Saints precious to them?

If these things be so, whether thou feast ^ or no, these Men are coming to
Jesus Christ Romans 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Psalm. 38.3.4.5, 6, 7, 8. ^ 6.18,
14.20. Isa 64 6. Phil. 3.7, 8 Psalm 45.1. Ps. ^ 21. Acts 16 30. Psalm. 51.7, 8 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. Rom^ 24. 2 Cor. 5.2. Acts 5.41. James 2.7. Phil 3.7, 8. ^ ^
10.11, 12, 13, 14 15 Psalm 1 19 John 13.35. 1 John ^ 7 chap 3 14. Job. 16 9 Rom
14.23. Heb. 11.6. Ps. ^ 10.11 Jer 17 16. Heb. 11 24 25, 26, 27. Acts 29. ^ 23,
24. chap 21.13. Tit. 3.15. 2 John 1. Ephesians. 4 16. ^^il 7. 1 Cor. 16.24.

The second Observation.

I came now to the second Observation pro^ounded to be spoken to; to wit,

That they that are coming to Jesus Christ, ^re oft-times heartily afraid that
Jesus Christ ^ill not receive them.

I told you that this Observation is implied in ^he Text, and I gather it from
the largeness and ^^^penness of the Promise, (I will in no wise cast ^ut) For
had there not been a proneness in us, to ^ew casting out, Christ needed not to
have, as it ^ were, way laid our fear, as he does by this ^reat and strange
Expression, In no wise. And ^im that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
There needed not, as I may say, such a Promise to be invented by the Wisdom of
Heaven, ^orded at such a ra^e, as it were on purpose to ^ash in pieces at one
blow all the Objections of ^oming Sinners; if they were not prone to admit of
such Objections to the discouraging of their own souls; for these words In no
wise, ^ut the throats of all Objections; and they were ^ropp'd by the Lord
Jesus for that very ^^d* and to help the Faith that is mixed with ^nbelief.

And it is as it were the Sum of all Promises* neither can any Objection be
made upon the ^nworthiness that thou find in thee, that this ^romise will
not assail.

But I am a sinner, say thou.
I will in no wise cast ^ut says Christ.
But I am an old sinner, say thou.
I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.
But I am a Backsliding sinner, say^st thou.
I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.
But I am an hard hearted sinner, say tho^
I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.
But I have served Satan all my Days say^ thou.
I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.
But I have sinned against Light, say the
I will in no wise cast out, sa^s Christ.
But I have sinned against Mercy, say tho^
I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.
But I have no good thing to bring with m^ say thou.
I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.
Thus I might go on to the end of things, an^ show you that still this Promise
was provided ^ answer all Objections, and does answer them* But, I say, What
need it be, if they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are not sometimes, yea*
oftentimes heartily afraid, that Jesus Christ will cast them out?

I will give you now two Instances, that seem to imply the Truth of this
Observation.

In the Ninth of Matthew at the second Verse, you Read of a Man that was sick
of the Palsy; and he was coming to Jesus Christ, being borne upon a Bed by his
F^iends. He also was coming himself, and that upon another Account than any of
his Friends were aware of even for the Pardon of sins, and the Salvation of his
Soul. Now, so soon as even he was come into the Presence of Christ* Christ bids
him be of good Cheer. It seems then his Heart was ^^inting: But what was the
cause of hi^ ^^inting? Not his bodily Infirmity, for the ^re of which his
Friends did bring him to ^^rist, but the Guilt and Burden of his sins; ^ the
pardon of which, himself did come to ^n; therefore he proceeds Be of good
Cheer, thy ^ be forgiven thee.

I say, Christ saw him sinking in his Mind, ^ut how it would go with his most
noble ^rt; And therefore first he applies himself to ^m on that account. For,
though his Friends ^d Faith enough as to the Cure of his Body, ^t he himself
had little enough, as to the cure ^f his Soul. Therefore Christ takes him up as
^ Man falling down, saying, Son be of good cheer, ^y sins be forgiven thee.

That about the Prodigal, seems pertinent also ^ this matter, when he was come
to himself, ^e said, How many hired Servants of my Father have (...) enough,
and to spare, and I perish for Hunger? ^ will arise now, and go to my Father.
Heartily ^poken. But how did he perform his Promi^^s; I think not so well as he
promised to do: and my ground for my thoughts is, because (...) Father, so soon
as he was come to him, fell upon his Neck, and kissed him; implying, me^hinks,
as if the P^digal by this time was de^^cted in his mind; and therefore his
Father ^ves him the most sudden and familiar Token ^f Reconciliation.

And Kisses were of Old Time often used to ^ move Doubts and Fears. Thus Laban
and Esai* ^^st Jacob; thus Joseph kissed his Brethren; and ^ was also David
kissed Absalom. Genesis 31.55. Chap. ^.1, 2, 3.4, 5, 6. Chap. 48.9, 10. 2 Samuel
14.33.

It Is (...) as I said, at first setting out, he (...) heartily, as sometimes
Sinners also do in their beginning to come to Jesus Christ: ^ might not he,
yea, in all probability he ^ (between the first S^ep he took, and the last*
which he accomplished that Journey) many Thought, both this way and that, as
whet^ his Father would receive him or no? As the I said, I would go to my
Father; But how, ^ when I come at him he should ask me, When have all this
while been? What must I say the Also if he ask me what is become of the Portion
Goods that he gave me? What shall I say then, if ^ ask me, who have been my
C^mpanions? What sha^^ say then; if he also should ask me, what has been ^
Preferment ^n all the time if my absence from hi^ What shall I say th^^; Yea,
and ^f he ask, why ^ came home no s^oner? What shall I say then? The I say,
might he reason with himself; and be^^ conscious to himself, that he could give
bu^ bad Answer to any of these Interrogatories, ^ marvel if he stood in need
first of all, of a (...) from his Father's Lips. For had he answere^ the first
in Truth, he must say, I have been ^ Haunter of Taverns, and Ale houses: and
f^^ my Portion, I spent it in Riotous Living; (...) companions were Whores and
Drabs: As for my Preferment, the highest was, that I becam^ a H^g Herd; and as
for my not coming hom^ till now, Could I have made shift to stay abro^^ any
longer, I had not lain at thy Feet for mercy now.

I say these things considered, and considerin^ again, how prone poor Man is to
give wa^ truly awakened ^o Despondings, to give wa^ misgivings; no marvel if he
did sink in ^ Mind, between the time of his first setting (...) and that of his
coming to his Father.

But Thirdly, Methinks I have, for the Con^^^mation of this Truth, the Consent
of all the ^ints that are under Heaven, to wit, That they ^ are coming to Jesus
Christ, are oft-times ^^artily afraid that he will not leave them.

Quest. But what should be the Reason?

I will answer to this Question thus.

First, It is not for want of the revealed Will of ^od, that manifested Grounds
for the contra^; for of that there was a Sufficiency; yea, the ^ext it self
has lain a sufficient Foundation (...) Encouragement for them that are coming
to jesus Christ.

And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast ^ut.

Secondly, It is not for want of an Invitation ^o come, for that is full and
plain, Come unto ^e all ye that Labor, and are heavy laden, and I will (...)
you rest, Mat. 11 28.

Thirdly, It is not for want of a solemn Oath and Engagement to save them that
come; For because he could swear by no greater, He swore ^y himself. That by
two immutable things, in which ^t was impossibble that God should lie, we might
have ^trong Consolation, who have fled* for refuge, to lay hold on the hope set
before us, Heb 6.15, 16, 17, 19.

Fourthly, Neither is it for want of great Examples of God's Mercy, that have
come to Jesus Christ, of which we read most plentifully in the word.

Therefore it must be concluded, it was for want of that which follows.

First, It is for want of Knowledge in Christ. Thou know but little of the
Grace and Kindness that is in the Heart of Christ Thou know but little of
the Merit and Virtue of his Blood. Thou know (...) little of the Willingness
th^^ is in his heart to save thee: And this is t^ reason of the Fear that
arises in thy Heart, ^ causes th^e to doubt* that Christ will not r^ceive
thee Unbelief is the Daughter of Ign^rance: Therefore Christ says, O Fools and
slow ^ Heart to believe Luke 24 25.

Slowness of Heart to believe flows from the Foolishness in the things of
Christ; This ^ evident to all that are acquainted with themselves, and are
seeking after Jesus Christ: T^ more Ignorance, the more Unbelief; the mo^^
Knowledge of Christ, the more faith. They the know thy Name, will put their
trust in thee, Psalm. ^ 10. He therefore that began to come to Christ the other
Day, and has yet but little Knowledge of him, he fears that Christ will not
r^ceive him. But he that has been longer ^^quainted with him, he is strong,
and has ow^ come the wicked one, 1 John 2.

When Joseph's Brethren came into Egypt t^ buy Corn it is said, Joseph knew his
Brethren* but his Brethren knew not him. What follows? Why, great mistrust of
Heart about their speeding well; especialy if Joseph did but answe^ them
roughly, calling them Spies, and questioning the Truth and the like And observe
it s^ long as their Ignorance about their Brother remained, with them,
whatsoever Joseph did they put the worst Sense upon it: For Instance, Joseph
upon a time, bids the Steward of the House to bring them home to Dine with him,
to Din^ even Joseph's House: And how is this resented by them? Why they are
afraid: And tha^ Men were afraid, because they were brought unto (their
Brother) Joseph's House. And they ^d, He seeks occasion against us and will
fall ^on, us, and take us for Bond Men, and our ^ses, Gen 4^. and Chap. 43.
What afraid to go ^ Joseph's House? He was their Brother; He ^ended to Feast
them, and Feast with them ^ but they were ignorant that he was their ^rther:
And so long as their Ignorance lasted, ^long their Fear terrified them Just
thus it ^ with the Sinner, that but of late is coming to ^us Christ. He is
ignorant of the Love and (...) that is in Christ to coming Sinners. There^^^e
he doubts, therefore he Fears, therefore his ^eart misgives him.

Coming Sinner, Christ inviteth thee to Dine ^d Sup with him: He inviteth thee
to a Ban^et of Wine, yea to come into his Wine-celler; ^ his Banner over the
shall be Love, Rev. 30.20. ^t. 2. Chap. 5. But I doubt it, says the Sinner'
(...) its answered, He calls thee, invites thee to ^ Banquet: Flaggons, Apples,
to his Wine, and ^ the Juice of his Pomegrana^e. O I fear, I ^^ubt, I mistrust,
I tremble in expection of the ^^ntrary! Come out of the Man thou dastardly
^gnorance. Be not afraid, Sinner, only believe, ^ that comes to Christ, He
will ^n no wise cast out* Let the Coming Sinner, therefore seek after ^ ^re of
the good Knowledge of Jesus Christ: ^ess after it, seek it as Silver, and Dig
for it as ^ hid Treasure: This will embolden thee; ^ is will make thee wa^
Stronger and Stronger. ^ now when I have believed, I know him said (...). And
what follows? Why, and I am per^^^^ed, that he is able to keep that which I
(...) committed to him against that Day. 2* ^ 19 13.

What had Paul committed to Jesus Christ? The Answer is, he had committed to
him b^ Soul But why did he commit to him (...) Soul? Why, because he knew him:
He kne^ him to be Faithful, to be kind: He knew ^ would not fail him, nor
forsake him, and the^^fore he laid his Soul down at his feet, and committed to
him to keep against that Day. (...)

Secondly, Thy Fears that Christ will not ^^ceive thee may be also a Consequent
of ^ earnest and strong Desires after thy Salvati^^ by him, For this I observe
that strong Desi^^ to have, are attended with strong fears of ^sing. What man
most sets his Heart upon, ^ what his Desires are most after, (he oft-time^ most
fears he shall not obtain. So the M^^ Ruler of the Synagogue had a great Desire
th^^ his Daughter should live; and that Desire ^ attended with fear that she
would not; Wh^^^fore Christ says unto him, Be not afraid, M^^ 5.36,

Suppose a Young Man should have his He^ much set upon a Virgin to have her to
Wife, ever he fears he shall not obtain, it is when ^ begins to Love. Now,
thinks he some bo^^ will step in betwixt my Love and the Obje^^ of it; either
they will find fault with my P^^son, my Estate, my Condition, or somethin^

Now Thoughts begin to Work, he does ^ like me, or something. And thus it is
with ^ Soul, at first coming to Jesus Christ; Thou it ^ him, and thy Love
produces Jealousy, and ^ Jealousy often times beget Fears.

Now thou fear the Sins of thy Youth* Sins of thine Old Age, the Sins of thy
Call^^ the Sins of thy Christian Duties, the Sins o^ Heart or something, thou
think somethin^ ^er will alienate the Heart and Affections of ^^sus Christ
from thee, thou think he sees ^^^ething in thee, for the sake of which he
will ^ use thy Soul.

But be content, a little more Knowledge of ^ will make thee take better Heart;
thy ear^^^t Desiers shall not be attended with such burn^ Fears; thou shall
hereafter say, This is my ^mity, Psalm. 77.

Thou art sick of Love; a very sweet Disease, and ^ every Disease has some
weakness attending ^ yet I wish this Distemper (if it be lawful to ^ it so) was
more Epidemical. I would glad^ die of this Disease; it is better than Life it
^f, though it be attended with Fears. But thou (...) out, I cannot obtain it.
Well, be not too ^sty in making Conclusions: If Jesus Christ had ^t put his
Finger in at the Hole of the Lock ^ Bowels would not have been troubled for him
^ Song 5.) Ma^k how the Prophet has it. They ^l walk after the Lord, He shall
roar like a Lion: ^hen he shall roar, the Children shall tremble from the ^,
they shall tremble like a Bird out of of Egypt, and ^n Dove out of the Land of
Assyria, Hos 11 10 11. When God roars (as often times the coming ^l hears him
roar) What Man, that is com^^g can do otherwise but tremble? ( Amos 3.8.) ^t
trembling he comes, He sprang in, and came ^mbling and fell down before Paul
and Silas Acts 16 should you ask him that we mentioned but ^, How long is it,
since you began to fear you ^ld miss of this Damsel you love so? The An^ will
be Ever since I began to love her. But ^ you not fear it before? No nor should
I fear ^ but that I most vehemently love Her. Come ^r, let us apply it; How
long is it since thou began'st to fear, that Jesus Christ will not recei^^
thee? thy answer is, ever since I began to desi^^ Christ? then I began to come.
And the m^^ my Heart burns in desires after him, the more ^ feel my heart fear,
I shall nor be saved by him

See now did I not tell thee that thy Fea^ were but the Consequence^ of strong
D^sire^ Well, fear not. Coming Sinner, Thousands ^ Coming Souls are in thy
condition; and ^ they will get safe into Christ's Bosom. ^ (says Christ) to
them that are of a fearful Hea^^ Be strong, fear not; Your God will come a^
save you, Isa. 35. 4 Chap. 63.

Thirdly, thy fear that Christ will not rece^^^ thee, may arise from a fence of
thine own ^ worthiness. Thou see what a poor, so^^ wretched, worthless
Creature thou art! A^ seeing this, thou fear Christ will not rec^^^ thee:
Alas, say thou, I Am the V^l^st of all M^^ A Town Sinner! A Ring-leading
Sinner! I a^ not only a Sinner my se^f, but have made oth^^ twofold ^^rse the
Children of Hell also! ^ side, now I am undersome Awakening and stirri^^ of
Mind after Salvation, even now I find my h^^ Rebellious, Carnal, Hard,
Treacherous. Desp^rate prone to Unbelief and Despair: It forgette^ the Word; it
wa^^^e^eth, it runs to the (...) of the Earth. There is not (I am perswade^
one in all the World, has such a desperate ^^ked Heart us mine (...) My soul
is careless to ^ Good, but none m^^e earnest to do that which is ^

Can such a man as I am live in Glory i^ an Holy, a Just, and a Righteous GOD,
^ think (with Honor to his Name) of sa^^ such a Vile Creature as I am? Truly I
se^^ Will he show Wonder to such a Dead D^ am? I doubt it.

^ am cast out to the lo^^hing of my Person, (...), ^ has my self, I stink in
mine Nostrils. How can (...) accepted us a Holy and Sin abhorring Gods ^l 38 5
67. Ez^k ^. Chap. ^0 42 43 44 Saved I would (...) who is the (...) would not,
were they in ^ Condi^ion? Indeed I wonder at the Madness and ^ully of others,
when I see them leap and skip s^ ^re^ sl^^ about the Mourn of Hell! Behold
Sinner, (...) da^est thou tempt God* by laughing at the ^reach of his holy Law
(...) But alas! they are not so and one way, but I am worse another* I wish my
(...) were any Body but my self* And yet here again ^ know not what to wish.
When I see such I be^^eve are coming to Jesus Christ* I b^ess them; but ^ am
confounded in my self to see how unlike (as ^ think) I am to every good Man in
the World: They can hear, read, pray, remember, repent, be ^umble, and do every
thing better than so Vile a Wretch as I.

I Vile Wretch! Am good for nothing but to burn ^n Hell fire; and when I think
of that, I am con^ounded too.

Thus the sense of Unworthiness creates and heigh^-^ Fears in the Hearts of
them that are coming to ^^esus Christ; but indeed it should not, for who ^^eds
the Physician, but the Sick? Or, who did Christ come into the World to save,
but the Chief ^ Sinners? ( Mat 1 17. 1 Timothy 1 15) Wherefore, the ^ore thou see
thy Sins, the faste^ fly thou to Jesus Christ; and let the sense of thine own
unworthiness, ^revail with thee yet to go faster. As it is with the Man that
carries his broken Arm in a Sling to the Bone-setter, still as he thi^es of
his broken Arm, and ^s he feels the Pain and Anguish, he hastens his pace ^o
the Man. And if Satan meets thee, and asks, Whither go thou? Tell him,
Thou art maimed; and art going to the Lord Jesus. If he Objects thine ^wn
Unworthiness, tell him, That even as the Sick ^^ke In the Physician, as he that
has broken Bone^ ^^^ks him that can set them, so thou art going to Jesus
Christ for Care and Healing for thy sick Soul.

But it often times happens to him that flies ^ his Life, he despairs of
escaping, and therefore d^vers himself up into the hand of the Pursuer. ^ up,
up Sinner; be of good Cheer* Christ came ^ save the unworthy One. Be not
faithless but ^^lieve. Come away Man, the Lord Jesus calls saying, And him
that co^^eth to me, I will in wise cast out

Fourthly. Thy Fear that Christ will not rece^^^ thee, may arise from a sense
of the exceeding Me^ of being saved. Sometimes Salvation is in the (...) of him
that desires so great, so huge: So wonde^ a thing* that the very Thoughts of
the Excelle^^ of it, ingenders unbelief about obtaining it, in ^ Heart of those
that unfeignedly desire it. Serm^^ it to you (says David) a light thing to be
the Kin^ Son in Law 1 1 Samuel 18.23 So the Thoughts of ^ Greatness and Glory of
the Thing propounded, ^ Heaven, Eternal Life, Eternal Glory; to be ^ God and
Christ, and Angels: These are great th^^ things too good (says the Soul that
is little (...) own Eyes.) Things too Rich (says the Soul the ^ truly poor in
spirit) for me.

Besides, The Holy Ghost has a way to great ^ Heavenly Things to the
Understanding of t^^ Coming Sinner; yea and at the same time ^ greaten too the
Sin and Unworthiness of that Si^ner. Now the Soul staggeringly wonders, saying,
What, to be made like Angels, like Christ ^ for Angels, and for them that can
walk like Angels.

And it is a Wonder then to see a Soul that ^ drowned in the sense of Glory,
and a sense of (...) own Nothingness, to be confounded in it self, an^ to fear
that the Glory apprehended, is too great too good, and too rich for such an one.

That thing, Heaven and eternal Glory, it ^ great, and I that would have it so
small, so sor^ a Creature, that the Thoughts of obtaining it co^founds me.

Thus I say, does the greatness of the things ^ fired, quite dash and overthrow
the Minds of the desire: Oh, it is too big! it is too big! it is ^ ^reat a
Mercy,

But, Coming Sinner, let me reason with thee* Thou-say'st it is too big, too
great. Well, will things that are less satisfy thy Soul; will a less thing
than Heaven, than Glory and eternal Life, ^nswer thy Desires? No, nothing less,
yet I fear ^hey are too big and too good for me ever to ob^ain. Well as big and
as good as they are, God gi^eth them to such as thou; they are not too big for
God to give. No not too big for God to give ^reely, be content, let God give
like Himself; He ^ that Eternal God, and gives like Himself. When Kings give,
they do not use to give as poor Men do. Hence it is said that Nabal made a
Feast in his House like the Feast of a King: And again, All these things did
A^^anah, as a King gave unto David, 1 Samuel ^5 2 Samuel 24. Now God is a great
King, let him give like a King, nay let him give himself, and do ^hou receive
like thy self. He has all, and thou have nothing God told his People of old*
that he would save them in Truth and Righteousness, and that they should return
to, and enjoy the Land, which before for their Sins had spued them out. And
then adds under a Supposition of their counting the Mercy too ^^ood or too big.
Is it he marvell^us in the Eyes of the Remnant of this People in these Days,
should it also be mavelous in mine Eyes? says the Lord of H^sts, Zech. 8 9,

As who should say, They are now in Captivity, and li^t^e in their own E^es,
therefore they think the Mercy too marvellously big for them to enjoy, but if
it be so in their Eyes, it is not so in mine. I will do for them like God, if
they all but receive my Bounty like Sinners.

Coming Sinner, God can give his heavenly Canaan, and the Glory of it to thee:
yea none ever had them, but as a Gift, a free Gift. He has given us his Son,
How shall he not them, with him freely give us all things?

It was not the worthiness of Abraham, Moses, or David, or Peter, or Paul, but
the Mercy of God that made them Inheritors of Heaven. If God thinks thee
worthy, ^^dge not thy self unworthy, bu^ take it, and be thankful. And it is a
good sign he intends to give thee, if he has drawn out t^^ heart to ask. O
Lord, thou have heard the desi^^ of the humble, thou will prepare their hearts,
the wilt incline thine Ear, Psalm. 10.17.

When God is said to incline his Ear, it implies ^ Intention to bestow the
Mercy desired. Take ^ therefore, thy Wisdom will be to receive, not sti^^ing at
thy own unworthiness. It is said, He raise^ up the Poor out of the Dust, and
lifts up the Be^gar out of the Dunghill, to set them among Prin^^ and to make
them inherit the Throne of Glo^^ Again, he raises up the poor out of the Dust.
^ lifts some Needy out of the Dunghill that he ^ set him with Princes, even
with the Princes of ^ People. Sam 4 28. Psalm. 113 7, 8.

You see also, when God made a Wedding ^ his Son, he called not the Great, nor
the Rich, (...) the Mighty* but the Poor* the Maimed* the Halt* ^ the Blind,
Mat. 22 Luke 14

Fifthly, Thy Fears that Christ will not recei^^ thee, may arise from the
hideous Roaring of the Devil, who pursues thee, He that hearts him rou^^ must
be a mighty Christian if he can at that tim^ deliver himself from Fear. He is
called a roa^i^^ Lion; and then to allude to that in Isaiah, If on^ look into
them, they have Darkn^ss, and Sorro^ and the Light is Darkness to their* very
Heav^^ a (...) 3.8 Isa. ^.30.

There are two things among many, that Satan uses to roar out after them that
are coming (...) Jesus Christ.

1. That they are not Elected, Or,

2. That they have* sinned the Sin against (...) Holy Ghost.

To both these I answer briefly.

Touching Election, out of which thou (...) thou art excluded. Why, coming
Sinner, even ^ Text it self affords thee help against this (...) and that by
a double Argument.

First, That coming to Christ, is by Virt^^ ^ the Gift, Promise, and Drawing of
the Father; In thou act a coming, therefore God has given that ^ised thee, and
is a Drawing thee to Jesus Christ. ^ing Sinner, hold to this, and when Satan
begins our again, answer But I feel my heart moving af^ ^^sus Christ. But that
would not be if it were not ^ by Promise, and Drawing to Christ by the (...) of
the Father

^^condly, Jesus Christ has Promised, That him ^ comes to him, he will in no
wise cast out, ^ if he has said it, will he not make it good. I ^ even thy
Salvation? For as I have said al^ ^y, not to cast out, is to receive and admit
to (...) fit of Salvation. If then the Father has ^n thee, as is manifested by
thy coming and if ^^^ist will receive thee* thou coming Soul, as it is ^in he
w^ll, be cause he has said. He well in no ^e cast thee out. Then be confident*
and let those ^^nclusions that as naturally flow from the ^^ne, ^ Light from
the Sun, or Water from the Foun^^n stay thee.

If Satan therefore objecteth, But thou art not ^ected; answer, But I am
coming, Satan, I am ^ming; and that I could not be, but that the ^ther draws;
and I am coming to such a Lord ^^sus as will in no wise cast me out. Farther,
^^tan, were I not the Elect, the Father would not ^^w me; nor would the Son so
graciously open ^s Bosom to me. I am persawded that not ^e of the Non-elect
shall ever be able to say ^^o not in the Day of Judgment) I did sincerely ^ome
to Jesus Christ, Come they may, feignedly (...) Judas and S^mon Magus did; but
that is not ^ur Question. Therefore O thou honest-hearted ^^ming Sinner! be not
afraid, but come.

As to the second Part of the Objection about ^^ing that Sin against the Holy
Ghost; the ^^e Argument also overthrows that also. But ^ will argue thus.

First, Coming to Christ is by virtue of a spe^ Gift of the Father; but the
Father gives no such Gift to them that have sinned that Si^ therefore thou
that art coming have not committed that Sin that the Father gives no su^^ Gift
to them that have sinned that Sin is evide^^

1. Because they have sinned themselves out ^ God's Favor; they shall never
have forgi^^ness, Mat 12 32. But it is a special Favor ^ God to give unto a
Man, to come to Jes^^ Christ; because thereby he obtains Forgi^^ness
Therefore he that comes, has not ^ned that Sin.

2. They that have sinned the Sin against ^ H^ly G^ost, have sinned themselves
out of ^ interest in the sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blo^^ There remains for
such no more sacrifice for S^^

But God gives not Grace to any of them ^ come to Christ, that have no share
in the S^crifice of his B^dy and Blood; Therefore ^ that art coming to him,
have not sinned the Sin, Heb. 19 26.

Secondly, Coming to Christ, is by the specia^ drawing of the Father. No man
comes to M^ except the Father which has sent me draw him. But the Father
draws not him to Christ for whom he has not allotted Forgiveness by hi^
Blood. Therefore, they that are coming to Jesus Christ, have not sinned that
Sin, because he has allotted them Forgiveness by his Blood* John 6.44.

That the Father cannot draw them to Jesus Christ, for whom he has not
allotted Forgiveness of Sin, is manifest to Sense; for that wou^^ be a plain
Mockery, a Flam neither becomi^^ his Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, nor Goodness.

Thirdly, Coming to Jesus Christ, lays a (...) under his Intercession: For he
ever lives ^ ^^ke Intercession for them that come, Heb 7.25. therefore he that
is coming to Jesus Christ, ^^nnot have sinned that Sin

Christ has forbidden the People to Pray for them ^^at have sinned that Sin,
and therefore will not Pray ^^r them himself, but he prays for them that come.

Fourthly, He that has sinned that Sin Christ is ^o him of no more Worth, than
it a Man that is ^ead. For he has crucified to him the Son of God* Yea, and
has also counted his precious Blood as an ^nholy thing Heb 6 10. Now he that
has this low ^steem of Christ, will never come to him for Life, ^ut the Coming
Man has an high Esteem of his Person, Blood and Merits. Therefore he that is
coming has not committed that Sin.

Fifthly, If he that has sinned this Sin might yet come to Jesus Christ then
must the truth of God be overthrown, which says in one place. He has never
Forgiveness. And ^n another, I will in no wise cast out. Therefore that he may
never have Forgiveness, he shall never have an Heart to come ^o Jesus Christ.
It is impossible that such an one should be renewed either to, or by
Repentance* Heb. 6. Wherefore, never trouble thy Head nor Heart about this
matter. He that comes to Jesus Christ, cannot have sinned against the Holy
Ghost.

Sixthly, Thy Fears that Christ will not receive thee, may arise from thine own
Folly, in inventing yea, in the chalking out to God a way to bring thee Home to
Jesus Christ. Some Souls that are coming to Jesus Christ are great Tormentors
of themselves upon this account. They conclude, that if their coming to Jesus
Christ is right, they must needs be brought home thus and thus. As to instance.

1. Says one, if God be bringing of me to Jesus Christ, then will he load me
with the Guilt of Sin, ^till he make me roar again.

2. If God be indeed bringing me home to Jesus Christ, then must I be assaulted
with dreadful Temptations of the Devil.

3. If God be indeed a bringing me to Jesus Christ then even when I come at ^ll
n^^ I shall n^ wonderful Revelations of him.

This is the way that some Sinners appoint ^ God. But perhaps he will not walk
herein, et he ^ b^ing the unto Jesus Christ. But now because t^ come not in the
way of their own chalking o^ therefore they are at a loss. They look for a
h^^vy lord and burden; but perhaps God gives the a sight of their lost
Condition and adds ^ that heavy weight and burden. They look for^ fearful
Temptations of Satan but God sees t^ yet they are not fit for them? Nor is the
^ come, that he should be honored by them in ^ a Condition. They look for
Great and Glorio^^ Revelations of Christ, Grace, and Mercy. ^ perhaps God only
takes the Yoke from off the Jaws, and lays Meat before them. And now age they
are at a Loss yet a coming to Christ: I dre^^ (says God) with the Cords of a
Man, with the Bands of Love: I took the Yoke from of their Jaws, and said Meat
unto them, Heb. 1.14.

Now I say, if God brings thee to Christ, and ^ by the way that thou have
appointed, then th^^ art a loss; and for thy being at a loss thou may ^ thank
thy self, God has more ways than tho^ know of, to bring a Sinner to Jesus
Christ. Bu^ he will not give thee before hand an Account h^^ which he will
bring thee to Christ, Isa. 40.12. Joh 43.13.

Sometimes he has his Way in the Whirl wind, but sometimes the Lord is not
there. Neh. 13. 1 Kin 10.11.

If God will deal more gently with thee, tha^ with others of his Children,
grudge not at it* refus^ to the Waters of the Rivers* strong and many, ev^^
these two smoking Fire Brands the D^^^ and Guilt of Sin* I^a 8 6 7.8 He says
to P^ter follow me. And what Thunder did Zac^^us hear or see? Zacheus Come
down, said Christ ^ he came town, (says Luke) and received H^ joyfully.

^^t had Peter or Zacheus made the Obi^cti^^ ^ha^ thou have made, and directed
the Spirit ^e Lord, as thou have done, they might have ^ed long enough, before
they had found ^mselves coming to Jesus Christ.

^ sides, I will tell thee, that the greatness of ^f Sin, the hideous R^a^ing
of the D^vil, ^ and abundance of Revelations, will not ^re that God is bringing
the Soul to Jesus ^^rist: As Balaam, Cain, Judas, and others can ^ness.

Farther, Consider, that what thou have not of ^se things here thou may^st have
another time, ^d that thy Destruction: Wherefore instead ^ being Discontent,
because thou art not in ^e Fire; because thou hear not the Sound of ^e
Trumpet, and Alarm of War; Pray that (...) enter not into Temptation; Yea, come
^dly to the Throne of Grace, and obtain Mer^ and find Grace to help in that
time of need? ^l. 88 15 Mat 40.41. Heb 4 16.

Poor Creature! Thou cry'st, if I were temp^^d, I could come faster, and with
more Confi^^nce to Jesus Christ; Thou say thou know ^ot what. What says
Job, Withdraw thy Hand ^n me, and let not thy Dread make me afraid; ^en call
thou, and I will answer; or let me speak, ^^d answer thou me, J^b 11.31 It is
not the ^ver ^^avy Load of Sin, but the Discovery of Mer^^; not the Roaring of
the Devil, but the ^awing of the Father, that makes a man come ^ Jesus Christ,
I my self know all these things ^ True, sometimes (yea, most an end) they ^t
come to Jesus Christ, come the way that ^m desi^est; the Loading, Tempted Way;
^t the Lord also leads some by the Waters of Comfort. If I was to choose, when
to go a ^o^ Journey; to wit, Whether I would go it in ^ Dead of Winter, or in
the Pleasant Spri^ (though it was a very profitable Journey; ^ that of coming
to Christ is) I would choose ^ go through Fire and Water, before I would ^ the
Benefit. But I say, if I choose the time, ^ would choose to go it in the pleasant
Spring, ^^cause the way would be more delightsome, ^ Days longer and warmer,
the Nights sho^ and no so cold. And it is observable, that the very Argument
that thou usest, to weaken ^ strength in the way, that very Argument Ch^ Jesus
uses to encourage his beloved to come^ him: Arise (says he) my Love, my fair
One, ^ come away; (Why) For lo, the Winter is past, ^ Rain is over and gone,
the Flowers appear or ^ Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, ^ the
Voice of the Turtle is heard in our land. ^ Fig Tree puts forth for green
Fi^s, and the Vi^ with her tender Grapes, give a good smell: Arise^ Love, my
fair One, and come away, Song 2.10.

Trouble not thy self, Coming Sinner, if the feast thy lost Condition by thy
original and ac^^al Sin. If thou see thy need of the spoi^ Righteousness of
Jesus Christ; If thou art ^ling to be found in him, and to take up ^ Cross and
follow him, then Pray for a ^ Wind and good Weather, and come a way. ^ no
longer in a Muse or Doubt about things ^ come away to Jesus Christ: Do it, I
say, ^ thou tempt God to lay the Sorrows of a tra^^ling Woman upon thee. Thy
Folly in ^ thing, makes him to do it. Mind what foll^^ The Sorrows of a
traveling Women shall, ^ upon him: Why? He is an unwise Son, ^ should not stay
long in the breaking forth of ^^ildren, Hos. 13.13.

Seventhly, Thy Fears that Christ will not re^^^ve thee, may rise from those
Decays that ^^ou find in thy Soul, even while thou art ^^^ing to Him: Some,
even as they are com^^g to Jesus Christ, do find themselves grow ^^rse and
worse: And this is indeed, a fore ^^yal to the poor coming Sinner.

To explain my self; There is such an one a ^^ming to Jesus Christ; who, when
at first he ^^gan to look out after him, was sensible, affecti^nate, and broken
in Spirit; But now is grown ^^rk, senseless, hard-harted; and inclining to
^eglect Spiritual Duties, etc. Besides he now ^ads in himself Inclinations to
Unbelief, Atheism, ^lasphemy, and the like. Now he finds he cannot tremble at
God's Word, his Judgments, nor ^ the Apprehension of Hellfire: Neither can ^e,
as he thinks, be sorry for these things, Now ^^is is a sad Dispensation. The
Man, under the ^ixth Head, complains for want of Tempta^^ons, but thou have
enough of them; art thou ^lad of them, tempted, coming Sinner? They ^^at never
were exercised with them, may think it ^ fine thing to be within their Rage;
but he that ^ there, is ready to sweat blood for Sorrow of ^eart, and to howl
for Vexation of Spirit.

This Man is in the Wilderness among Wild ^^asts; here he sees a Rear, there a
Lion, yonder ^ Leopard, a Wolf, a Dragon; Devils of all sorts, ^oubts of all
sorts; Fears of all sorts: haunt ^^d molest his Soul. Here he sees Smoke, yea
feels ^re and Brimstone scattered upon his secret pla^; he hears the sound of
an horrible Tempest* ^ O! my Friends, even the Lord Jesus, that knew all
things, even he saw no Pleasure i^ Temptations, nor did he desire to be with
them Wherefore one Text says, he was led; and another, he was driven of the
Spirit into the Wilderness, to be Tempted of the Devil, Mat. 4.^

But to return, Thus it happens sometim^ to them that are coming to Jesus
Christ, A sad ha^ indeed: One would think, that he that is flyin^ from the
Wrath to come, has little Ne^d of su^^ Clogs as these; And yet so it is, and
woeful Experince proves it. The Church of old complained, that her Enemies
overtook her betwee^ the Straits; just between Hope and Fear, Heaven and Hell,
Lam. 1.3.

This Men feels the Infirmity of his Flesh ^ he finds a proneness in
himself to be Desperate: Now he chides with God, Flings and tumbles like a wild
Bull in a Net, and still the Guilt of all returns upon himself to the crushing
of him in pieces; yet he feels his Hear^ so hard that he can find, as he
thinks no kin^ falling under any of his miscarriages. Now b^ is a Lump of
confusion in his own Eyes, whos^ Spirit and Actions are without Order.

Temptations serve the Christian as the Shepherds Dog serves the silly Sheep;
that is coming behind the Flock he runs upon it, pulls i^ down, worries it,
wounds it, and grievou^ bedableth it with Dirt and Wet, in the lowe^ places of
the Furrows of the Field, and n^^ leaving it until it is half Dead, not then
neithe^ except God rebuke.

Here is room now for Fears of being cast away, Now I see I am lost, says the
Sinner: Thi^ is not coming to Jesus Christ, says he; su^ a desperate hard, and
wretched Heart, as mine ^ cannot be a Gracious one says the Sinner. And ^id
such an one be better, he says, I cannot, no ^ cannot.

Que. But what will you say to a Soul in this Condition?

Answ. I will say, That Temptations have attended ^he best of God's People I
will say, That Temptations come to do as Good* And I will say also, That there
is a difference betwixt growing worse and worse, and thy seeing more clearly
how bad thou art.

There is a Man of an ill favored Countenance, who has too high a Conceit of
his Beauty; and wanting the Benefit of a Glass, he still stands in his own
Conceit* at last a Limner is sent unto him, who draws his ill favored Face
to the Life; now looking on it* he begins to be convinced, that he is not half
so Handsome as he thought he was. Coming Sinner, thy Temptations are these
Painters, they have drawn out thy ill favored Heart to the Life, and have set
it before thine Eyes, and now thou see how ill favored thou art.

Hezekiah was a good Man, yet when he lay Sick (for ought I know) he had
somewhat too good an Opinion of his Heart, and for ought I know also, the Lord
might upon his Recovery, leave him to a Temptation, that he might better know
all that was in his Heart. Compare, Isa. 38.1. Chron. 32 31.

Alas* We are sinful out of measure, but see it not to the full, until an Hour
of Temptation comes, but when it comes it does as the Painter does, it draws
out our Heart to the Life. Yet the sight of what we are, should not keep us
from coming to Jesus Christ.

There are two Ways by which God sets a Man into a sight of the Naughtiness of
his Heart, one is, by the light of the Word and Spirit of God: and the other
is, by the Temptations of the Devil. But by the first, we see our Naughtiness
one way, and by the second, another. By the light of the Word, and Spirit of
God, thou have a sight of thy naughtiness, and by the Light of the Sun thou
have a sight of the Spots and Defilements that are in thy House an^ Raiment,
which Light gives thee to see a Necessi^^ of Cleansing, but makes not the
Blemishes ^ spread more abominably. But when Satan com^ when he tempts he puts
life end rage into our Si^ and turns them, as it were, into so many Dev^^
within us. Now, like Prisoners, they attempt ^ break through the Prison of our
Body, they will a^tempt to get out at our Eyes, Mouth* Ears, a^ ways to the
scandal of the Gospel, and Reproach^ Religion; to the darkning of our
Evidences, ^ damning of our Souls.

But I shall say as I said before* this has o^ti^ been the Lot of God's
People. And no Tempta^^on has overtaken thee, but such as is common ^ Man, and
God is faithful, who will not luster ^ to be tempted above what thou art able,
1 Cor. ^ 13. See the Book of Job. the Book of Psalms, ^ that of the
Lamentations. And remember farth^^ that Christ himself was tempted to
Blesp^l^eme ^ worship the Devil, and to murder himself Man Luke 4.
(Temptations worse than which thou ca^ be hardly overtaken with.) But he was
Sensele^ that is true. And he is thy Savior, and that it ^ true. Yea, is as
true also, that by his being temp^ed, He became the Conqueror of the Tempter,
a^ a Succourer of those that are tempted, Col. ^ 14,

Quest. But what should be the Reason that so^ that are coming to Christ,
should be so lamentab^ cast down, and buffered with Temptations?

Answ. It may be for several Causes.

First Some that are coming to Christ, cannot ^ persuaded, until the Temptation
comes, that the are so Vile as the Scripture says they are, Tr^ they see so
much of their Wretchedness as to de^ them to Christ: but there is an over and
above ^ Wickedness, which they see not. Peter little ^ that he had Cursing, and
Swearing, and Lying ^ an inclination in his heart to Deny his Master, ^fore the
Temptation came. But when that ind^ came upon him, then he found it there to
his ^row John 13.36, etc.

Secondly. Some that are coming to Jesus Christ ^e too much affected with their
own Graces, and ^o little taken with Christ's Person, wherefore God ^ take them
off from doathing on their own Jewels, ^o that they may look more to the
Person, Un^ertaking, and Merits of his Son, plunges them into ^e Ditch by
Temptations and this I take to be ^he meaning of Job If I wash me (said he)
with ^now Water, and make my self never so clean, yet ^ilt thou plunge me in
the Ditch and mine own Clothes shall abhor me, J^b 9 30. Job had been a little
^oo much tampering with his own Graces, and seeing ^is Excellencies a little
too high, (as these Texts ^ake manifest Job 33 8.9 10, 11) But by that the ^
Temptations were ended, you find him better ^ a^ight.

Yea, God does often times, even for this thing, as ^e were take our Graces
from us and so leave us ^lmost quite to our selves and to the Tempter, that ^e
may learn, not to love the Picture, more than ^he Person of his Son. See how he
dealt with them ^n the 16th of Ezekiel, and the 2d of Hosea.

Thirdly Perhaps thou have been given too much ^o judge the Brother, to condemn
thy Brother, because a poor tempted Man: And God to bring ^own the pride of thy
Heart, let^eth the Tempter ^oose upon thee that thou may also feel thy ^elf
wealt, For Pride goes before Destruction and an ^aughty Spirit before a Fall.
Prove. 16 18.

Fourthly. It man be thou have d^alt too roughly with those that God has
wounded; not conside^^ng thy self lest thou also be tempted; and therefore God
has suste^ed is to come unto thee, Gal. 6.7.

Fifthly, It m^^ be thou wast given to Slumber and Sleep, and therefo^^ ^hese
Temptations were sent to ^waken thee. You know that Peter's Temptation came
upon him after his Sleeping* then instead of Watching and Praying then he
Denied, and Denied, and Denied has Master, Mat ^0^

Sixthly, It may be thou have Presumed too far, (...) stood too much in thine
own S^rength; and (...) ^fore is a time of Temptation come upon thee. Though all
Men forsake thee, yet will not I. A^ That Is the way to be tempted indeed, John
13.36.

Seventhly, It may be God intends to make the wise to speak a word in season to
others that a^ afflicted; and therefore he suffered thee to be temp^ed, Christ
was tempted, that he might be able to su^cour those that are tempted, Heh. 2.

Eighthly, It may be Satan has dated God ^ suffer him to tempt thee, promising
himself, th^^ if he will but let him do it, thou will Curse him ^ his Face.
Thus he obtained leave against Jo^ Wherefore take heed, tempted Soul, lest thou
p^^ vest the Devil's Sayings true, Job 1.2.

Ninthly, It may be thy Graces must be tried ^ the Fire, that the Rust which
cleaves to them m^^^ be taken away, and themselves p^o^ed both before Angels
and Devil's, to be far better than of Go^ that perishes. It may be also that
thy Graces a^ to receive special Praise and Honor, and Glory at the coming of
the Lord Jesus (to Judgment) for all the Exploits that thou have acted by them
against Hell and its infernal Crew, in the Day ^ thy Temptation, 1 Pet. 1.6.

Tenthly, It may be God would have others lear^ by the Sighs, Groans and
Complaints under Temptations, to beware of those Sins, for the sake o^ which,
thou art at present delivered to the Tormentors.

To conclude this, put the worst to the worst, ((...) then things will be bad
enough) suppose that thou art to this Day without the Grace of God, yes thou
are but a miserable Creature, a Sinner that ^as (...) of a blessed Savior, and
the Text presents (...) with one, as good, and kind, as Heart can wit^ who also
for thine Encouragement says, And (...) that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out.

To come therefore to a Word of Application.
IS it so, that they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are often heartily afraid
that Jesus Christ will not receive t^ (...) Then thi^ teach (...) these Things.

First, That Faith and Doubting, may at the ^ne time have their Residence in
the same ^^ul? O thou of little Faith, wherefore did ^ou Doubt, Matthew
14.31. He says not Oh! ^ou of no Faith; but Oh! thou of little Faith; ^^cause
He had a little Faith in the midst of his ^any Doubts. And the same is True,
even of ^any that are coming to Jesus Christ. They ^^me and Fear they come not,
and Doubt they ^ome not. When They look upon the Promise, ^ a Word of
Encouragement by Faith, then they ^ome; but when they look upon themselves, or
(...) D^fficulties that lay before 'em, then they doubt. Bid me come, said
Peter; Come, says Christ So He went down out of the Ship to ^o to Jesus; but
his Hap was to go to Him upon ^he Water; There was the Trial, So it is with ^he
poor, desiring Soul; Bid me come, says the ^innner. Come, says Christ, and I
will in no wise ^ast thee out. So He comes, but his Hap is to ^ome upon the
Water; upon Drowning Difficul^ies: If therefore the Wind of Temptation blow,
^he Waves of Doubts and Fears will presently ^ife; and this coming Sinner will
presently sink, ^f He has but little Faith.

But you shall find here, in Peter's little Faith ^ Tow fold Act; to wit,
Coming, and Crying: Little Faith cannot come all the way without Crying. So
long as its holy boldness lasts, so ^ong it cannot come in Peace; but when 'its
so, (...) can come no farther; it will go the rest of ^he way with Crying.
Peter went as far as his little Faith would carry him: He also cried ^s far as
his little Faith would help, Lord Save me, I perish! And so with coming and
Crying, ^e was kept from sinking, though he had but a little Faith Jesus
streched forth his Hand, and caught him, and said unto him, Oh! Thou little
Faith wherefore did thou doubt?

Secondly, Is it so* That they that are comin^ to Jesus Christ are often times
heartily afraid the Jesus Christ will not recieve them? Then th^^ shows us a
reas^n of that Dejection, and tha^ casting down that very often (...) ^erceive to
^ in them tha^ are c^m^ng (...) Jesus Christ Why ^ is because they are a^^aid
the Jesus Christ wi^^ not receive them. The poor World they mo^ us because we
are a dejected People; I me^^ because we are sometimes so; but they do no^ know
the cause of our Dejections. Could we b^ persuaded, even then, when we are
dejected, the Jesus Christ would indeed receive us, it would make us fly over
their Heads, and would put mo^ gladness into our Hearts, then in the time (...)
which their Corn, Wine and Oil increases. Psa. 46.7

Thirdly, Is it so. That they that are coming t^ Jesus Christ are often times
heartily afraid that h^ will not receive them? Then this shows, that they that
are coming to Jesus Christ, are an awakened, sensible considering People: For
Fe^^ comes from Sense, and Consideration of things They are sensible of Sin,
sensible of the Curs^ due thereto; they are also sensible of the glorious
Majesty of God, and of what a blessed thing it is to be received of Jesus
Christ: The Glory of Heaven, and the Evil of Sin; the^ things they consider,
and are sensible of; Wh^ I remember, I am afraid; when I consider, I am ^
afraid, Job 21.6.

These things dash their Spirits, being awake and sensible. Were th^^ Dead,
like other Men. they would not be affl^cted with Fear as they are: f^ Dead Men
fear not, ^eel not, care not, but the living and sensible Man, he it is that is
often heart^ afraid that Jesus Christ will not receive him. I ^ the Dead and
Senseless are not distressed. They same, they are groundlesly confident. Who so
hold Wind Bayard? These indeed, should fear and be and, because they are not
coming to Jesus Christ, the Hell, the Fire, the Pit, the Wrath of God and
^^rments of Hell, that are prepared for poor ne^^^cting Sinners! How shall we
escape if we neglect great Salvation! Heb 2.3. But they want sense of ^^ings,
and so cannot fear.

Fourthly, Is it so, That they that are coming to ^^sus Christ are often
heartily afraid that he will ^ot receive them. Then this should teach old
Chris^ians to pity and pray for young Comers! You now the Heart of a Stranger,
for you your selves ^ere Strangers in the Land of Egypt. You know ^he Fears and
Doubts and Terrors, that take hold ^f them; for that they sometimes took hold
^f you; wherefore pity them, pray for them, en^ourage them, they need all that.
Guilt has ove^^en them Perhaps they are within the fight (...) ^ell-Fire, and
the Fear of going thither, is burning ^ot within their Hearts. You may know how
^^rangely Satan is suggesting his Devilish Doubts unto them, if possible he may
sink and drown them, with the multitude and weight of them. Old Chri^tians mend
up the Path for them, take the Stumbling Blocks out of the way, lest that which
is feeble (...) weak be turned aside, but let it rather be healed.

I come now to the Observation, and shall speak a little to that; to wit,
THat Jesus Christ would not have them, that in ^ Truth are coming to Him once
think that He (...) cast them out.

The Text is full of this: For he says, And him (...) comes to me, I will in
no wise cast out. Now ^he says* I will not, He would not have us think, (...)
will.

This is yet farther manifest by these Considera^ion.

First, Christ Jesus did forbid even them. That as ^ were not coming to him,
Once to think him such an One. Do not think (says he) that accuse you to the
Father John 5.45

These (as I says) were such that as yet were coming to him: For he says of
them a little b^ and ye will not come to me. For the Respect ^ had to the
Honor of Men, kept them back, y^ say, Jesus Christ gives them to understand, ^
though he might justly reject them, yet he (...) not, but bids them not once to
think that he (...) accuse them to the Father. Now, not to are (with Christ) is
to plead for: For Christian things, stands not Neuter between the Father ^
Sinners. So then if Jesus Christ would not (...) them think that. Yet will not
come to him, ^ he will accuse them* then he would not that (...) should think
so, that in Truth are coming to b^ And him that comes to me, I will in no ^
cast out.

Secondly, When the Woman taken in Adult^ (even in the very Act) was brought
before Je^^^ Christ, so he carried it both by Words and A^ti^ that he evidently
enough made it manifest, t^ Condemning and Casting out, were such things, ^ the
doing of which he came not into the World.

Wherefore, when they had set her before him, ^ had laid to her Charge her
heinous Fact he stoo^ down, and with his Finger wrote upon the Grou^ as though
he heard them not. Now what did ^ do by this his Carriage, but testify
plainly, that ^ was not for receiving Accusations against poor S^^ners, whoever
accused by? And Observe, Th^^ they continue Asking, thinking at last to forth ^
to Condemn her; yet when he so answered, as ^ it drove all condemning Persons
from her. And ^ he ad^^ for her Encouragement to come to ^ Neither do I Condemn
thee? go and (...) more, John 8 7.

Not but that he indeed abhorred the Fact, ^ because that was not his Office:
He was not ^ into the wo^ld to Condemn the world* but ^ the world through him
might be saved, John* Now, if Christ, though urged to it, would ^ (...) the
Guilty Woman, though she was far at ^ from coming to him, he would not that
they ^ once think, that be will cast them out that ^th are coming to him. And
him that comes ^ I will in no wise cast out.

^^^rdly. Christ plainly bids the turning Sinner ^e^ and for bids him to
entertain any such though it, ^e will cast him out. Let the wicked forsake ^ay, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and ^ torn unto the Lord* and he will have
mercy ^ him; and to our God* for he will abundantly ^n, Isa. 54 7.

(...) ^o^d, by bidding the Unrighteous forsake ^ ^^ghts, ^oth in special
forbid, as I have said, (...) ^se though (...) that hinder the coming man in ^
Prog^ess to Jesus Christ* his unbelieving Tho'ts. therefore he bids him not
only to forsake his ^s, but his Thoughts: Let the wicked forsake his ^, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts. It Is ^ enough to forsake one, if thou will come
to Je^^^ Christ; because the other will keep thee from ^ Suppose a man forsakes
his wicked ways, his ^ached and filthy Life; yet if these tho'ts that ^ Christ
will not receive him be entertained and ^ished in his Heart, them thoughts will
keep ^ from coming to Jesus Christ.

^inner Coming Sinner, art thou for coming to ^s Christ? Yes, sa^s the Sinner.
Forsake thy ^ked ways then. So I do, says the Sinner. Why ^rst thou then so
slowly? Because I am hindered? ^t hinders thee? Has God for hidden thee? No, ^
thou not willing to come faster? Yes yet I ^ot. Well, p^ithe be plain with me,
and tell me ^ Reason and Ground of thy Discouragement: ^, (says the Sinner)
though God forbids me ^ and though I am willing to come faster yet ^e naturally
arises this, and that, and the other ^ght in my Heart, that hinders my speed
to Je^^^ Christ. Sometimes I think I am not Chosen; ^^^^times I think I am not
Called* sometimes I ^^^^k I am come too Late* and sometimes I think, ^^w not
what it is to come. Also one while I think I have no Grace, and then again that
I ^ not Pray: and then again I think, that I am a ^ Hypocrite. And these things
keep me from ^ming to Jesus Christ.

Look ye now! Did not I tell ye so? There ^ Thoughts yet remaining in the
Heart, even of the who have forsaken their wicked Ways: and ^ those Thoughts
they are more plagued, than ^ any thing else? because they hinder their co^ to
Jesus Christ. For the Sin of Unbelief, which ^ the Original of all these
Thoughts, is that ^ besets a coming Sinner more easily than does ^ ways, Heb.
12.1, 2, 3 4.

But now, since Jesus Christ commands thee ^ forsake these Thoughts* forsake
them, coming ^ner: and if thou forsake them not, thou transg^ lest the Commands
of Christ* and abidest thine o^ Tormentor, and keep thy self from the
Es^^blishment in Grace. If ye will not believe, ye ^ not be established, Isa.
7.9.

Thus you see how Jesus Christ sets himself against such Thoughts, that any
way discourage ^ coming Sinner: and thereby truly vindicates ^ Doctrine we have
in Hand? to wit, That Je^^^ Christ would not have them that in Truth ^ coming
to him, once think, that He will cast the out. And him that comes to me, I
will in ^ wise cast out.

I come now to the Reasons of the Observation.
1. IF Jesus Christ would allow thee Once ^ Think, that he will cast thee out;
^ must allow thee to think, that he will falsify ^ Word: For he has said, I
will in no wise ^ out. But Christ would not that thou should ^ account him as
one, that will falsify his W^ For he says of himself, I am the Truth.
Th^^^fore he would not, that any that in Truth ^ coming to him, should once
think that he ^ cast them out.

Secondly, If Jesus Christ should allow ^ ^ner that in Truth is coming to him
Once to ^nk, that he will cast him out; then he must ^ow, and so countenance
the first appearance ^ Unbelief; which he counts his greatest Ene^^, and
against which he has bent even his Holy ^^spel. Therefore Jesus Christ would
not, that ^ey that in Truth are coming to him should ^ce think, that he will
cast them out: Sea ^^t. 14.31. Mark 11.13. Luke 24.25.

Thirdly, If Jesus Christ should allow the com^^g Sinner once to think that he
will cast him ^et; then he must allow him to make a Quest^on, wether he is
willing to recieve his Father's ^ift? For the coming Sinner is his Father's
Gift: ^s also says the Text, but he testifies. All that ^e Father gives him,
shall come to him; and ^m that comes, he will in no wise cast out. ^ Therefore
Jesus Christ would not have him, that ^ truth is coming to him, once to think
that ^e will cast him out.

Fourthly, If Jesus Christ should allow them once to ^ink (that indeed are
coming to him) that he will ^^st him out, he must allow them to think* that he
^ill despise and reject the Drawing of the Father. ^^r no man can come to him,
but whom the Father Draws. But it would be high Blasphemy and dam^^ble
Wickedness once to imagine thus. Therefore, jesus Christ would not have him
that comes, once ^hink that he will cast him out.

Fifthly If Jesus Christ should allow those that in^^ed are coming to him, once
to think that he will ^ast them out, he must allow them to think, that he ^ill
be unfaithful to the Trust and Charge that his ^^ther has committed to him,
which is to Save* and ^^t to Lose any thing of that which he has give^ ^im to
save* John 6.3^.

But the Father has given him a charge to save ^he coming sinner: therefore it
cannot be that he should all (...) that such should once think that the ^ll
cast him out.

Sixthly. If Jesus Christ should allow, that t^ should once think, that are
coming to him, that will cast them out, then he must allow them think, that he
will be unfaithful to his Office Priesthood. For as by the first part of it he
pai^ Price for, and ransomed Souls: So b^ the see^ part of it, he continually
makes Intercession to ^ for them that come, Heb 7 21. But he cannot al^ us at
all to scruple or question his faithful Execu^^on of his Priesthood. Therefore
he cannot all ^ us once to think, that the coming Sinner shall ^ cast out.

Sevently. If Jesus Christ should allow us once ^ think, that the coming Sinner
shall be cast out, the must allow us to Question his will or Power or ^rit to
Save, but he cannot allow us once to Quest^^^ any of those. Therefore not once
to think, the the coming Sinner shall be cast out.

1. He cannot allow us to Question his Will; for he says in the Text, I will
in no wise cast out

2. He cannot allow us to Question his Power for the Holy Ghost says, He is
able to save to t^ utmost them that come.

3. He cannot allow us to Question the Efficacy ^ his Merit. For the Blood of
Christ cleanses ^ Comer from all Sin. 1 John 1. Therefore he cann^^ allow,
that he that is coming to him, should on^^ think, that he will cast him out.

Eighthly. If Jesus Christ should allow the co^ing Sinner once to think that he
will him cast o^^ he must allow him to give the Life to the manife^^ Testimony
of the Father* Son, and Spirit, (...) the whole Gospel contained in Moses* the
Proph^^ the Book of Psalms* and that commonly called ^ New Testament. But he
cannot allow of thi^ therefore not that the coming Sinner should (...) think,
that he will cast him out.

Ninthly. Lastly, If Jesus Christ should allow ^ that is coming to him once to
think that he ^ cast him out, which he in Truth and Righteousn^^^ has taken
that they might have a strong Co^^^^^tion, who have fled for refuge to Jesus
Chr^^^ ^^t he cannot allow th^^* therefore he cannot allow ^^at the coming
Sinner should once think that he ^^ill cast him out, H^b 8.

I come now to make some General Use and Application of the whole, and so to
draw toward a (...) si^n.
THe first Use A Use of information And it informs us, Tha^ Men by Nature are
far off from Christ.

Let me a little improve this Use, by speaking to ^hese three Questions.

1 Where is he that is coming to Jesus Christ?

2. What is he that is coming to Jesus Christ?

3 Whither is he to go that comes not to Jesus Christ?

First, Where is he?

1. Answ He is far from God, he is without him, ^ven alienate from him, both in
his Understanding, Will, Aff^^ctions Judgment and Conscience, Ephesians. 2.1^.

2. He is far from Jesus Christ, who is the only deliverer of Men from
Hellfire, Psalm. 37.27.

3. He is far from the work of the Holy Ghost* the ^o^k of Regeneration and a
second Creation* without which no man shall see the Kingdom of Heaven Joh 3.3.

4. He is far from being Righteous from that Righteousness that should make him
acceptable in (...)'s sight Isa. 64 14

5. He is under the Power and Dominion of Sin, in reigns in and over him; it
dwells in every ^ac^lty of his Soul and member of his Body: So that from Head
to Foot there is no place clean, Isa. ^6 Cor 8 9 10 11 12, 13 14 etc.

6. He is the P^st House with Vz^iah and ex^luded the Camp of Israel with the
Lepers, 2 Chronicles. ^5.21 Numb. 5.2

7. His Life is among the unclean* He is in the ^^ill of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity, Joh. 3.^4 Acts 8 23.

8. He is in Sin, in the Flesh in Death, in the ^hare of the Devil and is taken
Captive by him at ^ will 1 Cor. 1^.17. Rom 8 8 1 John 3.14. 2 Timothy 2 ^8.

9. He is under the Curse of the Law, and the Devil dwells in him* and has the
mastery of him, Gal 3.13. Ephesians 2 2 ^.

10. He is Darkness* and walks in Darkness, an^ know not whither he goes, for
Darkness has blinde^ his Eyes.

11. He is in the broad way that leads to Destruction: and holding on, he
will assuredly go in ^ the broad Gate, and down the Stairs to Hell.

Secondly What is he that comes to Jesus Christ

1. He is counted one of God's Enemies* Luke 19 ^

2. He is a Child of the Devil and of Hell so the Devil begat him, as to his
sinful Nature* and He^ must swallow him at last, because he comes no^ to Jesus
Christ John 8.44.

3. He is a Child or Wrath, an Heir of it, 'ti^ his Portion, and God will repay
it him to (...) Face, Ephesians. 2.1.

4. He is a Self murderer, he wrongeth his o^ Soul, and is one that loves
Death, Prove. 1.18.

5. He is a Companion of Devils, and damn^d Men, Prove. 21.16.

Thirdly, Whither is he like to go, that comet^ not to Jesus Christ?

1. He that comes not to him, is like to go farther from him. So every Sin is
a step farther from Jesus Christ, Hosea 11.

2. As he is in Darkness, so is he like to go on i^ it. For Christ is the Light
of the World, and b^ that comes not to him, walks in Darkness John 18.82.

3. He is like to be removed at last, as far from God, and Christ, and Heaven,
and all Felicity, ^ an infinite God can move him, Mat. 12.41.

But Secondly, This Doctrine of coming to Christ informs us, Where poor
destitute Sinners man find Life for their Souls, and that is in Christ. The
Life is in his Son; he that has the Son has Li^^ And again, Whosoever finds me,
finds Life, a^ shall obtain favor of the Lord, Prove. 8.

Now for farther enlargement, I will also h^ propound three more Questions.

1. What Life is in Christ? 2. Who may have it? 3. Upon what Terms?
First, What Life is in Jesus Christ?

1. There is Justifying Life in Christ: Man by ^n is Dead in Law, and Christ
only can deliver ^em, by his Righteousness and Blood from this Death, unto a
state of Life. For God sent his Son into the World, the^ we might live through
him, 1 John 4. ^ That is, through the Righteousness which he should accomplish,
and the Death that he should Die.

2 There is Eternal Life in Christ, Life tha'ts ^ndless: and this Life is in
his son* 1 John 5.

Now Justification eternal Salvation being both ^n Christ, and no where else to
be had for Men, who would not come to Jesus Christ?

Secondly, Who may have this Life?

I answer, poor, helpless, miserable Sinners ^articularly.

1. Such as are willing to have it: Whosoever will let him take the Waters of
Life, Rev. 22.17.

2 He that thirsts for it let them take the Wa^ers of Life f^eely; I will
give to him that is a thirst of the Fountain of the Waters of Life. Rev. 21.6.

3, He that is weary of his Sins. This is the rest whereby you may cause the
the weary to rest, and this is the refreshing, Isa. 28 12

4 He that is poor and needy. He shall spare the ^oor and needy, and shall save
the Souls of the needy

5. He that follows after him* cries for Life: ^e that follows me, shall not
walk in Darkness, ^^t shall have the Light of Life, John 8.12.

Thirdly, Upon what Terms may he have this Life;

Ans Freely, Sinner do t^ou hear? Thou may ^ave it freely: I will give him
of the Fountain ^ the Water of Life Freely; And when they had nothing to pay,
he frankly forgave them both Luke 7.

Freely, without Money, or without Price. H^! Eevery one that thirsts, come
ye to the Waters and that has no Money, come, buy; and eat; Yea come buy Wine
and Milk, without Money and without Price Is^ 55.1

Sinner, Art thou Thirsty? Art thou Weary? Art thou Willing? come then, and
regard not your Stuff, for all the good that is in Christ, is offered to the
Coming Sinner, without Money, and without Price He has Life to give away to
such as want it, and that have not a Penny to Purchase it, and he will give it
freely. Oh, what a blessed Condition ^ the coming Sinner in.

But Thirdly, This Doctrine of Coming to Jesus Christ for Life, informs us,
That it is to be had no where else; might it be had any where else? the Text
and him that spoke it, would be but little set by; for what greater matter is
there, in I will in no wise cast out, if another stood by that would receive
them? But here appears the Glory of Christ, that none but he can save And here
appears his Love, that though none can save but He, yet he is not Coy in
Saving; But him that comes to me sayshel will in no wise cast him out

That none can save but Jesus Christ, is evident from Acts 4.12. Neither is
there Salvation in any other; and he has given us Eternal Life, and this Life
is in his Son. If Life could have been had any where else it should have been
in the Law, no man living shall be justified; and i^ not justified, then no
Life.

Therefore Life is no where to be had but in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.

Qu. But why would God so order it, that Life should be had no where else, but
in Jesus Christ.

Ans. There is reason for it, and that with respect to God and us

First. With respect to God.

first, That it might be in way of Justice, as (...) as Mercy. And in a way of
Justice it could ^ have been if it had not been by Christ, because ^ and he
only, was able to answer the Demand of ^ Law; and give for Sin, what the
Justice there^ required. All Angels had been Crushed down ^ Hell for ever, had
that Curse been laid upon ^em for our Sins, which was laid upon Jesus christ,
but 'twas laid upon him, and he bare it, ^d answered the Penalty, and redeemed
his Peo^^e from under it with that satisfaction to Divine ^^stice, that God
himself does now proclaim, ^ut he is faithful and just to forgive us, if by
^aith we shall venture to Jesus, and trust to that he has done for Life, Rom
3.24, 25, 26. Joh. ^.9.

Secondly, Life must be by Jesus Christ, that God might be adored and
magnified, for finding ^ut the Way. This is the Lord's doings, that in ^ll
things he might be glorified through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thirdly, It must be by Jesus Christ, that Life ^ight be at God's dispose who
has great Pity for ^he Poor, the Lowly, the Meek, the Broken in heart, and for
them that others care not for, Psalm. 34 6.

Fourthly, Life must be in Christ to cut off Boas^ing from the Lips of Men.
This also is the Apostle's Reason, Rom 3.20, 27.

Fifthly, Life must be in Jesus Christ, with ^espect to us.

First, That we might have it upon the easiest Terms, to wit Freely; as a Gift,
not as Wages: was it in Moses's hand, we should come hardly at it. Was it in
the Pope's hand, we should pay soundly ^or it. But thanks be to God, it is in
Christ laid ^p in him, and by him to be communicated to ^^^ners upon easy
Terms, even so receiving, ac^^pting* and embracing with Thanksgiving, as the
Scripture plainly declare, Job. 1.11.

Secondly, Life is in Christ for us, that it might ^^at be upon so b^^ttle a
Foundation, as indeed it ^ould, ^^d i^ been any where else. The Law it self is
weak, because of us to this; but Christ is tr^ed Stone, a sure founda^ion one
that will not fa^^ to bear thy Burden, and to receive thy Soul, coming Sinner.

Thirdly, Life is in Christ, that it might be su^ to be the Seed. Alas! the
best of us* was Life lef^ in our hands* to be sure we should forfeit it, over
and over, and over. Or, was it in any other hand we should by our often
Backsliding so offend him* that at last he would shut up his Bowels in
everlasting Displeasure against us. But now it is in Christ it is with one that
can pity, pray for Pardon yea* multiply Pardons. It is with one that can have
Compassion upon us, when we are out of the wa^* with one that has an heart to
fetch us again when we are gone astray: with one that can Pardon without
upbraiding. Blessed be God that Life is in Christ! For now it is sure to all the
Seed.

But Fourthly. This Doctrine of coming to Jesus Christ for Life, informs us of
the Evil of Unbelief, that wicked thing that is the only, or chief hindrance to
the coming Sinner* Does the Text say, Come? Does it say, And him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out? Then what an Evil is that keeps Sinners from
coming to Jesus Christ? And that Evil is Unbelief. For by Faith we come. By
Unbelief we keep away. Therefore it is said to be that, by which a Soul is said
to depart from God, because it was that which at first caused the World to go
off from him* and that also that keeps them from him to this day, And it does
it the more eastly, because it does it with a Wile.

This Sin may be called, The White Devil, for it oftentimes in its mischievous
doing in the Soul shows as it was an Angel of Light, yet it acts like a
Counselor of Heaven. Therefore, a little to D^^course of this Disease.

1. It is that Sin, above all others that has some show of Reasons in its
Attempts. For it keeps the Soul from Christ, by pretending its present
unfitness and unpreparedness, as want of more sense of Sin, want of more
Repentance, want of more Hu^ility, want of a more broken Heart.

2. It is the Sin that most suiteth with the Con^^^ence. The Conscience of the
coming sinner tells ^^^m, that he has nothing Good; that he stands ^^^dictable
for Ten thousand Talents; that he is a ^y ignorant, blind, and hard hearted
Sinner, un^orthy to be once taken notice of by Jesus Christ. and will you (says
Unbelief) in such a case as now ^ou are, presume to come to Jesus Christ.

3. It it the Sin that most suits with our Sense of feeling. The coming Sinner
feels the Working of ^n* of all manner of Sin and Wretchedness in his ^lesh; he
also feels the Wrath and Judgment of God due to sin* and oftimes staggers under
it. Now, says Unbelief* you may see you have no Grace for that which works in
you is Corruption. You may also perceive that God does not love you, because
the sense of his wrath abides upon you. Therefore how can you bear the Face to
come to Jesus Christ.

4. It is sin above all others, that most suiteth the Wisdom of our Flesh. The
Wisdom of our Flesh thinks it Prudence to question a while, to hearken to both
sides a while, and not to be rash sudden, or unadvised, in too bold a presuming
upon Jesus Christ. And this Wisdom Unbelief falls in with.

5. It is the sin, above all others, that continually is whispering the Soul in
the Ear with Mistrusts of the Faithfulness of God in keeping Promise to 'em
that come to Jesus Christ for Life. It also suggests Mistrust about Christ's
willingness to receive it. And no sin can do this so artificially as Unbelief.

6. It is also that sin which is always at hand, to enter an Objection against
this or that Promise, that by the spirit of God is brought to our Heart to
comfort us. And if the poor coming Sinner is not aware of it, it will, b^ some
Exaction, Slight* Trick or Cavil, quickly wrest from him the Promise again, and
he shall have but little benefit of it.

7. It is that, above all other sins, that weakens our Prayers, one Faith, our
Love, our Diligence, our Hope and Expectations. It even takes the Heart away
from God in Duty.

8. La^tly This sin, as I have said, even now i^ appears in the Soul with so
many sweet Pretenses t^ safety and security, that it is, as it were, Counse^
sent from Heaven: bidding the Soul be wiser, wary^ considerate* well advised,
and to make heed of to rash a venture upon Believing. Be sure first tha^ God
loves you: take hold of no Promise, un^^^ you are forced by God unto it:
neither be you sur^ of your Salvation doubt it still, though the Testimony of
the Lord has often been confirmed i^ you? Live not by Faith but by Sense; and
when you can neither see no^ feel, then fear and mistrust* then doubt and
question all. This is the D^vilish Counsel of Unbelief which is to covered over
with specious Pretenses* that the wisest Christian can hardly shake off these
Reasonings.

But to be brief: Let me here give thee Christian Reader, a more particular
Description of the Qualities of Unbelief, by opposing Faith unto it, in these
Twenty five Particulars.

1. Faith believes the Word of God, but Unbe^ questioneth the Certainty ^f the
same, Ps. 106 4.

^ Faith believes the Word, because it is true; the Unbelief doubts thereof,
because it is true, 1 Timothy 3.4.

3 Faith sees more in a Promise of God to help, th^^ all other things to
hinder: but Unbelief notwithstanding God's Promise, says. How can these things
be* Romans 4.19 20, 21 2 King. 7.2.

4. Faith will make thee see Love in the Heart of Christ* when with his Mouth
he gives Reproofs* but Unbelief will imagine Wrath in his Heart, when with his
Mouth and Word he says, he loves us, Mat. 15*22 23.24 25 26, 27 23. Numb. 3.2.

5 Faith will help the Soul to wait* though God desires to give? but Unbelief
will take snuff and throw up all if God makes any carrying, Psalm. 2^.^. Isa. 8
16. 2 King 6 33 Psalm. 100.13.14

6 Faith will give Comfort in the midst of Bears* But Unbelief causes Fears in
the midst of ^^mfort, 2 Chronicles. 20, 21. Mat. 8.26 Luke. 24. ^ 37.

^ Faith will suck Sweetness out of God's Rod; ^ Unbelief can find no comfort
in his greatest ^^^cies. Psalm 23 4.

^ Faith makes great Burdens light; but Un^^^^ef makethh light ones
intolerable heavy, 2 Cor. ^ 15 16, 17.18.

^ Faith helps us when we are down: but belief throws us down when we are up,
Mich. ^ 9 10.

10 Faith brings us near to God, when we are ^ from him; but Unbelief puts us
far from God, ^en we are near to him Heb. 10 22 ch, 3 12 13.

11. Where Faith reigns, it declares Men to be ^ Friends of God; but where
Unbelief reigns ^ declares them to be his Enemies, Jam. 5 23. ^eb 3.18.

12 Faith puts a man under Grace; but Un^^lief holds him under wrath, Romans
3 24.25, ^ Chap. 14 16. Ephesians 2.8 John 3.39. 1 John ^ 10 Heb 3.17 Mark 16.16.

13 Faith purifieth the Heart; but Unbelief ^epeth it polluted and impure. Acts
15* 9. ^t 1.15.16.

14. By Faith the Righteousness of Christ is ^puted to us; but by Unbelief, we
are shut up ^der the Law to perish* Rom, 3.23, 24 Chap. ^ 32 Gal 2 23.

15 Faith makes our work acceptable to God ^rough Christ; but whatsoever is of
Unbelief ^ Sin; for without Faith it is impossible to ^ease him, Heb. 11.4.
Romans 14.2, 3 Heb. 11.6.

16. Faith gives us peace and comfort in our ^ouls, but Unbelief works
trouble and tossings, ^ke the restless Waves of the Sea Rom 5 1 Ja 6.1

17 Faith makes us see preciousness in Christ; ^t Unbelief sees no Form, Beauty
or Comeliness in him 1 Pet 2.7. Isa. 53.1, 3, 3.

18 By Faith we have our Life in Christ Fullness ^ ^ut by Unbelief we Starve and
P^ away; Gal 2.20.

19 Faith gives us the Victory over the L^ Sin, Death, the Devil, and all
Evils; but Un^^lief lays us obnoxious to them all, 1 Jo 5.^

20 Faith will show us more Excellency things not seen, then in them that are;
but ^^belief sees more in things that are, than in the that will be hereafter,
Cor. 4.18 Heb. 11. ^ 25.26, 29. 1 Cor. 15.31.

21 Faith makes the ways of God pleasant ^ admirable; but Unbelief makes them
heavy hard. Gal. 5 6. 1 Cor. 11.10 11. Jo. 6 60. Psa. ^

22. By Faith Abraham, Isaac and Jac^^ possessed the Land of Promise; but
because Unblief, neither Aaron, nor Moses, nor Mi^i^ could get thither, Heb. 9.
Chap. 3.10.

23. By Faith the Children of Israel passed throu^^ the Red Sea; but by
U^belief the generality ^ them perished in the Wilderness. Heb 11 ^9

24. By Faith Gideon did more with The hundred Men and a few empty Pitchers,
the all the twelve Tribes could do; because the believed not God, Judges 7.16.

25 By Faith Peter walked on the Water; ^ by Unbelief he began to sink, Mat. 14
21.

Thus might many more be added, which ^ brevity sake I omit; Beseeching every
one, t^ thinks he has a Soul to save, or be damn to take heed of Unbelief;
lest, seeing there i^ Promise left us of entering into his rest, any us by
Unblief, should indeed come short of ^

The Second Use: of Examination.
WE come to a Use of Examination. Sin^ thou have heard of the necessity of
(...) ^ to Christ; also of the wil^ingness of Christ ^^ceive the coming Soul;
together with the ^rofit that they by him shall ha^^, tha^ indeed ^ne to him
Put thy self now upon (...) ^^rious ^quiry, Am I indeed come in Jesus Christ

Mo^ives plenty I might here (...), to prevail ^h thee to a conscientious
^erformance of this ^y: As,

^. Thou art in Sin, in the Flesh, in Death, in ^ Snare of the Devil, and under
the Curse of ^ Law, if you are not coming to Jesus Christ.

^. There is no way to be delivered from these ^ by coming to Jesus Christ.

3. If thou come, Jesus Christ will receive thee, ^d will in no wise cast
thee out.

4. Thou will not repent it in the Day of ^dgment, if thou now come to Jesus
Christ.

5 But will thou surely mourn at last, it now ^ou sha^t refuse to come: And,

Lastly, Now thou have been invited to come; ^ will thy Judgment o^ greater,
and the Da^^^^ion more fearful, if thou shall yet re^^ (...) thou had never
heard of coming (...)

Obj^ But we ^ope we a^e come (...)

Answ It Is well if it pro^e (...) ^uld'st speak without ground, (...) into Hell
F^^e; let us examine a (...).

First Art thou indeed a coming to Jesus C^^ist? (...) thou left behind thee?
(...) thou (...) away ^^^m in, thy coming to J^su^ Ch^^st.

When L^^^ come out of S^^^om, he (...) the (...) behind him, Gen 19.

When Abraham came out of Cha^^^^, (...) left ^ kindred and Country behind him
(...)

When Ruth come to put her trust (...) ^he ^ngs of the Lord God of Israel; she
left her ^er and Mother, her Gods and the Land of her Nativity behind her, Ruth
1.15. etc.

When Peter came to Christ he left the N^ behind him, Matthew. ^.

When Matthew came to Christ, he left t^ Receipt of Custom behind him. Luke. 18.

When Paul came to Christ, he left his ow^ Righteousness behind him. Phil. 3.7,
8.

When those that used curious Arts came ^ Jesus Christ, they took their curious
Books (...) burned them, though in another Man's Eye, the were counted worth
fifty thousand Piece^ Silver, Acts 19.18, 19, 20.

What say thou, Man? Have thou left the d^rling Sins, thy Sodomitish
Pleasu^s, thy A^quaintance, and vain Companions, thy unla^f^^ Gain, thy Idol
Gods, thy Righteousness, and t^ unlawful curious Arts behind thee? If any ^
these be with thee, and thou with them in thy Hea^^ and Life, thou art not yet
come to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Art thou come to Jesus Christ? P^^ ^^ee tell me what moved thee to
come to Jes^^ Christ? Men do not usually come or ^ to this or that Place,
before we have a movi^^ cause* or rather, ^ cause moving them theret^ No more
do they come to Jesus Christ, (I do ^ say) before they have a cause, but before
the cause moves them to come; What say tho^ Have thou a cause moving thee
to come? To ^ at present in a state of Condemnation, is ca^ sufficient for Men
to come to Jesus Ch^ ^o^ Life; but that will not do, except the Ca^ move them;
the which it will never ^ until their eyes be opened, to see themselves ^ that
Condition. For it is not in Man's be^ (...) wrath, but his seeing it, that
moves (...) come to Jesus Christ: Alas! All Men by ^ are under Wrath; yet but
few of them. All come to Jesus Christ; and the reason i^, because they do not
see their Condition; who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come, Mat
3.7. Until Men are warned, and also to receive the Warning, they will not come
to Jesus Christ,.

Take three or Four Instances for this.

1. Adam and Eve came not to Jesus Christ, until they received the Alarm, the
Conviction of the^^ undone State by Sin. Genesis 3.

2 The Children of Israel cried not out for a Mediator, before they saw
themselves in danger of Death by the Law, Exodus 20* 18.

3. Before the Publican came, he saw himself lost, and undone. Luke 18 13.

4. The Prodigal came not, until he saw Death a^ the Door ready to devou^ him
Luke 15, 17, 18.

5 The Three Thousand came not, until they ^^ew not what to do to be saved,
Acts 2 37 38 39.

6 Paul came not, until he saw himself lost and undone. Acts 9 3, 4 5 6 7.11.

7 Last^^ Before the (...) ^ame he saw himself (...) Acts 1^ 29 30 31. And ^
tell thee, it is, (...) Man to go to (...) a Man without (...) (...) than i^ is
to persuade* ^ Man that sees not his Soul (...) to come to Jesus Christ; the
whole have no need (...) a Physician. Then why should they go to him? The full
Pitcher can hold no more* Then why should it go to the Fountain? And if thou
come full, thou come not aright, and be sure Christ, will send thee empty
away but he b^^^eth the broken in heart, and binds up their Wounds. Mark 2.17.

Thirdly, Art thou coming to Jesus Christ* Pri^hee tell me, what see thou in
him to allure thee. to forsake all the World to come to him? I say, What have
thou seen in him? Men must see something in Jesus Christ, ^^se they will not
come to him.

1. What Comeliness have thou seen in his Person? Thou come not if thou ^^^st
no Form not Comeliness in him Isa 45, 1.2 3.

2. Until those mentioned in the Song, were con^ convinced that there was more
Beaut^, Comeliness and D^si^^bleness in Christ, than in Ten Thousand I they did
not so much as ask where he was no incline to turn (...) him, Song 5 chapter 6.

T^^re be many things on this side Heaven, that (...) and do carry away the
Heart, and so will do so long as thou liv^st if thou shall ^e kept Blind and
not be admitted to see the Beauty of the Lord J^s^^

Fourthly, Art thou come to the Lord Jesus? what have thou found in him since
thou came t^ him.

(...) found with him the Word of eternal Life J^hn 6.88.

They thet Peter make mention of, found him a living Stone even such a living
Stone, as communicate^ Life to them, 2 Pet. 2.

He says ^mself, they that come to him etc. (...) find rest unto their souls?
Have thou found re^^ in him for thy Soul? Mat. 11.

Let us go the times of the Old Testament.

First Abraham found that in him that made (...) leave his Country for him, and
become for his (...) a Pilgrim and a Stranger in the Earth* G^. 12. Heb. ^

Secondly, Moses found that in him, that made h^ forsake a Crown, a Kingdom for
him too.

Thirdly, David found so much in him that h^ counted to be in his House one
Day, was better than a Thousand^ yea to be, a Doorkeeper therein, wa^ better
E^teem, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84 10.

Fourthly W^a^ did Daniel, and the three Children (...) to make them run the
Hazard of (...), and the D^^ of Lions, for hi^ sake* D^^ 6 23.

L^^^ come down to the Martyrs.

1 Steph^n found that in him, that made him joyful, and quietly ^ield up his
Life for his name. Act. 17

2. Ignatius found that to him, that made him choose to go through the Torments
of the Devil and Hell it self, rather than not to have him, Acts and Monuments*
Vol 4 page 25.

3. What saw Roman^^ in Christ, when he said to the ^aging Emperor I joyfully
embrace, and refuse not to be sacrificed By as cruel torments as thou can
invent, Page 16.

4. What saw Man as the Egyptian in Christ, when he said, under most cruel
Torments, there is nothing in my Mind that can be compared to the Kingdom of
Heaven* neither is all the wo^ld, if it was weighed in a Balance, to be
preferred with ^he p^ice of one soul. Who is able to separate us from the Love
of Jesus Christ our Lord, And I have learned of my Lord and King, not to fear
'em that ^^ll the Body etc. Page ^1 17.

5. What did E^laliah see in Christ* when she said when they were pulling her
one joint from another, Behold, O Lord, I will not forget thee. What a pleasure
is it for them O Christ ^ That remembers thy triumphant victory, Page 1^^.

6. What think you did Agnus see in Christ, when ^ejoycingly she went to meet
the ^oldier, that was ^ pointed to be her Executioner. I will willingly ^^id
she) receive into my Papa the length of him ^^rd, and into my Breast will draw
the force there^ even to the Hilt, that thus I being married to christ, my
spouse may surmount and escape all the ^arkness of this World, page 123.

7. What did you think did Justitia see in Christ, ^hen at the Emperor's
telling of her, that except she would worship the Gods she should never have
pro^ection, Laws Judgments, nor Life, she replied Farewell Life, welcome Death;
Farewell Riches, welcome ^overty. All that I have, if it were a thousand times
^ore, would I give, rather than to speak one wicked ^ blasphemous Word against
my Creator, page 123

8. What did Marcus Arethusius see in Christ, when ^^ter his Enemies had cut
his Flesh, anointed it ^th Honey, and hanged him up in a ^asket, for (...) and
Bees to feed on, he would not give (to ^ bold Idolatry) one Half-p^ny to save
his Life,

9. Wha^ ^id Constantine see in (...) when she used to Kiss the Wounds of them
that suffered for him? page 135.

20. But what need I give this particular Instance of Works and smaller
Actions, when by these Laws, their Blood, their even en^u^ing Hunger. Sword,
Fire, pulling asunder, and all Torments that the Devil and Hell can de^sie for
the Love they bear to Christ after they were come to him?

What have thou found in him, Sinner?

What! come to Christ and find nothing in him (when all things that are worth
seeking for, are in him) or if any thing yet not enough to wean thee from thy
sinful Delights and fleshly Lusts? Away, Thou art not come to Jesus Christ.

He that is come to Jesus Christ has found in him that as I said, that it is
not to be found any where else. As,

1. He* that is come to Christ, has found God in him, reconciling the World
unto himself, not imputing their Tresp^sses to them, and so God is not to be
found in Hea^^n and Earth besides 2 Cor 5.19 20.

2. He that is come to Jesus Christ has found in him a Fountain of Grace,
sufficient not only to pardon Sin, but to sanctify the Soul, and to preserve ^
from falling in this evil World.

3. He that is come to Jesus Christ, has found Virtue in him* that Virtue*
that if be does but touch thee with his word, or thou him by Faith, Life in
forthwith conveyed into thy Soul* It makes thee Wake, as one that is waked out
of his Sleep. It awakes all the Powers of the Soul* Psalm. 30.11, 12.

4. Art thou come to Jesus Christ? Thou have found Glory in him, Glory that
formmounts and goes beyond: Thou art more Glorious than the Mountains of Prey,
Psalm. 76.4.

5. What shall I say, Thou have found Righteousness in him, thou have found
Rest, Peace, Delight, Heaven, Glory and Eternal Life.

Sinner, be advised; ask thy Heart again, saying Ar^ I come to Jesus Christ?
For upon this one, Question, am I come, or am I not, hangs heaven and Hell* as
to (...) I am come* and God ^^^ll a^prove o^ (...) s^yi^g Happy, happy M^n art
^hou (...) what can make thee happy? Yea, what can make that Man happy, that
^or his not coming to Jesus Christ for Life, must ^e damned to Hell.

The Third Use* A Use of Encouragement.
COming Sinner, I have now a word for thee* be of good Comfort He will in no
wise cast out: Of all ^den* thou art the blessed of the Lord, the Father (...)
prepared his Son to be Sacrifice for thee, and ^^sus Christ the Lord, is gone
to prepare a place for ^ee John 1.29 Heb. 10.

What shall ^ say to thee? Thou come to a full Christ, th^^ can (...) any
thing for Soul, or ^ody, for ^is Work^ (...) to come, but it is to ^e had in^o
by Jesus Christ.

As it is said of the L^^nd that the Canaanites went to poss^ss^^ so and with
much (...) truth, it may be said of Christ. He is such an (...) with whom there
^s want of no good them that is in Heaven or Earth.

A full Christ (...) the Christ.

1. He is full of Grace. Grace is sometimes taken ^or Love* never (...) Love
like Jesus Christ. J^^a^an's Love went beyond the Love of Women: but ^he Love
of Christ passes Knowledge. It is beyond all ^he love of all the Earth, of all
Creatures, even of ^en and Angels. His love prevailed with him to lay ^de his
Glory, to leave the heavenly Place, to cloth himself with Flesh, to be born in
a Stable, to be laid ^ a Manger, to live a poor Life in the World, to ^ake upon
him our Sickness, Infirmities Sins, Curse, ^eath, and the Wrath that was due to
Man. And all (...) he did, for a base, undeserving unthankful People: yea for a
People that was at Enmity with him. ^or when we were yet without strength, in
due time christ died for the Ungodly. For scarely for a ^eligious Man will one
die, yet peradventure for a ^od man some would even da^e to die. But God
^^mm^nded his love toward us, in that while we ^re yet Sinners, Christ died
for us: much more ^an being now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved o^
hi^ Life For i^ w^en^^ were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5* 6,
7.

2. He is full of Truth, full of Grace and Truth. Truth, that is Fai^hfulness
in keeping Promises, even this of the Text (with all other) I will in no wise
cast out. Hence it is said That his Words be true and that he is the Faithful
God, that keeps Covenant. And hence it is also that his Promise is called
Truth. Thou will fulfill thy Truth unto Jacob, and thy Mercy unto Abraham which
thou have sworn unto our Fathers from the Days of Old. Therefore it is said
again, that both himself and words are Truth: I am the Truth, the Scriptures of
Truth, thy Word is Truth thy Law is Truth and my Mouth says he shall speak
Truth, John 14 6, etc.

Now, I say, his Word is Truth, and he is full of Truth to fulfill his Truth,
even to a Thousand Generations. Coming Sinner, he will not deceive thee, come
Boldly to Jesus Christ

3. He is full of Wisdom? He is made unto us of God wisdom. Wisdom to manage
the Affairs of his Church in general, and the Affairs of every coming Sinner in
particular. And upon this account he is said to be Head above all things, 2
Cor. 1. Because he manages all things that are in the World by his Wisdom, for
the good of his Church, all Men's Actions, all Satan's Temptations, all God's
Providence, and Crosses, and Disappointments, all things whatever are under
the Hand of Christ, (who is the wisdom of God) and he orders them all for
good to his Church* and can Christ help it, (and be sure he can) nothing shall
happen or fall out in the world, but it shall, in despite of all Opposition,
have a good tendency to his Church and People.

4. He is full of the Spirit, to communicate it to the coming Sinner: he has
therefore received it without measure, that he may communicate it to every
Member of his Body, according as every man's measure therefore is allotted him
by the Father. Wherefore he says, That he that comes to him, out of his Belly
shall flow Rivers of living Water, John 3.31. etc.

5. He is full of the Bowels of Compassion, and they shall feel and find it so*
that come to him for Life. He can bear with thy Weakness he can pity thy
Ignorance, he can be touched with the feeling of thy Infirmities, he can
affectionately forgive the Transgressions, he can head thy Backsliding, and
love thee freely. His compassions f^ll not* And be will not break a bruised
R^^d* no^ quench the smoking flax. He can pity them that no Eyes pities, and
be afflicted in all thy Affl^ctions* Mat ^6.41. Heb. 5.2.

6. Coming So^l the Jesus that thou art coming to, is full of Might and
Terribleness, for thy Advantage. He can suppress all thine Enemies. He is the
Prince and King of the Earth* he can bow all Men's Designs for thy help. He can
break all Snares laid for thee in the way. He can life thee out of all
Difficulties, wherewith thou may be surrounded. He is Wise in Heart, and
Mighty in Power. Every Life under Heaven is in his hand, yea the fallen Angels
trembled before him: And he will save thy Life, coming Sinner, Cor. 1.24.

7. Coming Sinner, the Jesus to whom thou art coming, is lowly in Heart, he
despises not any. It Is not thy outward Meanness, not thy inward Weakness, it is
not because thou art poor or base, or deformed, or a Fool, that he will despise
thee. He has chosen the foolish the base, and despised things of this World,
to confound the wise and Mighty. He will bow his Ear to thy stammering Prayers.
He will pick out the meaning in thy inexpressible groans, he will respect thy
weakest Offering if there be in it but thy Heart, Mat. 11.20.

Now is not this a blessed Christ, coming Sinner* Art thou not like to fare
well, when thou have emb^a^^d him, coming Sinner? But,

8. Thou have yet another Advantage by Jesus Christ thou art coming to him, for
he not only full but ^^ee He is not sparing of what he has: He (...) ^pen
^earted and open handed. Let me in a ^ew Particulars show thee this.

First This evident because he calls thee. He calls upon thee to come unto him,
the which he would not do was he not free to give Yea, he bids thee Welcome ask
seek, knock. And for thy Encouragement a^^e so every Command a Promise, seek
and ye shall find ask and ye shall have* knock and it shall be opened unto you.
If the Rich man should say thus to the Poor* would not he be reckoned a free
hearted man? I say, should he say to the Poor, come to my door, ask at my door
knock at my Door and you shall find and have, would he not he counted Liberal?
Why thus does Jesus Christ. Mind it coming Sinner, Isa 55.3

Secondly, He does not only bid thee come, but tells thee he will heartily do
thee good yea he will do it with rejoicing ^ I will rejoice over them to do
them good with my whole Heart, and with my whole Soul Jer. 52.41.

Thirdly, it appears that he it free, because he (...) without ^^^^ting. He
gives to all men liberally, and u^braideth not. Jam ^.3. There are some that
will no^ deny to do (...) ^oor a pleasure, ^^at they (...) Merc^^^ wish so
(...), that the (...) Chari^ (...) he will ^^me (...) Isa. 38. ^^.

Fourthly. That Christ is (...) is manifest by the Complaints that he makes
against them that well not come to him (...) Mercy. I say he complains, saying,
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how of^ would I have gathered ^^y Children together* as
a Hen gathers her Chickens under he^ Wing^, and ye would not, Mat. 23.37. I
say, he speaks it by way of Complaint. He says also in another place* But thou
have not called upon me. O ^ac^^. Isa. 43 22. coming Sinner, see here the
willingness of Christ to say See here how free he is to communicate Life and
all good things, to such as (...). He complains* if thou come not, he is
displeased if thou call not upon him.

Hark, coming Sinner, once again* When Jeru^^lem would not come to him for
Safeguard. He ^ held the City and wept over it, saying, If thou ^dst known,
even thou at least in this thy Day, ^e things that belong to thy Peace, but now
they ^e hid from thine eyes, Luke 19 81.

Fifthly, Lastly, He is open and free hearted to ^ thee good, as is seen by the
Joy and Rejoicing ^t he manifests at the coming home of poor ^^odigals. He
receives the lost Sheep with rejoy^^^g* the lost Groat with rejoicing Yea, when
^he Prodigal came home, what Joy and Mirth, what ^ Music and Dancing was in
his Fathers House. Luke 19

Sixthly, Coming Sinner, I will add another En^ouragement for thy help.

First, God has prepared a Mercy Seat, a Throne ^f Grace to fit on* that thou
may come thither ^o him, and that he may from thence hear thee, and receive
thee. I will commune with thee (says ^e) from above thy Mercy Seat, Exodus 2.22.

As who would say, Sinner, when thou come ^ me, thou shall find me upon the
Mercy Seat ^here also I am always to be found of the Un^one, coming Sinner.
Thither I bring my Par^on. Here I hear and receive their Petitions, and ^ccept
them to my Favor.

Secondly, God has also prepared a Golden ^ltar for thee, to offer thy Prayers
and Tears upon. A Golden Altar, it is called a Golden ^ltar* to show what worth
it is or in God's Account. For this Golden Altar is Jesus Christ. This Altar
sanctifies thy Gift, and makes thy Sacrifice acceptable. This Altar then makes
thy Groans, golden Groans; thy Tears golden tears, and thy Prayers golden
Prayers, in the Eyes of that God thou come to, coming Sinner, Rev. 8.

Thirdly, God has strewed all the way from ^he Grace of Hell, where thou wast,
to the Gate ^f Heaven, whither thou art going with Flow^ers out of his own
Garden. Behold, how the Promises, Invitations, Calls, and Encouragements, like
(...) ^o and (...) thee, (take heed thou do not tread them under foot Sinner,
with Promises did I say? Y^a, he has mixed all these with his own Name, his
Son's Name; also with the Name of Mercy, Goodness, Compassion, Love, Pity,
Grace, Forgiveness, Pardon, and that not that may encourage the coming S^nner.

Fourthly, He has also for thy encouragment laid up the Names, and set forth
the Sons of those that have been saved: In his Book they are f^^tly written,
that thou through Patience and Comfort of the Scripturs might H^pe.

1. In this Book is recorded Noah's Name and Sin, and ho^ God had Mercy on him.

2. In this Record is Fairly written the Name of Lot, and the nature of his
Sin: and how the Lord and Mercy on him.

3 I^ this Record thou have also Fairly Written the Names of Moses, Aaron,
Gideon, Sampson, David; Solomon, Peter and Paul, with the Nature of their Sins,
and how God had Mercy upon them, and all to Encourage thee, coming Sinner

4. I will add yet another Encouragement for the Man that is coming to Jesus
Christ: Art thou a coming? Art thou coming indeed? Why?

1. Then this thy coming is, by Vir^ne of God's Call, thou art called: calling
goes before coming: Coming is not of Work, but ^f ^im that Calls. He went up
into a Mountain and called to him whom he would, and they come to him Mark 3.13.

2. Art thou coming, This is by Virtue of ^^mination: God has made thee (...)
and therefore thou art coming* Sol^^ng as them was^ (...) Darkness, thou
lovedst Darkness, and could not abide to come because thy deeds are evil: But
now being Illuminated and made to see what and where thou art: and also, what
and where thy Savior is, now thou art coming to Jesus Christ. Blessed art thou
Simon Ba^jona: for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it (says Christ) but my
Father which is in Heaven. Mat. 1^ 15, 16.

Thirdly, Art thou coming? This is because God has inclined thy Heart to come,
and has desired thee, nay God has called thee: Illuminated thee: and inclined
thine Heart to come, and therefore thou come to Jesus Christ: it is God than
works in thee to will and to come to Jesus Christ. Coming Sinner, bless God,
for that he has given thee a Will to come to Jesus Christ. It is a sign that
thou belongest to Jesus Christ, because God has made thee willing to come to
him, Ps. 102.2. Bless God for staying the Enemy of thy mind, had he not done
it, thou would as yet, have hated thine own Salvation.

Fourthly, Art thou coming to Jesus Christ? It is God that gives thee Power;
Power to pursue thy will in matters of thy salvation, is the Gift of God. It Is
God that works in thee both to will and to do, Phil 1 13. Not that God would
will to them, where he gives no Power; but that thou should take notice the
Power is an additional mercy. The Church saw Will and Power were two things
when we cried, Draw me, we will run after thee. (Son^ 1.4) and so did David
too, when he said, I will run the ways of by Commandments when thou shall
^nlarge my Heart: Will to come, and Power to pursue thy Will is Double Mercy
coming Sinner.

Fifthly, All thy strange, passionate, sudden Rushings forward after Jesus
Christ (Coming Sinner know what I mean) they also are thy helps from God:
Perhaps thou feel at some times more than at others, strong Stirrings up of
Heart to fly to Jesus Christ? now thou have i^ this time a ^weet and st^ff g^le
of the Spirit of God filling thy Sails with the fresh Gales of his good Spirit;
and thou ridest at those times as upon the Wings of the Wind* being carried out
beyond thy self, beyond the most of thy prayers, and also above all thy Fears
and Temptations.

Sixthly, Coming Sinner, have thou now and then had a Kiss of the sweet Lips of
Jesus Christ? I mean, some blessed words dropping like a Honeycomb upon thy
Soul to revive thee when thou art in the midst of thy Dumps.

Seventhly, Does not Jesus Christ sometimes give thee a glimpse of himself,
though perhaps thou see him not so long a time, as while you may tell Twenty.

Eighthly, Have thou not sometimes, as it were the warmth of his Wings over
shadowing the Face of thy Soul, that gives thee as it were, a load upon thy
spirit as the bright Beams of the Sun do upon thy Body, when it suddenly breaks
out of a Cloud, though presently all is gone away.

Well, all these things are the good Hand of thy God upon thee, and they are
upon thee to constrain to provoke, and to make the willing and able to come
(coming Sinner,) that thou might in the End be saved.

FINIS.

