The Secretary's Guide, OR Young Man's Companion, In Four Parts.

Part I. Contains Directions for Spelling, Reading and Writing True English,
with true Pronunciation.

Part II. Arithmetic made easy, and the Rules thereof Explained and made
familiar to the Capacity of those that desire to Learn.

Part III. The Method of Writing Letters upon most Subjects; as from one Friend
to another, as well as Trade, Traffic or other Occasions.

Part IV. Contains a choice Collection of Bills of Parcels, Bills, Bonds,
Letters of Attorney, Indentures, Bonds of Arbitration, Awards, Umpirages, Deeds
of Sale, Deeds of Gift, Assignments, Leases and Releases, Counter Securities,
Declarations of Trust, Bills of Exchange, Charter party of Affreightment, with
many other useful Presidents, Profitable both for Old and Young to Learn and
Know.

This Fourth Edition is much Enlarged.

The whole, Adorned with Variety of other Matters as will appear by the
Contents.

Printed and Sold by W. Bradford in New York, and A. Bradford in Philadelphia,
1728.

To the READER.
Kind Reader;
IT is now above thirty years since I first compiled this short Manuel, during
which time several Impressions have sold off, and each time (...) has been
Reprinted, it has been enlarged, and now this fourth Edition, thou will find
many Additions, in order to make it more useful than heretofore. And the going
off of the former Editions are a better Argument of the Usefulness of the
ensuing Book, than any Recommandation a Preface could give. However, I will
adventure to Recommend it as Useful and Necessary if these American Parts,
where Books of this Nature are not frequently to be got, and will (...) to say,
that Elder People, as well as the Youth, may receive benefit and Advantage by
it, by instructing them not only in True Spelling and Reading true English,
with the Rules of Arithmetic, but also you have the Copies of Letters upon
most Subjects. And lastly This small Treatise will supply you with Forms and
Presidents of most sorts of Legal Writings that the Country has occasion for,
ready drawn up to your hands, and save you the Charge not only of a Lawyer,
Scrivener, or one that understands these Matters, but also Time and Expense in
Traveling to seek such a Person; and likewise enables the Countryman to do
that Business himself which may not be proper for others to know, but to be
kept private.

But not to detain the Kind Reader with a long Preface, I Recommend him to the
perusal of the several subject Matters contained in the following Sheets, which
if they prove Profitable and answer the Readers Expectation, I shall be
satisfied, and 'twill encourage us to Collect and Publish some other useful
Matters that may be further Advantageous to the Country in general, and the
better enable the diligent to perform their several Callings, Profession and
Employments which Providence; may allot to every of us. I am,

Kind Reader, Thy Real Well-Wisher; W. B.

Lately Published, the Book, entitled,
Conductor Generals, or The Office, Duty and Authority of Justices of the
Peace, High-Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, (...), Coroners, Constables, Jurymen,
Overseers of the Poor. And also, The Office of Clerks of Assize, and of the
Peace. Collected out of the Books hitherto written (...) those Subject, whether
of Common or Statue-Law. To which is added, A Collection out of Sir Matthew
Hales concerning the Descent of Lands.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York, and sold by (...) Bradford
in Philadelphia.

THE CONTENTS
PART I. OF Letters, great and small, and when each are to be used, page 1, 2.
Their Division into Vowels, and Consonants, page 3,3. Of Diphthongs, what they
are, how many, and how Pronounced and Written, p. 3, 4, 5. Of Syllables, and
Rules how to divide them, p. 6. Of Letters that ought to be Written, and yet
not Sounded, and the Reasons thereof; particularly of the Letter (e) at the end
of a Word, when it must, and when it should not be Written, p. 10. A Table of
Words which are a-like in Sound, but different in Signification, p. 1^. Of
Points and Stops, p. 2^.
PART II. Arithmetic made Easy, etc. OF Numeration, p. 31. Of Addition, p.
34. Of Subtraction, p. 44. Of Multiplication, p. 48. Of Division, p. 52. Of
Reduction, p. 56. The Rule of Three, p. 58. A Table for Buying and Selling any
thing by the Hundred, p. 64. A Table of Square Timber Measure, p. 65. A Table
(...) how many inches in length will make a Foot Sollid of a round piece of
Timber, p. 66. A Table of Round Measure, p. 67. Of G^aging of Vessels, p. 69. A
Table of Interest, at ^ per Cent. p. 71. The Rates of Post Letters in North
America. p. 72. A Table of Interest at (...) per Cent, p. 73. Of Women, p. 74.
Of Children, p. 76. Of Servants, p. 77. Of Religion, p. ibid.
PART III. Instructions for Writing and Ind^^ing of Letters, A Letter from one
at School to his Father, p. 87. Another from one at School to his Friend, p.
ibid. A Letter of Entreaty from a Son to a Father, p. 88. A Letter from a
Scholar to his Parents, p. ibid. A Letter of Entreaty from a Daughter, p. 89.
A Letter of Entreaty to continue Abroad, p. ibid. A Letter of Excuse to a
Father and Mother, p. 90. A Sons Return of Thanks for good Education, p. ibid.
A Letter of Thanks for a Kindness received, p. 91. A Letter of Thanks to a
Mother, p. 92. A Letter of Thanks returned for the Advancement to a Person, p.
93. A Letter of Advice to a Friend, p. ibid. Another, p. 94. A Letter of
Recommendation, p. ibid. The Answer, p. ibid. A Letter of Congratulation from a
Son to a Father upon his Recovery from Sickness, p. 95. A Letter to a Friend,
p. ibid. A Letter requiring the Payment of Money, which (...) as in (...), p.
96. An Answer to the last Letter, p. ibid A Daughter Letter of Entreaty to her
Mother, p. 9^ The Answer (...) p. ibid. A Letter from an Apprentice to his
Father, p. 98. A Letter from Apprentice in his Master, p. ibid. A Letter from
Young Man newly out of his Time p. 99. A Letter from Young Man to his Mother,
to (...) her with his Marriage, p. ibid. Another from a Young Woman, p. 10^. A
Letter of Congratulation from a Youth to his Sister, upon her Marriage. p.
ibid. The Answer, p. 101. A Letter to request a Kindness, p. ibid. The Answer,
p. 102. A Letter from a Husband to his Wife, p. ibid. The Wifes Answer, p. 103.
A Letter from one Sister to another, be enquire of Health, etc. p. ibid. The
Answer, p. 104. A Letter requiring the Payment of Money, p. ibid. A Letter for
Goods, p. ibid. A Letter of Trade and Commerce, p. 105. A Letter of Credit, p.
ibid. A Letter written to Reclaim Youthful Extravagancies, etc. p. 106. A
Letter form a Gentleman, excusing a Son, to his Father. p. ibid. A Letter to
Congratulate a Person upon his Return out of Foreign parts, or from a long
Journey, p. 107. A Letter from a Country Chapman to a Person he deals with in
the City, p. 108. A Letter from a Person at Sea, to his Friend in Shore, p.
ibid. A Letter from one Gentlewoman to another, p. 109. A Letter from a
Gentleman to a Gentlewoman, to beg Pardon for an Offense, p. 109. The Answer,
p. 110. A Letter to a Lady, defi^ing admi^^ance into her Presence, p. 111. The
Ladys Answer. p. 112. The Letter to a Widow on the Death of her Husband, p.
ibid. Instructions for External and Internal Super (...) Subscriptions of
Letters, p. 114. Subscriptions, and other necessary Matters for the Reader to
Learn and Understand, p. 116.
PART IV. Containing Instructions for making such Legal Writtings as are
generally used. A Merchants Bill of Parcels, with proper Receipts, p. 118, 119.
Carpenters Bill, a Bricklayers Bill, and a Smiths Bill, with proper Receipts,
p. 119, 120, 121. An Acquittance for Rent, p. 121. A Servants Receipt for Rent,
p. 122. Receipts in full of all Accounts, p. ibid. A short Bill of Debt, p.
123. A short Bill with a Penalty, p. ibid. A Penal Bond, with the Condition, p.
124. The Condition of a Bond for the Payment of a Sum of Money at several Time,
p. 125. The Condition of an Obligation from Two Persons to One, and from One to
Two, and from Two Persons to Two, p. 126. Legal Directions concerning
Arbitration, p. 127. A Bond of Arbitration, with the Condition, p. 128. A
Condition of a Bond of Arbitration, with a Clause for a Umpire, p. 129. The
Form of an Award, p. 131. The Form of the Umpirages, p. 132. Observations
thereon, p. 133. A Condition of a Bond to perform Covenants, specified in a
Lease of Indenture, p. 135. A Condition of a Counter Bond to five harmless, p.
ibid. A Discharge proper to be given upon the Receipt of a Legacy. p. 136. A
Counter Condition to save Bail (...). p. 137. A Conditon to Marry a Person or
pay etc p. ibid. A Condition to pay pack part of a Legacy, if any Debt of the
Testator shall after appear to be unpaid, p. 138. A Condition to give Account
and render the Stock delivered to one who is to carry on a Trade at half
Profit. p. ibid. A short Assignment of a Bond, p. 139. A larger Assignment of a
Bond, p. 140. A Declaration of a Bond, made in a Third Persons Name upon Trust,
p. 141. The Explanation of a Bond, p. ibid. The Form of a Bill of Sale for
Goods, p. 142. A Sale of Lands, by Lease and Release. p. 143. A Lease of a
House, p. 146. An Assignment of a Lease, p. ^. An Assignment of Rent, reserved
upon a Lease, p. ^. Observations upon a Lease, p. ^. An Exchange of Lands, p.
^. A Letter of Attorney, p. ^ A Letter of Attorney to receive Rents, p. ^. The
Form of Revoking a Letter of Attorney, p. 155. An Indenture of an Apprentice,
p. ibid. A Letter of Lisence usually granted, allowing Time to a Debtor that
cannot make present Payment, p. 156. A Condition that an Heir shall make no
Claim, p. 158. A Release to be given by a Ward to his Guardian, when he comes
of Age, if he has truly Discharged his trust, and rendered a faithful Account,
p. ibid. The Form of a General Release, p. 159. The Copy of a Will. p. 160.
Rule worthy of Observation in ^atters relating to Wills and Testaments, p. 161.
A (...) to a Will. p. 163. The Form of a Administrators Account. p. 164. A
Covenant to pass Money lent upon (...), p. ibid. A Charter-part of
Affreightment, p. 166. Of Exchange, p. 169. (...) of Bills of Exchange, p. 171.
The Protest of a Bill of Exchange, p. 172. A Bill of Sale for a Vessel, p.
ibid. A Declaration of Trust, p. 173. A (...) on Lands forfeited, p. 174. A
brief Relation of the Kingdom of England,p. 275. Of America, p. 182.

PART I.
Directions for Spelling, Reading, and Writing True English.
Of Letters great and small, and when each are to be Used; Their Division into
Vowels and Consona^ts: Of Diphthongs, what they are, how many, and how
Pronounced and Written.
THERE is no Building without a Foundation. Therefore whoever would obtain the
Accomplishment of Writing all ^ons of Engli^^ Word^ properly, and Scholar
(...), mu^^ in the first Place, end^avour to understand (...) whereof all Words
are composed.

These are in Number Twenty four, and are to be considered in their Form, their
Nature, and their Force.

1. As to their Form, Letters are e^ther Small, as a, ^, c, etc. or Great
(which ar^ ^all^d Capitals) as A, B, C. etc. And to know when rightly to use
the one* and when the (...)* is the first step toward good Clerk-ship; wherein
th^^ Rule will guide you.

You must never use Great Letters in the middle, or end of (...) Word (unless
the whole be wrote so, as LORD) but always in the beginning: And there too;
only in these six Cases following, viz. 1. At the beginning of any Writing. 2.
After every Period, or Full-Point, when a new (...). 3. At the beginning of
every Line in Poetry, and every Verse in the Bible. 4. Proper Names of all
sorts, whether of Persons, Places, or Things, and the like, must begin with
them. 5. So also the Names and Terms of Arts, Dignities, Offices, or any other
Word of special Note in a Sentence; or to which we pay a particular Deference;
(...) God, King, your Lordship, etc. And lastly, The Personal Pronoun I; must
always be a Capital. The small Letters are every where else to be used.

It would therefore be highly ridiculous to write thus:

master george francklin the coroner of kent, with dorothy his wife, came last
maRch to loNDon, where i met him.

When it should be,

Master George Franklin, the Coroner of Kent, with Dorothy his Wife, came last
March to London, where I met him.

Note, There are two Forms of s used in writing; the long s, which is always
put in the beginning, or middle of Words, and the short s, which only comes in
the end, or after another s; As substantial, Assesments; not substantial (...);

Note also, That i and n, the reasons which we shall mention by and by, are
oft-times written thus, j, v.

2. As to the Nature of Letters, they are either Vowels or Consonants.

The Vowels are commonly counted but five, viz. a, e, i, o, u, but we must add
to them y, when it comes after a Consonant.

All the rest are Consonants, and so are j, ^, and y, when any of them come
before a Vowel.

They are called Vowels, (which is as much as to say Self-Sounders) because
each of them gives a perfect sound of it self; whereas the Consonant (that is,
Sounders together with) cannot be pronounced without out of the Vowels: As, to
say B, you must make use of the sound e after it; and in q, of u, and in m or
s, of e, before them, etc.

When two Vowels come together, and yet are not par^ed in Pronunciation, but
the sound of them both united, it is called a DIPHTHONG [that being originally
a Greek Word, signifying a Double Sound] As heard, sweet, People; not he-ard,
swe-et, People.

Of these Diphthongs we have Twelve that are chiefly to be observed; that is to
say, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, ^^, ^^, ea, eo, oa, and ie: As in these Words,
Faith, Either, Join, A^l, E^^^ch, Stant, Seed, Food, Wealth, People, Beat,
Friend.

Where you may observe, that in the first six, both Vowels are fully founded;
but in the last, one of the Vowels is but little, or scarce at all heard; and
therefore by some they are called improper Dipthongs.

Note, That ay, ey, oy, are also Diphthongs, and have the same sound with ai,
ei, oi; only these are used in the beginning or middle of Words, those always
in the end; so we write, air, fair, Heifer, either, Cheister; not air, fair,
either, Cleyster; but May, Joy, Whey, etc. not May, Joi, Whei.

Aw, ew, ow, are likewise Dipthongs, and have the same sound with (...), (...),
and ou, save that those are used chiefly in the end of Words. And ow is sounded
flat and soft; as A Bow, to (...); whereas ou is more sharp and shrill, as
Thou, you, adieu, Yet, contrary to this Rule, we do commonly write these Words
following of a sharp sound, with ow, viz. To Bow, A Cow, Flower, Fowl, How,
Power, Sow, Vowel. Again, on the other side, we write some with ou, and yet
pronounce them as flat as the sound of ow, in know, viz. Four, Soul, drought.
But certainly it is an Inconveniency, that Words under one and the same manner
of Writing, should have a double and different Sound: To remedy which, some
preferring Reason before corrupt Custom, use ow where ever the Sound is soft
and flat, either in the beginning, middle, or end of a word; but ou where it is
sharp: And write thus:

I want Strength to bou this Bow.

Do you mow the Grass, and I will lay it up in the Mow.

Toe; Pease I sow to Fat the Sou, not the Cou. Hou can I make up the Hop-Garden
without a How? Others distinguish them by adding e, As Jane is an ill-bred Sow,
and cannot so we.

But I take the other writing to be more natural,

AE and oe (which have peculiar Characters, viz. AE and oe) are not properly
English Diphthongs, but Latin, and therefore we in English do, for them,
commonly both write and sound the single e. As Equity, Femele, Phoenix, Tragedy,
from AEquitas, Foemina, P^oenix, Tragoedia. Yet, in borrowed Words, of rare
use, and especially in proper Names, as AEneas, AEtna, Economy, etc. The best
Authors use the Diphthongs, to denote their Original.

Question, When two Vowels come together, Is it always a Diphthong?

Answer. No, not always; but generally where any of the beforementioned Pairs
of Vowels happen together, they make a Diphthong, and must be sounded jointly,
except in these Words following:

ea are parted in Beatitude, Create, Creator, Creation, Genealogy, Ocean,
Pag^ant, ^eal, Sergeant, (...), Vengeance.

And ei in Atheist, Atheism, Deity, Polytheism.

Eo is a Diphthong in Dungeon, Hideo^^, Meteor, Pig^^n, S^utcheon, Surgeon,
Theory.

O a are severed in Co-action, Co-adjurer.

Ie is parted in Audience, Brier, Buried, Busied, Clothier, Dier, Diet, Driet,
Espiet, Gaiety, Laiety, Moiety, Quiet, Studied.

Ui are parted in Ambiguity, Fruition, Genuine, Gratuity, Puissant, Perspicuity.

E e in Pre-eminence, Pre-em^tion, Re-enter, Re-edify.

Oi in Doing and Going.

Likewise, most Vowels that come together like Diphthongs, are parted in all
proper Names of Persons or Places mentioned in the Bible, As La-ish, Alphe-us,
Cesure-^, Gill^-ab, Abine-am, etc. save only Cain, Cainan, Theudas, Rubem, and
Beelzebub, where the Vowels are sounded together as Diphthongs

In all such Words where two Vowels come together they are to be parted, that
they may not seem to make a Diphthong. If you would write exactly, you ought to
make this Mark (...) over the latter Vowel, which is called Diaeresis, or a
Note of Partition, thus Laiety, Capernaum, Gilead, etc. Though this, through the
Negligence of Printers and Writers, is often omitted.

There are some few Words derived from French, where three Vowels are joined in
our sound; as Lieutenant, Beauty, etc. which may be called Triphthongs.

Note, That although we have but 24 Letters, and fix of them Vowels, are we have
21 Consonants; For I, U and Y, when they are set before any Vowels in the same
Syllable, do become Consonants. And in such a Case, the two former must be
Written with a different Character from that which they have when they are
Vowels, viz. j and v, (which by Learned Men and Printers, are called Jo^ and
Vo) As single, (...), (...), vulgar; not (...), which would be uncouth and
absurd, therefore this is to be carefully observed. And in such a case I know
no need of a Tittle over j, which yet you must always make over ^.

And though y keeps one and the same Form, yet whereas, (when it is a Consonant,)
it differs much from j Consonant. As may be perceived by these Examples -- jet,
yet, jew, yew, joke, yoke.

Y being Originally a Greek Vowel, is rightly used, 1st In most Words derived
from that Tongue; As Crystal, Presbyter, Martyr, Apocrypha, Apocalypse. 2.
English Words that end with the sound of i, may be indifferently writ with a y,
or ie; as Safety or Safety, Beauty or Beauty, but you must never end them
with an i only, as Bounti, Safeti, for we have no English words so terminated.
3. When two ii's come together, y is put in the place of the (...), because it
looks handsomer; as Burying, Marrying, (not Burieing, Marrieing, nor Buriing,
Marriing) and sometimes when e follows, as Marryeth, Buryeth.

Of Syllables, and Rules how to divide them.
IT is very necessary both for True Writing and Reading, to understand the
Nature and proper Division of Syllables.

A Syllable is either a Vowel, or Diphthong, sounding by it self, or joined
with one or more Consonants in (...) sound, and pronounced at one Breath.

For since each of the five Vowels make a perfect Sound, any of them may be,
and often is a Syllable, as a-hate, e-ve-ry, i-vie, o-pinion, (...). So most of
the Diphthongs, as an-ger, En-s^ace, ow-ner, ai-der ai-ster, (...), (...).

Many Consonants with one Vowel may make but one Syllable; as Length, Strength,
Knights.

1. Rule, If two Vowels come together in a Word, and yet are no Diphthong, but
both fully sounded, they must be divided, as in Di-et, Mu-tu-al, Tri-umph,
Co-(...), Coequal.

2. Rule, If the same Consonant be doubled in the middle of a Word, they must
be divided; as in Ab-be, Accord, Ad-der, Af-fect, Ag-gra-vate, and the like.

3. Rule, A Consonant coming between two Vowels, must be joined to the latter;
as in E-qui-tie, De-liver; not Equit-i^, Del-iver.

4. Rule, Two Consonants between two Vowels do separate themselves, one to the
former, the other to the latter Syllable; as Stran-ger, For-tune.

But no these general Rules, there are these Exceptions following.

First, x, in any Word, must be joined to the Vowel before it, contrary to the
third Rule; as Ox-en, Ex-ercise.

The Reason is, because it is a double Consonant, and has the sound of c and s,
which cannot begin a Syllable, For,

Secondly, Any two or three Consonants, which may be joined to begin any
English Word, are not to be separated in the middle of any Word; so you must
not spell ag-ree, bes-tow, res-rain, etc. but a-gree, be-strow, resrain,
because gr^^st, and fr do begin several English Words, as in the following
Example.

The two Consonants that may begin Words, are Thirty in Number, etc.

As in Bl. Blunt. Br. Bread. Chapter Church. Cl. Clock. Cr. (...) Dr. Drink. Dw.
Dwell, Fl. Flame. Fr. Frank. Gl. Glove. Gn. Gn^w. Gr. Grave. Kn. Know. Pl.
Play, Pr. Pray. Sc. (...). Sh. Shut. Sk. Sk^^. Sp. Sport. St. Stop. Sl. Slew.
Sm. Smites Sn. Snow. Sq. Squi^^. Sw. Sway. Th. Thunder, Tr. Treasure. Tw. Two.
Wh. Whistle. Wr. Wrest.

The three Consonants that may begin a Word, are these Nine, viz. Sch. School.
Scr. Scrape. Shr. Shrink. Skr. Skrew. Spl. Split. Spr. Spring. Str. Stroke.
Thr. Threw. Thw. Thwart.

All these must be spelt together, and not separated, except in compounded
Words; and there each simple Word must retain its own Letters. As Mis-take
Mis-like Mis-lead Dis-lodg Dis-close
not Mi-stake Mi-slike Mi-slead Di-slodg Di-sclose
Dis-miss Di-smiss

So Trans-pose, not Tran-spose, because 'us Compounded of trans.

So Cramp-ring, not Cram-pring.

So likewise all Words that remain entire, when their Prepositions and
Terminations, (which of themselves signify nothing) are taken away from them,
must be spelt by themselves, as stand-ing, not stan-ding; reclaim-ed, not
reclai-med, un-ex-pect-ed, not u-nex-pec-ted.

Thirdly, Any, Consonant joined with I, or r, before e, in the end of a Word,
is inseparable; as in the very Word in-se-pa-ra-ble, tri-fle, Mi-tre.

Fourthly, This Particle es, at the end of Words (which we commonly either
Nouns of the Plural Number, or Verbs of the Third Person) is, sometimes
swallowed up of the foregoing Syllable, and serves only to make it long; but
sometimes it makes a Syllable of it self.

Note, A Noun is the Name of a Thing, A Verb is a Word that betokens to do,
or to suffer, or to be. The singular Number speaks but of one, the plural of
more. The first Person is when a Man speaks of himself, as, I come. The second
when one speaks to another, as, Thou come. The third, as He comes or comes.

In these Words following it closes with the former Syllable.

Nouns. Verbs. An Hide, Hides, he hides himself. A Drake, Drakes, he bakes
Bread. A Bile, Biles, he piles up Wood. A Name, Names, he names me. A Bone,
Bones, he means and weeps. A Rope, Ropes, he copes with. A Wire, Wires, he
tires all Men. A Brute, Brutes, he suits well with it. A Way, Ways, he stays
for me. An Eye, Eyes, he lies in wait. A Virtue, Virtues, he argues well.

But in these it may be a Syllable by it self.

A Grace, Graces, he places all things. A Church, Churches, he lurches Conies.
A Cage, Cages, he wages War. An Hedge, Hedges, he judges none. A Rose, Roses he
poses Scholars. A Nose, Noses, A Fish, Fishes, he refreshes himself. A Witness,
Witnesses he oppresses the Poor. A Box, Boxes, he foxes his Guests, Assize,
Assizes, he freezes for Cold.

Note, That these Verbs, are, by the Curious, written with an Apostrophus, as
Refreshe's, for Refreshes, or does Refresh, especially when the Verb and the
Noun are both alike, to distinguish them, as, he hide's himself amongst the
Hides. For otherwise it seems needless to write an Apostrophus where s is set
for th, as Love's for be Loves; there being nothing omitted, only the th
(which in sound is but one Letter) is changed into s.

Es is also sounded in these Words, Aloes, Jubiles, Epitornes; and in all
proper Names, as Moses, The-res, (...) except James.

If these Rules for dividing so Syllables seem too tedious and intricate, a
little practice and observation will render them easy and familiar: In the mean
time take this for a general Direction, That Syllables are so to be divided in
Spelling as they are in Speaking. And be sure if you cannot write a whole Word
at the end of a Line, break it off at the end of a Syllable; as for Example,
Communiin one Line, and ^^tion in the next, not Communic- in one Line, and
^tion in the next; so if I should write discharge at the end of a Line these,
discharge, it would be ridiculous, for if I could not bring it in all, I ought
to have left off after dis, and begun the next Line with the other Syllable.

Of Letters that ought to be Written, and yet are not Sounded, and the Reasons
thereof; particularly of e at the end of a Word, when it must, and when it
should not he Written.
IN the Words Isaac, Cuiaphas, Canaanite, Sabbath, and Pharaoh, one of the a's
is not pronounced, they being originally Hebrew.

And b after m, in Words of one Syllable, are not sounded, as in Lamb, Climb,
Comb, Dumb, Tomb, Womb, Thumb, And before t, as Debt, Debtor, Doubt.

And c is not sounded in Indict, Indictment, Indicted. Nor ^ in Wednesday. Nor
e in the middle of the Word ^^orge. And ^ at the end of a Word is very ^eldom
(...), except in those of one Syllable, as Me, (...), ^^e, be, ye, ^e, where it
has the ^ound of a (...), o^ (...). And in Words derived from the H^bre^ and
(...), a^ Jesse, J^bile, (...), Ni^ive, C^^d^^n, C^^^,^, (...), (...), (...),
Epit^^^, (...), etc.

In other Words where ^ is put at the end, and the Sound ^ot heard, y^^ it is
not ^uper^^uous, no^ to be ^mitt^d in Writing, for these following Reasons:

1. It serves to draw the Syllable long, which with^^^ must be sounded short,
and so several Words of different Sense would be con^ounded, which by this
means are plainly distinguished, as appears by these Examples.

T^ Curse and Ban is Childre^s Ba^e.

A Hedger's Bill is no ^it Instr^^^^t wherewith to (...) a Bil^.

You may Bi^e one Bit of my Apple.

I did Bathe my self in a Bath.

I can break this Japan Cane.

A Scolding Dame deserves to be d^ckt in the Mill^Da^,

Meat that is ^etcht far is Ladies fare.

A piece of Fir is good for the Fire.

I am out of Hope to ^ave one H^p this Year.

They say a Cat ^as nine Lives, but to be sure (...) will Live as long as ^he
can see me alive.

Bad usage ^as made many a Man mad.

Let the Man cut my Horse's Mane.

It Is two Miles to the next Mill.

I will quit and discharge you quite of (...)*

To Rid the way let us Ride the faster.

The Poor will Scrape up every Scrap.

I cannot S^are all Night at a Sta^.

For a new Tune I get a Tu^^ ^f Wine.

Oft-times one Twin does twine about the other*

For a Pint of Wine you do not Win.

Are you not ashamed to Whine for a S^r^tch with ^ W^in, or ^ Furz Bu^^?

I will Write to my Lawyer for a Writ

Nay, this e final does not only draw out the Syllable after one Consonant, but
sometimes effects the same after two; as in Find, Mind, Wind, Rind, Bind,
Waste, Taste, Tithe, Child, which therefore ought to be so written.

Yet these following Words seem priviledg'd by Custom, to be pronounced long,
without an e in the end, viz. Bold, cold, have, post, told, scold, bolt, Golt,
dolt, most, Ghost, both, Ruth; but if any should add an e to them, though it
might seem unfashionable, I could not blame him, because it is but reasonable:
But in other Words it is a self-contradiction to add e in the end, which makes a
Syllable long, after I have made it short with two Consonants; and therefore I
must write, pass, turn, black; not pass, turn black.

2. Another Reason for writing e final when not sounded, is to soften the sound
of these two Letters, c and g, as in Ace, place, lice, truce, Justice; whereas
otherwise c sounds strong, like k, as in ac-cept, ac-count, and the like of g,
as in stag and stage, hug and huge, swing and swinge, string and fringe.

And here Note, That if g be hard with a long Vowel, ue is added, and always
pronounced in the same Syllable, as Plague, Rogue, Prague, the Hague, Intrigue,
Catalogue, Dialogue, Prologue, Epilogue, Synagogue, Colleague, Prorogue, League,
Tongue. Beware that you do not read such Words Catalo-gue, Intri-gue, nor write
them Catalog, Prolog, etc.

But if g be short, with a short Vowel, then it must have d before it, as in
badg, ledg, bridge, lodge, judge, which Words are thereby differenced both in
Sound and Writing, from bag, leg, log, jug.

3. Another use of e at the end of Words, is for Oxnament, rather than
Necessity; for so we add it to Words ending in i, o, or u, as Charity, Virtue,
Foe, Toe, where it does not vary the Sound, except after i, and there it makes
the Syllable sound more gently, like the Diphthong ee, as Charity is
pronounced, as if it were written Charitee. Likewise in Nouns and Verbs
singular, it is generally added after the long s, joined with another Consonant;
as Horse, Curse, to Nurse, Disburse: for we do not use to write Horse, Disburs,
Curs, much less Horse, Disburs, Nurs; and I take the reason to be partly because
those Words are thereby the more readily varied; As Nurse, Nurses; Curse,
Curses; Disburse, Disburses. And especially because the short s after r,
without an e, makes a soft Sound, as Wars.

If to e at the end of a Word, a long Vowel be added, the e is lost, and must
be omitted in Writting, as love, loving, not loveing; have, having, not
having; except these endings ge and ce, before able, as change, change-able;
peace, peace-able; not chan-ga-ble, pea-ca-ble.

It is needless to use e at the end of a Syllable already made long by a
Diphthong, and therefore you must write, gnaw, fear, weight; not gnawe, fear,
weighte; except when it is to give a right sound to soft s, soft th, and to
these endings, ce, ge, ve; as please, soothe, peace, siege, leave.

Words of one short Syllable, ending with s Consonant, are to be written with a
single Consonant; and without any e after; as sin, son, sun, at, put, war; not
sin, son, sun, etc. although such Words are so writ in our old Bibles, and
after the same manner in the Plural, sins sons, etc. But this is reformed
in our later Impressions.

6. G is not sounded, though written, in Sign, and its Compositions, Assign,
Resign, Design, Consign; nor in Seignior, Reign, Sovereign, Arraign, Phlegm,
and the like.

7. H has Place, but no Voice, in Authority, Christ, Christopher, Crystal,
Chrysostom, Chronick, Chronology, Chronography, Ghost, John, Rhide, Rhenish,
Rhetoric, Schedule, Schism, and Thomas.

8. I is not much, if at all, sounded in these Words, Adieu, Juice, Pursuit,
Bruit, Fruit, Suit, Bruise; yet in the five last, it draws the Syllable long.

9. K is not heard in Back, Deck, Sick, Rock, ^uck, etc. for the Latins made
the same sound with c alone, as Lac, Nec, Dic, Hec, Duc; and our best Authors
do now write such Words, when deduced from the Greek or Latin, in ous, with c
only, as Public, Physic, Catholic. But if the ^

^

^

^

13. U is written many times after g, when it has no Sound; as Guide, Guardian,
etc. and always after q; as in Queen, Quick, and the like. In the Words Buy,
Build, (...), Circuit, it is also silent, and so also in Labor, Favor, Honor,
and other Words of like (...).

I have been the longer upon this Rule, that my Young Learner may have full and
plain Instructions, in relation to the true knowledge of the Sound of those
Letters which ought to be Written, and particularly the Letter e, which, though
the second Vowel, affords more variety of Instruction, than any of the other:
So that by following carefully the Observation I have made, the Learner will
know when this significant Letter must, or must not be written at the end of a
Word.

Of Letters sounded alike, and how to avoid Mistakes in writing one for the
other.
C And K, they have great Affinity in Sound, but to distinguish when you ought
to use one, and where the other; Observe,

That C has the force of K only before a, e, co, u, and these two Consonants,
l and r. And therefore you must write Care, Cow, Cooper, Cupboard, Clergy,
Crown; not Kare, Kow, Kooper, Kupboard, Klergy, Krown. But before e and i. C
has commonly the sound of S; as Caesar, Citers, not Kasar, Kiters. And the use
of K, is only before e, i, and ^; as Key, Keep, Kill, Knight; not Cry, Ceep,
Cill, Cnight. And for this Reason too, we ought to write Calender, Catherine,
Catholic; not Calendar, Katherine, Katholic; although these two last come of
Greek Words, written with Kuppa.

In short Syllables you must write c before k, if a Vowel go before, as Buck,
Thick, Stick, and the Reason, as I told you a little before, is, because k is
never doubled; but if a Consonant come before k, there is then no need of c, as
Banks, Barks; nor Bancks, Barcks.

C is to be written after x, in some Words derived from the Latin, as Exceed,
Excel, Excessive; not Exeed, Exel.

Ch in mere English Words, or such as are derived from the French and Latin,
sounds chee, as in Approach, and Acts, Charity; and if the Syllable be
pronounced (...), you must write e before the ch, as Catch, Wretch, Scatch^^n;
But in the following Words, borrowed from Hebrew and Greek, ch has the sound of
k; as in Character, (...), Chederleomer, Antioch, Encharist, Anchor, (...),
(...) Chushite, (...), Malchus, Melchizedoc, Baruch; And must be read as if
they were wrote Karacter, Kederleemer, (...), Antiok, Baruk, etc.

And the same in all other like Words, except these, Rachel (not Rakel)
Cherubim, Tychicus (not Tykicus) Archbishop, Archduke; yet these two Words;
Architect and Archangel, are pronounced as if they were spelt Arkitect
Arkangel, and the Reason I conceive to be, because in the two last, a Vowel,
but in the former, a Consonant follows.

F and ph will not be mistaken, if it be remembered, that the first is used in
all English Words, as face, find, etc. The latter in these few following,
derived of the Greek and Hebrew.

Phanatick Phlebotomy Phantasy Phlegm

(for which yet we commonly use (...))

Pharaoh Phrensy Pharisee Phrenetic Pharez Physic Phoenix Physician Phil^re
Physiology Philistines Triumph, not (...) Philosophy

Beware therefore of writing these Words with an (...), for it were equally as
absurd to see Filososy; Fhysician; as (...) would be to behold Phastning,
(...), Phigure, instead of fastening, find, figure.

Gb in the end of some few Words where (...) or (...) goes before, has the
Sound of (...) as Laugh, Cough, Tough, Enough, wherein (...) the a loses its
Sound; yet have a (...) you do no make your Readers sport by writing Laff,
Coff, Tuff, and Enuff; because Custom has not yet allowed thereof; yet Cuff,
Snuff, Haff, Buff, etc. must be so written.

G before e and i is sounded soft like j Consonant, as Agent, George, Gentle,
Ge^, Generosity, Generation, Gender Genealogy, Geometry, Gesture, Giant,
Ginger, Clergy, Gipsy, Imagine, Do not play the Fool, and write Ajent,
Jeneration, jingee, etc. Yet we must write Ajax, January, Janizeries, (...),
jeer, (...), joy, not (...), Gob^t, geer.

C has many times the Sound of s; To distinguish them take these Rules:

1. You must write c before e or i, in Accept, Special, Circumcision, Exceed,
being Words derived from the Latin wherein e must be retained.

2. Words that end with the sound of ace, ec, ice, nce, are generally wrote
with c; as Mace, piece, Lice, induce, So also Words in ance, (...), ince, once,
unce, ancy, or ency; as Countenance, Prudence, Quince, Sconce, Dunce,
Lieutenancy, Continence; not Countenants, Continensy, or the like, Except out
of this Rule these Words.

Abase To Advise To Advertise Case Hypocrisy Mittins Base Paradise Rinse Chase
Promise Recompense Dispense Frankincense Sins (...) Intense Pens Expense Sense.

3. Words ending in the Sound of ose, use, [long] must be wrote with s, as
Hose, Nose, Abuse, Choose.

4. C. ^ounds like a soft s, is these Words Sacrifice, Suffice, and in
Gloucester and Worcester, the ce ^s not at all sounded in common Speech, yet
must not be left out in Writing.

5. As for the beginning of Words, these following having the Sound of S, must
be written with a C.

Cease Censor Circle Ceasing. Center Circuit Celebrate Centurion Citron
Celerity Ceremony Cite, and its Compound. Cell Certify Excite, Recite, etc.
Cellar Ceruss City Cement Cistern Civil Censer Cider C^^et Censure Cinque
Cymbal Circumstance Cinnamon Cypress. Circumference Cipher

All other Words (as near as I can remember) of that Sound, must begin, with s,
as Sack, Senate, sob, Sum, etc.

6. There are seven Words (I can think of no more at present) beginning with
She, Sci, Sobe, and Sobi, which ought to be taken notice of, to prevent their
being written wrong (as they seem to sound) with an s only; And they are Scene,
Scepter, Schedule, Schijin, Science, (...), (...); which you must read as if
they were wrote. Seen, Septer, Sedul, yet Scheme and Skeleton are always ^anded
Skeme, Skeleton, so Scarcity, Scholar, Scrivener, (...)

Ti, before, a Vowel, generally sounds like si, as Patience, Dictionary, except
when s goes before, as Fustian, Combustian. And except the Word tied, and
whenever a Word ending in ty has another Syllable added to it that begins with
a Vowel, as from Plenty, Pienteous; Mighty, Mightier.

T. (...) re since the same Sound is frequently to be expressed by ty, and
sometimes by si, (especially in the ends of Words) it will be worth while to
understand when, and where, properly to use each, and the Reason thereof.

For your Guidance herein, Pray Observe these Directions.

1. Generally you must write (...), not (...). in Words that end with the sound
of ation, ition, action, iction; except where there is a double s, as Passion,
^^ an sh, as Cushion, Fashion; not Cution, Fation. But more particularly,

2. You are to know that the Reason of the different writing of such like
sounding Words is this, they are all originally Latin Verbals, derived from the
first Supine, which if it end in tum, then you write ti; if in sum, then fi.
However because all People are not acquainted with Supines, I shall here set
down those Words of both sons that most frequently occur.

These are to be written with a t. These with an s. Action Admission Ambition
Allusion Apparition Apprehension Attention Ascension Benediction Aspersion
Compunction Aversion Concoction Circumcision Contention Commission Declamation
Confusion Dissension Conclusion Distribution Confusion Exclamation Dismission
Faction Descension Fruction Diversion Injunction Effusion Motion Evasion
Munition Invasion Nation, Notion Occasion Obtation Permission Obligation
Submission Perdition Vision. Perturbation And the like of many others, where
there is the some Reason. Relation, Sanction Toleration Valediction To which
you may add, Gresier, Br^sier, Vis^^^. Vocation.

A Table of Words, which are a like in Sound, but different in Signification.
ABel, Cain's Brother. A Bell of Metal, Able, powerful. Accidence, a Book,
Accidents, Chances. Account, Esteem, Account, a Reckoning. A^hor, a Valley,
Acre of Land, Acorn, a Nut. Advice, Counsel, Advise, to Council, Ale,
Malt-Liquor, Ail, to trouble, All, every one. Awl to bore Holes, Ale-hoof, an
Herb, Aloof, at a Distance, Alloy, to give Ease. Alloy, of Metal. Alley, a
narrow Passage, Ally, Confederate. A Lie, falsity. Allowed, granted. A loud,
with a Noise, Altar, for Sacrifice. Alter, to change. Amiss, Wrong. A Miss, a
Whom. Ant, Pismite. Aunt, Uncle's Wife A Peal, Ringing. Appeal to higher (...)
A Peer, Lord (...) Appear, to be seen Array, good Order. Array, to cloth. A
Rose, to smell in. Arose, did rise. (...), a Message. Arrant, Notorious. Arras,
Hangings, Arrows, to shoot. Harrass, to trouble. A Scent, Smell. Ascent, going
up Assent, Agreement. Assistance, help. Assistants, helpers. Angur, a
Sooth-sayer. Augre, for Carpenters. Axe, to cut Wood, Acts, of Parliament.
Babel, the Tower. Babble, to prate. (...), Hogs Flesh. Baken, baked. Beckon, to
wink. Bail, is Surety. Bale, of Cloth or Silk, Bold, without Hair. Bowl'd,
cried out. Ball, a round Substance. Bawl, to cry aloud. Barbara, a Woman.
Barbary, a Country. Barberry, Fruit. Bare, naked. Bear, a wild Beast.
Barrister, at Law. Barrester, a Disturber. Base, a part (...). Baiz. Cloth.
Bays, (...) Trees, Be, are (...). Be, with (...). Beer, Malt Drink. Bier, to
carry the Dead on. Bell, an Idol. Bell, to ring. Berry, a small Fruits. Bury, to
interr. Blew, did blow. Blue, a Color. Board, Plank. Bored a Hole. Boar, a
Beast. Boor, a Country Fellow. Bore, to make a Hole. Bold, confident. Bowled,
cast as a Bowl. Bolt, the Door. Boult, Boult Meal. Bow, to bind. Bough, a
Branch. Boy, a Lad. B^oy, to beat up. Bread, to eat. Bred, brought up.
Breeches, to wear. Breaches, broken Places. Bruit, a Report. Bruit, a Beast.
Burrow, for Coneys. Borough, a Corporation. By, near. Buy, for Money. Brews, he
breweth. Bruise, to break. Brewis, fat. Caen, in Normandy. Cain, the Murderer.
Cane to walk with Calais, in France. Chalice, a Cup. Call, by Name. Cawl, of a
Pe^riwig. Cannon, a Gun* Canon, a Rule, Capital, chief. Capitol, a Tower in
Rome. Career, full sp^^d, Carrier, that carri^th. Cellar, of Liquors. Seller,
that sells. Censer, for Incen^e. Censor, a Reformer. Censure, Judgment,
Centaury, (...) Herb. Century, 100 Years. Centry, a Guard. Chair, a si^ in.
Chare, a Jobb of Work. Champ^gne, in France. Champaign, a Summer's War, Choler,
Rage. Collar, for the Neck. Collar,Beef and Brawn. Cieling, of a Room. Sealing,
setting a Seal. Citter^, an Instrument. Citron* a Fruit* Clark, of the Parish.
Clerk, a Clergyman* Clause, or a Sentence. Claws, of a Bird, or Beast. Coat. a
Garment. Cot^. a Cottage* Comb, for the Hair. Come, remove hither. Comet, a
Blazing Star* Commit, to do, Common, public. Commune, to converse. Condemn, to
death. Contem^, to de^pise. Council, an Assembly, Counsel, Advise. Could, was
able. Cud, of Cattle. Couran^t, a Messenger* Current, passable. Currants,
Cori^^^s, Fruit* Creek, of the Sea. Crick, in the Neck. Causin, by Relation.
Cozen, to cheat. Cymbal, an Instrument. Symbol, a Mark. Cypress, a Tree.
Cyprus, an Island. Cruse, a little Vessel. Cruise, by the Sea Coas^* Cygnet, a
young Swan* Signet. a Seal. Daign, to vouch^a^e. Dane, of Denmark. Dam, to
stop. Damn, to condemn. Dear, of great value* Deer, in a Pa^k. De^^^sed, dead.
Diseased, sick. Decent, becoming. Descent, going down* Dissent, to disagree.
Deep, low in the Earth. Diep, a Town in France. Defer, to put off* Differ* to
(...). Derbe, a City in Asia. Derby, in England, Desert, Merit. Desert, a
Wilderness, Dew, from Heaven, Due, a Debt. Do, to make. Due, a Female Deer.
Dough, Paste or Leaven. Deuteronomy, acted, Dew,a Spanish Lord. Dew, Color. (...),
Inventions. (...), in Wiltshire, Doer, that does. D^er of an House, Dragon, a
Beast, Drageon a Soldier. Drought, of Drink. Draught, dryness. (...), of the
Head. (...), Ever. (...),twelve Months. Earth, the Ground. (...) of a Chimney,
Easter, a Feast. Easter, a Woman. (...), (...). (...), a Town's Name (...)
famous. (...), over head. (...), in Number. (...), (...). (...), (...),to busy.
(...), to whole Envy, Hatred. Envey, an Ambassador Er, the Son of (...) Err, to
mistake. Exercise, Labor. Exorcise, to conjure. Extant, to being. Extent,
distance. Fain, desirous. Feign, no dissemble. Faint, weary. Feint, a false
March. Fair, comely. Fare, of a yet. Feed, to eat. Fee'd, rewarded. Fellon, a
Whitelaw. Felon, a Criminal. Figure, Shape. Vigor, Strength. File, of Metal.
Foil, to overcome. Fillip, with the Finger. Philip, a Man's Names. Fir, Wood.
Furr, of a Skip Flour, for Bread. Flower, or the Field. Follow. to come after.
Fallow, ground untill'do. Forth, abroad. Fourth,in Number Foul, nasty. Fowl, a
Bird. Fourm, to sit on. Form, Shape. Francis, a Man. Frances, a Woman Fr^^ys,
Quarrels Froise, fried Meat Gall, bitter Substance Gaul, a Frenchman Garden,
of Herbs, Guardian, Overseer, Genteel, Graceful. Gentile, Heathen. Gentle,
quiet Gesture, Carriage Jester, a merry Fellow Gilt, with Gold Guilt, of Sin
Glutinous, sticking Gluttonous, greedy Grain of Corn Grane, an Island in Kent
Grate, for Coal; Great, large Grater, for Nutmeg Greater, larger Greave, a Boot
Grieve, to lament Grays, a Town Graze, to eat Grass Groan, to sigh Grown,
increased Grot, a Cave Groat, four Pence Hail to salute Hale, to draw a long
Hare in the Field Hair of the Head Harsh, cruel Hash to mince Meat Heart a Beast
Heart, the Seat of Life Haven, a Harbor Heaven; and Hell Herd of Cattle Heard,
did hear Hard, difficult Here in this Place Hear, to hearken Hie, to make haste
High, lofty Hey, a Ship Him, that Man. Hymn, a Song. Hire Wages Higher, more
high His, of him. Hiss, to deride Hoar, Frost Whore, a lewd Woman Hole,
Hollowness Whole, perfect Ho! la! to call Hallow, to make holy Hollow, empty
Holy, pious Wholly, entirely Home, House Whom? What Man! Holm, Holly Hoop, for
a Tub Whoop, to cry out Hue, color Hew, to cut Hugh, a Man's Name I, my self
Eye, to see with Idle, lazy Idol, an Image I Will, I will I Will, to walk in Isle,
an Island Oil, of Olives Employ, Work Imply, to signify In, within Inn, for
Travelers Incite, to stir up Insight, Knowledge Ingenious, of quick Parts
Ingenuous, candid Iron, Metal Eyeborne Proper Name Ketch, a Ship Catch, to lay
hold Kill, to Murder Kiln, for Bricks Kind, good natured (...) at the Mini
Kiss, to salute Cis, Readiness Father Knave, dishonest Nave, of a Cart Wheel
Knight, by Honor Night, the Evening Lade, the Water Laid, placed Lain, did lie
Lane, a narrow Passage Latin, old Roman Latin, Tin Lattice, of a Window
Latice, a Woman's Name Lettice, an Herb. Lease, a Demise. Leash, th^^e. Lees,
Dregs of Wine. Leese, to loose Leeper, one leprous. Leaper, that leape^^h.
Lesser, to make less. (...) a Reading. Lest, for fear, Least, smallest
Lethargy, Sleepiness Liturgy, Common Prayer, Lier, in wait Liar, a Teller of
Lies Limb, to Member Lime, to paint Line, Length Loyn of Veal Lo, behold Low,
humble Lose, to suffer loss Loose, to let go Lower, to let down Lowr, to frown
Made, finished Maid, a young Woman. Main, the chief Thing Mane, of a horse.
Male, the He Mail, Armor Manner, Custom Mannora Lordship Market for Traffic
Mark it, mind that Marsh, watery Ground Mash, the Hole of a Net Martin, a Man's
Name Marten, a Bird Mead, a Meadow Made one of Media Mean of low Value Mien
Behavior Meat to eat Mete to measure Message Business Message a House Mews,
for Hawks. Muse, to meditate. Mighty, powerful. Moiety, half. Mile, by measure.
Moil, to labor, Mite, small Money. Might, Strength. Meat, a Ditch. Mole, in
the Eye. More, in Quantity. (...),that mows. Moor, barren Ground. Mortar, made
of Lime. Mortar, to pound in. Naim, a Place so called, Name, a Title. Naught,
bad. Naught, nothing. Nay, (...) Neigh, as a Horse. Nether, lower. Neither,
none of the two. Nice, curious. Noise, clamor. Nigh, near Nigh, Isaac. Not,
denying. Knot, to untie Oar of a Boar. Oe'r, over. Ore, of Metal. Of, belonging
to. Off, at a Distance. Oh!Alas. Owe, to be indebted. One, in Number. Own, to
acknowledge, Order, Rank. Ordure, Dung. Our, of us. Hour, sixty Minutes.
Palate, of the Mouth, Pallet, a little Bed. Pale, Color. Pail, a Vessel. Pall,
a Funeral Cloth. Paul, a Man's Name. Parasite, a Flatterer. Parricide, a
Murderer. Parson, of Parish. Person, some Body. Peal, upon the Bells. Peel, the
Outside. Pear, a Fruit. Pair, a Couple Pare, to cup. Peter, a Man's Name.
Petre, Salt. Pick, to choose. Picque, a Quarrel. Pint, half a Quart. Point, a
Stop. Place, of abode, Plaise, a Fish. Plumb, the Fruit. Plain, a leaden
Weight. Plow, to make Furrow Pole, a long Stick. Poll, to cut the Hair. Pore,
of the skin. Poor, beggarly. Posy, of ^owers. Poesy, Poetry. Pour, as Water.
Power, Might, Practice,Exercises Practice, to exercise, Pray, to beseech. Prey,
a Boo^y, Presence, being here Present, Gifts Princess, Kings Son^. Princess,
the Daughter Principal, chief Principle, the first Rule Profit, Advantage
Prophet, a Foreteller Prophery, foretelling Prophecy, to foretell Quiz, of
Paper, Choir, of Singers Rack, to (...) Wreck, of a Ship Rain, Water. Reign,
rule as king Rein, of a Bridle Raise. to set up Rays, Sunbeams. Race, to (...)
Rose, to demolish Red, a Color Read, did read Radish, a Root Reed, a Shrub
Read, in a Book Relick, a Remainder Relict, a Widow Rere, the back part Rear,
to erect, (...), Verse (...), a freezing Rice, a sort of (...) Rise, Raise up.
P^ye,in Sussex. Way, crooked. Ring, the Bells Wring, the (...) Rite, a
Ceremony. Right, just and ^ne. Wright, a working Smith. Write, with a Pen.
Road, the Highway. Rowed, did row in a Boat. Roe, a Kind of Deer. Row, a Rank.
Rome, a City. Ro^^, part of House. Rote, by Heart. Wrote, did write Wrought,
work^. Rough, not smooth. Ruff, a ^and. Roof, Top of a House. Said, did say.
Sail, of a Ship. Sale, bargaining. Satiety, Fullness. Society, Company. Savior,
that saves. Savor, a smell. Server, a Taste. Savior, Christ JESUS. (...), of
the Sage. Seen, beheld. Seas, great Waters. Seize, to lay hold of. Cease, to
leave off. Sent, ordered away. Scent, a Smell. Show, to make appear. Shoe, for
the Foot. Ship, (...) sailing. Sheep, a Beast. Shore, a Prop. Shore, the Sea
Coast. (...), did show. (...), did (...). Shread, to mince. Scred,minced. Sign,
a (...) (...),in Geometry. Site, (...) Cite, to (...). Sight, seeing. Sink, to
go down. Cinque, (...) Slight, to despise. Slight, Dexterity. Site, a four
(...). Slow, walk slowly, Slough, a paddle. Seal, of a Shoe. Soul, of a Man.
Sole, of a Fish. Some, a part. Sum, the whole, Son, a Man Child. Sun, the
Heavenly Light. Soon, quickly. (...), to saint. Sore, an Ulcer. (...), to mount
upward, (...), to leak earnestly. Stait, a (...) Stear, a young (...). Steer,
to guide a Ship. Style, for Passage. Style, of (...), Stood, did (...) Stud, in
(...) Straight, not crooked. Strait, narrow. (...), (...) Sucker, a young Twig.
Sue, to (...) Suit. Sew,with it Needle. Tail, the End. Tale, a Story, True, not
wild. (...), a Town. Tare, weight allowed. Tear, to rend in Pieces. Then, in
Comparison. Then, at that Time There, in (...) Place. Their, of them. Through,
(...). Throw, to (...). Throne, a (...) (...), cast Tie, to (...) Toy, a Play
thing. Tide, Fla^t of the Sea. Ti'd, made fast. Tile, for covering Toil, to
make (...) Time, whom, Thyme, a sweet Herbs. (...), unto. The^^ of the Font.
Tow, to draw along. Too, likewise. Tue, a Couple. Told, as a Tale. Tell'd as a
Best. (...) for the Fire. Tongues, Languages. Towr, to hang in fight, Tower, of
Defense. Tusc^^, Order. (...), a great Tooth. Vacation, a ceasing. Vocation, a
Calling. Veil, a Covering. Veal, Calf Flesh. Vale, a Valley. Vain, useless.
Vant, to show the Wind. Vein, of the Blood. Valley, a Dale. Value, Worth.
Valley, of Shot. Vessal, a Slave, Vessel, for use. Vi^l, or (...), a Glass.
Vi^l, for Music. Vice, ill Habit. Vise, for Workmen. Voice, a Sound. Ure,
Practice. ^ewer, a (...) Your, of you. Use, to be (...). (...),Sheep. Wade, to
go in Water. Weighed in the Balance. Wail, to mourn. Whale, a Sea Fish, Yern,
to Compassionate. Wain, to decrease. Wean, a Child. Wait, to look for. Weight,
Heaviness. Were, Merchandise. Wear, to put on Cloths. Were, was. Waste, to
spend. Waist, the middles. Way, to walk in. Weight, to poize. Wey, forty
Bushels. Weal, good. Wheal, a Pimple, Weald, of Kent and Suffer Weild, to
manage. Wen, a Swelling. When, at what Time. Wet, watery. Whet, to sharpen.
What, which. Wat, Walter. While, in the mean Time. Wile, a Trick. Where, a lewd
Woman. Woer, a Suitor. Wight, an Island. White, a Color. Wist, knew. Whist,
Silence. Woe, Misery. Who, which. Wood, of Trees. Would was willing. Yarn,
Woollen. Earn, to get. Ye, your selves. Yea, yes. Yew, a Tree. Ewe, a Sheep.
You, your self.
Of Points and Stops.
SInce Points, Stops and Notes are of absolute necessity in Writing True
English, Therefore

All Points and Stops must be observed when you Would write with Credit, and
your Skill would (...).

If stops be small, than Comma you should take,

The Comma (,)

If great, you must a Semi-colon make,

The Semicolon (;)

If half a sentence, then the Colon (...)

The colon (:)

Must plainly make. If out this point does showed.

The Period or full Point. (.)

The Period is a point of perfect sense, and perfect Sentence, at the end of
which the Tone of the Voice (...) below us ordinary Tenor, with a long (...) --
--

An Apostrophas (')

This is set over that plane where you Leave out a Vowel, as there Words do
(...)

Penned, sinned, trained, the other, it is, (...)

Hyphen, Divisioner Note of Connection (-)

When you have Compound Words or end your line, In parting Words this Mark is
for a sign.

As Old-England, New York, Husbandman.

An Interogation (?)

This Note is put when any Question's made, As does appear in what is
under-said.

Qu. What shall I do? Whether shall I flee? Whom (...) I blame? Where is the
Man?

A Note of Admirations (!)

This Mark denotes our suddain-Admiration, Of what we say, or Write, or give
Relation,

As, Hear, O Heaven! give our, O (...)

A Parenthesis ()

This Mark a sentence does enclose when we Use, or omit the same, yet sense
'twill be.

As, In me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing.

A Note of Citation (")

This is then made when Authors quoted, are, And do show forth what they to us
declars.

An Index ()

This Note like to a forefinger is made, To point to what Remarkable is said.

Asterism (*) Oblisk ()

These are as Notes, always referring to The Margin, where the meaning you may
know,

A Section

A Paragraph

A (...) ^^

PART II.
Arithmetic MADE EASY Teaching the Necessary Rules thereof.
Arithmetic is the Art of Numbering will, or (...) Accounting well by Numbers;
for as Magnitude of Greatness is the Subject of Geometry, so is Number the
Subject of Arithmeticks.

The whole (...) of Arithmetic depends upon the knowledge of the five
following (...) viz.

1. Numeration, 2. Addition, 3. Subtraction, 4. Multiplication, 5. Division.

All the (...) being compounded of these, of which we shall (...), (...) in
their order.

Of Numeration.
Numeration, (...) express or write down the (...)

All Numbers are written with the Characters, called Figures, (...) which the
last is called a Cipher, and of it self it signifies nothing, but serves
(according as it is placed) to increase or diminish the value of another
figure, to which it is either annexed or prefixed.

The Ten Characters of Figures by which all Numbers are expressed, are thus
written, viz. One; Two; Three; Four; Five; Six; Seven; Eight; Nine; Cipher. 1 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0

The Cipher serves to make up the number of places, but of it self signifies
nothing.

The nine first of these are called significant Figures.

And the value of any Figure Increases in a Ducuple preportion from the right
Hand to the left, every place being Ten times the value of the former, as you
may see in the following Table.

A Numeration Table.
Hundreds of Millions, Tens of Millions, Millions, Hundreds of Thousands, Tens
of Thousands, Thousands, Hundreds, Tens. Units, The Numbers to the Table are
thus to be read, viz. 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 987 Mil. 654 Th. 321 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
123 Mil. 456 Th. 789. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 23 Mil. 456 Th. 789. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 3 Mil.
456 Th. 789. 4 5 6 7 8 9 456 Th. 789. 5 6 7 8 9 56 Th. 789. 6 7 8 9 6 Th. 789.
7 8 9 789. 8 9 89. 9 9. (...)

Over against every place of the Numbers in the (...) Table is written in words
at length the value their (...) Units, Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, etc. which
(...) being perfectly gotten by heart, and (...), will be thereby enabled to
(...) of any Number proposed.

And on the right Hand of the Table over against every Number therein contained
you are directed how to read of express those Numbers: As 987654321 is thus to
be read, viz. Nine Hundred Eighty Seven Millions, six Hundred fifty four
Thousand, three Hundred twenty one. And the like is to be understood of the
rest.

Although the foregoing Table be made to consist but of Nine Places, yet it may
be continued to more Places at pleasure, even ad infinitum, observing that the
value of every place is ten times at much at that which goes before it; so the
tenth place is Thousands of Millions, the eleventh place is Tens of Thousands
of Millions, the 12 place is Hundreds of Thousands of Millions, and the 13 th
Place is Millions of Millions Million (...)

Thus much of (...), next we shall proceed to Addition.

Of ADDITION.
ADdition Teaches us to add, or put together diverse Numbers, and to bring them
to one total Sum. As if 7 and 9 were given to be added together, the Sum will
be 16, and the Sum of 5 and 4 is nine.

When it is required to add together several Numbers of one Denomination, they
must (in order to the Work) be disposed of according to the following example,
viz.

Let it be required to add 136 and 42 together, they must be placed one under
the other as follows, viz. Thus 136 42

Having placed the given Numbers, as before is directed, then draw a straight
line under them, and (beginning at the Place of units) add all the figures
together that stand over^^^ another in that Rank, putting their Sum enter the
said straight line; As in this Example, I say, 2 and (...) wherefore I put a
(...) the line, (...) proper place, -- 2 and 6, and proceed to (...) next Rank
which is the Place of Teal, saying 4 and 3 is 7 wherefore I put 7 in in its
proper place under the line, and proceed to the next last Rank, where I find
only 1, which I put down in its proper place under the line, and so the Work is
finished; and I find that the Total Sum of 136 and 42 to be 178. See the
Operation in the Margenn.

136 42 178

If in adding together any of the Ranks (as is before directed) their Sum
amounts to, or excedeth 10, or any number of tens, then in such case you are
either to see down a Cipher under the line in its proper Place, or else the
excess above the ten or tens; and for every ten carry one unite to be added to
the next Rank of Figures. As, if it amount to 30, then set down (o) a Cipher,
and carry 3 (for the three tens) to be added, to the next Rank; if a amount to
34, then set down four under the Rank that you added, and carry 3 to the next,
etc. And when you have cast up the last Rank toward the left Hand, set down
the Total that it amounts to, as in the following Example.

748 364 296 242 1650

I begin, saying 2 and 6 is 8, and 4 is 12, and 8 makes 20, which is just 2
tens, wherefore I put down 8 under the line, and carry 2, to the next Rank for
the 2 Tens, and proceed, saying, 2 that I carry and 4 is 6, and 9 is 15, and 6
is 21, and 4 is 25, which is 5 above 10. Wherefore I put down 5 under the line,
and carry 2 for the 2 tens to the next Rank; and then proceed, saying, 2 that I
carry, and 2 is 4, and 2 is 6, and 3 is 9, and 7 makes 16. Wherefore (because
it is the last Rank) I put down 16 under the line, and so the work is finished,
the total Sum of this Addition being 1650.

A Men had in his Orchad 13^ Apple Trees, 76 Pear Trees, 107 Cherry-Trees and
36 Ph^^l-Trees, and be desires treatly to know new many Trees be has in all.

Place your Numbers ^oot under another, at in the Margent, and then begin to
add them together at your right Hand, saying 6 and 7 is 13 and 6 is 19, and 6
is 25, place 5 under the line, and carry 2 to the next Row, saying 2 and 3 is 5
and 7 is 12 and 3 is 15, place 5 under the line, and carry 1 to the next row,
saying, 1 and 1 is 2 and 1 is 3, which 3 I set under the line, and ( because
^^^re was ^o (...) i^ that row, therefore) the total is 355, and so many Trees
are in the Orchard.

Apple (...) 136 Pear trees 076 Cherry trees 107 (...) ^rees 036 Tr^ts in all
355

Addition of Money.
The most usual Coyns used in England, are Pounds, Shillings, (...) and
^arthings, (and in which Denomina^^^^s we keep our Accounts here in America) of
which 4 Far^hings 12 Pence 20 Shillings
makes 1 Penny 1 Shilling 1 Pound


In all Sums you are to mind the Title of your Accounts, and how many of the
first Denomination does make out of the second, and how many of the second do
make one of the third, and how many of the 3d do make one o^ the 9th; and so in
this manner if there be more.

When it is required to add together Numbers consisting of diverse
Denominations, place all Numbers of the same Denomination one directly under,
another, as Pounds under Pounds, Shillings under Shillings, Pence under Pence,
and Fa^things (...) Farthings; the like is to be understood of Weight, Measure,
Time, etc.

Having placed your Sums and Denominations right in their proper Ranks, draw a
line under them, and beg^^ your Addition with the (...) Denomination, as in the
following ^xample,

1. Let it be required to add together 37 l 16 s. 9 d. 3 q. and 21 l. 9 s. 8 d.
1 q. and 13 l. 12 s. 9 d. ^ q. In order to which I set them down, and draw a
line under them it follows.

l. s. d. q. 37. 16 9. 3. 21 ^9. 8. 1. 13 12 9 2 72 ^9 2 2

First, I begin with the least Denomination, which here is Farthings, saying, 2
and 1 is 3, and 3 is 6 q. Which is 1 d. and 2 q. I put the a farthings under
the line and carry the 1 d. to the next row, which is the Place of Pence,
saying, 1 that I carry and 9 is 10, and 8 is 18 d. which is 1 s. and ^^. (Now
against the 8 1 make a prick with my Pen, for any (...) remembrance, to
signify that there is 1 ^ to be carried to the place of Shillings) Then go on,
and say, 6 and 9 is 15. which is 1 s. and 3 d. and therefore against 9 I make a
prick with my Pen, and (because that is the last number) I set down the odd ^
d. under the Place of Pence; and (seeing ^ find 2 Pricks in the row of Pence,
therefore) ^ carry 2 s. to the place of Shillings, saying, ^ s. which I
carried, and 1 s. is 14, and 9 is 13 ^. (which is 1 l. and 3 s. remaining) make
a prick against the 9. and go on, saying, ^ s. and 16 is 19 s. which (being
there (...) more Numbers to be added, and being less than 20 s. I set 10 under
the row of Shillings, and finding one prick in said row. I therefore carry 1 to
the Place of Pounds; saying 1 that I carried, and 3 is 4, and 1 is ^, and 7 is
(...), (...) down a under the line (as its Addition of Numbers of the
Denomination) and carry 1 to the next row, saying 1 that I carried and 1 is 2,
and 2 is 4, and 3 is 7. which being the last, I set it down; and the Total or
whole Sum is 72 Pounds, 19 Shillings, ^ Pence, ^ Farthings.

Example 2. I have received these following several Sums of Money, and desire
to know how much I have received in all.

l. s. d. Received as one time, 29 16 8. As another time, 32 17. 9. More. 81 13
11 The Sums received amount to 144 l. 8 s. 4 d.

Here in this Example the least Denomination is Pence, therefore I begin with
them and say, 11 d, and 9 d, is 20 d, (which is 1 s, and 8 d,) make 2 prick
against the 9, and say, 8 d, and 8 d, is 1 s, and 4 d, make a prick, against
the 8, and set down the odd 4 d under the line Then (because there are 2 Pricks
in the row of Pence) you must carry 2 s. to the Place of Shillings, saying, 2 s
which I carry, and 13 is 15 s and 17 is 32 s. (which is 1 l 12 s) make a prick
against 17, and say, 12 s. and 16 is 28 s. make a prick against 16 and (because
there are no more Numbers to be added) set down the add 8 s, under the
Shillings, and (being there are 2 pricks in the row of Shillings) carry 2 to
the place of Pounds, saying 2 and 1 is 3, and 2 is 5, and 9 is 14, set down 4
and carry 1 to the next row; saying 1 that I carry and 8 is 9, and 3 is 12, and
3 is 14, which (because it is the last) you set down 14, and your work is done.
And you find that the several Sums received amount to 144 l. 8 s. 4 d,

Now though I direct you to make Pricks with your Pen at every 4 in the
Farthings, and at every 12 in the Pence, and at every 20 in the Shillings
(which is to help your Memory) yet this way is neither so near nor commendable;
for if you once prick it false, you must prick it over again, which will looks
like so many Blots, and make you more subject to mistake, Therefore I recommend
to you the two following Tables, to be gotten perfectly by heart, before you
adventure upon Addition; As, 1 Shilling is 12 Pence, etc. as follows, viz. s.
d. d. s. d. Note, That 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
is 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 132 144
Note also, That 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
is 1 2 3 4 5 5 6 7 8 9 10
8 6 4 2 0 10 8 6 4 ^ 0


The Proof of Addition.
Add all the Sums up again (except the uppermost, which is here 300 l. 11 s. 6
d. 2 qr.) and then add the Total thereof unto the said uppermost Line, and if
it make the just Sum of the first Total, it is true, otherwise not. To
demonstrate which observe the following Example, viz. 300 l. 11 s. 6 d. 2 qr.
300 11 6 2 102 15 1^ 1 106 17 10 0 241 18 11 1 601 11 11 1 314 10 10 2 611 11
11 1 Total 2279 19 00 0 00 00 00 0 2279 19 00 0

II. Of Troy Weight.
Troy Weight is a Weight used in Great Britain, by which is weighed Bread,
Gold, Silver, Pearl, etc. The most usual Denominations of which Weight, are
Pounds, Ounces, PennyWeight and Grains; of which 24 Grains 20 Penny-weight 12
Ounces
make 1 Penny-weight, 1 Ounce, 1 Pound,


The Addition of Troy Weight (and consequently of any other Weight or Measure
whatsoever, either Domestic or Foreign) differs nothing at all from the
Addition of English Coin last taught, if the Affinity of one Denomination to
another be first known; for whereas in Money, because 12 d. makes 1 s. you
therefore observe how many twelves there are in the Addition of your Pence, and
for every 12 you add 1 s. to the place of Shillings; so in the Addition of Troy
Weight, knowing that 24 gr, make one Penny-Weight, you must therefore in the
Addition of Grains in Troy Weight, observe how many times 24 you find in your
line of Grains, and for every 24 carry one to the place of Penny-weights;
likewise, in the Addition of Penny-weights, you must consider how many times 20
is contained in your line, and for every 20 carry one to the Place of Ounces,
(because 20 Penny weight make an Ounces) Also in the Addition of Ounces Troy,
you must observe how many times 12 you find in your line or Ounces, and for
every 12 carry one to the place of Pounds; Then lastly, Add your, Pounds
together, as number, of one Denomination.

Examples for Practice.
l. ^^. pw. gr. 32 9 12 16 0^ 10 17 11 17 11 06 9 09 06 00 ^^ 30 8 15 10 00 00
19 ^^ 08 10 4 7 00 05 0^ 19 366 3 18 18 ^1 10 19 15

III, Of Avoirdupois little Weight.
There is another kind of Weight most commonly used in Great Britain, called
Avoirdupois little Weight; (...) which weighed all sorts of Ware or
Merchandise, Ga^^lable, as Sugar, Peppers, Cloves, etc. The Weight is commonly
divided into these Denominations, Pounds, Ounces and Drams, of which 16 Drams
16 Ounces
make 1 Ounce 1 Pound,


IV, Of Avoirdupois great Weight,
There is also a Weight commonly used in Great Britain, by which is weighed all
Commodities that are sold by the Hundred, as Tobacco, Wool, Flesh, Butter,
Cheese, and the like; the which Hundred Weight contains 112 Pound, and the
Hundred weight is divided into Quarters, Pounds and Ounces; so that 16 Ounces
28 Pounds 4 Quarters
make 1 Pounds 1 Quarter of a Hundred, 1 Hundred weight


In the Addition of Avoirdupois weight you must observe the very same method
and Order, as in Money and Troy weight, having due respect to the Quantity of
the Denomination, etc.

Example for Practice.
I have bought five Cask of Sugar of one man, and five Cask of another Man, all
different weights, and want to know how much in all I have had of each man, In
order ^o know which I set down each man's parcels by themselves, and add them
together according to the former Directions, as follows, viz, C. qr. lb. ^^
37 3 21 12 05 1 07 00 09 1 06 03 03 2 18 06 33 2 20 00 00 1 06 08 10 0 00 00 11
3 04 00 12 3 07 03 06 1 10 05 113 2 ^7 02 27 ^ ^0 03

By this it appears, that I have received from one Man 113 ^^ndred 2 Quarters
2^ Pounds and 2 Ounces, and from another Man I have received 2^ Hundred 1
Quarter 18 Pounds and 3 Ounces.

V. Of Liquid Measures.
Liquid Measures are those by which all sorts of Liquors are measured, of which
a Pint is the least, according to the following Table.

2 Pints 2 Quarts 2 Poules 63 Gallons 4 Hogsheads
Make 1 Quart, 1 Poule 1 Gallon, 1 Hogshead, 1 Tun,


Dry Measures are those by which Corn, (...) etc. are measured, of which 2
Pints 8 Quarts 4 Pecks
make 1 Quart, 1 Peck 1 Bushel


VII. Of (...) Measures.
(...) Measure is that by which we measure (...), Land, Beards, Glass,
Pavement, etc. of which Measure a Barley Corn is the least so that 3 Barley
Co^^ 12 Inches 3 Foot 3 Foot 9 Inches 16 Foot and half 40 Perches ^ Furlongs
Make 1 Inch, 1 Foot, 1 Yard, 1 (...), 1 (...) 1 Furlong. 1 Mile.


VIII. Of TIME.
Time consists of Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours and Minutes, so that 60
Minutes 24 Hours 7 Days 4 Weeks 13 Months 1 days and 6 hours
Make 1 Hour, 1 Day, 1 Week, 1 Month, 1 Year.


IX. Of Apothecaries Weights.
The Weights used by Apothecaries are (...), Scruples, Drams and Ounces, of
which 20 (...) ^ Scruples ^ Drams ^ Ounces
Make 1 Scruple, 1 Dram, 1 Ounce, 1 Pound,


(...) of these Tables, and the Rules and Cautions before (...) any one may
make Addition of any the above named Coyns, Weights and Measures; And therefore
I shall only set down some Examples for Practice, and so conclude and Rule of
Addition.

Addition of Liquid Measure.
Tun^, hogs. Gall. Po^l. qu^. Pi. 411 3 ^6 1 0 1 ^^^ 1 10 1 1 0 317 1 15 0 1 1
241 2 30 1 ^ ^ 317 1 40 1 1 ^ 374 3 10 ^ 1 ^ 343 2 10 1 1 0 333 1 17 1 1 0 2461
3 04 0 1 1

It adding of these sums you must remember for every ^ Pi^^s carry one (...), 2
Quarts 1 po^^le, every 2 Po^^les ^ Gallon, every 6 (...), ^ ^og^^^d, and for
every 4 Hog^^. carry 1 Tun. Which being performed, there is in this Sum 2461
Tuns 3 ^ogsh. 04 gall. 0^ P^t. 1 quarts, 1 Pint.

Addition of Dry Measure.
Bush* Pecks, Quar. Pints, 317 1 2 3 102 3 0 6 439 0 7 0 200 8 5 0 045 0 2 ^
117 2 9 1 1224 1 10 9 Bush* Pecks, Quar. Pint* 400 1 1 3 103 2 1 2 210 1 7 1
317 1 3 2 106 3 00 0

Of Substraction.
SUbstraction is the taking of one or more small Numbers out of a greater, as 7
out of 20, or 37 out of 38, or the like.

Received 397 Paid 136 Remains 243

Example 1. First set down the greater Number (from which you would substract)
and then place the lesser Number (to be subtracted) under it, draw a Line, as
you see done in the Margin, and begin with the first Figure toward the Right
hand, (which is 6) saying, 6 from 9, and there remain* 3 s place 3 under the
line and go to the next figure, which is 3, saying 3 from 7, and there remains
4, place 4 under the line, and go to the next figure, which is 1, saying 1 from
3 and there remains 2, place 2 under the line and your Substraction is ended.

Example 2. I have borrowed 96527 l and I have paid 2976 l. and I want to know
how much I have yet to pay.

Borrowed 96527 Paid 2976 Remains due 93551

In order to resolve which, Place the figures one under another (as you see
done in the Margin) draw a line under them, and begin with the first figure
toward the right Hand, say 6 out of 7, and there remains 1, which set down,
and go to the next, saying, 7 out of 2 I cannot ( wherefore you must borrow 10,
and add it to your figure 2, which makes it 12, then say* 7 from 12 and there
remains 5, which set down. Then go to the next, and say, 9 and 1 that I
borrowed is 10 ( for when ever you borrow, you must be sure to pay it back
again to the next figure) 10 from 5 I cannot, but (I borrow (10) and add it to
5, which makes it 15; then say) 10 from 15 and there remains 5, which set down
under the line, Then go on, and say, one that I borrowed (or 1 that I carry)
and 2 is 3, take 3 out of 6 and three remains 3, which place under the line;
because there are no more Figures to be subtracted from the Number above, you
must say 0 from 9 and there remains 9, which place down under the line, and
your Substraction is ended, and it shows that you have 93551 l, yet to pay.

Substraction of diverse Denominations,
In Substraction of Numbers of Diverse Denominations, you must observe the same
Method as in Addition, namely, to place Pounds under Pounds, Shillings under
Shillings and Pence under Pence; and always place the greatest Sum uppermost.
And you must also here (as it^ Addition) observe how many of the first
Denomination make one of the second, and so on. And if the Figure or Figures be
greater than those you are to substract from, borrow one from the next
Denomination. The following Examples will explain it to you, And Received 275
11 3 Laid out 196 12 5 Remains 78 18 10

Having placed the Sum, and drawn a line under it (as in the Margin, begin with
the least Denomination (which ^ere is Pence) and say, Take 5 d. from 3 d. I
cannot, but 5 d from a Shilling or 12 d ( that I borrow) and there remains 9 d,
which added to the 3 makes 10 d. which set down. Then go to the Shillings, and
say, 1 that I borrowed, ( for you must be sure to pay what you borrow) and 12
is 13, which to take from 11 I cannot; therefore I must borrow 20 s, which
added to 11 s, makes 31 s, then say 13 s, from 31 s, and there remains 18 s,
which set down. Then go the next Denomination* which is Pounds, and say 1 that
I borrowed and 6 is 7; now 7 from 5 I cannot, but 7 from 15 and there remains
8, which I set down. Then, 1 that I borrowed and 9 is 10, now 10 from 7 I
cannot; but 10 from 17, and there remains 7, which set down. Then again, 1 that
I borrowed and 1 is 2, 2 from 2. and there remains 0 l. s. d. So that being
taken from 196 12 05 275 11 03 there remains 078 18 10

And thus in any other Sums of this nature, observe that the same that you
carried in Addition, the same you must borrow in Substraction; as* 12 in the
Pence, 20 in the Shillings, and 10 in the last Denomination.

Substraction of Av^ir-du-poize Weight,
For the better understanding of the Rule observe (as you did before) the Title
of your Account, and where you cannot take one Number out of another, take it
out of the next Denomination, as in the following Example of A^^ir-du-poize
Weight.

C. qr. ^^. ^^. dr. Bought ^4 2 ^^ 11 10 Sold 1^ 3 14 13 13 Remains 28 ^ 24 13
14

I begin with the least Denomination, and say, 12 dr^^s from 10 I cannot, but
12 from 1 ounce (which contains 16 dr.) and there rests 4, and 10 makes 14,
which I set down; Then I go to the Ounces, where I find 13, and 1 that I
borrowed is 14, 14 from 11 I cannot, but I borrow 1 lb. (which is 16 ou.) and
say 14 from 16 and there remains 2, and the 11 is 13. which I set down* Then I
go to the Pounds, and say, 14 and 1 that I borrowed is 15, 15 from 11 I cannot
( therefore I borrow 1 Quarter, which is 28 lb.) Take 15 from 28, and there
remains 13, and the 11 is 24, which I set down. Go to the next and say, 1 that
I borrowed and 3 is 4* 4 from 2 I cannot, but I borrow 1 Hundred which is 4
qrs* and say, 4 from 4 and there remains 0, but the 2 is 2 which I set down.
Now 1 that I borrowed and 8 is 9, 9 from 7 I cannot, but 9 from 17 and there
remains 8, Now 1 that I borrowed and 1 is 2, 2 from 4 and there remains 2, and
the work is finished,

The Proof of Substraction.
The Proof of Substraction is by Addition; for adding the Number to be
Subtracted to the Remainder, the Sum of them must be Equal to the number
given, if you have truly wrought: The operation you may see in the following
example.

The number given is 987 The number to be Subtracted 243 The Remainder is 744
The Proof 987

Add the Number to be Subtracted, 243, to (...) (...) 744. The Sum of them is
987, which is Equal (...) (...) given.

Questions performed by Addition and Substraction.

Quest. 1 What Number is that which being added to 376 shall (...) 1000?
Substract 376* from 1000, the Remainder is 624, the Number sought.

Quest. 2 What Number of Pounds Shillings and Pence must be added to 26 l. 17
s. 3 d. to make up the Sum 100 l* Substract 36 l. 17 s. 3 d. from 100 l. the
Remainder is 63 l. 2 s. 9 d. which added to 36 l. 17 s. 3 d. makes 100 l.

Quest. 3. In the Year of our Lord 1440 the famous Art of Printing was
Invented; I would know how long it is since that time to this Year of our Lord
1727? From 1727 Substract 1440 the Remainder is 287, and so many Years are
expir^d since Printing was invented.

Quest. 4. An Army consisting of 13721 Horse, 26850 Foot; in an engagement
there was slain 3760 horse, and 7523 ^oot; the Question is, How many were slain
in all? and how many Horse and how many Foot escaped? From the (...) Horse that
went out substract the 3760 that were ^^ain, and there remains 9961, and so
many Horse escaped: also, from the 26850 Foot which went out, substract the
7523, which were slain, and there remains 19327, the Number of Foot that
escaped. And by adding the 3760 Horse which were slain to the 7523 Foot which
were slain, their Total is 11283, and so many were ^^ain in all

Of Multiplication.
MUltiplication serves instead of many Additions, and teaches of two Numbers
given to increase the greater as often as there are Unites in the le^^er.

There are three things strictly to be observed in Multiplication, viz. 2 Times
2 is 4 3 is 6 4 is 8 5 is 10 6 is 12 7 is 14 8 is 16 9 is 18 3 Times 3 is 9 4
is 12 5 is 15 6 is 18 7 is 21 8 is 24 9 is 27 4 Times 4 is ^6 5 is 20 6 is 24 7
is 28 8 i^ 32 9 ^^ 36 5 Times ^ is ^5 6 is 30 7 is ^5 8 is 40 9 is 45 6 Times 6
is 36 7 is 42 8 is 48 9 is 54 7 Times 7 is 49 8 is 56 9 is 63 8 Times 8 is 64 9
is 72 9 Times 9 is 8^

2. The Multi^^er, or Sum by which you Multiply.

3. The Product, or Sum Produced*

But before you enter upon the Practice of Multiplication, it is necessary to
learn the Multiplication Table by heart. which is here set in the Margin.

TO Read this Table of Multiplication, 1 st, Begin at the Top, at the Figure 2,
saying, 2 times 2 is 4. 2 dly, 3 times 3 is 9, etc. Next, 4 times 4 is 16. Then
in the last Line read, 9 times 9 is 81. The Table is so plain, that I need give
you no more Directions.

Therefore I shall proceed to give you some Examples of the Practice of
Multiplication.

1. Example. What is the Number of 3 times 654?

Answer. If you set down the Number 654, 3 times one under the other, and add
them together, you will find the Number to be 1962.

But by Multiplication such Questions are more readily answered than by
Addition. And therefore I set the Number in question down thus,

65^ Multiplicand,

^ Multiplyer.

In order thereto, you must (...)* In Multiplication to ^et down the greatest
Number first, and the lesser under it, and then begin at the Right hand, and
multip^^ every (...) the Multiplic^nd by each Figure of the Multiplyer; (...)
in Addition) set down all that is under 10, or (...) and for every 10 carry 1
to the next place, (...) set down the Tens. The following Examples (...) to you.

654 Multiplicand, 3 Multiplyer. 1962

Now to know how much 3 times 654 is, begin thus, saying, 3 times 4 is 12, the
Figure 2 of (...) set below the Line, and bea^ the 1 of the 12 in Mind, as 1.
Next, 3 times ^ is 15, and the 1 bore in mind, mak^ 16, so 1 for 6 below the
Line, and ^ar the 10 in mind as 1; Next, I say 3 times 6 is 1^, and (...) 1 I
bor^ in mind makes 19, which I set down, and the (...) will stand as (...) the
Margin.

52 Multiplicand, 7 Multiplier, 364 Product.

Example 2. Let it be required to Multiply 52 by ^7, set them down as in
Margin, and draw (...) under them, and begin with the Multiplier, saying, 7
times 2 is 14, (...) down 4 under 7, and carry 1 (...) the next place* saying,
7 times 5 is 35, (...) ^ that I carried is 36, which set down, as you see in
the Margin, and (...) Product of this Mutiplication is (...)

Next, I will give you an Example how ^o (...) more than one ^igure. Let it
then ^e (...) to Multiply 3712 by 48. Place your Number as (...) Margin, and
proceed according to the (...) Example, saying 8 times 2 is 16, set down ^, and
carry 1 to the next place, say^^^ 8 times 1 (...) 8 and 1 that I carry is 9,
set down 9 and carry 0, saying 8 times 7 is 56. set down 6 and carry (...) (...)

And having done with the first Figure of the Multipl^er, cancel ^t with a dash
of the Pen, and proceed to the next (...) (...) (...) (...) carry is 14, which
I set down. Then (...) 2 line under them, and add these two Lines of Figures
together, (as in Addition) saying, 6 is 6, put 6 under the Line (...) then say,
8 and 9 is 17, set down ^ and carry 1, saying, 1 that I carry and ^ is 5 and ^
(...) set down 1, and carry 1, saying, 1 that I carry and 8 is 9, 9 and 9 is
18, set down ^, and carry 1, ^ that I carry and 4 i^ 5, and 2 is 7, which set
down, and go to the next, where I find only 1, which I set down, and the Work
is done, and I find the Product to be 178176.

^^^^ ^^ 29^^^ ^4^^^ 17817^

How to Prove Multiplication.
First, Cast away the Nin^^ of the Multiplic^^d (in the above example) 3712,
saying 3 and 7 is 10, cast away 9* and there remains 1; then 1 and 1 is 2, and
2 is 4, which set down at the right side of the Cross. Then

2dly. Cast away all the Nines in the Multiplier* saying, 4 and 8 is 12 cast
away 9 and there remains 3, which place on the le^t side on the Cross* Then.

^

^, Then 6 and 6 is 12, Cast away 9* and there remains 3, which (...) at the
(...) of the Cross* and if the top Figure and the (...) be alike, it shows that
your Multiplication is truly performed.

This is the common way to, Prove Multiplication; but the most certain proof is
by Division, as I will hereafter show you.

(...) performed by Multiplication.
Q* 1 If a p^^ce of Land be 236 Perches long and 18^ Perches br^^d, how many
square Perches are contained therein? Multiply 236 the length, by 182 the
breadth, the Product is 42952. and so many square Perches are contained in such
a p^^ce of Land.

Qu. 2. There are 365 Days in a Year, and in every Day 24 hours* How many Hours
(...) i^ a Year? Multiply 365 the number of Days, (...) 24, the number of
Hours, the Product is 8760, and so many hours there be in a Year.

Qu, 3 From New York to Philadelphia it is accounted 102 Miles. How many Yards
is it from New York to Philadelphia? Multiply 1760 the number of Yards
contained in one Mile) by 102, the Product is 12120. And so many Yards there is
between New York and Philadelphia.

Of Division.
DIvision is just the contrary to Multiplication; for this turns small
Denominations to greater, as Multiplication turns greater to smaller. And as
Multiplication is a Compendi^m of many Additions; so Division is but a
Compendium of many Substractions.

And as I told you before, that the best Proof of Multiplication was by
Division, so I here tell you, that the best Proof of Division is by
Multiplication* as I shall, hereafter show you.

In this Rule of Division, you must Observe,

1. The Dividend, or Sum to be Divided.

2. The Divisor, or Sum by which we Divide.

3. The Quotient, which is the Sum Produced. And

4. the Remainder, which is always less than the Divison*

There are several Ways of Dividing one Number by another, but I shall only
insert one, which is plainer than Cancelli^^ and shorter, and is the way now
commonly practiced, viz.

This way of Division is thus set down.

^

Having thus set down your Sums in order, Consider with your self how often
times 4 you can have in 1, but now because 1 is less than 4 you must take the
next figure with it, and Consider how often times 4 is contained in 12, which
it 3 times, set 3 in the Quotient, then Multiply the Divisor by the Quotient,
the Product is 1^, which Substract from the Dividend, and there Remains 0.

Next, let it be required to Divide. 37642 by 7.

7 37642 5377 ^6 54 52 3

Having made a crooked line at each end of the Dividend, (to separate it from
the Divisor and Quotient,) make a point or prick under 7 in the Dividend (not
under 3, because you cannot take the Divisor from the 3) and say; how often is
7 (the Divisor) contained in 37, the first Branch toward the left hand of the
Dividend? The Answer is, 5 times, which (5) put in the Quotient, and Multiply
the Divisor thereby, saying 5 times 7 is 35, which deduct from the said 37, and
put the Remainder, which is 2, under a line; as in the Example; Then making a
prick under the 6 ( as a distinguishing Mark, that no figure may be brought
down twice) place it to the Right Hand of the Remainer, 2, and ask how often 7
is contained in 26? the Answer is 3 times; which put in the Quotient, (as
before) multiplying the Divisor thereby: as 3 times 7 is 21, from 26 and there
remains ^, which put under the 6, (drawing a line between the 26 and 5) Then
make a prick under the next Figure, toward the right hand, in the Dividend;
viz. under 4, and place it to the right hand of the Remainder 5, making it 54,
and ask how often the Divisor, 7, can be had in 54? Answer, 7 times; which put
in the Quotient, and say 5 times 7 is 49, from 54, and there rests 5; which put
under a line, a^ before. Lastly, make a prick under the 2 in the Dividend, and
place it to the Right Hand of the 5, and ask how often the Divisor 7 can be had
in 52? the answer is, 7 times, which put in the Quotient, and Multiply the
Divisor thereby* saying, 7 times 7 is 49; which deduct from the 52, and the
Remainer is 3; and you have no more Figures in the Dividend, So the Work is
finished; and I find that 5377 is one seventh part of ^^ (...) and 3 over.

2. (...) 5152 l. to be divided betwixt 7 men; the Question is, how much each
man must have?

^

First, set the Numbers down as you see in the Margent, and because 7 ( the
Divisor) is greater than 5 ( the first figure of the Dividend) make a prick
under the second Figure, viz. under 1. 2 dly, Ask how many times 7 can I have
in 51? I can have 7 times, therefore I put 7 in the Quotient, and Multiply 7 (
the Divisor) by 7 ( the Quotient) the Product will be 49, which I set under 51.
Then Subtract 42 from 51, and there remains 2; which I set under 9, and draw a
line under it.

3 die; Make a prick under 5 ( the third figure in the Dividend) and bring that
Figure 5 down to 2 ( the first Remainder,) making it 25, Then ask, How many
times 7 can I have in 25? Answ 3 times; I set 3 in the Quotient, and Multiply
(the Divisor) 7 by it, saying 3 times 7 is 21 ( for the 2 d Product) which set
under 25. and Substract 21 from 25, and there remains, 4, which I set under 21,
and draw a line under it.

4 thly, Make a prick under ^ ( the last figure of the Divid^^d) and bring that
^igure 2 down to the 2 d Remainder, 4, which makes it 42. (...) I ask how many
times 7 (the Divisor) I can have in 42? 'twill be 6 times; I set 6 in the
Quotient, and Multiply (the Divisor) ^7 by i^, saying, 6 times 7 is 42 ( for
the 3 d Product) which set under 42, and substract 1 from the other, 42 from
42, the Remainber will be ^00. So is this Division ended, and the Quotient
shows that each man's part or share is just 736 l.

3. Let it be required to Divide 21 1048 by 37.

Set down the Numbers, as (...) the Margin, and seeing that 37 (the Divisor) is
greater than 21 (the two first figures of the Dividend) I make a prick under 1,
the third Figure. Then I seek how many times 37 can have in 211, or how many
times 3 can I have in 21? I can have it 5 times, wherefore I put 3 in the
Quotient, and multiply 37 the Divisor by 5, the Product will be 185, which I
set under 211, and substract 1^5 form 211, and there remains 26, which I set
under it. See the Operation,

2 dly. I make a prick under 0, and bring that 0 down to 26, making it 2^^,
then I seek how many times 37 I can have in 260 (or how many times 3 in 26?) I
find 7 times, and therefore I set 7 in the Quotient, and Multiply 37 by 7; the
Product is 259, which I set under 260, and substract it, the Remainder will be
1.

^

4 thly, I make a prick under 4, and bring it down to (...) which makes it 14,
I draw a line under it, and seek how many times 37 I can have in 14; but now
the Remainder being less than the Divisor, I can have it never a time and
therefore I put a ^, in the Quotient. And,

4 thly, I make a prick under 8 (the last figure in the Dividend) and bring
that 8 down to 14, making it 148 Then I seek how many times 37 I can have in
148 (or how many times 3 in 14) I find 4 times, which I put in the Quotient,
and multiply 37 (the Divisor) by 4, and the Product will be 148, which set
under 148, and substracting it there from, there remains, 0. And the Division
is ended.

Now if you would prove whether your Division be truly wrought, or not,
Multiply the Quotient. 5704 By the Divisor, 37 The Product will be equal to the
Dividend, 21104^

Which proves your Division to be truly preformed.

Of Reduction.
ALthough Reduction be no Rule of it self, but merely wrought by Multiplication
and Division, yet I shall ^ot omit it, because it is useful and usually
practiced. To deliver some what concerning it, you must understand that
Reduction teaches how to bring all Great Denominations into Smaller, and Small
into Greater.

First, All Great Denominations are brought into small by Multiplication; as.

Pounds Multiplied by 20 are Shillings.

Shillings Multiplied by 12 are Pence.

Pence Multiplied by 2 are Half pence*

Pence Multiplied by 4 are Farthings,

Pounds Multiplied by 240 are Pence,

Pounds Multiplied by 480 are Half pen^^,

Pounds Multiplied by ^60 are Farthings.

Secondly all small Names are brought into great by Division, as

(...) Divided by 20, are Pounds,

(...) 1^, are Shillings,

(...) pence Divided by ^ are Pence,

^^rthings Divided* by 4, are Pence,

Pence Divided by 240 are Pounds,

Half pence Divided by 480, are Pound^*

Farthings Divided by 960, are Pounds*

Example 1. Let it be asked how many Shillings, (...) and Farthings there are
in 1000 ^* 11 s. 7 d.

^

In like manner you may Reduce all sorts of Numbers be they Weights, Measures,
Time, or the like, having special regard to observe how many of the one
Denomination do make one of the other, and so multiply or divide as before
directed.

Example 2. In 960556 Farthings how ^^ny Pence, Shillings and Pounds.

^

Here you see, ^ ^^, That great Denominations are brought into small (as
Pounds, Shilling^ and Pence into Farthings) by Multiplication. And 2 dly, By
the second Example, you see how small Denominations are brought into great (as
Shillings, Pence and Farthings into Pounds) by Divisor. And 3 dly, you see how
Multiplication and Division prove (...) other.

Let this (...) for Reduction. Next, we come to the Rule of Three.

The Rule of Three.
THE Rule of Three is commonly called The Golden Rule; and indeed it may
rightly be so termed; for as Gold (...) all other Metals, so does this Rule all
others in Arithmetic.

Now for your better Information concerning it, you must observe, that there
are Three Numbers known, by which a Fourth (that is unknown) may be found out,
which bears like proportion to the third, as the second does to the first.

Here also is to be noted, That if your Sums consist of sundry Denominations*
the the first and third Number must be of (...) same Denomination, as also the
fourth and the second* As thus If the first number be Yards, the third likewise
must be Yards; if the second be Pence, then the fourth must be Pence also

But the greatest difficulty lies in the stating the Question.

Therefore observe, first, That what you desire to know, or to be resolved in
the Question, must be your Third Number: and you have commonly these Words
before it, as What cost? How long? How broad? How much? How deep? etc.

2. Your Question being stated, bring your first and third Numbers into one
Denomination.

3. Being your second into the least Name mentioned* (...) few as you desire
the Question to be answered in.

4. Observe whether your Third Number r^^^ires More or Less; if More, then
multiply the middle Number by the greater of the two (...), and divide by the
lesser, and the Quotient answerth the Question.

But if it require Less, ^hen multiply the Middle Number by the lesser of the
two Extremes, and divide by the greater.

These two-Word [ More] or [ Less] being well observed, the Scholar will
understand what he does, (...) not to make two distinct Rules of three, as most
do.

As for Example,

If 4 (...) of Cloth cost 12 s. What will 6 Yards cost?

Here the two numbers of one kind are Four and Six, ( viz, they both (...) so
many Yards) and (...) Shillings in the same kind with the number ^ought; for
the price of six Yards is sought.

Having placed my Numbers, I Multiply my second number (12) by the third Number
6 and the Product is 72, which I divide by the first Number 4, and the Q^^^ient
is 18, which shows that 6 Yards will cost 18 shilling^* See the Operation.

If 4 Yards cost 12 s. What 6 Yards (...)

^

Again, If 7 C. [7 (...)] of P^pper cost ^^ ^. How much will 16 C. ^^st?

To Resolve which question, I consider that the Demand lying upon 16 C. it must
be the third Number, and that of the same ^^nd with (...) must be the first,
viz* 7 C. and ^^ l, (being the same kind with the number ^ought) must be the
second number in the Question, Wherefore I place down my Numbers, and work as
before thus,

^

By this you see that 16 C. of Peppe^ will cost 48 Pounds*

If 20 Sheep cost 13 l. ^3 s. 4 d. (...) I^ that for every Sheep.

Turn the Shillings and Pounds in (...), That Multiply 13 s. by 12 the Product
is 156 And 13 l by 24^* the Product is 3120 To which add the 4 d. 4 (...) 3280

Then the Question (...) If 20 Sheep cost 32^0 Pence, What will 1 Sheep cost?

^

Every Sheep will cost 146 Pence, which Pen^e being divided by 12 produces 13
^. ^ d. and so much each Sheep does cost.

Qu. But sometimes after the Division is ended, there is something remains.
What must be done with it?

Answ. You must Multiply what so remains by the part of the next inferior
Denomination, that are equal to an (...) of the second ^^mber in the Question,
and the Quotient is of the (...) Denomination which the pa^^ by watch you
multiplier (...) Remainder, and is part of the Fourth Number which is sought*

Again, If any thing yet remain after this last Division i^ ended, multiply it
by the part of the next Inferior Denominati^n, equal to an (...) of the last
Quotient, and divide the Product by the same Divisor, viz. the first Number in
the Question, and the Qu^tient is still of the (...) Denomination with your
Multiplyer. Follow this Method (...) you have reduced your Remainder into the
lowest Denomination.

An Example o^ two will make this Rule very plain, which ^ake as follows,

If 13 Yards cost 21 ^* what cost 27 Yards.

^

And there is yet a Remainder of 8 which multiply by 20 s* because the last
Quotient was Pounds, and the Product is 160, which I divide by 13 (the first
Number in the Question) and in quotes 12, which are 12 s,

And there is yet a Remainder of 4, which I multiply by 12 d, because the last
Quotient was shillings and the Product is 48, which I divide by 13 the first
number, and the Quoti^^^ is 3 d,

But there is yet a Remainder of 9, what must be done with it? I multiply 9 by
4 farthings, because the last Quotient was Pence, the Product is 36, which I
divide by 13, the Quotient is 2 farthings,

And there is yet a Remainder of 10, but may be omitted, because it is but 10
thirteenth* of a Farthing,

And thus it appears, that if 13 Yards of Cloth cost 12 l, then 27 Yards of
same will Cost 46 l, 12 s, 3 d, 2 qrs, and 10 13 ths of a Farthing*

^

You see (...) in the Question, the Third Number requires [ less.] and
therefore you must multiply the middle Number by the Lesser of the two extremes.

If ^ Man will be finishing a piece of Work in ^0 Days, How long will ^^ Men be
doing the same?

This Question is stated four several ways by which (...) one is a proof of the
other,

Set the Operation, as follows, ^

A Table for Buying and Solding any thing by the Hundred.
d. q. l. s. d. 0 1 0 02 4 0 2 0 04 8 0 3 0 07 0 1 0 0 09 4 1 1 0 11 8 1 2 0 14
0 1 3 0 16 4 ^ 0 0 18 8 2 1 1 01 0 2 2 1 03 4 2 3 1 05 ^ 3 0 1 08 4 3 1 1 10 4
3 2 1 12 ^ 3 ^ 1 15 0 ^ 0 1 17 4 ^ 1 1 16 8 4 2 2 02 0 4 3 2 04 4 5 0 2 06 ^ 5
1 2 09 0 5 ^ ^ 11 4 5 3 2 13 ^ 6 0 2 16 0 6 1 2 18 4 6 2 3 00 8 6 3 3 03 0 7 0
3 05 4 7 1 3 07 8 7 2 3 10 0 7 3 3 12 4 8 0 3 14 8 d* q* l. s. d. 3 1 3 17 0 0
^ 3 19 4 0 3 4 0^ 8 0 0 4 04 0 ^ 1 4 06 4 ^ 2 4 08 8 9 3 4 11 0 10 0 4 13 4 10
1 4 15 8 10 2 4 18 0 10 3 5 00 4 11 0 5 02 8 11 1 5 ^5 0 11 2 5 07 4 11 3 5 09
8 12 0 5 12 0 12 1 5 14 4 12 2 5 16 8 12 3 5 19 0 ^3 0 6 01 4 13 1 6 03 8 13 2
6 06 0 13 3 6 08 4 14 0 6 10 8 14 1 6 13 0 14 2 6 15 4 14 3 6 17 8 15 0 7 00 0
15 1 7 02 4 15 2 7 04 ^ 15 3 ^ 07 0 16 0 7 09 4

IF you ^^y any thing by the hundred, (that is, 112 l.) you may by th^^ Table
know what it cost by the Pound; or* if you buy any Commodity at so much the
Pound, by this Table you may find how much (...) is by the Hundred.

Example 1

At 8 d. 3 qr. a Pound what is that by the great Hundred*

Look in the first Colume of the Table for 8 d. 3 qr. and right against (...)
in the 2d Colume you will find 4 l. 1 s. 8 d. and so much it is by the Hundred.

Again, If a Hundred weight cost 3 ^* 7 s. 8 d what is that by the Pound?

Look in the Table for 3 l. 7 s. ^ d* i^ the ^d Column, and right against it in
the ^st Column, you shall find 7 d. 1 qr and so much it is by the Pound.

Example ^^.

One buys a Hundred Weight of a Commodity for 4 l. 1 s, ^d. which ^e retails
again at 10 d. the Pound, what does be get by Selling a Hundred Weight.

A hundred Weight at 10 d. the Pound* comes to 4 l. 13 s. 4 d from which take 4
l. 1 s. 8 d. there remains 11 s. ^ d. and so much does the Retailer gain.

The use of the following Table of square Timber Measure.
THe Number of Inches, (or half Inches, which are signified by the blanks, as
supposing your Timber to be 18 Inches and a half square, look for 18, the Blank
under it signifies 18 and an half) being known of a square piece of Timber,
enter the same in the 1 st, or 5 th, or 8 th Column of the Table, and against
it is the Feet, Inches and 50 th parts of an Inch that makes a Foot solid, and
being thus taken out of the Table between a pair of Compasses, will readily
show the content of a piece of Timber squared*

In. (...). Foot. Inch. 50 part. In. Squa. Inch. 50 part. In. Squa. Inch. 50
part. 2 36 0 00 12 3 21 3 46 23 0 35 12 12 00 3 37 3 16 0 00 11 3 22 3 28 11 9
02 13 10 32 3 20 4 9 0 00 9 25 23 3 13 7 1 17 14 8 41 3 9 5 5 9 6 8 11 24 3 00
4 9 6 15 7 34 2 44 6 4 0 00 7 6 25 2 38 3 4 45 16 6 37 2 33 7 2 11 13 6 17 26 2
28 2 6 36 17 5 49 2 23 8 2 3 00 5 35 27 2 18 1 11 46 18 5 17 2 14 9 1 9 17 5 3
28 2 10 1 7 7 19 4 40 2 6 10 1 5 14 4 31 29 2 2 1 3 34 20 4 17 1 49 11 1 2 14 4
6 30 1 46

A Table showing how many Inches in length will make a Foot Solid of a Round
Piece o^ Timber, the Girt being known, from one Foot to six.

(...). Inch (...)* Part^, Co^^. Inch Inche^* 50 Parts. Com. Inch. Inches. 50
Parts. 12 150 40 33 19 46 54 0^ 21 13 128 24 34 18 39 55 07 09 14 110 39 35 17
37 56 06 46 15 94 15 36 16 38 57 06 34 16 84 41 37 15 43 58 06 22 17 75 07 3^
15 02 59 06 12 18 67 21 39 14 14 60 06 03 19 60 07 40 13 29 61 05 43 20 ^^ 14
41 12 46 6^ 05 32 21 49 12 42 12 15 63 05 24 22 44 43 43 11 37 64 05 15 23 40
45 44 11 16 65 05 07 24 37 35 45 10 37 66 04 49 25 34 37 46 10 13 67 04 42 26
32 06 47 9 41 68 04 35 ^^ 29 40 48 9 21 69 04 28 28 27 35 49 9 02 70 04 22 29
25 41 50 8 34 71 04 16 30 24 06 51 8 17 72 04 10 3^ 22 30 52 8 01 32 21 11 53 7
37

The Use of the Table of Round Timber-Measure.
Inches Inches, 10 ^ar 1 144 0 2 72 0 3 48 0 4 36 0 5 38 8 6 24 0 7 20 6 8 18 0
9 16 0 10 14 4 11 1^ 1 12 12 0 13 21 1 14 10 0 15 9 6 16 9 0 17 8 5 18 8 9 19 7
6 20 7 ^ 21 6 8 22 6 5 23 6 3 24 6 0 25 5 8 26 5 5 27 5 3 28 5 1 29 4 9 30 4 8

Example,

Suppose a Board be 10 Inches Broad, How much thereof in (...) will make a
Foot? Look for 10 in the first Colume and over against the same is 14 Inches,
and 4 10 th parts, which shows, tha^ fourteen Inches and almost half an ^^ch
makes a Foot.

Paving, Painting and Plai^tering are measured by the Yard Square, being 9
square F^^t. The common way is no multiply the length by the breadth* in Feet
and Inches, the Product thereof divide by 144, for Inches, ^o bring it into
Feet.

A Court being paved, whose length is 16 Feet 4 Inches, and the Breadth (...)
Feet 8 Inches, How many square Yards does it contain? The length in Inches is
196, the breadth ^5^, which being Multiplied produce ^^ (...) ^^ches square,
which divide by 14^, the Quotient will will be 206 and 8 9 ths F^^t* which
divide again by 9, the Quotient will be 22 and 8 9 ths Yards square in the said
Court. If there had been 1^ Inches more, there would have been just 23 Yards
Square.

The same Methods is to (...) observed in Measuring of Land* As will hereafter
appear.

TO measure by Guater's Chain, you must observe. (...) this Chain is 4 Poles in
length, or 22 Yards, or 66 Feet, (...) 792 Inches. It is divided into 100
Links, at every 10 Links is a Brass Ring, for the more ready counting in
Measuring, so that its no matter which end of the Chain goes foremost. But he
that draws the Chain should carry in his hand ten small sticks to stick in the
ground at every Chain's length, and he that follows the Chain should gather up
the sticks.

Suppose the Length of a piece of ground be 9 Chains 50 Links, the Breadth 6
Chains 25 Links, How many Acres, Rods and Poles is there in this piece of
Ground?

^

Set the Numbers down, as here in the Margent, drawing a Line under them, Then
Multiply one by the other, and the Product will be 593750. From which Product
you must always cut off the five last Figures toward the right hand, with a
dash of the Pen; then will the Product stand thus, 5^93750, So is the 5 toward
the left hand complete Acres, and the 93750 hundred thousand parts of an Acre.
Which 93750 being Multiplied by 4, ( the number of Rods in an Acre) the Product
will be 375000. From which Product cut off 5 Figure toward the right hand, as
before, and it will stand thus, 3l75000: So is the 3 toward the left hand
complete Rods, and the 75000 hundred thousand parts of a Rod; which being
Multiplied by 40 ( the Number of Perches in a Rod) the Product will be 3000000;
from which I cut off the five last Figures toward the Right hand, and the
Product will stand thus, 30l00000, and the 30 toward the left hand is the
Number of Perches. And so the Arrea or Content of the whole p^^ce will be 5
Acres, 3 Ro^s, and 30 Perches.

Note, That if any length or breadth taken by the Chain the Links be under
(...), add a Cipher to the left hand thereof, before you begin to Multiply. And
whereas there was nothing but Ciphers ^^t off from the 30 Poles (above) but if
they had been Figures, as suppose 34762, there would want of a Pole so much as
that S^m wants of 100000.

Of G^aging of Vessels.
THe Art of Guaging is little differen^ from the measuring of Timber; for as a
Foot of Timber is 1728 Cubical or Square Inches, and as often as 1728 Inches
are found in a Piece of Timber (be it Round or Square) SO many Foot of Timber
is contained in the Piece.

So in the Art of Guaging* the Gallon of Ale and Beer is agreed on to be 282
Cubical Inches, and the Wine Gallon 23^, and the Gallon of Dry Measure 272
Inches.

Therefore so often ^* 282 square Inches are contained in ^ay Vessel, round or
square, so many Gallon of Ale or Beer the said Vessel will hold. The same is to
be observed in Wine and Dry Measure, etc.

Note, That every Cubical Foot may contain 6 Gallons and almost a Pint of Al^
or Beer.

Of Wine, 7 Gallons 2 Quarts, and almost a Pint.

A C^bical Foot of Dry-Measure may contain 6 Gallons, and a (...) above half a
Gallon.

Suppose there is a square (...) ^e Measured, in length ^05 Inches. in breadth
^6, and in depth 46 Inches, How many Square Inches is therein? as also how many
Gall^ns or Bar^^is?

Multiply the Dimensions one in another, as is showed i^ the first Example in
Square-Timber Measure, and the last Product given 367080 inches in the (...):
Which divide by 282, or Multiply by this Number 35461, a^ in this Example.

^

And from this Product out off 7 figures ( always) or places to the Right Hand,
(which are the parts of a Gallon) and those on the Left Hand are Gallons, as in
this Example is (...) Gallons.

Note, That the Parts of a Gallon is not considerable, if there happen to be a
Cipher next the Gallons: But in the above is the Figure 7, which is the 7 ^e^th
Parts of aGallon; that is if a Gallon was divided into ten Parts, that is 7
par^s ^hereof: or if the Figure 5 had been in the place of 7, it had been half
a Gallon, because 5 is the half of 1^; or if the 70 next the Gallons had been
75, (...) had been th^^e quarters of a Gallon, because 75 is three quarters of
a Hundred, etc.

Lastly, Divide 1301 Gallons, so cut off, by 36, (the Gallon in a Barrels of
Beer, or by 32 in a Barrel of Al^) and the Quotien^ gives 36 Barrels, of Beer,
and 5 Gallons remaining, and near three quarters of a Gallon.

(...) to G^age a round Tun, Tub or Furnace.

First, If your Tun, or the like, be of one Bigness or Breadth, both at top and
bottom, and the Cube Inches therein contained, and reduce into Gallons, as
before.

But if it be narrower at the Top than at the Bottom, or (...), take the
Breadth or Diameter of the Tun, a little above the middle of it, that is, next
the widest end, if it be Taper.

HEre follows a Table showing the Interest due upon any (...) of Money, from
One Pound to One Hundred Pounds, for 2, 4, 6, and 12 Month, at 8 per Cent.

The Use of the Table.
(...) the Principal in the first Colume, and against it is the (...) for 2, 4,
6, and 12 Months.

If you desire to know the Interest for any (...) not express in the Table, you
must either add to or substract from the Time that you desire to know. As,
suppos^^^ (...) ^esire to know the (...) of ^^ l. for six Months. (...)
Interest of a Months and ^ Months together, and the Product is the (...).

A Table of Interest, at 8 per Cent, from 20 s. to 100 l.
Pounds 2 Mon. 4 Mon. 6 Mon. 12* Mon. s. d. q. s. d. q. s. d. q. s. d. q. 1 0 ^
^ 0 6 1 0 ^ 2 1 7 0 2 0 ^ ^ 1 6 3 1 ^ 0 ^ 2 1 3 0 ^ 2 1 7 0 2 4 3 4 9 2 4 1 ^ 3
2 1 1 3 2 1 6 4 3 5 1 4 0 2 8 0 4 0 0 ^ 0 0 6 1 7 0 3 2 1 4 9 2 9 7 0 7 1 10 1
^ 8 3 5 7 ^^ 11 2 1 8 2 1 2 4 3 0 6 4 3 12 9 2 9 2 4 3 4 9 2 7 ^ 1 14 4 3 l. s.
d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 10 0 2 8 0 5 4 0 8 0 0 16 0 20 0 5 4 0 10 8 0 16
0 1 12 0 30 0 8 0 0 16 ^ 1 4 0 2 8 0 40 0 10 8 1 ^ 4 1 12 0 3 4 0 50 0 13 4 1 6
8 2 0 0 4 ^ ^ 60 0 16 0 1 12 0 2 8 0 4 ^^ 0 70 0 18 8 1 17 4 2 16 0 5 12 0 80 1
^ 4 2 2 0 3 4 0 6 8 0 90 1 4 0 2 8 0 3 12 0 7 4 0 100 1 6 8 2 ^ 4 4 0 0 8 0 0

The Rates of Post-Letters in North America, settled by Act of Parliament.
ALL single Letters passing from London, pays 12 d. Pacquets 6 s. Per Ounce.

From London to New York, 1 s. Pacquets 4 s. per Ouz.

From New York to Newport, Boston, Portsmouth, or to Annapolis in Maryland, and
from said Places to New York, ^ s. Pacq^e^s 4 s. per Ounce.

From New York to Perth-Amboy, ^or from or to any (...) Place not exceeding 100
Miles, 6 ^* Pacquets 2 s. per Ounce.

From Perth-Amboy to Burlingt^n, or any other Place not exceeding 60 Miles, 4
d. Pacqu^ts 1 s. 4 d. per Ounce.

From New York to New London, and to Philadelphia, and (...), 9 d. Pacquets 3
s. per Ounce.

From New York to Salem, Ipswich and Piscattaway, or to Williams-Burgh in
Virginia, 15 d. Pacquets 5 s. per Oun.

From New York to Charlestown in Carolina, 18 d. P^cquets 6 s. per Ounce.

From any part of the West Indies to New York, or from or (...) any the Places
aforesaid, not exceeding 60 Miles, 4 d. Pacquets 16 d. per Ounce.

And all Letters and Pacquets of Letters directed to or from on Board any Ship
in any Port within his Majesty's Dominions, shall pay 1 d. over and above the
Rates above specified.

N.E. The Post to pay nothing for passing ^erries in North America.

A Table of interest, at ^ix per Cent. from 20 s. To 100 l.
Pound^ 2 Mon. 4 Mon. 6 Mon. 12 Mon s. d. q. s. d. q. s. d. q. s. d. q. 1 0 2 2
0 5 0 0 7 1 1 2 2 2 0 4 3 0 9 2 1 2 2 2 4 3 3 0 7 1 1 2 2 1 9 2 3 7 1 4 ^ 9 2 1
7 0 2 4 3 4 9 2 ^ ^ ^ 0 2 0 0 3 0 0 6 0 0 6 ^ ^ ^ 2 5 0 3 7 1 7 2 2 7 ^ 4 3 2 9
2 4 2 2 8 4 3 8 1 7 1 3 2 2 4 9 2 9 7 1 9 1 9 2 3 7 0 5 4 3 10 9 2 l. s. d. l.
s. d l. s. d. l. s. d. 10 0 2 0 0 4 0 0 6 0 0 12 0 20 0 4 0 0 8 0 0 12 0 1 4 0
30 0 6 0 0 12 0 0 18 0 1 16 0 40 0 8 0 0 16 0 1 4 0 2 8 0 50 0 10 0 1 0 0 1 10
0 3 0 0 60 0 12 0 1 4 0 1 16 0 3 12 0 70 0 14 0 1 8 0 2 2 0 4 4 0 80 0 16 0 1
12 0 2 8 0 4 16 0 90 0 18 0 1 16 0 2 14 0 5 8 0 100 1 0 0 2 0 0 3 0 0 6 0 0

IF you would know the Interest of 20 Pounds, for 2 Months, 4 Months; 6 Months,
or 12 Months. Look for 20 Pounds in the ^st Colume, and in the next Colume
under 2 Months is 4 s* for 4 Months is 8 s* for 6 Months is 12 s. and for 12
Months is 1 l. 4 s. and so of all the ^est.

Of Women, Children and Servants.
BY the (...) of England, a Woman at her Marriage becomes wholly the Man's,
together with all her moveable Goods; and if Goods be given to a Married Woman,
they all immediately become her Husbands: She cannot Let, Set, Sell* Give away
or Alienate any thing without her Husbands Consent, not her very Apparel, which
at her Husbands decease goes to the Executor or Administrator of her Husband
(excepting her necessary (...)) which* with the Consent of her Husband she may
give by Will, no^ otherwise by ou^ English Laws.

The Wife, after her Husbands Death, (having no Jointure settled before
Marriage) may Challenge the Third part of his Yearly Rents and Free-Lands for
her Life, and also the Thirds of the Rents and Free-Lands which he sold in his
Lifetime, if she did not consent to the same by a Fine; but she can claim no
Thirds of such Lands as her Husband buys* when he has Sold them again, and
dies, if he puts another Persons Name in the Deed, besides himself, when he
bought those Lands. But if her Husband dye without a Will in Writing (leaving
no Child) she may claim the Thirds, ((...) above) and the Third Part of his
Goo^s for ever, and the other Two Thirds of his Goods go to the next Kindred.

But if she be the Wife of a Freeman of the City of London (he dying without
Will, leaving no Child, as before) (...) will Challenge by Law, Three Parts of
Four of her Husbands Goods and Chattles, and one Third of the Profits of (...)
Free Lands for Life, the Goods for ever.

The Husband must answer for his Wifes Faults, if (...) Wrong another by her
Tongue, or by Trespass, he (...) make Satisfaction; and pay the Debts that she
contracted* except ^e have given public Notice that they shall not (...) Her.

A Woman cannot hope to have the Thirds of her Husbands Land, which he
Mortgaged before Marriage, until the (...) paid, and Mortgage be Cancelled.

If a Man and Wi^e are joint Purchasers of Land, to them and their Heirs, and
the Husband dies without Will, the Wife may sell the Land without the consent
of their Children.

The Woman that kills her Husband is to be burnt alive.

A Wife cannot be a Witness for or against her Husband, they two being so much
One.

If a Woman brings forth a Child begotten by a former Husband (or by any other)
before Marriage, but born after Marriage (...) the present Husband, this la^^er
must own the Child, (...) Child shall be Heir at Law.

If a (...) ^orth a Child during her Husbands long Absence, (...) be for some
years, yet if he have lived all the time within this Island ( England) he must
Father that Child; and (...) that Child be her first born Son, he shall inherit
that Husbands Estate, if entailed, or left without Will.

A Woman that does not hear of her Husband for Seven Years together, may Marry
another Man

The Woman upon Marriage loses not only the Power over her Person, and her
Will, and the Property of her Goods, but her very Name, and her own is wholly
laid aside, which is not observed in France and other Countries.

But then, as the Wife does participate of her Husbands Name, so likewise of
his Condition: If he be a Duke, she is a Duchess; if he be a Knight, she is a
Lady; if he of an Alien be made a Denizon, she is, ipso^ facto, so too. If a
^ree Man Marry a Bond Woman, she is also Free during the Coverture* And such is
the good Nature of English Men toward their Wives, such is their Tenderness
and Respect, that they put them to do Drudgery no^ Hardship, as in some other
Countries, but on the contrary, give them the Right Hand every where, and the
Uppermost Place a^ Table and elsewhere. So that (generally speaking) English
Women are the most happy Women in the World.

A Man and his Wife are so fast joined by our Law, that they may not be wholly
parted by our Law, but only by Sentence of a Judge, for Adul^^y, etc.

Of Children.
AS Husbands have an absolute Authority over their Wives and Estates, so
Ea^hers have a more absolute Authority over Children. A Father may give all his
Estate ((...) entailed) to any one Child, (or to any other Person) and none to
the rest of his Children. The Consideration of which keeps some Children in Awe.

A Son, at the Age of 14 may choose his Guardian, may be an Executor, may
consent to Marriage (if he be not an Apprentice) may, by Will, give his Goods
and Chattles, and may Covenant and become Bound for Necessaries, as Food,
Raiment, Schooling, etc.

At 21 he is said to be of full Age, may then make any Contract, may sell
Lands, and may sit in Parliament, which in other Countries he cannot do till
the Age of 25.

A Daughter at 7 years may consent to Marriage, though she may afterward
di^^ent. At At 9 she may consent to a Jointure.

At 12 she is able to Confirm her former Consent to Marriage, and if at that
Age she dissent no^, she is bound: She may at that Age bequ^ath her Goods by
Will, become Bound for Necessaries, etc.

At the Age of 13 she may receive her Lands into her own Possession. At 21 she
may Let, Sell or bequeath her Lands by Will.

The Eldest Son Inherits all his Fathers Lands (if the Father dye without a
Will) and to the Younger Children are disposed Goods and Chattles; and because
they have no Lands, they are commonly put out to learn some Profession or Trade.

If there be no Son, the Lands, as well as Goods, are equally divided amongst
the Daughters.

A man Marrying a Wife having Land, and she dies, leaving a Child that is heard
to Cry, and dies, the Man shall have the Lands for his Life. This is called
The Court^^^e of England.

Of Servants.
SErvants in the Sax^n Times were properly Slave^, and very many Instances of
their Manumission are still extant; but now Slavery is entirely taken away, and
every Servant Man or Woman (excepting Apprentices, who are for a Term of Years)
are properly hired Servants, commonly for a Year, at the end whereof they be
free, giving Warning three Months before, and may hire themselves to other
Masters, only it is accounted unfriendly to take another Servant before leave
given by his or her former Master.

All Servants are subject to be corrected by their Masters or Mistresses, and
Resistance in a Servant is punished with a severe Penalty.

Formerly Servants were bought and sold in the Markets in England, like as we
buy and sell Negro Salves here in America, but now (since Christianity
prevailed, if a Foreign Slave is brought into England, is upon landing, ipso
facto, free from Slavery, but not from ordinary Service.

Of Religion.
Christianity was very Early Planted in England, but when or by Whom is
uncertain, probably in the beginning of the second Century. In Tertullians
Time, even that part of Britain which did not own the Roman Yoke, submitted to
the Name of Christ.

The British Church, upon the I^asion of the Saxons, was, with its People,
driven into the Western Parts, as Wales, Gloucest^rshire* Somersetshire, etc.
where it continued. When Augustine the Monk converted Ethelber^, King of Kent,
and his People to Christianity (in the year (...) Christ 59^^) by Order of his
Master Pope Gregory the Great, he (...) to bring the British Clergy to own the
Popes Authority, and himself as their Archbishop, which they refusing to do,
the Saxons, at his In^tigation, ^ell upon the British Nation, and killed 1200
Monks and Priests. (...),

The Saxons, and after them the Normans, owned five Pop^s Authority; and after
King John had basely subjected his Crown to the Pope, England was, till the
Reformation, one of the Tamest Countries that any where submitted to the Romans
Yo^e. Our Parliaments indeed, did many Times exert themselves vigorously, but
still the Papal Yoke lay heavy upon the Shoulders of the whole Nation, till
Henry the Eighths Time, when Luther's Preaching had alarmed the greatest part
of the Kingdoms of the North, and inspired them with almost an Universal
Consent to set their Conscienc^^ free from the Romish Tyranny, England joined
in with the general Torrent* And it was time for England to look about them,
when Bigotry had so far prevailed in the Nation, that the lazy Monks and
Priests by their pretended Piety, had so far prevailed upon the foolish People
as (...) engross unto their hands the greatest part of the Riches of the
Nation: for in King Henry the VIIIs Time, when he threw off the Popes
Authority, the Poor Humble Clergy were possessed of but Fourteen Millions, One
Hundred and One Thousand, Five Hundred Fifty Eight Pounds per Annum, which is
in other words, that the Priests were Masters of above Fourteen parts of Twenty
of the Riches of the whole Nation; and the other six Parts were kindly left for
King, Lords and Commons, as does appear at large i^ a Book printed at London in
the year 1717, entitled, A Summary of all the Religious Houses in England and
Wales, And it is not only in England that the Clergy do enhance the Riches of
the World to themselves, but in all Countries where they can prevail with the
Power Secular to assist them. A fragrance instance of which we have from a
Calculation taken by the great Duke of Tuscany himself in his own Dominions,
(...) the Priesthood were found to enjoy Seventeen Parts in Twenty of the whole
Land. And from tha^ Profitable Religions (...), That to give to the Church was
Charity toward God, and such as would Atton^ for a M^ltitude of (...)* etc did
the Founder of the Order of St. Be^^et (...) himself so great Riches (though at
the same (...) the (...) Same enjoys Poverty to his Disciples,) that in his own
(...) (...) he erected Twelve Monasteries, and give himself the Humble Tale of
Patriarch of the Sacred Religion, (...) of the Sacred Monastery of Mount (...),
Duke and Prince of all Abbots and Religi^^, Vice Chancellor of the Kingdom of
^ath the S^cilys, of Jerusalem and (...), Co^^^ and Governor of C^mpania, and
Terra de (...), and of the (...) Province, Vice-Emperor and Prince of Peace.
The abovementioned Monastery of Mount Ca^^in so Renounced the World as to be
possessed of but Four (...), T^^ Dukedoms, Twenty (...), Thirty Six Cities, Two
Hundred Castles, Three Hundred Territori^s, Four Hundred and Forty Villages,
Three hundred and Six (...), Twenty Three Sea-Parts, Thirty Three Islands, Two
Hundred Mills, and One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty-Two Churches. This was their
holy Poverty. And thus you see how spiritually, the pretended Followers of St.
Peter (...) from the World, and the Pomps and Vanities thereof! These were the
humble Priests, from whom our gallant King Henry the (...) the Discipline of
Eighty Lashes, for having (like an Undutiful Son of the Church) dated to
contend in Power with Thomas a Becket, whose Stirrup he had before been obliged
to hold* whilst that Meek (...) Mounted*

When our Kings were thus managed by the Priests, it was no wonder if the
common People submitted their Necks to the same Priestly Yoke of Slavery.

And though the Reformation is now advanced, and the Eyes of People are opened,
and they have (in part) thrown off these Yok^, and Shackles in which their
Forefathers were bound, yet it is to be feared the debauched part of our
Clergy (...) the Grandeur and Luxury in which the Romish Clergy swin, are
longing after these (...) of Egypt, and (...) this Papal Power and Wealth,
which would set them (...) are greatest Sovereigns, and cause Princes to become
the (...) or Priests, as is too manifest by their Actions of late years.

But waving this Digression, let us Return to King (...)* the 8th* who having
Abolished the (...) Suprema^^ (...) England, he ^eized upon all the Monasteries
and Religious Houses, and divided their Lands amongst the (...) Papist, and the
Reformation went on but slowly; but in King Edward the sixths Reign it gained
more ground, and the Superstitions of Popery were almost abolished. He dies,
and then Queen Mary coming to the Crown, Popery was again Revived, and during
the five years that she Reigned, above Five Hundred Protestants were burnt for
their (...) Conforming to Popery* She dies*

Queen Elizabeth, succeeds, and favors the Protestants, in her Reign Religion
was settled a it now continues in the National Church; Protestant Bishops were
placed in the room of Popish Bishops, and the inferior Clergy that would
Conform, (and others that were Ordained) were settled in the several Parishes
through-out England. In her Reign the Articles of Religion were appointed, a
Liturgy was Enacted to be Observed in the Church, and a Book of Canons was
(...) Forth.

In this Queen Reign, as well as in later Reigns, several other Persuasions did
arise in England, making some further Progress of Reformation, and Dissented
from the National Church. Which Dissenters now go under the Denomination of
Presbyteriant, Independents, Baptists and Quakers, who, by reason of several
Acts of Parliament chiefly (...) against the Papists, suffered great
Persecutions as several Times. But since the Happy Revolution, by an Act of the
(...) of K William and Q. Mary, his Majesty's Dissenting Subjects were Exemp^d
from the Pena^nes of certain (...) therein mentioned. So that now no Man is:
^olested upon the account of his Religion.

The Papist^ are not now very Numerous in England, those th^^ are, (...)
abound* in Lancashire, Sta^^ordshire and (...). They are generally very Zealous
in their way, and (...) intent upon gaining Pro^elites, for which reason it has
(...) thought adviscable to put some Check to their Progress, (...) they are
allowed greater Freedom than any Protestant^ (...) allowed in Roman Catholic
Countries.

The (...) and Independents, how widely soever they formerly (...) among
themselves, there is now (...) difference between them. In the Doctrinal (...)
they agree with the Church of England, as her Doctrines are set down in the 39
Articles of Religion: The Differences he chiefly in the outward Administration
of P^^lesiastical Government, viz. who shall appoint the Governors of the
Church, and what Subordination there shall be* or shall not be between them.
The Presbyteri^ns allow of no such Sub-ordination in the Person of their
Ministers; but th^^ they reach* That every Minister ought to be Obedient to the
Class under which we lives, and that the Power of Ordination ought to reside in
the Class.

The next is the Ana-baptists or Baptists, The great Constituent Doctrine of
these Men is their entire Disallowance of Infant Baptism; and in their
Baptizing of Adult Person^ they constantly make use of Dipping. In appointing
Pastors and Teachers they make use of Laying on of Hands. And some of them
observe the Jewish Sabbath.

The last society that we shall mention, is the Quakers, T^ose are a distinct
(...) all the other Diss^^^ers, differing in their Deport^^ent, (...) Speech
and Habit, and ((...)) seem to differ in Principles and Doctrine, as wall as
Church Discipline, from both the Church of England and the other Dissenters.
They first appeared in Lancashire in Old England, about the year 1650. One of
the first (...) them was George F^^, he was (...) Man. (...) many Books,
Traveled and Preached many (...) and Countries, and suffered much: He got a
great (...) among this People, and was esteemed one of the Chief of them. When
he first appeared he was accused of Blasphemy, but was acquitted on Trial.
These People under wear great Sufferings upon account of their Profession, and
have been accused by their Adversaries with a People of the Fundamentals of
Christianity, which Charge they have always denied* (...) they being an
ille^erate People at first, there has dropped some unwarrantable Expressions (as
some think) in some of their former (...), which they now seem to correct, and
by their late Writings and Preaching they seem to own all the Fundamentals of
Christianity. The best account we have of their Principles is in a Book,
entitled, An Apology (...) the true Christian Divinity* as held forth by the
People called Quakers, writ by Robert Barclay, which he dedicated to K. Charles
the ^d: some who have read over that Apology* think it to be a Charitable and
Reasonable System; for they are of Opinion, that it solves the numerous
Difficulties raised by other Sects, and by Turns shows all part^ of Scripture
to b^ (...) and Consistent. And as Sir Isaac Newton (by allowing him
Gravitation) has accounted for all the Phenomina of Nature; So if we allow to
Mr. Barclay those Operations of the Spirit which the Quakers pretend to feel
and experience, and which he says every Man in the World has and may feel, if
he wa^ts and watches its Motions, and does not suppress them; Then we think all
the Janglings, vain Chestions, numerous Superst^tions and various Oppressions
which ^^ave Plag^ed the World, would cease and bea^ End. And notwithstanding
all that has been writ or said against this Sect, yet upon long and due
Inspection into the (...) of that People, they are found to be Ingenuous,
Industrious, Modest, Intelligent and Virtuous, To be animated with the most
Beneficent Principles of any Sect which has yet appeared amongst us: They seem
to have a Comprehensive Charity to the whole Race of Mankind, and deny the
Mercies of God to None. They publicly own, that an Universal Liberty is due to
all, are against Impositions of every kind; and yet have all along patiently
(...) to many themselves* and, perhaps, are the only Party whose Practices, (as
a Body) correspond with their Principles.

They have no Clergy among them, that is, Men that are chosen, appointed or
(...) to Preach, yet they have many Preachers, and some of them of excellent
Parts. They pretend to Preach and Pray as the holy Spirit of God moves and
assists them. They say, That as the Rays of the Sun in the Firmament do extend
to the Earth to comfort, nourish, and revive all things thereon, So Christ
Jesus by the Em^^nations of his Spirit, Light and Life, ^lows into the hearts
of all true believers (who wait and watch for its Motions etc Operations) and
has the like ^^fect upon such, ^ the Sun has on the Earth. And (they say)*
when this Spirit of God and Christ, this Grace of God, or Light of Christ, has
had its through Operations, to break the (...) heart, and to (...) and (...) the
same, That then this same Grace and Spirit of God and Christ draws and inclines
many to Teach, Instruct* Reprove, Admonish and Exhort others, both as to Life
and Doctrine, and to be Obedient to this inward Teacher and Instructor, which,
through Faith in Christ will clease and sanctify them, and by which they may
work out their Salvation* And this (they say) is the True Call to the Ministry.

They are a distinct Political Body of People; governed with great Regularity
by Laws of their own making, and hold the strictest Correspondence of any
Society now in being, and there appeals to be a more particular Love and
Respect, and more Hospitality among them than there is in any other Society in
Christendom.

For the first Ten years after their Appearance, in the World, many of them in
their Meetings were seized with strange Shakings and Convulsions, but these
Motions are not now common among them. But from these S^^akings and Quakings
that were then amongst them, one Justice Bennet (a Persecutor of them) in the
year 1650* out of Derision, gave them the Name, of QUAKERS, which they have
never taken to themselves, but give themselves the Name of Friends, or Friends
of the Truth.

At first they had no such thing as Church Government, but every Man was left
to the Leadings and Guidance of the Spirit of God within him, or Light within.
But as they grew Numero^^, they saw a Necessity for setting Church Government,
by which they formed themselves into a Regular Body, and now observe a stated
Discipline, in which (without any thing like Co-er^ion) they are united, and
understand the state of one another, as well, if not better than any Society of
Men whatsoever in Christendom.

Their Meetings (in which they act as a Society) are of several sorts viz.
Monthly, Quarterly, Yearly, Second-Days Meetings, and Meetings for Sufferings.

Their Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings are held in the several Counties in which
they live (both in Europe and America) according as their Settlements are more
or less Numerous. In their Monthly Meetings they take care of their Poor, take
care to Reconcile Differences, examine into Marriages, as to the Parties being
clear of others, and having consent of (...), etc and enquire into the
Conversatio^s of those that profess to be of their Society; as likewise how fat
their Rules and Orders are Observed; Who Marry by the Priest* pay Ty^hes, use
carnal Weapons, or the like, and accordingly Censure of Encourage. In these
(...) they make their Monthly Collections for the Poor, and other Services. Of
all which they keep Registers in Books kept for that purpose.

From the Monthly Meetings there is Appeals and References to the Quarterly
Meetings, which consist of the Members of several Monthly Meetings meeting
together (...) three Months.

From these Quarterly Meetings Appeals (...), and References had to the Yearly
Ones here in America, and from them Accounts of the State of their Church
Affairs are given to the Yearly Meeting at London, which ^ constantly h^ld
(...) (...)* Thither Deputies come from all (...) of Great Britain, Ireland,
Holland, Germany, and the American Plantations. To this Yearly Meeting are
(...) Accounts (from their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings) of all Material
Matters relating to their Church Affairs, all the World over. Here Directions
are given concerning Friends Behavior relating to Paying Tithes* Using the
Carnal Weapons, Plain Language, Plain Habit, etc. as also concerning Dispersing
of Books, etc. Here the Public Stock (which now is very considerable) is
Audited; and here Directions are given for the ^e^emption of their Friends who
are taken Captive into Algi^rs, or elsewhere. And here proper Directions are
given to the Deputies for them to observe and communicate to their respective
Meetings when they come home. And from his Meeting they also send a Yearly
Epistle to all their Settlements, giving Admonitions proper to the Occasion, to
be Read in all their Quarterly and Monthly Meeting^.

The Second Days-Meeting is a standing Committee residing in London, which
meets every Monday in the year; (...) Business is to attend every Exigency
relating to the Body of that People, from one Yearly Meeting to another; but
more particularly they are to Examine, Approve and Lisen^e all Books to be
Printed or Reprinted, etc.

The Meeting of Sufferings is the most Ancient Meeting they have, relating to
Church Affairs; it was Erected in Time of Persecution; Their chief business is
to receive Complaints out of all parts of Great Britain from their Friends who
suffer on account of their Religion, and to take care for their Relief, by
sending them Money, or soliciting their Causes above, or both, and have a Fond
to carry o^ this Affair.

ALthough some of the foregoing Particulars may seem to be foreign to the
design of this Book, yet we presume it may be of some Service to inform our
Youth of some few of the Customs and Usages of the Kingdom to which we belong*
as also of the Religious Societies therein, which Accounts are impartially
related, without ^avour or Affection to one Party more than another, according
to the best of our Understanding, Enquiry (...) Observation. And so We shall
conclude this Second part of our Young Man's Companion.

The Third Part shall contain necessary Instructions with Copies of Letters,
which may inform our Youth of the Method of Writing and Inditing the same. In
the Performance of which, We advise our Youth, 1 st, To observe to Spell Words
truly. 2 dly, To make great or Capital Letters in their proper Places 3 dly, To
observe Stops and Points. And, 4 thly, To alter and vary their Words from the
following Copies, as the Matter or Occasion may require.

When Words we want, Love teaches to Indite,
And what we blush to Speak, she bids us Write.

PART III.
The Young Secretary's Guide,
Instructing him in Writing and Inditing Letters upon most Subjects, whether
Trade, Traffic or otherwise, etc
AS Arithmetic is Universally Useful in Managing Affairs in the World, so we
also find that the Art of Writing and Ind^^ing, in all Ages, has proved a (...)
than (...) Benefit to Mankind, in relation to his present Occasions, and the
bettering his Understanding and Judgment, by giving him (...) In^ight into
Things (perhaps of the greatest (...) imaginable) which would other ways (...)
have escaped his Knowledge; for, consequently, without Writing, ( or a
Continuation of Divine (...)) not only the Civil, but Sacred, Transactions of
former Times must have ^ate in (...). As this (...) (I say) has been
Advantag^o^s so many ways beyond Expression, even of Man himself, in whom it
has all along raised such Wonder and Admiration, so immediately does it show
its Serviceableness in negotiating and managing important Affairs thro'*out the
^abitable World, especially in all Civilized Nations, where Traffic, Trade or
Commerce relating to the Profit, Pleasure (...) W^ll b^ing of Human Society,
take place, or where the Necessity of (...) with one another (though at the
greatest Distance) (...) and (...) And since this is done (...) Satisfaction of
^mpire, Kingdoms, State^ and Provinces, by Letters, whose ^nfluences
effectually create the same Effect^ and right Understanding as if the (...)
W^iter were present; And since Letters (...) upon by all understanding Men to
(...) the maintainers of Love. An^ity and (...), I shall therefore here present
(...) some Copies of Useful and Necessary Letters, ad^pted to the Affairs and
Occasions, that may happen. And herein you (...) Observe, That

All Letters should begin with Declaration
Of Friendly Titles, as a Preparation*
Saluting them with Love and Commendation,
As they are in Esteem, or in Relation;
Then to the Matter needful, short and plain,
They should proceed in, at being the main
Of their then Writing, which when done, to cease,
And wind up all with words of Love and Peace,
Concluding, as unto their Friends they stand,
In humbleness. Theirs, when they them Command*
Subscribing those their Letters with their Hand*
And for their Superscription, on the Outside,
The Name and Place where now their Friends abide*
A Letter from one at School, to his Father.
Honored Father:
MY Humble Duty unto you presented, giving you all hearty Thanks for all your
Love and Kindness manifested unto me. I make bold at this time to present you
with a few Lines, being the fruits of my Labor, and do hope, in time, to be
better accomplished to give you an account of my Proceedings. In the mean time
crave your Acceptance of this, it coming from

Your Obedient and Dutiful Son, A. B.

Another, from one at School, to his Friend.
Worthy Sir;
Having gained some skill in the Art of Writing, think in my Duty to present
you with some Fruits thereof, as (...) humble Gratulation and thankful
Remembrance of your great Love and Respect shew^d on me, from time to time*
hoping it may gain esteem and acceptance with you, do, (...), yet an all
Humility, rest, subscribing my self,

Your Obliged Friend and Humble Servant, C. D.

A Letter of Entreaty, from a Son, to a Father.
Dear Honored Father;
I send this Letter as an humble Suit^r on my behalf (although I must confess, no
Merit in me (did not your tender (...) plead my Cause) could ever have deserved
what I have already received) to entreat you to procure me those necessary
Clothes and Books, of which I gave you an account the last time I had an
opportunity to send you a Letter. But in this, as in all other Things, I submit
to your Pleasure and Discretion, and hereby offer you my humble* Duty and
Thankfulness (which is all the Return my tender years are as yet, capable to
make) for the many Favors of Love that you have extended to me. I shall not
further trouble you at this time but, as in Duty bound, subscribe my self

Your Most Obedient and Dutiful Son, E. F.

A Letter from a Scholar to his Parents.
Dear Father and Mother;
AFter my most humble Duty to you, and my dear Love to my Brothers and Sisters,
and to my Uncle and Aunt and Cousins, hoping you are all in good Health, as I
and my Master, and the rest of his Family are at this Time, (Thanks be to God)
These are to let you know, that I Received your Letter dated the 6th of this
Instant June, for which, and also for the many Testimonies of your Love, I
return you hearty Thanks; and hope, that happy Progress already made in my
Learning, may, in the end, answer your careful Expectations, and in some
measure require your (...) and Tenderness toward me I beg your Prayers to God
for his Blessing o^ my weak Endeavors, that you, (...) length, may reap the
Harvest of your Expectations, with (...) have the Glory* I remain

Your Dutiful Son, N. W.

A Letter of (...) from a (...).
SIR,
MY Long Absence from (...) *and my dear Mother, has not been a little Tedious
to me, though I have not been wanting to comfort my self, as much as the
Discretion of my Tender Years will allow, with the frequent Communication of
your Health and Welfare, by way of Letters, or otherwise; for the continuance
of which I am not forgetful to offer up my Vows and Prayers to him who is able
to continue them; yet being sep^rated from you almost in my Infancy, I cannot
(...) fancy, that returning to you again, would raise in me a greater Joy.
(although where I am, I want for nothing that is convenient, no^ am I insensible,
that it is for my good ye^, send me abroad, especially, that by Learning, I may
(as I grow in years) grow likewise in Understanding* But however, Sir, I hope
it would not much prejudice (...), if you would be pleased ^o grant me leave to
come Home for a time, in which time (should not neglect to make a further
Progress in what I am so (...) initiated. But knowing i^ my Du^y not to dispute
your good Pleasure, I shall no further insist upon it, but ^^ther, (...) I have
offended, beg your Pardon for what I have written* and remain to be disposed
of, upon all accounts, as you in your Wisdom shall (...), I am

Your Dutiful Daughter G. H*

A Letter of ^^reaty to continue Abroad.
Honored Sir;
I Have received your Letter, wherein I find you have laid your Commands upon
me to return (...) ^^d though it is not for me to dispute them, (...) please to
permit (...) humbly to assure you, I (...) so sensible of the (...) I have
gained since I have been abroad, (...) i^ (...) other Qualifications, that I
cannot but imagine, (...) (...), not only of what I have already gained, but
what I may further acquire by a (...), you would (...) with my Absence, than
any ways be desirous to cut a stop to so Advantagio^ a Progress in what I am so
well initi^ted. Wherefore, let me entreat you, Sir, Not to be Offended, if I
(...) leave to stay where I am, only so long as to receive a (...) Letter from
you, in which, whether (...) your Pleasure shall be, without my further Delay,
my (...) Obedience shall speak how much I honor so good a Father. So hoping
you will (...) to grant this one Request, ^ subscribe my self*

Your Obedient and Dutiful Son, W. ^.

A Letter of Excuse to a Father and Mother.
Honored Father and Mother; May 13, 1727.
T^^ (...) Report that you have heard of me, I suppose, (...) from some of my
School-fellows, who either (...) Happiness, or by aggravating my Faults, would
(...) thought to seem less Criminal themselves; though I (...), I have been too
Remiss in my Studies; And when I consider the Time and Credit I have lost
thereby, the first (...) irrecoverable, my double Diligence for the future, ^
(...) will regain the last, and my Deportment be such, that I may, in (...),
subscribe my self,

Your Dutiful Son, James Mendone.

A Son's Return of Thanks for good Education.
Most Kind Parents; June 3. 1727.
I Am ^^nstrained, as an humble acknowledgement of my Gradtitude, often to
trouble you with my Epistles, ^s (...) ^he only Requital I am (as yet) capable
of rendering (...) for the many Benefits and Advantages I have received at your
hands; but above all, for your prudent (...) me to the Knowledge of those
Things which have (...) my Young Years with the (...) of God, and (...) of
Understanding, and will, past all adventure, render me acceptable on sundry*
Occasions, with Gods Blessing; wherefore I must applaud that compelling
Goodness in you, by which you even Obliged me to perseve^^ in Learning what I
had begun; though then, indeed, (not discerning wh^^ I should afterward reap
thereby) I imputed ^t to you a^ (...) and Seve^^^ty.

Therefore let Mistaken Youth consider, that in their tender Age the^^ (not
knowing what is good and Co^^aendable) ought ^o su^mit to the m^ture Judgment
of their Parents, who always* with ^owels of Love and Compassion) are studying
the^^ Welfare, though they perceive it not. And in this Care, what shall I say
more, than Returning all possible Thanks to you, (...) next to the Love and
Mercies of God, are the Instruments of my Being and Well-being, and ought to
acknowledge my ^f

Your Most Dutiful and Obedient Son, F. ^*

POSTSCRIPT.
Next unto God, Dear Parents, I Address
My self to you, in humble Thankfulness,
For all your Care and Charges (...) me (...)*
The Means of Learning unto we allow*d.
Go on, I pray, and let Me shall (...)
These Golden Arts the Vulgar never knew.


A Letter of Thanks for a Kindness received*
Most B^^^tiful Sir
HOW can I (...), make you so poor ^ Return (...) for the many and weighty
(...) you (...) upon (...) yet* though I be (...) in making an Acknowledgem^^^
o^ you^ (...) only you, but all (...), (...) gratitude, from the (...) of
(...), (...) Crimes, I desire to be most (...). I must (...) you, and in some
measu^e insinuate it self into your good opinion, ^ll such time as my Abilities
may speak lo^der, what my Desires with willingness are framing, and so, Sir,
with all imaginable Respect begging to be excused for my ^o better performance,
I must, till a more seasonable Opportunity of Requital offers it self, lie
under the weight of your Favors, and subscribe my self,

Your most Thankful and Obliged Servant, J. R*

POSTSCRIPT.
To the above Lines I here add some of my best Writing which be pleased to
accept of, viz.

These, Honored Parents, are but small Effect^
Of your true Love, and manifold Respects.
These few unpolished Lines cannot express
The Thousandth Part of my due Thankfulness
For your last Favors: Yet, if these you grace
With Acceptance* I in Writing's Race
Shall run more swi^t by that Encouragement.
And in due Time some Nobl^^ Piece present.


A Letter returning Thanks to a Mother.
Loving mother;
I Have received the things you expressed in your Letter, and find my self
highly bound in general and particular Obligations, to return my hearty Thank^,
and express the ^rue (...) I always have of your Care and Te^derness toward
me, which makes me wish it in my Power to make a larger Acknowledgment; but
seeing that wi^h cannot b^ing forth the desired effects* I must humbly b^g you
to accept of my good Will, and dutiful Affections toward you, together with my
Prayers for your Prosperity, and whatever else is in my weak power to wish or
imagine, ^^^ping in a short time to be with you, that I may give you the same,
or any other satisfaction of which I am capable by word^ of Mouth; ^^ll when, I
lay my self in conc^^t at your (...), and remain,

Your dutiful Daughter to obey your Commands, M.G.

A Letter of Thanks returned for the Advancement of a Person.
SIR,
BY the influence of your Recommendation I have obtained my Desire, and
therefore, in gratitude, (...) you my hearty and unfeigned Thanks: Not is my
Soul so mean to conceit these lines can make Satis^^^tion for such a kindness;
but being all at present that m^ Ability or Bu^ine^^ will put in my power to
offer, as an ^^knowledgement of your Favor, I will hence forward (...) by what
more effectual ways or means I may be able to do you some Service, that may be
worthy your Approbati^n; til^ when, I shall ^^ly desire ^o subscribe my self,

Your devoted Servant, G. C.

A Letter of Advice to a Friend.
SIR,
UNderstanding that you have at present lef^ the Town, I thought in convenien^
to inform you how things are carried on, especially in relation to Trade (a
particular account of which I have enclosed in this Pa^^^) I should indeed have
communicated it to you in writing, but that I found it done to my hand. Our
Friends are generally in good health, and kindly present (especially such as I
have had the opportunity lately to converse witha^) their Love and kind
Respects to you and your good Lady As for your Affirs in the City, they go on
-- And for News, we have none of Moment, wherefore not to trouble you with a
^edious Epistle, I only request that a good Correspondence may be maintained
between us, as here^ofore, and that I may still be ranked in the number of your
Friends, desiring always to be, whilst my own,

Yours in all Friendship and Respe^t. G. D.

Another.
SIR,
THe cause of my writing (the the News perhaps may be unwellcome to your ears)
is to let you know that I. B^ of N. with whom, I understan^, you had
considerable dealing, is dead, and h^^ left (as I further hear) his Estate and
Effects much e^^umbred and imb^zzl'd, to the no small admiration of his
Neighbors* who all along imagined it ^ired with him far otherwise; though indeed
it is a common, saying, That few know what a Man is worth till be dye^, This,
though unrequired, I thought fit to advertise you of; and so leaving the further
Prosecution to your Discretion, whom it mainly concerns, I remain,

Your Friend and Servan^^

A Letter of Recomendation.
SIR,
RElying on your ancient Friendship, I have made bold to recommend to you, as a
trusty and faithful Servant, (...) of this Letter; he is a Person well known to
me, and therefore you may take him on my Word, that he is (...) and (...)
qualified to undertake any of those Affairs you have to Employ him in. Dear
Friend, I do desire you ^o entertain him as he deserves, and in so doing you
will not only profit your self, but pleasure him who is,

Your unfeigned Friend, Well-wisher* And most humble Servant.

The Answer etc.
Dear Friend;
I Have received your Letter* and find by the Contents you have been careful in
providing a Person suitable to my Occasions* for which Diligence I must own my
self much obliged to you* As for the Person, I take him as you r^^^mmend him,
viz. Honest and f^^ly qualified, and shall more especially, for your sake, use
him (...) such a (...), (...) he shall have no cause to (...) any thing but
well and honorable of your Recommendation, and my Entertainment. And so till a
further Opportunity of expressing my Gratitude, I r^^t, in all Friendship,

Yours to Serve, D. C.

A Letter of Congratulation from a Son to ^is Father, upon his recovery from
Sickness,
Honored Sir;
HAving yesterday received advice that you are recovered from your ^edious and
dangerous Di^^^mper, I embrace that welcome News with Tears of Joy, more than
my Pen or T^ngue can express; and how could I (...) for the w^llfare of a
Father whose Affliction I had so long (...)* and for whose case and r^^^ef I
had put up so (...) and prayers to Heaven* for always where the sorrow (...)
great, the joy that exples it must needs be so. I would indeed, have wa^^ed
upon you many times, and with all the Officious Duty of an obedient Son, done
what in me lay; but understanding your Commands were to the contrary, I durst
(...) presume to disobey you, le^t by the disturbance it might have occasioned;
the Passions of the Might have augment^^ the Distemper: Wherefore, seeing you
are happily recovered, My joy i^ not thereby lessened, but rather increased*
and so continuing my Prayer, for the Preservation of your Health restored, I am
ready to obey your Commands in all things, and subscribe my self,

Your most dutiful, And most Obedient (...)* ^. ^.

A Letter to a Friend.
Dear Friend,
I Was not a little glad, upon the Perusal of your Letter of the 9th Instant,
that you would be so kind at last, as to put it (...) my Power to do you any
manner of Service, whereby I might more immediately signalize some Ma^ks of
true Friendshi^* nor, indeed, could you have required it at a more seasonable
Time, wherefore, not to give you any Delay, I have (...) by your Bearer what
you desired, and shall always be glad to oblige you in this Kind, as far as my
Ability will extend. And so, with my hearty good Will toward you, and good
Wishes for the Prosperity of your Affair, I remain,

Your unfeigned Friend, J. S.

A Letter requiring the Payment of Money: which serves as an Acquittance.
Friend and Chapman,
I Find, upon starting the Accounts between you and me, That several
considerable Sum^ of Money are due to (...) from you; wherefore, having present
occasion for Twenty Pounds* I desire you to send it me by the Bearer hereof, (
or ^ere (...) the Carrier) and in so doing, you will very much oblige me; For,
indeed, I would no^ have given you this Trouble (at this T^^^) had not my
Business been urgen^.

As the Payment thereof, this Letter, and the Bearer's A^quittance (...) be
your (...) Security and Discharge for so much Money. In W^^ness whereof, I have
here^^^^ set my Hand this ^th Day of May, 1727.

John Chapman,

An Answer to the last Letter.
Sir, or Loving Friend,
I Sent by the Bearer [or the Carrier] Twenty Pounds, according to your desire;
and have taken his Acquittance for it; ^u^, because you know I sent but for
small Parce^s of Goods (...) time, therefore I desire you always, for the
future, when I send you Money, that you mention in the Acquittances the Names
of the Goods for which you received the Money, or, (...)* I would have you to
mention what Money remains unpaid, for, by certain knowledge, (for (...) of
which) some poor Country Tradesmen have found great Loss either by the Masters
o^ their Apprentice receiving the Money sent, never mentioning for what Goods
Pray take it not ^ll that I thus write, for I am satisfied of your honest
Dealing; but know nor the Servants you may entrust to receive the Money. I send
in small Parcels. So with my Love to you, I rest,

May* 20. 1727. Your Friend and Chapman. W. Lovetru^^*

A Daughters Letter of Entreaty to her Mother.
Dear Mother;
AFter my Duty in the humblest manner presented to you, and my kind Love to my
Relations and Friends in general, in these subsequent lines have presumed to
put you in mind, that it was your pleasure, the last time I had the happiness
to see you, to tell me, You would (...) speedy orders for my learning to (...)
(...) no such Orders having yet been given, the length of the time induces me
to believe, the remembrance of Your Promise, through the multitude of business,
may have slipped out of your thoughts. However the great desire I have to learn
(...) has imbolden'd me to entreat you, that with the first convenience you
would be pleased so to order it, that I may loose no time* seeing I have
already made a considerable progress in what else our School affords*
Wherefore, Dear Mother, let me by all the ^yes of tender Love, entreat you once
more* not to delay me any longer than the first convenience of sending, and
also to give orders for such Necessaries as will be requisite on that occasion;
in which you will infinit^^ endear her whose duty it is to Pleasure you, and is,

Your most Obedient Daughter*

The Answer.
Daughter*
I Have received your Letter, wherein you press me to the Performance of my
Promise, of which I am no ways (...): but your (...) M. having been (...) these
several Weeks past, and being committed to my ^^re, I could not have the
Opportunity to be with you, though, dear Child, my thoughts have often
accompanied you; nor am I ignorant what is convenient for your accomplishment
in -- Wherefore rest contented for a few Days, and you shall find my Promise
made good. As for the Necessaries that are suitable for what is intended, I
have already given order, and you need not doubt of my (...) provide all things
convenient, that y^^ may hereafter have occasion for. And so at present taking
my ^^ave. I rest,

Your Affectionate Mother,

A Letter from an Apprentice to his Father.
Most Ind^^^ent Father;
TH^^e are humbly to satisfy you, That I am not a little pleased with the
Trade you have put me to, no^ less with the good usage I find* Inde^^ I found
^t tedious at first to be separated from your self and my Dear Mother, etc.
being witha^ in a strange place; but Time and good Conversation have banished
those Thoughts which made a Melancholy Impression upon my Mind, and I am full
of Liveliness, studying nothing more than to Please those that have the Command
over me, by carefully and faithfully regarding the Business I am put to,
without delay or regret, as well considering that it will be my own hereafter.
And thus, Sir, in compliance with your Command, when I saw you last, I have
sent you this Letter, desiring, with all the Submision and dutiful Observance,
that a Son can express toward so good a Father and Mother,

To remain at your Disposal in all things. T. B.

A Letter from an Apprentice to his Master.
SIR;
I Took this occasion to write to you, to let you understand, that I have
accomplish'^ the business you gave me ^^rections to undertake, when you went
out of Town: And (...) for your other Affairs, they are managed to your
Advantage; only as yet not having had an opportunity to meet with Mr. P. I have
not got the Money you ordered me to receive of him; nor have I hith^^^^ had any
return out of the County of R. yet I doubt no^ but by the next to give you an
account, that I have fulfilled your Commands in effecting of them both: Till
when not having any further Business, at present, to write about, I continue to
be

Your faithful Servant, R. C.

A Letter from a young Man newly out of his Time.
Respected Sir;
HAving now finished my (...) years Apprenti^eship, am now ent^ring into the
World for employ for my self, and knowing my Trade depends upon Acquaintance,
make bold to ren^^ (...) Friendship with you, hoping, if it lies in your (...)
to do me any kindness therein, you will (for the love and good will you bear to
me) do your utmost. And what (...) do therein, shall be acceptable to and
oblige,

Your Servant to (...).

A Letter from a young Man to his Mother to acquaint^^^^ will his Marriage.
Dear Mother;
MY time being expired, and having been some (...) settled at my Trade, could
think of no be^^er expedient, than to get me a H^lper and Pa^^ner in my
Affairs, that so I might not only have Comfort, but the be^^er Improvement. Now
what Partner this may be, you may* prehaps, wonder* but give me leave, a^^er
having asked ^^rdon for proceeding to Marriage without your knowledge or
consent, to tell you, it is a Female Partner, (...) that as both Virtuous and
Beautiful, suitable to my Hum^^^ in ^ll things, and through whose Indust^^y,
and my own, I doubt not but to thrive in the World; and that we may the better
do (...), I entreat you to send us your Blessing at lea^^ if you put nothing in
over and above toward (...) keeping. And so with mine and my Wises h^^ble Duty
pre^^^^ed to you* I take leave to subscribe my self*

Your most Dutiful Son, C. R.

Another from a Young Wom^n.
Dear Father;
THese are first ^o beg your Pardon and Blessing, and afterward to let you
know, that I have changed my (...)* as I hope, to the bettering of my For^^^^*
(...) in We^lock to an honest (...) industri^^s young Man, ^ho, by his Love to
me, and care of his Affairs gives me hopes to Assure my self, that when you
have a true account what manner of Person I have chose for my Husband, you will
not be dispeased, although I did it without your Consent, which indeed the Duty
of a Daughter required me first to have had; but the length of the wa^, and
many other things that frequently happen to cross poor Lovers, made me presume
upon your good Na^^^e, and promise my self, that you will forgive this one
Disobedience, no^ doub^^^^ but my future Endeavors shall* make a^ends for this
one Defa^^t. And so with mine and my Husbands Duty and entire Affections to
you^ and ^ll our Relations, I continue to be, Sir,

Your most Dutiful Daughter ^. ^.

A Letter of Congratulation from a Youth to his Sister, upon her Marriage.
Loving Sister;
EVer since I heard the News, that you had changed your Condition, I have even
longed for an opportunity to tell you how pleasing it was to me to hear that
you have changed for the better, who, as a kind Brother, do participate wish
you in your Happiness, being fully persuaded of the Reality thereof; for had
you put it into my Power to make your Choice, I could not have laid your Lot in
a (...); wherefore I cannot forbear to Congratulate your good (...), as being
constrained to express a more than ordinary Joy upon the Prospect of her
present and futur^ ^elicity, whom I (...) love. And so with my Respects to Your
self, and to you^ loving Husband, whom henceforth ^ must style, my dearest
Brother, and remain, in all Affection and Tenderness of your Welfare,

Your Joyful Brother, J. R.

The Answer.
Dear Brother;
I Am not a little glad, that the Choice I have made it so exceptable to you*
for although I acquainted you not with my (...), yet let me tell you, I did not
proceed ^^^hly or unad^isedly, but with all Caution and Deliberation, a k^^wing
Marriage to be a weighty Affair, on which depends our (...) or Happiness in
this World; for as there it nothing more comfortable on Earth th^^ Marriage,
where m^tal Affections are united and joined in one r^ciprocal Love; so there
is nothing ^^re ^^comfortable, where Discord and Dise^^tent put in to destroy
the expected Happiness* which Enemies to true Love, I hope, shall never
prevail, Indeed, there is little Prospect of (...) Disagre^ment between (...),
though few can t^^l what time may bring forth; but in the mean while, being
(...) of all that I can wish or reasonably desire (...) Earth, (...) my Joys
with the Melancholy I ^ought, or (...)* but think my self above the reach of
En^^y, or (...) Fortune; And so returning you hearty Thanks for your (...) and
good liking, as also for the sense of Joy you express ^^^ my well doing, I
remain,

Your ever Loving Sister, M. P.

A Letter to request a kindness.
Dear Friend;
RE^^ng upon the long (...) passed between us* and your la^ge (...) Friendship*
urged by necess^^y (...) require, I have (...), that I (...) in ^eed of (...)
with which if you can possibly furnish a^e, without any prejudice (...)
hindrance to your own Affairs, I shall take (...) as an extraordinary Kindness;
and if it stand with your conveniecy, pray send it by the bearer of by some
other speedy hand; and in so doing, You will very much oblige him who is,

Your very humble Servant, T. S.

The Answer.
Dear (...)
I Was not a little glad, upon the perusal of your Letter, that you would be so
kind a^ last as (...) put it into my Power to (...) you any manner of Service,
whereby I might more immediately signalize some Marks of Friendship, n^^ indeed
could you have required it at a more seasonable time. Wherefore, not to give
you any delay, I have sent by your Bearer what (...) demanded, and shall always
be pro^d to oblige you in this kind, as f^r as my Abilities will extend; And so
with (...) hearty good Will toward you, and my good Wishes for the Prosperity
of your Affairs, I remain,

Your unfeigned (...), N. D.

A Letter from a Husband to his Wife.
(...) loving Wife;
(...) you have been absent, together with my Children, ^besides my Prayers for
the continuation of your Health) I take all Possible Care to provide such
Necessary* as I imagine any ways useful or convenient for you, and have sent
(...) by the ^earer, and by whom it is my desire* and kind (...), that you
would send me an Account of your entertainment, and (...) what estate and
condition of Health and ^aking you are; for though you are absent from me, yet it
is the great Concern of my Thoughts, to study the m^^hod and means to promote
your Welfare, which I eve^ ^ender equal* if no^ superior to my own; and so
with all the love and tender (...) of a Husband and Father, with (...) love
(...)* our Children, and all our Friends and Relations, I remain*

Dear Wife, Your loving Husband, D. P.

The Wife's Answer to the foregoing Letter.
(...) and ever Loving Husband;
I Received your Letter, which next to your Company, I highly esteem; and
according to Your desire have made you this Return, whereby I assure you, that
we are not only in good Health, but have found Entertainment beyond ou^
Expectations, all our Friends being every where, and at all times, so Obliging
and Respectful, that they will as it were, detain us from you with the Charms of
their Kindness, which will, ^o doubt, prevail with us, to stay somewhat longer
them we intended, or you could possibly expect. As for the things you sent, I
have received them and return you all the good Thanks that are suitable and
consistent with the Virtue of an Obedient Wife, for your Care; assuring you,
that not only ou^ Children, in a grateful acknowledgement, as they stand in
Relation to us* present their humble Duty to you, but also, our Friend^ and
Relations in general, crave to be had in Remembrance by you: And so with my
Prayers for your Health and Welfare, I continue to be*

Dear Husband; Your Loving and Constant Wife, A. P.

A Letter from one ^^^ter to another to enquire of Health* (...)
Dear Sister;
YOur no^ writing (...) me in so long a time puts me some what in doubt, that
either you are not in Health, or that some unhappy Accident has fallen out.
Wherefore to remove my fears, pray, (...) the first Convenience, be so kind as
to send me a Letters by which I may be made sensible how it fares* And moreover
forget not to let me know how our Friends and Relations are, as to their Health
and Welfare; and in so doing you will very much satisfy and oblige her who is,

Your loving Sister, E. B.

The Answer etc.
Kind Sister;
I Cannot but return you my hearty and unfeigned Thanks for your Care and
Regard toward me, and must at the same time beg your Excuse, that I have been
so Negligent as not to write to you. I must confess, I had no want of
Opportunity; But hoping you will Pardon what is past, I will be more diligent
for the future, as to what you desire to know. And these are to certify you,
that at present my self together with all our Friends and Relations, are in
perfect Health, and desire most kindly to be remembered to you, not being a
little glad, after so long Absence, that they have the Opportunity to
Congratulate, though at a distance, your Health and Welfare. This being all at
present, I rest,

Yours in all kind of Love, S. B.

A Letter requiring the Payment of Money,
SIR,
I Find upon stating Accounts between me and you, that several considerable
Sums of Money are due to me from you: Wherefore having occasion for Twenty
Pounds, I desire you to send it me without fail by the bearer hereof, and, in
so doing you will very much oblige me; for indeed I would not have given you
this trouble, had not my business been urgent. As for the Payment thereof, this
Letter and the bearers Receipt shall be your sufficient Discharge for so much*
Not else, but that I am,

Your Friend and Servant, J. W*

A Letter for Goods.
SIR,
HEaring by a Friend of yours, that you are stored (...) sundry sorts of goods
which I want in my way of Trade, make ^old to essay a Trade with you, so as in
a small Parcel to become your Chap-man; my stock is not great, neither will
many vend in this place; therefore I pray you to send me -- or to the value of
about 05 l. worth, and as they prove shall deal further with you: The lowest
Price send, as also the time of Payment, and I shall endeavor to be punctual.
I am,

Your humble Servant, G. D.

A Letter of Trade and Commerce.
SIR;
I Send you, with this Letter, the (...) Goods You wri^ for, which amount to --
as per bill of Parcels enclosed, whereby you may understand the several Prices.
As to the time of Payment, I shall not be very pressing, but if it suit with
Your convenience to pay one Half in -- Month^ and the remainder at -- will
oblige me. And if you will let me know what Goods you shall want, from time to
time, I will endeavor to supply you. I take leave at present, and remain

Your Friend and Servant, H. M.

Another.
Sir;
YOurs of the 23d Instant I received, by which I perceive you* have put on
board the Sloop Mary, for this place* four Hogsheads of Rum, etc.* When they
come to hand I will do for you as for my self in the Disposal thereof. I have*
according to your former Order, shipped on board the Brigentine John and Mary,
whereof T. M. is Master, three Tun of Flower and one Tun of Oil, amounting, as
per Invoice enclosed, to 120 l. 15 s. 9 d The Bill of Lading for the same you
have also here enclosed. I am

Your Humble Servant, R. B.

A Letter of Credit.
Sir;
SInce mine of the 28th of the last Mouth, I have yours of the ^th Instant, and
refer you to what I have already written in answer to your said Letter. This
serves at present to desire you to supply my very good Friend Mr. N. H. with
what Money he shall have occasion for not exceeding the Sum of -- taking his
Bill or Bills of Exchange for the same, and put it to my Account; and this my
Letter of Credit shall be your sufficient Warrant for so doing.

Your Humble Servant, N. ^.

A Letter written to Reclaim Youthful Extravagan^ie^, etc.
SON William;
THe Unhappy Report of your of your wild Extravagancies having reached my ^ars,
I could no longer retrain to let you understand, that I Resent them very
heniously, and (...) altogether displeased that You should give up the Prime of
Your Years to such Follies as you stand charged withal, especially when I
expected other Fruits of my Labor and Care, to render you such an o^^ as might
be a Credit rather than a Reproach to Me; You little deserving the C^st* I have
bestowed upon you in Learning, and other Things, to fi^ and qualify you for
Employments, that might not only prove Profitable, but Honorable also. Nor is
it the smallest part of my Grief to hear that you are addicted to Drinking and
uttering Profane Words and Expressions altogether unbecoming a Christian.
Wherefore, I Conjure ^ou, by all the Ponds and Ty^s of Nature and Affection, by
which You stand bound and obliged to Me, That you speedily Reform Your Ways and
Actions, or else Y^^ may expect to be Disowned or Rejected by

Your Incensed Father, F. G.

A Letter from a Gentleman, Excusing a Son, to his Father.
Worthy Sir*
I Had not Interested my self in the Affair between a Father a^^ a Son (be^wix^
whom I am forty there should be any Difference) but that I can, of my own
certain Knowledge, declare him Innocen^ of that which you are pleased to Charge
him with; and therefore am Confident You must have received Your Information
from some who have M^^^ciously Tr^duced Your Son, on purpose to beget in You a
Causless Aversion toward him. I have all along had an Eye upon him, and have
with Pleasure beh^ld how Inoffensively he has been in all his Actions: His
sober Conversation and civil Carriage is particularly taken Notice of by all
the Neighbors: And therefore I wonder with (...) Face any one could suggest to
you that he is grown Debauched and a common Swearer; whereas I am every Day in
his Company, and never, that I know of, heard him swear an Oath in my Life, not
never saw him ^n Drink: And therefore his Accuser must be very ^^^^tless, in
laying things to his Charge that carry not the (...) shadow of Truth along with
'em. And therefore (...) me entreat you not ^o pass Sentence against him,
before you know him to be a Criminal: For if to be accused, be enough to make a
Man guilty; it will be hard to find one (...)* And I am sure he has always
retained that Duty and Respect for you, which becomes a dutiful Son to have for
so kind a Father, as I know you have been, and I hope will still continue to
him. This I was the more willing in let you know, (...) I might (...) former
Acquaintance, and let you* know how much I (...) Sir,

(...) in all true Friendship and Service, O. P.

A Letter to Congratulate a Person upon his Return ou^ of Foreign Parts, or
from a long Journey.
SIR;
I Am overyjoy'd at the News of your happy Return, and the more, because the
Assurance I have of your Safety, has banished those Fears that oppressed me
when you (...) absent, le^t some Mischance or sad Mishap had befallen, you;
yet, a^ the same time I must accuse myself for (...) you a Paper, when indeed I
ought to have waited upon you (...) Person, though in my defense I may say
(...) much, (...) did not extraordinary Business detained me, I had not failed
to have been with you: However that (...) once dispatched, I will no longer
delay my coming, to let (...)* by word of Mouth, more plainly know how much I
am, Sir,

Your very Humble Servant, T. ^.

A Letter from ^ Country C^apman to the Person (...) deals (...) in the City.
SIR;
Though I have not lately had any Occasion for Goods, yet thinking it necessary
to keep up our form^^ Correspondence, I have given You the Trouble of a few
Lines, desiring to hear from you how Trade moves at Philadelphia; and what the
Price is now of those Commodities in which you know I principally deal: And to
prevent your too much Trouble I should be glad if your would send me down a
very useful Paper, which I remember I have seen at Philadelphia* containing the
Price Current of all Goods and Merchandises, and I will gladly satisfy you for
it, and esteem it a Kindness done to, Sir,

Your Friend and Chap-man, M. N.

A Letter from a Person at Sea, to his Friend on (...).
Sir;
I Have now for some Months been (...) upon the uncertain Water, where variety
of Weathers have produced various Events; that is to say, we have had both
Cal^s and Storms, and I can hardly tell which is worst; For though a Calm indeed
looks Pl^^santer, there is no Seaman that would c^^se to be b^^almed: And yet
there is in Tempests so much Horror, as would affright one only to relate it:
We met with one upon the Coast of Portugal, but such as I never wish ^o see
again: Sometimes the Topmast tilting at the S^ars, whilst the Winds blew as if
they would waken Death* and the Laboring Ship climbed up vast Hills of Seas,
Olimpus high, and then ^ucked down again as low as Hell's from Heaven* for the
Tumultuating foamy M^in seemed to cast Water on the burning Bear, and quench
the Guard of the ever fixed Pole: the (...) failed, the Ship at random drove,
no Object could we see but Sea and Heaven; nay, Heaven it self loudly began
(...) as if it would split the very Globe in sunder, whi^^t Lightning issuing
from the parting Clouds added fresh ^orror to our trembling Hearts; each one
became a^ Orator for Life; our Hands still bu^ie, whilst our Hearts dispaired:
At last the mighty Rul^r of the Ocean commanded the Proud Waves, and they were
Still. But yet (...) Mercy, amid'st so many Dangers, I have not only been
preserved, but have uninterrup^^dly enjoyed my Health; and therefore hope I
shall at last return in safety to the shore again: For to speak Truth, I have
no mind to be devoured by Fishes, or wrapped up in a Winding-shee^ of Waves; and
if it were for nothing else, but tha^ I might once more enjoy my Friends,
especially your self, to whom I am so very much obliged* But how long time it
will be before I shall enjoy the Happiness, I know not; only be confident of
(...)* I shall no sooner set my Feet upon my native Soil again, but shall make
what haste I can to tell you how much I am, Dear Sir,

Your very obliged Friend and Servant, J. W.

A Letter from one Lady to another.
Madam;
IF to be forcibly deprived of what we most Delight in, is to be justly
reckoned amongst the Misfortunes o^ Life; the^ such I may esteem your absence
from me; who^e Conversation was so extremely agreeable, that I (...) the loss
of (...) be a very sensible Affliction. For the Honor you did me of taking me
into a more than ordinary Intimacy, the Effect of which was the unbosoming of
our Thoughts to each other, did as it were twist (...) very Souls together, so
that they could not be parted without some Violence. The only way left, Madam,
to make up this Separation, is to hasten your Return, which like the Sun's
breaking forth, after having been a considerable time invellop'd in Clouds and
Darkness can only revive the drooping Spirits of, Madam,

Your Friend and Servant, M* ^.

A Letter from a Gentleman to a Gentlewoman to beg Pardon for an Offense.
Madam,
It Is in vain to contend with my Judge: And therefore, though I know my Fault has
been aggravated beyond what it would justly ^ear? yet I will rather submit my
self (...) your Sentence, than to go about to (...) my Crime. I am Sensible
that I have (...) you, though I never (...)* And when you have (...) your self
Justice by (...) upon me what you think I merit for my Offense, then will I
plead my Innocence, and let you know I always was (...) from saying any thing
that might reflect upon your (...)* that in my Opinion no^ (...) it self is
(...) nor can unfull'd S^ow appear more White: (...), I am guilty, to give you
ground to think I have (...): but my Offense is my Misfortune, father than my
(...)* But, Madam, what if I appeal from your (...) Justice to your Mercy; I
know you are no^ inex^^able, nor did you (...) the Breasts of Wolves and
Tigers: And since there is so much Sweetness in your Eyes, there needs must be
(...) pi^y in your Heart; atleast, so far as so forgive a poor repenting
Criminal. And since you're such a brig^^ (...) of the (...) of all Goodness,
you cannot, but like (...)* delight in the wing Mercy: And because nothing more
(...) Mercy to a Criminal* I shall henceforth (...) ^o be like C^sar's Wife,
no^ only free from (...) from Suspicion. And further, shall, to expiate my
Offense, always remain,

Your truly sorrowful, and much afflicted Servant, T. B.

The Answer.
SIR,
I Received your Letter* and must let you know, That whatsoever reflects upon
my Fame (which is far dearer (...) me than my Life) though at the most remotest
Distance, is what* I cannot but think a Fault; and therefore know not how you
can be Innocent; and indeed, to plead your Innocence, is to accuse me of
Injustice, in charging, you with a Crime: (...) from what you write, I am (...)
to believe, that in what you said you deg^^^^^ (...)* and that it (...) a Crime
of (...)* (...) th^n (...) Mal^^^. And for that Reason, upon your Profession
(...) (...) And th^^ I Pardon this your (...) if you should Relapse into your
former (...) you must expect a such severer Treatment: For (...) I shall no
more esteem my self, as now I do,

Your (...) Friend, to serve you, M. S*

A Letter to a Lady, desiring (...) into her (...).
(...) Lady:
WHere nothing of Ill is (...), I hope nothing will b^taken Ill: And this hope
has embo^^^^ (...) who^ly a stranger to you (to make these Lines (...) yet an
Opportunity to do it with my Tongue) (...) of my Heart, and to let you know
(...) you have therein: In short, Madam, (...) Case it (...) to be at (...)
when my (...) Fortune brought (...) thither; I saw You, I liked you, I loved
(...)* And bring informed You are a single Person (as I (...) self also am) I
resolved to make my Adresses to you (...) order ^o which, all that I at present
desire, is only to (...) into your Presence* to kiss your fair Hand, and (...)
you some account of my self* I come not, (...)* (...) upon you, no^ do expect
you should take my (...) in (...) I say: No, Madam, I have a greater value
(...) your Judgment than ^o have such a Thought: But when (...) make good
(...) Words by correspondent Actions; and (...) you (...) my Circumstances, by
them whom you da^^ (...), as well as my own Word^, I then shall beg the Favou^
(...) being admitted to the Honor of, Madam,

Your most Affectionate* and Humble Servant, R. ^*

(...) Madam, you will return a line or two by the Bearer, (...) your Excuse
for my Admittance into your (...)*



The Lady's Answer.
SIR;
I Received yours by the bearer of this* and though I am altogether a stranger to
your Person, and so should perhaps make my self ^^able to Censure, by returning
you an Answer, yet you write so like a Gentleman of Probity and Honor, that I
know no^ well how to deny you; and th^^^fore have chosen rather to exp^se my
self to the Censure (...) others, than to show my self rude ^o a Stranger: It Is
(...) Sir, I am a single Person, (and therefore ought to be (...) much the more
cautious of the Correspondences I hold) (...) have not resolved to alter my
Condition: I do confess I have made no Vow of Ce^^bracy, and therefore if I
mee^ (...) such a Gentleman (...) I think I can be happy in, and I can fa^^^, I
am not so much devoted to a single, but I (...) change it for a Married State:
But it is not Words alone (...) will persuade me* for Words as you your self do
(...) observe, must ^e made good by correspondent Actions, (...) for nothing.
And therefore, in a word, (...) your (...) be r^^l and your designs honest and
honorable, you have hereby the Liberty of making me a Visit; and (...)
according as I find you, so I Will Treat you* And in the mean Time (...) my self.

(...) in all (...) Re^pe^t, M. L.

A Letter to a Widow, on the Death of her Husband.
Madam;
I the old Proverb has any Truth in it, viz. That it (...) very bad Husband
that is not missed in a Family, your (...) be greatly enhanced, as having lost
a Husband so (...) in all respects, but especially in his Love (...) You (...)
in this barren Age of Virtue, it will be hard to find an (...) like him; Yet
should not this make You (...) but on the contrary, you should Thank God that
did so long entrust you with enjoying of so Rich a Jewel* (...) who gave him,
has thought good to take him (...) should you no^, with holy (...) of Old,
quietly (...) The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away; and blessed be
the Name of the Lord. And since God himself has promised To be a Husband to the
Widow, you cannot but own, you have changed for the better, and so, without
doubt, ha^ your Husband also; for though he has left a Prudent Wife behind him,
yet we need no^ fear to affirm with St. Paul, That be with Christ is far
better. He tarried with you the Time stipulated first between you, which was,
Till Death parted (...). And what could you desire more? You knew at first that
Death at last must part you, and that it lay in neither of your Powers to choose
which must go first. Dry up Your Tears then, and prepare to follow him; for You
may (...) to him, but he can never return to you again, for Death has safely
landed him upon the shoarless Shore of vast Eternity. Look forward then, dear
Madam, and seeing Death has ^e^ you free from the Law of you Husband, you have
the ^hole World before you to make a second Choice (...) And if upon mature
Consideration, you should think fit to cast your Thoughts on me, there is none
should mee^ your Passion with a brighter Flame, or a more true and cordial
Affections, than* Madam,

Your humble Admirer and Friend to serve (...). ^* ^*

'Twould swe^^ this Volumn too too large,
And make this Book of too much Charge,
(...) put down Copies in all things,
(...) Trade and Friendship daily brings,
Therefore a little take and see,
And strive for Ingenuity.
It Is matter that will the^ and I,
B^th Mind and Heart and Head employ*
And when engaged with all our Might*
Our Business will teach to ^^dite,
The From being designed only,
To give you ^ sample to write by.
Superscriptions of Letters
Instructions for External and Internal Super and Subscriptions of Letters.

REader, having open you a Prospect of the intent and purport of sundry kinds,
of Letters, as to matter and (...), together with Examples of Letters of
several kinds, especially such (...) are necessary for the Intended Purpose and
Design; I shall only add the Titles Su^table for such, on Superscription of
Letters, and so conclude this head, viz.

1. Therefore when you writ to any Person, if you would have it well a^cepted,
you must consider his or her Title, Degree or Alliance, and so frame your
Complement, Superscription, and Subscription accordingly: And that you may know
how to distinguish in this case, a^ to Titles of Honor of Respect, take
notice, in your Addresses, this Form is mostly in use, viz.

To the King; Sir, or May it please Your Majesty; and sometimes, Sacred Sir,
Dread Sir, Liege Lord, etc.

To the Queen, Madam, or May it please Your Majesty, or Most Sacred Majesty.

To the Prince, Sir, or May it please Your Royal Highness.

To the Princess, Madam, or May it please Your Royal Highness.

To a Duke, My Lord, or May it please Your Grace.

To a Du^chess, Madam, or May it please Your Grace.

To a Marquess, My Lord, or May it please Your Lordship,

To a Marchioness, Madam, or May it please Your L^^^ship,

To an Earl; My Lord, or Right Honorable.

To a Countess, Madam, or Right Honorable.

To a Viscount, the same as an Earl; and to his Lady, the same as a Countess.

To a Baron, My Lord, or May it please Your Lordship.

To a Baroness, Madam, or May it please Yo^^ Ladyship.

To a Baron^t, Sir, or May it please Your Worship, And to his Lady, Madam, or
May it please Your Ladyship.

To a Knight, Sir, or Right Worshipful.

And to his Lady, Madam, or May it please Your Ladyship.

To an Esquire, Sir, or May it please your Worship.

And indeed, Sir, or much Honored, is used to Gentlemen in general; as Madam,
o^ May it please you dear Mistress, is used to the contrary Sex of any Degree,
inferior to what I have named.

There are other Titles which are proper external Superscriptions, or such
whereby the Letter is directed, if it be not sent by a special Messenger, and,
many times, not amiss to be inserted, although the Messenger be special, and then
to be Wr^t^en upon a Paper that covers the Letter, the enclosure not being
S^aled, to prevent ^^aring, as often in other Cases it happens: And these are
as follow, seldom varying, unless some addition be made in respect of several
Titles centring in one and the same Person, which is frequently le^t to the
discretion of the Superscriber. viz.

To the King, or T^ His most Excellent Majesty, or T^ the most Sacred Majesty
of George the First.

To the Queen, or To the Queen's most Excellent Majesty.

To the Prince, or To his Royal Highness.

To the Princess, or To her Royal Highness* And in case of the Lords Spiritual,
viz.

To his Grace, the Lord A. B. of Cant*

To his Grace, the Lord A. B. of York.

And frequently the style is, To the most Reverend Father i^ God, etc. And to
the other infe^^our Cle^gy, Reverend Docto^, or otherwise, according to their
Degree and Quality* But if you Write to a Temporal Lord, you must ^ary the
(...) after this m^^ner, as,

To his Grace, the Duke of B.

To the Right Honorable, the Marquess of H.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of S.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount M.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord B.

(...) to be dignified, ((...) the Immediate Heirs,) with less than the (...)
of Honorable, as being their due by Birthright; and to a Knight and Barrone^,
by Virtue of his Patent the Title of Honorable and right Worshipful (...)
given. As likewise the latter to a Knight, and Worshipful to an Esquire.

Every Privy-Counsellor, though no^ a Nobleman, is ^tiled Right Honorable; all
Ambassadors have a style of Excellency; as likewise has the Lord Lie^t* of
Ireland, and the Capt. General of his Majesty's Forces when i^* being: Nor has
the Lord Mayor of London, during his Mayoralty, a less Title than Right
Honorable, and the Sheriffs; during that Office, are styled Right Worshipful;
nor does any thing less* than the Title of ^^qurie extend to the Mayors of any
Corporation, Justices of the Peace, etc. As for Titles, or rather Complemental
Civilities, due to persons of lesser Rank, I leave them to the Discretion of
the Writer, to suit them according to their Dignities, or the occasion of his
writing; and so I proceed to other Ma^^ers necessary to be known*

Subscriptions, and other necessary matters for the Reader to learn and
understand.
AS for Subscriptions (which are those that are Writt^en under the Letter) they
are no other than the Complements of the Writers, to which their Names are
affixed, (...) ought to express in some measure the Quality of the Person, by
an owing Superiority in him to whom the Letters is directed, or a Power and
Authority in him who writes it, ov^^ him to whom it is written; on the other
Hand, Friendship Equality or Familiarity.

When we write to Persons of Quality, we leave a large distance between the
Body of the Letter and the Subscription as likewise in case of the Internal
Superscription, which ^ignifi^ the greater Respect. And if Letter of Business,
or from any strange Place are required, you must on the left (...) set down the
Date of the Year, and the Name of the (...) which indeed may not be amiss in
any kind of Letter, (...) you would no^ discover the Place from whence you
(...)* Wherefore, having thus hin^ed it, I leave the rest (...)* Discretion of
the Writer, ever minding him to write in (...) as may be most suitable to the
Capacity of (...) writes about, not affecting any Singularity or (...)* (...)
making too often a Repetition of unnecessary of affected Words; endeavoring in
the most seemly manner to suit what we write, (as I before have hinted) to the
Capacity, Quality, Sex and Age of the Person to whom it is intended. Nor must
Brevity and Pla^^ness be rejected, no, not ^^^^ness in Writing, especially by
those who are not much encumbered with Business, and have time to deliberate on
it; for by so doing, together with true Spelling, Credit and a good Opinion of
you is frequently gained; nor must the making up or s^aling your Letter be
uncomely* but neat and handsome, with a fair Impression of your Seal.

Part IV.
Containing useful Instructions for making all such legal Writings as are
generally used.
HAving thus given Directions and Instructions in Reading and Writing true
English, in Arithmetic, and in writing and Inditing Letters, I shall now in
thi^ Fourth Part given you plain Directions and Examples for making the most
usual legal Forms of Writings that are made between Man and Man, etc. with many
other things of the like nature, whereby a Man that is but an ordinary Scholar
may be enabled to do his Business, without being at the charge of a Scri^ener
or Attorney, who are not at all times to be met with in the American Woods or
Plantations. I shall in the first Place give you some Forms of Bills of
Parcels, Trades men's Accounts, with Acquittances or Discharges; and then
proceed to Bills, Bonds, etc. Not omitting some ce^^^ary, Directions concerning
Bills of Exchange, etc.

Both Shopkeepers and Merchants do when they,
Their Goods ^^ansport, put off, or truck away,
Plain Bills of Parcels make, that all may ^ee,
What Good, they are, and what their Prices be.
Sold to W. Paywel the 25th of March, 1727, the following Goods.
4^6 Yards of Dowla^^, at 2 s. 5. d. 55 09 03 987 Else of O^^br^g^, at 17 d. 69
18 03 8^6 Else of Holland, at 4 s. 6. d. 197 02 02 519 Else Linnen-Clo^^h, at 2
s. ^ d. 78 10 08 259 Else narrow ditto, at 14* d. 15 02 02 One Barrel of
Gunpowder, 08 08 08 Errors excepted per John ^ air deal^. L, 4^4 11 2

The Merchant when be does the Money take.
He ought the Paying Man a Discharge to make,
A Form hereof in short, yet full, is here,
Transcribed out, the Buying Man to clear.
REceived this 25 of March, 1727, of W. Paywell the full of the within Bill. I
say rec'd by me. John Fair-dealer*

Some Men of Handy-crafts may this Book see*
Therefore for them some Bills prepared be*
A Carpenters Bill.
Mr. Richard Goodpay of New York, Dr. for Work and Materials.

FOr 50 Boards, at 12 d. per p^. ^0 10 ^ For 30 Ps. of square Timber, 01 05 0
For 6 Oaken planks, 00 12 ^ For 2000 of Shingles, 03 00 0 For 30 Pounds of
Nails, 0^ 10 0 For 29 days Works* 0^ 01 ^ John Chargeall. L. 11 1^ 6

When this Bill's paid, the Carpenter must make,
A full Discharge for what be than does take,
It being his good (...) all t^ receive,
He does, with thanks a full Discharge then give,
A Copy here you will find prepared by me,
To teach you how a Discharge ought to be,
REceived the 16 of March, 17^7. of Mr* Richard Goodpay, the Sum of Eleven
Pounds eighteen Shillings and Six Pence, in full of the within Bill, and is in
full of all other Bills, Accounts and Demands to this day. I say (...) in full
by me.

John Chargeall.

A Brick-layers Bill.
Mr. Thomas Househave of New York, Dr. for Work and Materials.

FOr 2000 of Bricks, 25 00 0 For 60 Load of Lime, 30 00 0 For ^2 Load of Sand,
02 10 0 For 30 Days Work, 07 16 0 For a Labourer 32 Days, 04 16 0 Daniel
Ebbets. L. 69 16 ^

The Bricklayer does also his whole Bill take,
Therefore a full Discharge be must them make;
No Copy here is needed but the same,
Will serve for him, changing the Sum and Name.
A Smith's Bill.
Mr. Zach. Zinthos of Quietland his Bill.

FOr a great Iron Bars for the House, 01 18 8 For one fire-shovel and Tongs, 00
11 6 For 30 pair of Hooks and Hinges, 03 00 0 For ^^tending an Anchor, 00 10 0
For a pair of And-Irons, 01 02 0 For ^ Casements, 03 00 0 Edward Black, L^ 10
02 ^

The Smith's bad Fortune is but half to take,
And therefore a Discharge in part does make,
The which because it differs from the other,
We do a Copy of it here discover*
REceived (...) ^9th of March, 17^7. of Mr. (...) of (...) the Sum of Three
Pounds two (...) and Two Pence* in part of the within ^^ill. I say, (...) by me.

Edward Black,

When ^e the rest receives, ^e (...) does (...),
A full Discharge; A Copy you (...)
REceived this 3d day of May, 1727. of Mr. (...) the Sum of Seven Pounds, begin
in full for Work come for him March, ^ast, as per Bill given (...). I say,
received in full of th^^ Bill, by me.

Edward Black

You her^ may see three Trades-men^ Bill^ at large,
All paid, and therefore to (...) a discharge,
Which may (...) you (...) ^ Receipt to make,
Although you should not all the (...) Sum ^ak^.
One thing more yet follows, that needful is,
Which all should careful be, they it (...) miss,
And that is, true Discharges for their R^nt,
When a full Quarter i^ run (...) and (...).
Wherefore when you you^ Re^^s do pay,
See that you keep this (...) always,
To take discharge from ^^ndlords sure,
And in such sort as (...) endure.
An Aquitttance for Rent.
REc'd this 5 th of May, 1727, of James Rent^^ of Burlington, Cordwa^^er, the
Sum of Five Pounds, which is in full for a Quaters. Rent for the dwell^^^ House
he now lives in, and which (...) due the 25th of March, last past. I say,
received by me,

John Tr^^^le^,

A Servants Receipt for Rent.
REceived this 3d day of April, 1727* of Mr. (...) of New^^^n, the Sum of Six
Pounds, being in part for one Quarter^ Rent due the 25 of March, last past, for
the House he now lives in. I say, received for the use of my Master David Dill,
by me.

John Prenti^e,

It is (...) to most Me^ Accounts (...) for to clear,
And with exactness by their ^en ^he (...) to make appear;
And (...) the Ball^^ce 's^ee^ them ^^th i^ fully satisfied,
They do a full Discharge the^ make, that they ^^ng Friends may 'bi^^,
(...) Copies therefore here are made, for ^^th of them to make,
(...) to prevent all future Claims, each from the other take.
REceived this 9th of October, 1727. of Mr. Leonard ^airdealer, the Sum of
Ninety Pounds, being for so much due upon Accomp^, and is in full of all
Reckon^^^^* (...) Deb^s, Accounts and Demands whatsoever to the (...). I say
(...) by me, Ja. Peaceable.

REc'd the 10th of October, 1727. of Mr. Ja. Peaceable (...) Shopkeeper, the
Sum of Two Hundred (...)* being for Goods sold him at sundry times, and is
(...) all ^ccompts* Reckonings, Bills, Bonds, Debts, (...) and Demands
whatsoever from the beginning of the World unto the Day of the Date hereof. I
say (...) the (...) in full,

(...)

(...) to (...) a full Discharge, we do,
Advise, a Seal may be our thereunto,
And if a Witness may be gained, 'twould be,
Much more Authentic to Posterity.
With Men of Trade, sometimes Need does require*
The Selling Man of Chap*men to desire
A Bill or Bond, wherein they fix a Day,
The Money that is owing for to pay:
A Form of both may very helpful be,
Which here follows to be improved by thee.
A short Bill of Debt.
(...) all Men by these Presents, That I Thomas Debtor of the Parish of
Moneyless in the County of Camberland, Weaver, do own and am justly indebted
unto Mr. Letig. Troublesome, of the same place, Merchant, in the just and full
Sum of Ninety Pounds, Current Money of the Province of Lawless, which I promise
and oblige my (...) to pay to the said Litig. Troublesome, or to his order,
(...) before the 10th Day of October, next* Witness my (...) ^eal this 7th of
May, Ann^ (...). 1727.

Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of John Fridence Will. Tell^^ue.


Thomas Debit^^

A short Bill with a Penalty.
KNow all Men by these Presents, That I (...) of Woodbridge in the County of
Essex in the (...) o^ New Jersey, do owe and stand justly indebt^d (...) (...)
Wood^e of the same place, Merchant, in the Sum of (...) Pounds current lawful
Money of New Jersey* (...) to the said Will* Wood^e, or to his He^^s, (...)
Administrators or Assigns, a^ or before the first day (...) the Date hereof. In
and to the (...) and truly to be made, (...)* (...)* and Administrators, in
the (...) Sum (...) Money, firmly by these (...) hereunto set my Hand and Seal
(...) 1727.

^

^

^

The Bill that is last, is good, and will avail,
When unto it there is both* Hand and Seal,
And it is much better, if to what is done,
You have some is to Witness, at least one,
Now next that does present it self to thee,
Is an Example, how a Bond should be,
Made so Authentic, as that binding may,
Enforce the Debtor the just Sum to pay.
KNow all Men by these Presents, That I Edward Endeavor of Quietown in the
County of Troubles^^^ Carpenter, am holde^ and firmly bound unto Richard Usurer
of the same Place, Merchant, in the Sum of One Hundred Pounds Current lawful
Money of Pennsilvania: to be paid to the said Richard Usurer, or to his certain
Attorney, Executors, Administrators or Assigns To the which Payment well and
truly to be made, I do hereby bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them firmly by these Presents. Sealed with my
Seal* dated this 4th Day of May* in the 4th Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord George, by the Grace of God of Great (...)* etc. King, defender of the
Faith; Annoque Dom. 1727.

T He Condition of this Obligation in such, That if the above-bounden Edward
Endeavor, or his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall well and
truly pay or cause to be paid to the abovenamed Richard Usurer, or to his
certain Attorney, Exe^s, Adm^^^or Assigns, the just and full Sum of Fifty
Pounds of like Current Money aforesaid, and that at or before the 29 Day of
September next ensuing the Date hereof, without fraud or further delay* Then
this present Obligation to be void and of none effect* or else (...) stand and
remain in full force and virtue.

Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of N. K. and R. C. Edward (...).

Now you have seen a form of Bond and Bill*
You may accept from (...) which you will,
But in my Judgment a Bond is most sure,
Sealed before Witness (...) may long endure;
For Bonds with doub^^ (...) are made,
When nothing in some Bills of th^^ is said*
And by a Bond the Interest shall recover,
But nothing of thy In^'rest by the other,
Wherefore if Debtors may (...) be
In Paying, when '^is due, if thou can see,
Before hand, what thy Lo^ in this Case may,
Choose and accept a Bond, without delay,
In all thou do, deal with an honest Man,
And he will Pay on the Day* if tha^ he can.
The Condition of a Bond for the Payment of ^ Sum of Money at Several times.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such* That if the above bounden Dan,
P^^^ell at his certain Attorney, Executo^ or Administrators shall well and
truly pay* or cause to be paid (...) the above named William Walt^^, or to his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, the just and full Sum of Fifty Pounds of
like Current Money, and that in manner and fo^^^ following, th^^ is to say, the
Sum of twelve Pound Ten Shillings, part thereof, on the 9th day of June next
(...) the date hereof; And twelve Pound te^* Shillings, of like Money on the
^th Day of August then next ensuing, Part of the said 50 Pounds; and Twelve
Pounds Ten Shilling on the 9th Day of October then next ensuing; and Twelve
Pounds Ten Shillings the residue, of the said Fifty Pounds, on the 9th Day of
December then next ensuing, Then this present Obligation to be void, and of
none effect. But if in any of the aforementioned Payments default be made of
any of the said several and respective Sums, or any part of any of them, on
(...) of the said several and respective Days or times of Paym^^^s above
mentioned and (...)* contrary to the true intent and meaning of these Presents,
Then to be and remain to full Force and Virt^^,

Sealed and Delivered by the Presence of Daniel Paywell.

The Condition of an Obligation from Two to One.
THe Condition of this Obli^^^ion is such That if the above (...) John (...)
and* Charles Gold, or either of them, their, or either of their Heirs,
Executors, or Administrations, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid to
Samuel Receiver, or to his certain Attorney, Executors or Administrators the
just and full Sum of Fifty Pounds, of like Money aforesaid, on the 22th Day of
September next ensuing the Date hereof, Then this present Obligation to be
(...)* etc.

Sealed and Delivered etc.

The Condition of an Obligation from One to Two.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such That if the above bounden R Rich. or
his Heirs Executors Ad^^^^trators or Assigns do well and truly pay or cause to
be paid to the abovenamed Thomas Thomson and George Grig, or to either of
them, their, or either of their certain Attorney, Executors or Administrators
the just and full Sum of, etc.

The Condition of an Obligation from Two Persons to Two.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Thomas
True and John False, or either of them, their, or either of their certain
Attorney, Executors or Administrators do well and truly pay or cause to be paid
to the abovenamed George Allen and Alex Harper, or to either of them, their,
or either of their certain Attorney, Executors or Administrators, the just and
full Sum of, etc.

And after this ma^^^^ you may make the Condition of Obligations no^ only from
Three to Three, but from Ten to Ten, if Occasion require it, only observing to
insert in the Obligation the Persons Names, the Town and County where They
live, and the Trades or Employments that they follow, But various Business
requiring various Forms, I shall proceed to set down (...) as I apprehend any
ways useful.

But inasmuch as (...) amongst men is to be preser'd to strife and Enmity,
which is much Increased upon Difference, and going to Law upon the same;
Therefore I shall begin with Arbitraion, and Arbitration Bonds, U^^ireage and
Awards, with some Directions for the same being made well, so as to stand good
in Law; in order to avoid further Trouble and Difference concerning such
matters and Things as shall be submitted to Arbitration.

Arbitration or Arbitrament is greatly favored by the Common Law, the end
thereof being privately to compose Differences between Parties, by the Judgment
of honest, and Understanding Men, and to prevent the great Trouble and Charge
of Law Suits;

And Arbitrament is an Award, Determination or Judgment made or given between
Parti^s in Controversy, by the (...) or Umpire, elected by the Parties
Controversing according to the Submission or Compromise of the said Parties,
according (...) Reason and good Conscience, Dyer 236. 1^* (...)* pl. 39.

It is to be observed, That Criminal Offenses, as Treasons, ^elonies, etc. as
touching the Crime, are not Arbitrable, for it is necessary that such Offenders
be made known and punished, West. Symb. par. 2. Sect. 33.

Also, Causes Matrimonal seem not Arbitrable, le^t men should Separate those
whom God has joined together, (...) ut. Supra.

And generally, no Cha^^les real or mix^, no Debt by Deeds (...) Records, no
Annuities nor Freehold are not of themselves A^^^^table* But yet if men will
submit such Things by b^nd, such Bond is good, and for the Nonperformance of
the Award, the Bond will be forfeited.

Every Submission is either General or Special; General, as of all Qua^^els,
Actions, Executions, Demands, etc. Special, as when it is only of certain
Matters of Facts, and Things, as of Trespass, or all Actions of Trespass, of
Debt or Detinue, etc.

Submissions to Arbitration are two ways, either by Writing or by Word.

Submission by (...) only* will not oblige the Party (...) perform the Award;
but an Action on the Case for Reciprocal Promises will lie: And if Money be
awarded, an Action of Debt will ^e, 5 E. 4. 7. Keb* 600. 2 Keb. 238. 3. Keb. 64.

If Submissions are by Word only, it is said, either of the Parties may
Countermand and Discharge the Arbitrators without Deed or W^lting; but if there
be diverse Persons (...), one Person cannot discharge the Arbitrators without
the consent of the other Companions of the same Party; Fitz. Arbi^. 21 21. H.
6. 30. (...)* etc. 28. H. 6. Fitz. Arb. ^2. If the Submission be by Deed or
Writing, the Discharge must be by Deed or Writing.

A (...) Bond of Arbitration of all Actions without Exception, and without an
Umpire, is as follows, viz.

A Bond of Arbitration.
KNow all Man by these Presents, That I John Quarelsom of Trouble-Town in the
County of Vexal, (...), am held and firmly bound unto Joseph Peaceable of Amboy
in the County of Middlesex, Sadler, in the Sum o^ Five Hundred Pounds Current
lawful Money of New Jersey, to be paid to the said Joseph Peaceable, or to his
(...) Attorney, Executors or Administrators. To the which payment well and
truly to be made, I do hereby bind my (...) my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators and every of (...) firmly by these Presents* Sealed with my
Seal, dated this 2^th Day of April, in the 14 Year of his Majesty's Reign, etc.
Annoq* Damini 1727.

THe Condition of this Obligation is such* That if the above bounden John
Qua^elsom, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators and every of them, do and
shall, for his and then parts and behalf^, stand (...), obey, abid^, observ^,
and in and by all things well and truly perform the Award, Arbitrament,
Determination, final End and Judgment of Charles Peace maker of Strifes Town,
Gent, and John D^right of Suffer* Town, Merchant, Arbitrator, in, and
indifferently chosen, elected and named by the said John Quarelsom, as on the
part and behalf the abovenamed Joseph Peaceable, to award, arbitrate, order,
judge, determine and (...) end to make of, for upon and concerning all and all
manner of Actions, and causes of Acti^^^; Suits, Debts, Strifes, Accounts,
Reckoning, Sum and Sums, of Money, Trespasses, Differences, Quarrels, Bills,
Bonds* Specialties, Judgments, Extents* or any other Matter, Thing or Demand
whatsoever had, made* moved, risen or depending* Provided always, the said
Award, Arbitrament, Order* Determination, final End and Judgment, of the said
Arbitrators, for and upon the Premises, be made and given up in Writing, under
their Hands and Seals, ready to be delivered (...) the said Parties, on or
before the 19th Day of May; next ensuing the Date hereof, Then this present
Obligation to be void and of none effect* or (...) to be and remain in full
Force and Virtue,

Sealed and Delivered in the Presence T, L, and B* D, John Quarelsome,

In this Case there must be two Bonds Interchangeably from (...) party to the
other; and if an Umpire to be required he must be mentioned in the Condition in
these Words following, viz.

The Condition of a Bond of Arbitration, with a Clause for an Umpire.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That the above bounden A. B. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for his and their Parts and Behalfs, shall
and do in all Things well and truly stand to, obey, abide, observe* perform,
fulfill and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, final End and Determination of
C. D. of E. in the County of F. Gen^, and ^. H. of E. aforesaid, Gent.
[according to the Names and Plac^s the Arbitrators are of] Arbitratrators
indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well on the Part and Behalf of the
above bounden A. ^. as of the above named I. K. to arbitrate, award, order,
judge, and determine of, for, upon or concerning all and all manner of Action
or Actions, Cause or Causes of Actions, (...), Bills, Bonds, Specialties,
Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies, T^e^passes, Damages
and Demand* whatsoever, at any Time heretofore had made, moved, brought,
commenced, sued, prosecuted, done, suffered, committed or depending, by or
between the said Parties, so as the said Award, Arbitr^ment, Order,
Determination, final End and Judgment of the said Arbitrators of, for, or upon
the Premises be made o^ drawn up in Writing under their Hands and Seals, and
delivered or ready to be delivered to the said Parties, or such of them as
shall desire the same, on or before the first Day of May next ensuing the Date
of th^se Presents* then this Obligation to be void, and of none Effect, or else
to stand and remain in full Force and Virtue.

As to the Clause for an Umpire, in case the Arbitrators cannot agree by the
same Time, after the Words (next ensuing the Date of these Presents) add as
follows;

And if the said Arbitrators shall not make and draw up their Award in Writing,
as aforesaid, on or before the first Day of May* if then the said A. B. lus
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, do and shall stand
to, abide, observe, perform and keep the Award Umpirage, final End and Judgment
of M. N. of (...) said County F. Esquire Umpire indifferently elected and choice
betwixt the said Parties for ending and composing of all (...) Differences
aforesaid, so as the said Umpire do make (...) draw up his said Award, Umpirage
and Determination (...) Writing (indented) under hi^ Hand and Seal ready to be
delivered to the Parties, or such of them as shall (...) same, on or before the
tenth Day of the said Month of May next ensuing the Date of these Presents,
then this Obligation to be (...) and of none Effect, or (...) to stand and
(...) in full Force and Virtue. See pa^. 134. (...) the (...) Act of
Parliament, to make (...) Submission a Rule of Court.

If a Submission be concerning ^ Title of Land, Mr. West (...) his Sy^^. Part ^
Sect. 40. (...) to word it as follows.

As well of, for and concerning in the Right, Title, Interest, ^se, Possession,
and Demand, of and in the Manor of (...) the App^^^^^ances i^ ^. in the (...)
County of Y. and (...) Lands, Te^ements and (...), with the (...) in S.
aforesaid in the (...) A. B. and his Assigns, (...) of and upon all Actions,
(...), (...), Quarrels, Debts, Duties, Debates, Gri^fs, Inconveniences and
Demands, had, moved, starred, or depending between the said Parties concerning
the said Mann^r, T^n^ments, and Premises, or any Part thereof* and also if the
said A. B. before the Feast of I. now next coming, do show unto the (...)
Arbitrators all such Writings as ^e has concerning the (...) Manor and
^^^misses at such Time and Place as the (...) Arbitrators ^^all appoint for the
Sight (...) -- So always (...), ( etc. as in others) That then, etc. as before,
(...) others.

The Election of Arbitrators, and the Submission to them being this made, It is
the Duty of Parties to come before the Arbitrators* and show their Grievances,
and the Arbitrators ^^ght to he^r them and their Evidences, and Judge
accordingly. And in the next place to draw up the^ Award and (...) or Publish
the same to the Parties so submitting (...) Differences* and that within the
Time (...) make (...)* or else (...) is (...), nor is it any Award before it be
(...).

The Form and of an Award.
TO all People to whom this present Writing as Award (...) award, order, judge
and determine, of, for, upon and concerning all and all manner of Action and
Actions* Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Specialties,
Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses, (...) and
Demands whatsoever, at any Time before our said Election, had, made, moved,
commenced, (...), prosecuted, done suffered or committed by or between the said
Parties, as by the mutual Bonds o^ Writings Obligatory of the said Parties,
with the Conditions thereof (Relati^^ (...) had, may more (...) appear.) Now
Know (...), That we the said Arbitators in pursuance of (...) said Election,
and the Power given us thereby, for the Ending of all Matters to us therein
submitted, do Arbitrate, Award, Order, Judge and Determine upon the Premises,
as follows, First, That -- (...) Witness whereof we have to these our present
Inden^^res of Award, Interchangeably set our Hands and Seals, etc.

The Form of an Umpirage.
TO All Christian People to whom these Presents shall (...), Know Ye, That ^ M.
N. of K. Umpire indifferently chosen by ^ F. of, C and G. H. of, I. having
deliberately heard and understood the Griefs, Allegations and (...) of both the
said Parties, and willing, as much as in the (...) the said Parties at Unity
and good Accord, do by th^^^ (...) arbitrate, award, order, deem, decree and
judge, that the said E. ^. his Executors or Administrators or Assigns, o^ some
of them, do well and truly pay or (...) to be paid unto the said G. H. (...)
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in the dwelling (...) of J. K.
(...) in L. in the said County of M. the (...) Sum of Ten Pounds of lawful
Money of England on the (...) day of May (...) ensuing the Date hereof, and
that upon Payment (...), either of the said E F. and G. H. shall seal,
subscribe, and a^ his several Act and Deed, d^^^ver unto the other (...) them a
general Release in Writing of all Matters, Actions, (...), Causes o^ Actions,
Bonds, (...), Co^enants, Con^roversies and Demands whatsoever, which either of
them may, might, or in any wise ought to have of and against the other of them
by Reason aforesaid, or means of any Matters, or Cause or Thing whatsoever,
from the Beginning of the World until the 24th Day of August now last past. In
Witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the first Day of October,
in the thirteenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, George, of Great
Brit^^^, France and Ireland, King, Defender^ (...) the Faith, etc. Annoque
Domini, 1727.

It ought to be carefully observed by all Arbitrators* as well as the Umpires
chosen, to give their Award or Umpirage for and concerning such Matters and
Things (...) are submitted by the Parties who choose or appoint them; for (...)
they give their Award concerning matters that are not submitted, the Award is
vo^^, Pl Com. 396. ^.

But if the Award is made for more than is Submitted, the Award is good for
that part which is Submitted, and void for the rest.

In Trespass for taking away Goods, the Defendant pleaded an Award, that
because the Defendant had taken away the Plaintiffs Goods, he should therefore
carry and ^^deliver them to the Plaintiff, which he had done, this was held
naught; for re-delivery of the Plaintiffs own Goods could be no Satisfaction,
much less the re-deliverey of the part of they, 4^. E. 16. 2. H. 5. 2. ^. 12.
H. 7. 14. 15.

But it had been Good if the Defendant had been ordered to have carried the
Goods to such a place for the Plaintiffs Benefit, 2. H. 7. 2. 14. H. 4. 14*

So where there is an Acquittal or express Satisfaction awarded on both sides,
or on one side only, with an Employed Discharge on the other, the Award on such
side is good.

If it be found that one has done but one Penny worth of Damag^ more than the
other, and that penny Being award^^, and the other thereupon shall be quit
against him, is sa^d to be good, (...). H. 6. 1^* 21. H. 6. 9. D^er, 356*

(...) each party Submitting to the Award (...) by the Award to Compel the
other Party either by Law or Equity to perform the Award, the Award is good,
although the Party be thereby put to his Action. Mich. 24. Car. B. R. Pract. Reg.
28.

Every Arbitrament ought to be expounded and intended according to the Intent
of the Arbitrators, and not literally, 10. Co. ^^l. 57. b.

The Parties shall have a reasonable time allowed them for the Performance
(...) Award, if no Time be limited, 20. ^. 4. 8. 6.

Note, By a Sta^, of 9 and 10 W. 3* c. 15. After the 11th of May, 1727, it was
enacted, That all Merchants and Trader^, and others, desiring to end any
Controversy, Suit or Quarrel (for which there is no other Remedy but by
personal Action or Suit in Equity) by Arbitration, may agree, that their
Submission of the Suit to be the Award or Umpirage of any Person o^ Persons,
should be made a Rule of any of his Majesty's Courts of Record which the
Parties shall choose; and may insert such their Agreement in their Submission,
or the Condition of the Bond or Promise: And upon producing an Affidavit of
such inserting, and upon Reading and Filing such Affidavit in the Court so
chose* the same may be entered of Record in such Court, and a Rule of Court
shall thereupon be made, that the Parties shall submit to, and finally be
concluded by such Arbitration or Umpirage; and in case of Disobedience thereto,
the Party neglecting or refusing shall be subject to all the Penalties of (...)
a Rule of Court, and Process shall issue accordingly, which shall not be stopped
or delayed; unless i^ appear^^^ (...), that the Arbitrators or Umpire
misbehaved themselves, or that such Award was corruptl^* or undu^ly (...)* In
which Case such Arbitration or Umpirage shall (...) and set aside by any Court
of Law of Equity; so as (...) Corruption or und^e Practice be complained of in
the (...) where the R^le is made for such Arbitration* before the last Day of
the next Term after such Arbitration mad^ (...).

(...) I presume, may ^e to the Effect following* viz.

And the above bound A. B. does agree and desire, that this his Submission to
the Award abovementioned, be made a Rule of her Majesty's Court of Queen's
Bel^ch, pursuant to the late Act of Parliament for this purpose provided.

The like for the other Party in the Condition of his Bond of Submission.

The Condition of a Bond to perform Covenants, specified in a lease of (...)*
etc.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden William
Si^e, his He^rs, Executors, Administrators, they, or any of them* shall and do
for his and their parts, in all things well and truly observe, perform, fulfill,
accomplish, pay and keep all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles,
Clauses, Proviso's, Payments, Conditions and Agreements, whatsoever which on
his and their parts and behalfs are or ought to be observed, performed*
fulfilled, accomplished paid and kept, comprised and mentioned in a pair of
Indentures, bearing even da^^ with these Presents, shade or expressed to be
made between the said William (...) of the one part, and the abovenamed Robert
(...) of the other part, and that in and by all things, according to the
contents, purposes, true intent and (...) of the same Indenture, without Fraud
or cove^; Then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else
to be and re^^^^ in full Force and Virtue.

A Condition of a Counter Bond (...) save harmless from one Party to another.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That wherea^ the above named John
(...) at the special instance and request of Richard Wo^dby of Jamaica in
Queens County, (...)* is held and firmly bound unt^ Thomas Gowin, of New York,
Merchant, in and by one Obligation bearing date exactly with these Presents, in
the Penal Sum of one hundred Pounds current Money of New York, Conditioned for
the true and just Payment of Fifty Pounds of like lawful Money unto the said
Thomas Gowin, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns on the 12th Day of
August, next ensuing the date of the recited Obligation, as by the said
Obligation and the Condition thereof, relation being thereunto had, does and
may more at large appear. If therefore the said Richard Woodby, his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, or any of them, shall and do well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said Thomas Gowin, his Executors or
Administrators, or (...) the Sum of Fifty Pounds current lawful Money of
New York, the said 12 Day of August, next ensuring the Date of the said
Obligation before mentioned, in discharge of the said Obligation* then this
present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to stand good, ^^d
remain in full force and virtue.

Sealed and delivered, etc.

A Discharge proper to be given upon the Receipt of a Legacy.
REceived the twenty first Day of May, 17^7* by me William Lambwool of Hemstead
in Qeens County on the Island of N^ss^w, of David Yates and Morgan S^^w, of the
said Place and County, Executors of Caleb Welling of Flushing, in the County
aforesaid, late deceased, the Sum of Twenty two Pounds, Five Shillings and Six
Pence, of current Money of New York, being a Legacy given unto me the said
William Lambwool, by the said Ca^^^ Welling, in and by his Last Will act
Testament; of which said Sum of Twenty two Pounds, (...) Shillings and Six
Pence, and all other Debts, Duties, Sum (...) Sums of Money and Demands
whatsoever, I the said William Lambwool do acquit and fully discharge the said
David Yates and Morgan Show, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and every
of them forever by these Presents. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto (...) my
Hand and Seal this twenty first Day of May. 1727.

Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of (...) W. Lambwool.

A Counter Condition to save Bail Harmeless.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the ab^^^-namen C. D,
at the special Instance and Request of (...) above-bounden A, B, together with
the said C, D, is bound (...) M, N, Esquire High Sheriff of the County of L, in the
Sum (...)* Conditioned for the Appearance (...) said A, B, (...) his Majesty's
Justices at the next (...) City-Hall of the City of New-Yo^^* on Tuesday the
5th (...) of June next, to answer H, P, in a Ple^ of, etc. as by the (...)
Obligation and Condition thereof, more at la^e appears* Now if ^e above Bound
A. B. do and shall appear according to (...) said Sheriff^ Bail Bond, and as
the Law in such Case requires; and if the said A, B, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators shall also from time to time, and a^ all times hereafter, save
^armless and inde^^ him the said, C^ D, his Exers* and Adm^^* of and from all
Damages* Costs and Cha^ges which ^e, them, or any of them shall or may at any
Time hereafter be put (...) by reason of his the said C, D's being Bound for
the Appearance of the said A, B. as aforesaid, Then this Obligation to be Void,
and of none effect, or else, etc.

A Condition to Marry a Person, or pay, etc.
THE Condition, etc. That if the above-bound A. B. (...) or before, etc. next
ensuing the Date of the above-written Obligation, Espouse and Marry according
to the Usage of the (...) of England E. D Daughter of, etc. If she the said E.
^. will (...) Consent* And the Laws of this Realm permit (...) Marriage to be
consumated: Or if it shall happen the (...) A. B. shall not Marry and take to
Wife the said E. D. as (...)* if then the said A. B. do and shall well and
truly (...) to be paid unto the said E^ D. her Executors, etc. the full Sum of
(...) and upon etc. next ensuing the said Day of (...) abovementioned: (...)
etc. Or else, etc.

A Condition to pay back part of a Legacy, if any D^^^ of the Testator shall
after appear to be (...).
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound John Jones, has h^^ and
received of the above named Jam^^ Wild, Executor of the la^^ Will and Testament
of one (...) Tomb, of New York, deceased, the Sum of 50^. (...) etc. Legacy
given and (...) by the said J T. to the said J* W* If therefore any Debt
hereafter of the said J. T. shall (...); be demanded or received and paid by
the said J. W. his Execu^^^^ o^ Administrators, and the said J. J. his
Executors or Administrators, shall within one Month after notice thereof, well
and (...) pay or cause to be pai^ to the said J. W. his Executors (...)
Assigns, a Ratable Part and Proportion back again toward the satisfaction of
the said Debt. That then, etc.

Condition to give account and render the Stock delivered to one who is to
carry on a Trade at half profit.
THE* Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above*named, W. K.
at the request of the abovenamed J. C. has entrusted and committed into the
hands of the (...) C, diverse Goods, Working-^ools, Plate, Money and (...) being
in the whole to the value of (...) for the (...) the said J* C, with a
necessary Stock to exercise the Trade (...) G^ldsmith. And whereas it i^ agreed
between the said J, C* (...) W, K, that the said J, C, shall work upon and
improve (...) Stock in buying and selling, and for his Labor and (...) in
shall receive and have to his own Use the one Half of the Profit thereof to be
made, keeping the Stock entire, and paying (...) the said W. K. the other half
of the Profit (...) made. If therefore the said J. C. his Executors or (...) do
and shall within six Months next after (...) given, or le^t in writing at the
place of his usual (...), (...) deliver unto the said W, K, his Executor^ (...)
of lawful Money of England (...) before such notice given o^ left in writing as
aforesaid; then if the (...), Executors or Administrators of the said J* C*
shall within twenty days next after such the death of the (...) J, C, (...) and
deliver unto the said W, K, his Executors or Administrators the said (...) or
the value thereof as aforesaid* And also if the said J. C. do and shall from
time to time yearly, and every year at the Feasts, etc. until the said (...) or
the value thereof, as aforesaid, shall be paid and delivered unto the said W.
K. (...) Executors or Administrat^^^, pay or cause to be paid unto the said W.
K. his Executors or Administrators the (...) or ou^ half of all such sum and
sums of Money a^ ^e the said J. C* shall have received or gained by working in
the Trades of a Goldsmith or Silversmith, or by buying and selling any Wares
belonging to either of the said Trades; the first payment thereof to be made at
the Feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed Mary next ensuring the date
hereof, Then this Obligation to be (...), etc.

A short Assignment of a Bond.
TO all, etc. Whereas R. C. of, etc in and by one Obligation bearing date, etc.
stands Bound to I. ^. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in the Penal
Sum of 20 l* with ^ Condition for the Payment of 10 l. on the 10 th day of
March next ensuing the date of the said Obligation, as by the said Obligation
and Condition it does more fully appear* Now Know ye, That I the said I. ^. for
diverse good Causes and Considerations me hereunto moving, Have bargained, sold,
Assigned (...)-ever, and by these Presents do fully, clearly and absolutely
bargain, ^ell, assign and (...)-over unto F. I. of, etc. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as well the said Obligation, as the said Sum of
Money therein mentioned, to the proper (...) and b^^oof of the said F. I. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and without any account therefore to be
given (...) the said I. ^. my Execut^^^* (...) Assigns, or any of them, (...)
Witness, etc.

An Assignment of Bond.
WHereas A. B. of M, in and by one Bond or Obligation, ^ea^ing date -- became
bound to C. D. in the ^enal Sum of -- Conditioned for the Payment of the Sum of
-- at a Day long since past, as by the said Bond and Condition thereof may
appear. And whereas there now remains due to the said C. D. for Principal and
(...) on the said Bond, the Sum o^ -- Now Know All Men by these Presents, That
the said C. D. for and in Consideration of the Sum of -- to him in hand paid by
E. F. the Receipt whereof the said C. D. does hereby acknowledge, He the said
C. D. has assigned and set over, and by these Presents does assign and set
over to the said ^. F. the said recited Bond or Obligation, and the Moneys
thereupon due and owing, and all his Right, Title and Interest of, in and to
the same. And for the better receiving and Recovering the said Sum that is now
due, or hereafter may become due* the said C. D. has made, ordained,
constituted and appointed, and by these presents does make* ordain* etc. the
said E. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns his true and lawful
Attorney and Attorneys Irrevokable, for him, and in his Name, and in the Name
and Names of his Exers. and Admrs. but for the sole and proper Use and Benefit
of the said E. F. his Exers. Admrs. and Assigns to ask. demand (...) for,
recover and receive the same. Giving and granting (...) my said Attorney and
Attorneys* by these Presents* m^ whole Strength and Authority in and about the
Premises, to take and use all lawful ways and means for the Recovery thereof;
and one or more Attorneys under him to constitute and appoint* and at pleasure
to Revoke. And on Payment thereof to deliver up and cancel the said Bond, and
give sufficient Discharges therefore. And the said C. D. does Covenant with the
said E. F. That he the said C. D. has not received* no^ (...) receive the said
Moneys due on the said Bond, o^ any part thereof; neither has, shall or will
Release or Discharge the same, or any part thereof, but will own and (...) all
Lawful Proceedings for Recovery thereof, he the said E. F. saving the said C.
D. harmless from all Costs and Charges that may happen thereby. In Witness, etc.

A Declaration of a Bond, made in a Third Persons Name upon Trust
KNow, Ye, That whereas A. B. by his Obligation dated ( Or you may Recite the
Bond) Now Know Ye, (...) E. F. of G. do hereby Acknowledge and Confess, That
although the said Bond is made in my Name, yet nevertheless it is so taken only
upon Trust and Confidence in me Reposed by H. I. of K. and L. his Wife, and to
and for the Uses, Intents and Purposes hereafter mentioned, That is to say,
That he the said H. I. shall have, receive and take the Use and benefit of the
said Bond, during the Joy^^ and Natural Lives of them the said H. I. and L. his
Wife; and that the said Principal Sum, with the Interest thereof, after the
Decease of either of the said -- (...) remain, and to be (...) and for the use
of the (...) of them, and (...) no other use or Purpose whatsoever, In Witness,
etc.

HAving thus given you Presidents of the Conditions of Bonds most generally in
use, for your further and (...) understanding of the Natural of a Bond, you a^^
to Note, Tha^

A BOND is a Deed in Writing whereby one Person does (...) himself to another
to pay a Sum of Money, or (...) other Act or Thing It consis^s of two parts,
viz. the Obligation, whereby the Party is bound, and the Condition, which
expresses ^^at Money is to be pa^d, o^ Thing to be Performed, and the Time of
Performance.

I^ a Bond has no Date, or a Wrong Date, or contain false (...), and if some
English words be not right spelled, it (...) Sealed and Delivered, it i^ good
But if the Words at and end of the Condition, That then this Obligation to be
void be omitted, the Condition will be void, but not the Obligation, which in
this case remains single.

The Condition of a Bond must be to do a Thing Lawful and Possible, or else it
is void.

If no Place is mentioned for performing a Condition, the Obligor must find out
the Person of the Obligee, and tender the Money, or else the Obligation will be
forfeited; therefore its necessary to mention the Place where the Money is to
be paid, as well as the Time. If no Time be mentioned, the Money is due (...).
Or if the Time of Payment in the Condition of a Bond is said to be 30th of
February or the 32 d of March, etc. whenas there are no such Days, it shall not
make void the Condition. But if the Obligor be to do a sole Act, without the
Limitation of Time, and this Act is to be done at a certain Place, as to go to
England, etc. he has the Time of his whole Life for the Performance. Where
several Days and Times are appointed for Payment of Money, the Obligation is not
forfeited till all the Days are Expired.

The From of a Bill of Sale for Goods
KNow all men by these presents, That I William Grafsmore of Westchester in the
County of Westchester, weaver, for and in consideration of the Sum of Forty
Pounds, of current Lawful Money of New York, to me in Hand paid by James
Morewit of Rye, in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, whereof I do hereby
acknowledge the Receipt, and my self therewith fully and entirely satisfied,
have Bargained, Sold, Set over, and delivered, and by these presents, in plain
and open Market, according to the just and due Form of the Law, in that Case
made and provided, do to again, Set over and deliver unto the said Ja, Morewit,
Our (...) To have and to hold the said Bargained (...) unto the said James
Morewit, his Executor, Administrators, and Assigns, to the only proper are and
behoof of the said Ja. Morewit, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns
forever; And I the said Willaim (...), for my self, my Executors, and
Administrators the said Bargained (...), unto the (...) James Morewit, his
Executors Administrators and Assigns against est and all manner of Persons
shall and will warrant; and for ever defend by these Presents. In Witness
whereof, together with the delivery of the Bargein'd Premises, I have hereunto
set my Hand and Seal the Tenth Day of May, in the -- -- Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord George, King of Great Britain, etc and of our Lord God, 1727.

A Sale of Lands by Lease and Release.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the other
part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in Consideration of the Sum of 50
l. of lawful Money of Great Britain, to him in hand paid by the said C. D. the
Receipt whereof he does hereby Acknowledge, Has Bargained and Sold, and by
these Presents does Bargain and sell unto the said C. D. all that etc. and the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, together with the Rents and
Profits of the Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof; To have and to
hold the said, etc. and all and singular the Premises herein mentioned, and
intended to be hereby bargained and sold, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
from the Day before the Date hereof, for and during the Term of one whole year,
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; Yielding and
Paying therefore the Yearly Rent of one Pepper Corn at the Feast of St. Michael
the Archangel only. If the same be lawfully demanded, to the indent, that by
virtue of these preserves, and of the Statute for Transferring of Uses into
Possession, the said C. D. may be in the Actual Possession of the Premises, and
be enabled to accept a Grant of the Reversion and Inheritance thereof, to him
and his Heirs. In Witness, etc.

The Release.
THis Indenture made, etc between A. B. and E. his Wife of the one part, and C.
D. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. and E. his Wife, for and
in Consideration of the Sum of -- current Money of Y. to the said A. B. in hand
paid by the said C. D. at or before the ensealing and delivery of these
Presents, the Receipt whereof he the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge, and
thereof, and every Part and Parcel thereof Does clearly acquit and discharge
the said C. D, his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, by these
Presents, Have Given, Granted, Alienated, Released and Confirmed, and by these
Presents do Give, Grant, Alien, Release and Confirm unto the said C. D. and to
his Heirs and Assigns, all that ( Describe the Premises) together with all and
singular the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Pastures, Commons,
Woods, Woodlands, Water, Watercourse, Mines, Minerals, Profits, Commodities,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said -- belonging or in any
wise appertaining, or therewithal used, occupied, or enjoyed, or accepted,
reputed, taken and known as Part, Parcel and Member thereof; (All which said
Premises are now in the actual Possession of him the said C. D. by virtue of
one Indenture of Bargain and Sale to him thereof made, for the Term of One
Year, bearing Date the Day before the Date of these Presents, and made between
the said A. B. and E. his Wife, on the one part, and the said C. D. of the
other part, and by virtue of the Statute for Transferring of Use into
Possession) And all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use, Trust, Property,
Reversion, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of them the said A. B. And E. his Wife,
of, in and to the Premises, and every or any part or parcel thereof, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders yearly, and other Rents and
Profits of the Premises, and of every Part and Parcel thereof, Together with
all and singular Deeds, Evidences, Writings, Records, Exemplification of
Records, Escripts and Minuments' whatsoever, touching and concerning the said
Premises only, or only any Part or Parcel thereof. To Have and to Hold the
said -- and all and singular other the Premises herein before mentioned, meant
or intended to be hereby granted, alienated, released or confirmed, and every
Part and Parcel thereof, with their and every of their Appurtenances, unto the
said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof of him the
said C. D. and his Heirs and Assigns forever. And the said A. B. for himself;
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, Promise, Grant and
Agree to and with the said C. D* his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them by
these Presents, in manner and form following ( That is to say) That he said A,
B, at the Time of the Ensealing and Delivery of these Presents, is seized of
and in the said Message, etc. (...) singular other the Premises, in and by
these Presents (...) Bargained and sold, with all and every their Rights,
Members and Appurtenances, of good, pure, perfect and absolute Estate of
Inheritance in Fee simple, without any Condition, Reversion, Remainder or
Limitation of any Use of Uses, Estate or Estates, in or to any Person or
Persons whatsoever, to Alter, Change, Defeat, Determine or make Void the same.
And that the said A. B, at the Time of ensealing and Delivery of these
Presents, has full Power, good right and lawful Authority to grant* bargain,
sell and convey all and singular the before hereby granted or mentioned to be
granted Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances unto the said,
C. D. his Heirs and Assigns in manner and form aforesaid. And that he the said
C. D. his Heirs and Assigns and every of them shall and may by force and virtue
of these Presents at all Times hereafter lawfully, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy and possess the said, etc. and all and singular the before
granted Premises, with their and every of their Rights Members and
Appurtenances, and have, receive and take the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof
to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever, without any lawful Let,
Suit, Trouble, Denial, Interruption, Eviction or Disturbance of the said A. B.
his Heirs or Assigns, or from any other Person or Persons whatsoever lawfully
claiming by, from or under him, them or any of them, or by his or their means,
act or consent, Title; interest, privity or procurement: And that free and
clear, and freely and clearly exonerated and discharged, or otherwise from Time
to Time well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless by the said A. B. his
Heirs and Assigns of and (...) all and all manner of (...) and other Gifts,
Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Mortgages, (...) Dowers, (...) of Dower,
Statu^^merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Extents, Judgments,
Executions, Uses, (...), Rents and Arrearages of Rent, Forfeitures, Fines,
Issues and Amerceaments, and of and from all and singular other Tides,
Encumbrances and Demands whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered, omitted or
done by the said A. B. or his Assigns, or by any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him, them or any of Them (the
Rents and Services which from hence forth from thine to Time shall grow due and
payable to Chief Lord or Lords of the Foe or Foes of she Premises only
excepted and fore prized.) And further the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs
Executors and Administrators does covenant, Promise and agree to and with the
said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, That he the said A. B. his Heirs, etc. shall
and will at all Times, during the space of -- years, next ensuing the date
hereof, at and upon the reasonable Request, and at the Cost and Charges in the
Law of the said C. D. his Heirs of Assigns, make, do and execute all and every
such (...), lawful and reasonable Assurance and Conveyance in the Law, for the
farther Assuring and Conveying all and singular the before granted Premises
and Appurtenances unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, as by the said C.
D. his Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably advised, devised or
required, Provided, the said A. B. or his, etc be be not required to Travel
above -- Miles from his or their Dwelling Houses to make such further
Assurance. In Witness, etc.

A Lease of a House.
T His Indenture made the 4th Day, etc. by and between A. B. of M. on the one
part, and C. D. of N. on he other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. for and
in consideration of the yearly Rent, Covenants, Conditions and Agreements
herein after contained, on the part and behalf of the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, Has demised, granted, and to Farm-Let, and by
these Presents does demise, grant and to Farm-Let unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns all that Farm or Plantation, with the
Houses, ou^-Houses, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Meadows, Pasture Ground,
Advantages, Ways, Easements, Emoluments or Profits arising, belonging or
appertaining to the hereby dimised Premises, or any part thereof (...) standing
and being -- -- To have (...) to bold all and singular the hereby (...) unto
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns from the -- -- Day. --
--, for and during the Term of -- -- years to be fully complete and ended.
Yielding and Paying therefore yearly and every year the yearly Rent or Sum of
-- -- current Money of -- -- to be paid Quarterly in four equal payments. And
it is further Covenanted by and between the said Parties, That, etc. And the
said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns and
for every of them, does covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said
C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns and to and with every of them
by these Presents, That he the said C, D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns and every of them, for and under the yearly Rent, Covenants, Clauses
and Conditions herein before expressed, on the part behalf of the said C. D.
his Executors and Assigns, to be paid and performed as aforesaid, shall and may
peaceably have, hold, use, occupy and enjoy all and singular the hereby demised
Premises, and every part thereof without any let, trouble, molestation,
eviction, ejection, interruption or denial of the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or of any other Person or Persons whatsoever,
claiming, or that shall or may claim by, from or under him, them or any of
them. (...) Witness whereof the said Parties to these Presents interchangeably
have put their Hands and Seals the Day and Year first above-written.

Sealed and Delivered, etc

An Assignment of a Lease.
T His Indenture made, etc. Between I. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. C,
of the other part, Witnesses, That G. P. of -- in and by one Indenture of
Lease, bearing Date -- for the Consideration therein mentioned, did Demise,
Grant and to Farm. Let unto the said I. F. All that ( Recite the Premises) as
in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease (Reference being thereunto had)
does more fully and at large appear. And this Indenture farther Witnesses,
That the said I, F, for and in Consideration of the Sum of -- to him in hand
pride before the Ensealing and Delivery of these Presents, by the said R, C, the
Receipt whereof he the said I. F, does hereby acknowledge, and thereof, and
every part thereof does hereby fully acquit, exonerate and discharge the said
R, C, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Has granted, bargained, sold,
assigned and set over, And by these Presents does grant, bargain, sell, assign
and set over unto the said R, C, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, All
that etc. and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Term of years
to come, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said J, F, now has or may,
ought or should have or claim in or to the Message and Premises with the
Appurtenances aforesaid, by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of
Lease, To have and to bold the said, etc. And also the said recited Indenture
of Lease, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Term of years, before
in and by these presents, bargained, sold, assigned and set over unto the said
R, C, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their proper use
and behoof, during the residue of the said Term, by the Indenture of Lease
granted and yet to come, and unexpred, in as large, ample and beneficial manner
to all intents and purposes, as he the said A. B. now has or might, should or
ought to have, and enjoy the same by force and virtue of the said recited
Indenture of Lease or otherwise however; And the said A. B. for himself, his,
etc. does covenant and agree to and with the said C. D. his, etc. that
notwithstanding any act or thing by the said A. B. done to the contrary, the
said recited Indenture of Lease is a good, sure, perfect and indefeazable Lease
in the Law, at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, and so
shall stand, remain, continue and be unto the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for and during the remainder of the Term of years
thereby granted, under the Rents and Covenants therein mentioned and contained;
And also that the said E. D. his Executor, etc paying the Rent reserved, and
performing the Covenants, Conditions and Agreements in the above ^^cited Lease
contained, shall and may peaceebly and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and
enjoy the said, etc. for and during the residue of the Term aforesaid, without
the let, suit, trouble or interruption of him the said A. B. his, etc. or of
any other Person or Persons, lawfully, claiming or to claim any right or
interest in the Premises, by, from or under him, them of any of them In
Witness, etc.

An Assignment of Rent, reserved upon a Lease,
THIS Indenture made, etc. between A. B. on the one part, and C. D. of -- on
the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said A. B. by his Indenture of
Lease, bearing date -- -- did demise and to farm Let all that -- -- for the
yearly Rent of 20l. per annum, payable as by the same Indenture of Lease
(Reference being thereunto had) may at large appear. Now the said A. B. for and
in Consideration of the Sum of -- -- to him in hand paid by the said said C. D.
the Receipt thereof he does hereby acknowledge, has given, granted, assigned,
and set over, and by these Presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give,
grant, transport, assign and set over unto the said C. D. the said yearly Rent
of 20l. per annum, reserved to him the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns,
upon and by the said Lease, together with the Reversion of all and singular and
Premises, by the said Indentures of Lease demised, and also all his Right,
Title, Interest, Property, Claim and Demand, of in and to all singular the
Premises, together with the (...) part of the said recited Indentures of
Lease, To Have and to Hold, Receive and Enjoy the aforesaid yearly Rent of
(...). reserved by the said Lease, and all his said Right, Title, Interest,
Property, Claim and Demand of, in and to the same, unto him the said C. D. his
Exers, Admrs and Assigns from henceforth for and during all the Residue of the
said Term of -- years yet to come, and mentioned in the said Lease, in as large
and ample manner and force, to all (...) and purposes, as he the said A. B. his
(...);, Admrs and Assigns, should or might have done, if these Pre^^ns had not
been made. And the said A. B. does by these Presumes assign, authorize and
appoint the said C. D. his Exers, Admrs and Assigns his true and lawful
Attorney Irrevokable, of him the said A. B. to ask, levy, demand and receive
the same Rent from time to time, as the same shall grow due, and to use all
such lawful ways and means for the Recovery and Obtaining thereof from time to
time, as he the said A. B. his Exers, Admrs or Assigns may, might or could have
done if these Presents had not been made; and to make any Acquittance of and
for the same, etc, In Witness, etc.

NOTE,
A LEASE is a Contract put in Writing for a Tempory enjoyment of a Real thing,
under a certain Rent, and such other Conditions as are mutually agreed upon
betwixt the Parties. All Leases for Years ought to have a certain beginning and
time of ending. Leases for Years are called Chattles, and go to Executors. If a
Tenant permit Houses to go to Decay or cut, waste and destroy Timber, or take
away Wainscot, Doors, or other things fixed to the Freehold, it is Waste. But
if Wainscot or other things are fixed by the Tenant, they may be taken away by
him, provided it be before the end of his Term, and does not damage the
Freehold. If a Tenant for Life, Sows his Land, and dye before the Corn is
reaped, (...) Executors shall have the Corn. But if a Tennant for Term of
Years, Sows his Land, and his Term expire before the (...) is Ripe, the
Landlord is (...) to it, because he (...) his Term would (...) before the Corn
was ripe.

An Exchange of Lands.
THis indenture made etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one Part, and C. D. of
etc. of the other Part, (...), That the said A. B. Has Given and Granted, and
(...) these Presents Does Give and Grant unto the said C. D. (...) that
Messuages, etc. lying and being, etc. To have and (...) he said Message or
(...); and Premises above mentioned with the Appurtenances, unto the said C.
D. his Executors, Administrators and (...) For and during the (...) of
Ninety-nine Years next and immediately ensuing, etc. and fully to be complete
and ended. If the said A. B. C. D (...) shall happen so long to (...);, In
Exchange for one (...) etc. lying and being in, etc. Given and Granted in
Exchange by the said C. D. And this Indenture further Witnesses, That the said
C. D. for the Considerations aforesaid Has Given and Granted, and by these
Presents does (...) Grant, unto the said A. B. All that the said Message, etc
called, etc. last above mentioned, To have and to (...) the said Message or
Tenements, and Premises last above mentioned, with the Appurtenances, unto the
said A. B. his Execution Administrators and Assigns, for and during the Term of
Ninety-nine Years next and immediately ensuring, etc and say to be Complete and
Ended, If he the said C. D. E. D. etc. shall happen so long to live, In
Exchange for the said Message or, Tenement and Premises first above mentioned
to be Given and Granted in Exchange by the said A. B. And the said A. B for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, Does Covenant and Grant to and with
the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators. That he the said C. D. h^^
Executors, Administrators and Assign, shall and may from Time to Time, and at
all Times, during the said Term hereby Granted, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement and Premises
first above mentioned, without the Let, Trouble, Hindrance* Molestation,
Interruption or Denial of him the sa^d A. B. his Executors and Assigns, and
every of them, and of all and every other Person and Persons whatsoever,
claiming in, by, from or under him, them or any of them. And the sa^d C. D. for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and Grant to and with
the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators, That he the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may, from Time to Time, and at
all Times, during the said Term hereby Granted, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message or Tenement and Premises
last above mentioned, without the Let, Trouble, Hinderance, Molestation,
Interruptions or Denial of him the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, and of all and every other Person and Persons
whatsoever (...) in, by, from or under him, them, or any of them. In Witness,
etc.

A Lease of a House,
THis Indenture made the 12 Day of August, Anno Domini 1727, being the First
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord George (...) King of Great Britain,
etc. by and between A. B. of etc. on the one part, And C. D. of etc. on the
other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in consideration of the
yearly (...), Covenants, Conditions and Agreements herein after contained, on
the part and behalf of the said C. D. his Executors. Administrators and
Assigns; Has demised, granted, and to Farm letten, and by these Presents does
demise, grant and to farm let unto the said C.D. his Executors Administrators
and Assigns all that Farm or Plantation, with the Houses, Outhouses, Barns,
Stables, Orchards, Gardens, Meadow, Pastures, Ground, Advantages, Ways,
Easements, Emoluments, or Profits arising, belonging or appertaining to the
hereby demised Premises, or any part thereof situate standing and being in --
To have and to hold all and singular the hereby demised Premises unto the said
C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns from the -- Day of -- for the
during the Term of -- years to be fully complete and ended. Yielding and Paying
therefore yearly and every year the yearly Rent or Sum of -- current Money of
-- to be paid Quarterly in four equal payments. And it is further Covenanted by
and between the said Parties, That, etc. And the said A. B. for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does
Covenant, Promise, grant and agree to and with the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these Presents,
That he the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns and every of
them, for and under the yearly Rent, Covenants, Clauses and Conditions herein
before expressed, on the part and behalf of the said C. D. his Executors and
Assigns to be paid and performed, as aforesaid, shall and may peaceably have,
hold, use occupy and enjoy all and singular the hereby demised Premises and
every part thereof, without any Let, Trouble, Molestation, eviction, ejection,
interruption or denial of the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or of any other Person or Persons whatsoever, claiming, or that shall
or may claim by, from or under him, them, or any of them In Witneses whereof
the said parties to these Presents interchangeably have put their Hands and
Seals the Day and Year first above written.

Sealed and Delivered, etc.

A Letter of Attorney.
KNOW all Men by these Presents, That I John Vexall of the City of Trubill in
the Province of -- Merchant, have made, Ordained, Constituted, and by these
Presents do Make, Ordain and Constitute, and in my place and stead put and
depute my trusty and loving Friend William Trueman of Bridge Town in the Island
of Barbados, Merchant, my true and lawful, Attorney, for me, and in my Name
and for my use to ask, demand, sue for, levy recover and receive, all such Sum
and Sums of Money, Debts, Goods, Wares, Dues, Accounts, and other Demands
whatsoever, which are or shall be due, owing, payable and belonging to me, or
detained from me any manner of ways or means whatsoever, by any Person or
Persons whatsoever, in the said Island of ^arbadoes. Giving and Granting unto
my said Attorney by these Presents my fell and whole Power, Strength and
Authority, in and about the Premises, to have, use, and take all lawful ways
and means in my Name, for the Recovery thereof. And upon the Receipt of any
such Debts, (...) or Sums of Money aforesaid, Acquitances, or other sufficient
Discharges for me and in my name to Make, Seal and Deliver. And generally, all
and every other Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Device and Devices in the Law
whatsoever needful and necessary to be done in the Premises, for the Recovery
of all or any such Debts or Sums of Money aforesaid, for me, and in my Name to
do, execute and perform, as fully, largely and amply, to all intents and
purposes, as if I myself (...) personally present, or as if the matter required
more special Authority than is herein given. And Attorneys, one or more under
him, for the purposes aforesaid, to make and constitute, and again at pleasure
to Revoke, Ratifying, allowing and holding for firm and effectual all and
whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do in and about the Premises, by
virtue hereof. In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this 2d
day of May, 1727.

John Vexall,

Sealed and Delivered, etc.



A Letter of Attorney to Receive Rents.
KNOW all Men, etc, That I A. B. of, etc. have Made Ordained, Constituted and
Appointed; And by these Presents do make, ordain, constitute and appoint C. D.
of -- my True and Lawful Attorney, for me, and in my Name, and for my own
proper Use and Benefit, to Ask, Demand and Receive of and from -- all such
Rents, and arrearages of Rents, which now art, or hereafter shall grow due from
the said F. F. out of and from all that my Message or Tenement at G. And upon
Receipt thereof to give Acquittances or other sufficient Discharges therefore.
And in Default of Payment thereof, or any part thereof, to my said Attorney, I
Do hereby Authorize and Empower him my said Attorney, into and upon the Lands
and Premises, to Enter and Distrained and the Distress and Distresses there
(...) and taken to Dispose of according to Law, for the speedy Recovering and
Obtaining, (...) said Rents and Arrears of Rent: Or, other wise to proceeded by
Action of Debt for Recovery thereof, as to him my said (...) shall be thought
fit. Hereby Ratifying, etc. In (...), etc.

The Form of Revoking a Letter of Attorney.
KNow All Men by these Presents. That whereas I (...) upon Trust and Confidence
Reposed in W.N. of -- did by my Letter of Attorney, bearing Date the -- day of
-- Constitute and appoint the said W.N. my true and lawful Attorney, and did
give and grant to him my full Power and Authority, for me and in my Name to
Ask, Demand, (...) for, Recover and Receive, etc. Now Know ye, That for diverse
good Reasons to me best known, I the said H. K. have Revoked, Countermanded,
and by these Presents do Revoke, Countermand and make Void the said Letter of
Attorney so granted, and all the Power and Authority so given to for said W.N.
by the aforesaid Letter of Attorney, or by any otherways or meant whatsoever,
whereby he can or may pretend to any Order, Power and Authority to do, deal,
act intermeddle for me, or in my Name, touching or relating to any thing that
of right and (...) of pertains to me. In Witness, etc.

The Form of an Indenture of an Apprentice.
THis Indenture Witnesses, That T. W. Son of J. W. late of the City of
Bristol, has put himself, and by these Presents does voluntarily, and of his
(...) face Will and Accord, put himself Apprentice to W. ^. Citizen and Graces
or London, to learn his Art, Trade or Mystery, and after the (...) of and
Apprentice, to serve him from the Day of the (...), for and acting the Term of
(...) Years next ensuing; (...) all a (...) the said (...) has said Master
(...) his (...) keep, his (...) Commands gladly every where obey, he shall do
no damage to his said Master, nor see it to be done by others, without getting
or giving notice thereof to his said Masters. He that not waste his said
Masters Goods, not lend them unlawful to any. He shall not commit Fornication,
nor contract Matrimony within the said Term. At Cards, Dice, or any other (...)
lawful Game, he shall not play, whereby his said Master may have Damage. With
his own Goods, not the Goods of others, without Lisence from his said Master,
he shall neither buy nor sell. He shall not absent himself Day not night from
his Masters Service, without his Leave: Nor haunt Alehouses, Taverens, or
Play Houses; our in all things behave himself as a faithful Apprentice ought to
do, during the said Term. And the said Master shall are the utmost of his
endeavor to Teach, or cause to be Taught or Instructed, the said Apprentice,
in the Trade or Mystery he now follows: and procure and provide for him
sufficient Meat, Drink, Apparel, Lodging and Washing, sitting for an
Apprentice, during the said Term. And for the true Performance of all and every
the said Covenants and Agreements, either of the said Parties bind themselves
unto the other by these Presents. In Witnesses whereof, they have
interchangeably put their Hands and Seals this Twentieth Day of May.

N. B. In this case there must be a pair of Indentures, one of them to be
signedly the Servant, and delivered as his Act and Deed to the use of the
Master; and the other signed by the Master, and delivered in like Manner to the
Servant.

A Copy of a Letter of License, usually granted, allowing time and safe Conduct
to a Debtor incapable of making present Payment.
To All to whom these Presents shall come, we whose Names, are under (...) and
annexed, (...) of H. B. Citizen and Grocer of (...), send (...) Whereas the
said H. B. does now (...), Creditors in diverse Sums of Mercy which we are truly
(...) he is not at present able to pay: And we the said Creditors, and each of
us respectively, being very well satisfied of the good intent and meaning of
the said H. B. which he has to pay us our said several Debts. Now know ye.
that we the said Creditors and every one of us, for the Considerations
aforesaid, have given and granted, and by these Presents do give and grant unto
the said H. B. our sure and free License, Liberty and Conduct as is in us, to
go, come, pass and repass about his Business and Occasions, for and during the
Term and Space of Two whole Years from the date hereof, without Let, Suit,
Trouble or Molestation of us his said Creditors, or any of us, our, or any of
our Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of our Suit or Suits;
and if it shall so happen that the said H. B. at any Time during the said Term
of two full Years, to commence from the Date hereof, shall by us his said
Creditors or any of us, our, or any of our Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or by any Person or Persons, by, or through the Commandment, Will,
Consent or Knowledge of us, or any of us or them, contrary to the tenor and
true meaning of these Presents, be and ways Arrested, Sued or Molested in his
Person or Goods, and be not thereof forth with discharged and defended, that
then the said H. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall, by virtue
of these Presents, be forever clearly acquitted and discharged against him or
them, his or their Executors, or Administrators, by what means or consent the
said H. B. shall, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this our present
Writing of safe Conduct, be vexed, sued, arrested, attached or hindered as
aforesaid, and thereof not forth with discharged and defended as aforesaid, and
that it shall and may be Lawful for the said H. B. to Plead and give in
Evidence this out present Writing of safe Conduct, as in full bar and discharge
of the Debt and Debts of such Person or Persons by whom the said H. B. shall be
so Arrested, Sued or Molested as aforesaid. In Witness whereof, we the said
Creditors of the said H. B. have hereunto for our Hands and Seals the 28 Day of
May. 1727.

Sealed and Delivered. etc.

A Condition that the Heir shall make no Claim.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas R. G. of, etc. Father of the above bound R.
is possessed of one Message or Tenement, and certain Lands thereunto belonging,
called or known by the name of etc. now in the occupation of etc. and whereas
the said R. the Son, for and in consideration of a certain competent Sum of
etc. to him the said R. by the said J. well and truly contented and paid,
whereof and wherewith the said R. acknowledges himself fully satisfied, has
granted and agreed that the said J.G. by and with the consent of the said ^.
the Father) shall have and enjoy to his own use forever, the said Message or
Tenement, Lands and Premises, and all the Estate, Right, Title and Interest,
which the said R. the Son now has or any time herafter may, might, should or
ought to have, of, in and to the same from by or under the right, Title or
interest of the said R. the Father, or as Heir unto him, if therefore the said
R. the Son, his, etc. nor any of them, do not at any time hereafter make or
cause to be made any claim, or demand, of, in or to the said Massuage or
Tenement and Premises or any part thereof from and after the Decease of his
said Father, but to permit and suffer the said J. G. his, etc. and every of
them, to have, possess and enjoy, to his and their own use forever the said,
etc. and every part thereof, without any let or disturbance of or by him the
said R. the Son, his, etc or of or by any other Person or Persons, or by his,
their or any of their Acts, Means, Consents or Procurements, clearly released,
acquitted and discharged of and from all Encumbrances whatsoever, by him, of
any of them had, made committed or done, or to be had, made, committed or done,
in any wise, that then, etc.

A Release to be given by a Ward to his Guardian when becomes at Age, if he has
truly discharged his Trust, and (...) a faithful Account.
(...) People of whom these Presents shall come, (...) -- -- (...) county of --
-- send (...), Know ye, That I the said, T. M. for sundry good Causes and
Considerations me thereunto moving, have Remised, Released, and for ever quit
Claim unto G. L. of -- -- Gent, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, all
and all manner of Action and Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties, Reckonings,
Accounts and Demands whatsoever, which I the said T. M. had, have or at any
time hereafter may or shall have against the said G. L. his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, for and in, touching and concerning any the Rents received,
Profit or Profits of any of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, or any Thing
or Things appertaining, or by right belonging to me the said T. M. whether it
be touching or concerning the Premises, or any of them, or any other matter,
Cause or thing, whatsoever, made, committed or done, or for any Receipts or
Payments, of or touching the said Premises, Debt or Debts due to me by Bond,
Bill, or otherwise, and for any thing or things whatsoever done or committed on
my behalf, or tending to any matter or thing wherein I the said T. M. or at any
time since until the Day of the Date of these Presents. In Witness whereof, I
have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, The 23 Day of May, etc.

Sealed and Delivered etc.

The Form of a General Release.
KNow all Men by these Presents, That J. W. of G. in the County K. Mariner,
have Remised, Released, ^orever quit claimed, and by these Presents do for me,
by Heirs, Executors and Administrators Remise, Release, and forever absolutely
quit claim unto T. B. of the City of (...) in the County aforesaid, Merchant,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, all and all manner of Actions, Suits,
Bills, Bonds, Writings Obligatory, Debts, Dues, Duties, ^ccompts, Sum and Sums
of Money, Judgments, Executions, Extents Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses,
Damages (...) Demands whatsoever, both in Law and Equity, or other(...)
howsoever, which against the said T. B. I ever had, (...) have, or which I, my
Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall or may have, claim, challange or
demand, for (...) by reason of any matter, cause or thing from the beginning of
the World unto the Day of the Date of these Present (...) In Witness whereof, I
have hereunto put my Hand and Seal this 4th Day of May, etc.

Sealed and Delivered etc.

A Copy of a Will
IN the Name of God Amen. The tenth Day of May in the Year of our Lord, 1727. I
^. M. of S. in the County of L. Gentleman, being very sick and weak in Body,
but of perfect Mind and Memory, Thanks be given unto God therefore, calling
unto Mind the Mortality of my Body, and knowing that it is appointed for all
Men once to dye, do make and ordain this my Last Will and Testament: That is to
say principally, and first of all, I give and recommend my Soul into the Hands
of God that gave it; and for my (...) I recommend it to the Earth, to be buried
in a Christian like and decent manner, at the discretion of my Executors,
^^thing doubting but at the General Resurrection, I shall receive the same
again by the mighty Power of God. And as touching such worldly Estate wherewith
it has pleased God to bless me in this Life, I give, devise and dispose of the
same in the Following manner and form.

Impri^ly, It is my Will, and I do Order, That in the first place, all my just
Debts and Funeral Charges be paid an ^^tisfied.

Item,, I give and bequeath unto Mary my dearly beloved Wife and Sum of Two
Hundred Pounds, of good are lawful Moneys, to be raised and levied out of my
Estate together with all my Household Goods and Movables.

Item, I give to my well beloved Son, R. M. whom I likewise constitute, make
and ordain my only and sole Executor of this my Last Will and Testament, all
and Singular the Lands, Messuages and Tenements, to him, his Heirs and Assigns
forever. And I do hereby utterly disallow, revoke and (...) all and every other
former Testaments, Will Legacy and Executors, by me in any ways before this
(...) Named, Willed and Bequeathed. Ratifying and Confirming this, and no
other, to be my Last Will and Testament. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto
for my Hand and Seal, the Day and Year above written.

Signed, Sealed, Published, Pronounced, and declared by the said -- -- as his
Last Will and Testament, in the Presence of us the Subscribers, viz.

Note, That if any Legacies, or particular Sum or Sums of Money, Goods,
Chattles, etc. be given; they must be mentioned as the Names of those they are
given to; and that, at this Day, Three Witnesses are required, not any of them
being included by Name in the Substance of the Will, as a Party concerned
therein; for if so, the included Party is not held to be a legal Witness: And
because, in case of Wills, many Controversies have arose, which have proved
tedious and chargeable, I think it not (...) to cite the Opinions of the
Learned in this kind, touching some things very necessary to be known.

Rules worthy of Observation in Matters relating to Wills and Testaments, etc.
IF any Person Seized in Fee, makes a Feoffment declaring his Will, upon the
livery of it unto a Stranger, to be, That the Feoffer shall stand Seized to the
use of the Feoffee, during Life, the Remainder to C. in Fee. In this case it is
held, That the Feoffer cannot alter this Will by his last Will, (...) in the
said Last Will he does frustrate to former Will, because, say they, the Use is
in him, in the remainder upon the Livery; and it is in his Power to sell or
dispose of it. But it is otherwise if the uses were declared to be the right
Heirs of the Body of the Feoffer; for if so, it may be in his Power to alter
his Last Will and Testament.

If a Testament bear date a Paris in France, it may be proved by the Executors
in England, and it is a sufficient ground for the Executor to bring an Action
for the Recovery of the Testator's Debts contracted in England. But on the
contrary, if an Obligation hear (...) in Paris, then it is not sufficient (...)
ground an Action upon in our Courts.

It is further held, That if (...) be given to a (...) Will, that he has but a
Fee thereby, and some (...) has but a Freehold during Life, and no more. But
(...) given to Him his Assigns, then be has a Fee simple.

If it so happens (...) any (...) Will, me Fifty? (...), (...) shall be at the
Age of 21 Years, and it happen (...) I (...) told at age, ^et it is bold that
my (...) the said (...) at the time it should have (...) if a (...) give Lands
and Tenements to (...) and (...) so faith and that I dye before its Testator,
then (...) and (...) Heir canvas, by virtue of that Will, (...) is the (...)
that makes for the truth of these (...) part 7. Sol. 228. (...) 250. Dyer fol.
59. (...) Sevenborn part 5. Fol. 313. Godolph. Part 3. Fol. 34.

In case a Man has a Term of years in Lands or Tenements (...) the Right
thereof be in his Disposal, and be, during the said Term, (...) it to a
stranger, and dies; it is held, that the (...) can make Recovery of the
remaining of years, Perkins Tit. Devises, sol. 107.

A will, in its common Acceptance, is the Declaration of a Man's Mind and
Intent (concerning the Disposition of his Lands and Goods) of what he would
have done after his Death. The Common Lord (...), that a Will, when Lands or
Tenements are devised; and when it concerns chattles only, it is called a
Testament. Where Lands are given by a will, it is called a Devise, and where
Goods or Chattles are disposed of, it is called a Legacy.

By the Stat. 32 Hen. 8. Will were Ordained, and by 29 Cor. 2. for Prevention
of Frauds, all Devises of Lands or Tenements are to be in writing, signed by
the Devisor, or some one by his express Direction, in the Presence of Three
Credible Witnesses: And no Devise in Writing shall he Revoked, but by some
other (...) Writing, or by Cancelling the same by the Testators himself, or by
his Directions, and. If Goods, Chattles, Personal (...), etc. are given of
above the (...) of 301. by word of Mouth, without Writing, ( which the Law
calls a Noncupative will) the same must be likewise done in the Presence of
Three Witnesses, bid to bear Witness by the Testator to his last Sickness, etc.
And it must be Proved within six Months.

Words in Will ought to have a favorable Construction; and the Intent of Wills
must be governed by the Words.

A Man can make but One Will that shall take Effect, and that is the Last, but
he may make as many Codicils as he pleases.

In the well waking of a Will, Four things ought to be Observed, 1. That it be
done when the Testator is in Perfect Memory. 2. That there be Three, at least,
Credible Witnesses to the Signing, Sealing and Publication thereof, who must
set their Hands as Witnesses thereto. 3. If a Will contain more sheets than
One, the Testator ought to Sign and Seal every Sheet in Presence of the said
Witnesses. And ^thly, Where Lands or Tenements are Devised, let the word
[Heirs] not be omitted, if it be omitted, it is an Estate only for Life.

A Codicil to a Will.
I A. B. of the City of, etc. do this, -- day of -- make and publish this my
Codicil to my Last Will and Testament, in manner following, (that is to say) I
give to my Brother H. B. the Sum of Fifty Pounds, to be paid to him within --
Months after my Decease. I give to -- my grey-Horse which I used to ride, with
my best Sadle and Bridle. I give and bequeath -- the Sum of -- And whereas in
and by my last Will, I have given to -- the Sum of -- I do hereby Order and
Declare, That my Will is, That only the Sum of -- be paid to the said -- by my
Executors, instead of the said Legacy of -- Pounds, so given by my said Will,
as aforesaid. And, Lastly, It is my Desire, That this present Codicil be
annexed to, and make part of my Last will and Testament, to all Intents and
Purposes. In Witness whereof I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal, etc.

Signed, Sealed and Published by the said A. B. at a Codicil to be annexed to
his Will, in the Presence of T. D. F. G. H. K.

The form of an Administrators Account.
THe Account of L. R. etc, Administrator of all and singular the Goods and
Chattles of T. M. of C. (...), as well of and for such and so much of the same
Goods and Chattles as came to his Hands, as of and for his Payments and
Disbursements out of the same, as follows, viz.

The said Accomptant charge himself with all the singular the Goods and
Chattels of the said deceased, specified in an Inventory thereof made and
Exhibited into the Registry of the Prerogative Court of the Province of
New York, amounting as by the said Inventory appears, to the sum of -- (...)

I mprimis, the said Accomptan^ desires allowance of the several Charges of
the said Deceased, amounting one way or other, as this accomptant has them in
particulars, to the Sum of (...)

Item, He desires allowance of certain Debts inventoried, that prove
insolvent, amounting to (...)

Item, This Accomptant desires allowance of certain Debts due by the said
Deceased, at his Death, which this Accomptant has since paid and discharged,
that is, to pay and discharge as follows, viz. To William Receiver 26 02 9 To
Edward Talers, 09 00 2

A Covenant to pass Money lent upon Bottomrey
To all People to whom this present Writing shall come, J. Reed, Mariner
(under God) Commander of the good Sloop called the Fortune, of Philadelphie,
now riding at an Anchor in the River of Delaware, sends Greeting: Whereas the
said Sloop is now bound upon a Voyage unto the Island of Borbadoes and else
where, and back again to the Port of Philadelphia, And Whereas, Edward Denbam
of etc. Merchant, at the request and desire of the said J. R. has the Day of
the Date hereof lent and paid unto him the said J. the Sum of, etc. ^awful
Money of Philadelphia, the receipt whereof at the said if does hereby
acknowledge, and hereof and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge the said E. D. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns forever by these Presents. Which Sum of, etc. for the allowance and
considerations hereafter mentioned by the said E. D. is contened to adventure
to and with the said J. R. and to stand to and bear the dangers and casualities
of the Seat, concerning the same, as hereunder is declared. Now know ye, That
the said J. R. for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said E. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these Presents, That be the said J. R. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said E. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns
the Sum of etc. of Lawful Money of Philadelphia, within the Time and space of
Twenty Days next af^^^ the -- -- safe arrival into the River D. within the Port
of the City of Philadelphia, of the said Sloop front her aforesaid intended
Voyage, or within the like time and space of 20 Days next after the safe
arrival from the island of Barbados aforesaid into the River of D. into the
Po^^ of Philadelphia, or any other Sloop and Vessel, wherein the Account and
Return of the Proceeds of the sale of the said Sloop the Fortune in the Island
of Barbados aforesaid, in case she shall be there sold, or wherein the
Proceeds or Returns of the said Adventure of the said E. D. shall be returned
and sent. And the said J.K. for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, does further Covenant, Promise and Agree to and with the said E.D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That if the said
Sloop F. shall be and remain on her said intended Voyage longer than -- Months
from the Day of the Date hereof to be reckoned and accounted, Then he the said
J. R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators shall and will well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the said E. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns the Sum of -- current Money of -- per Month, for each and every several
and respective Month that die said Sloop shall be and remain on the said Voyage
longer than the said time and space of -- (not exceeding in the said Voyage in
the whole --) from the day of the Date (...) to be accomplished, together with
the said Sum of -- within the like time and space of 20 days next after the
first Return and safe Arrival of the said Sloop into the River of D. from her
said Intended Voyage, or within the like time and space of 20 days next after
the safe Arrival from the Island of Barbados aforesaid into the River of D.
within the said Port of Philadelphia, of any other Sloop of Vessel wherein the
said -- -- aforesaid. (A Covenant that the Sloop shall return from her Voyage
within -- -- to be accounted, and then the Money to be paid,) In Witness, etc.

A Charter-party of Affreightment.
THis Charter-party of Affreightment indented, made and agreed upon the Twenty
first Day of August, Anno Domini 1727. and in the First Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord George King of England, etc. between H. H. of D. Mariner,
Master (under God) of the good Sloop or Vessel called the F. of the (...) of --
-- Tuns or there abouts, now riding at Anchor in the Port of Philadelphia, of
the one pars, and G. G. of New York in the Province of N. ^. Merchant, of the
other part, Witnesses, That the said Master has gran^ed and let to Freight
the said Vessel unto the said Merchant; and the said Merchant has hired the
said Vessel for a Voyage with her to be made in manner and from following; That
is to say, The said H. H. for himself, his Executors and Administrators does
Covenant, Promise and Grant to and with the said G. G. his Executors and
Administrators by these Presents, That the said Vessel with the first fair Wind
that God shall send after the Twentieth Day of May next ensuing the Date above,
shall depart from the said Port of Philadelphia with such lawful Goods and
Merchandises (...) shall please the said G. G. or his Assigns in the mean time
to (...) on Board her. And that it shall be lawful to and for (...) G. G., his
Factors and Assigns in the mean time to (...) on Board here all such lawful
Goods and Merchandises as he or they shall think for, which she may reasonable
carry out and above her Victuals, Tackel and Apparel. And that the said Vessel
shall, by Gods Grace, directly, as Wind and Weather will serve, sail unto the
Island of B. and there Deliver unto the said G. G. his Executors,
Administrators, Factors and Assigns, all such Goods and Merchandises as shall
be laden on Board of her by the said G. G. his Executors, Administrators,
Factors or Assigns, dry and well conditioned, Danger of the Sea, Fire, Enemies,
and Embargo of Princes only excepted. And after here clearing and right
discharge of such Goods as she shall receive into her within the said Port of
Philadelphia, shall receive in the said Island of ^. her full lading in such
lawful Goods and Merchandises as it shall please the said G. G. his Executors,
Administrators, Factors or Assigns, to Lade or cause to be Landen aboard her;
and after such her full Lading at the Island of B. aforesaid, shall directly
fall as Wind and Weather will permit to the said Port or Harbor of P.
aforesaid, and there deliver to the said G.G. his Executors, Administrators,
Factors or Assigns, within the space of Ten Working Days hereafter mentioned,
the said Goods and Merchandises so received into her at B. aforesaid, dry and
well conditioned, and make a right Discharge and End of the said Voyage, the
Danger of the Sea, Fire, Enemies, and Embargo of Princes and Rulers only
excepted: And that the said Vessel, after her arrival at B. aforesaid, shall
stay at Anchor therefore her Unlading and Relading fifty Working Days, and shall
stay at Anchor at the said Port of P. after her Return again and Arrival there
from B. aforesaid, Ten Working Days, for the Delivery of the said Goods so to
be Landen aboard her at B. aforesaid; and the said G. G. for himself, his
Executors, and Administrators, does further Covenant, Promise and Grant to and
with the said H. H. his Executors and Administrators, and also Warrant by these
Presents, the said Vessel at her Departure from the said Port of P. and during
she said Voyage, shall be strong and staunch, and sufficiently Victualed,
Tackled and Apparelled, and furnished with Masts Sails, Sail-Yards, Anchors,
Cables, Roper, Cords, Tackle, Apparel, Boat and all other Furniture whatsoever
requisite or needful for such a Vessel for such Voyage. And the said G. G. for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and Grant to and with
the said H. H. his Executors and Administrators, not only to unlade and Relade
and dispatch away the said Vessel at and from Bar. and Phil. aforesaid, within
the Time and (...) before limited and agreed upon, but also for the freighter
Hire of the said Sloop or Vessel for all the said Voyage, viz. from P. to the
Island of B. and from thence to P, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
the said H. H. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of -- Pounds
current Money of P. in manner and form following, that is to say, The Sum of --
as the Island of Bar. within 20 days next after the arrival of the said Sloop
or Vessel and delivery of the said Goods well conditioned at the said Island of
Bar. aforesaid; and the Sum of -- Pounds more, the residue of the said -- --
Pounds at Phil. aforesaid, within Ten Working Days after the return again and
arrival of the said Sloop or Vessel from Bar. to Phil. and the Delivery of the
said Goods to be received into her at Bar. aforesaid unto the said G. G. his
Executors, Administrators, Factors or Assigns at P. aforesaid well conditioned
as aforesaid; together with Primage and Average, according to the use and
Custom of Merchants. And the said G. G. for himself, his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, does Covenant and Grant to and with the said H. H. his
Executors and Administrators by these Presents, that in case the said Vessel
shall through the defalt of the said G. G. his Factors or Assigns, stay for
Unlading or Relading at Bar. aforesaid, or for her Lading at P. aforesaid,
before her departure from thence; or for her Unlading at P. aforesaid and after
her return and arrival from Bar. aforesaid, to P. aforesaid, after the several
Days therefore abovementioned, That then the said G. G. his Executors or
Administrators shall and will pay or cause to be paid unto the said H. H. his
Executors or Administrators the Sum of -- -- Shillings for every Working Day
that the said Vessel shall either stay at Bar. for her Unlading and Relading,
or at P. aforesaid, for her Ladeng and Unlading after the Days above limited
and agreed upon. And to the Performance of all and singular the Covenants and
Agreements abovementioned, which on the part and behalf of the said H. H. his
Executors or Administrators, are to be performed in all things as above said,
the said H. H. binds himself, his Executors and Administrators, and
especially the Sloop or Vessel aforesaid, with her Freight, unto the said G. G.
his Executors and Administrators in the Sum or Penalty of Two Hundred Pounds of
Lawful Money of P. well and truly to be paid by these Presents; and likewise
for the performance of all and singular the Covenants and Agreements
abovementioned, which on the part and behalf of the said G. G. his Executors
and Administrators, are and ought to be performed in all things as are above
received, the said G. G. binds himself, his Executors and Administrators and
Goods, unto the said H. H. his Executors and Administrators, in the Sum or
Penalty of Two Hundred Pounds of like Money of P. well and truly to be paid by
these Presents. In Witness whereof, the Parties first abovenamed to these
Charter parties Indented, interchangeably have set their Hands and Seals, the
Day and Year first above-writen.

Sealed and Delivered, etc. H. H.

Of Exchange.
Exchange of Money is of great Antiquity, and is esteemed exceeding,
Coi^nodious, excellently useful and beneficial, as well to Kingdoms and Cities
in general, as to Merchants and others in particular: And as Money was first
invented to be made of the best Metals, for the avoiding of chargeable and
troublesome carriage, and transportation of Commodities from one Place to
another in way of Trade: so was Exchange of Money first invented for the
avoiding as well the danger, as the trouble and charge in the carriage of Money
from Place to Place; and by reason that the Standards, Stamps, and
Subscriptions of Moneys are found to be various and different (no Nation making
use of others Coin) Merchants were forced for the better performance and
carrying on this excellent (...), to appoint a certain Exchange, by giving
Value for Value, according to the Fineness or Courseness of the Coyns, with
certain allowance to the Merchant Exchanging.

Seeing then that Exchanges are of such great use and importance, the Merchant
ought to have great insight and knowledge in the Coyns of Foreign Countries,
that he may be able to reduce one Coin into the valuation of another, by
raising or (...) according to the Goodness or Badness of the Metal: that when
he has occasion to draw a Bill of Exchange upon (...) of 100 (...) here a
London, to be paid in France, Holland, (...) else where, he may know the Loss
or Gain.

The true Exchange for Moneys by Bills of Exchange, is really grounded on the
Valuation, Fineness and Weight of the Money of every Country according to the
Par, that is, Value for Value, and on this are the Exchanges of England
grounded.

Exchanges are made by Bills, when Money is delivered simply here in England,
the Bills received for the same to have the Payment in some other Country
beyond the Seas, for Goods here bought, or the like, at a certain Price agreed
upon: The like is observed beyond the Seas, and the Money received here in
England.

The meaning of a Bill of Exchange, in thus to be understood, suppose two
Merchants have correspondence and dealing together, the one here in England,
and the other in France, the Merchant in France having bought Good of a Man, to
the value of 500 or 1000 l. the Man being to come to England, comes to the
Merchant for his Money, who being perhaps not provided, or otherwise the Man
desirous to have his Money paid in England; the Merchant upon these or the like
confide rations, draws a Bill of Exchange for the said Sum upon his
Correspondent here in England (who perhaps is indebted to him in greater Sums)
to be Paid upon Sight, or within such a Time after Sight, either upon Usance,
or double or treble Usance, as they agree. To be explained, that is two or
three Months.

Again, sometimes Gentlemen or other having occasion to Travel beyond Seas, for
their Convenience, Pay their Money to a Merchant here at London, desiring him
to draw a Bill of Exchange for the same upon his Factor, or some Merchant with
whom he has Correspondence, at the Place where the Gentlemen do design their
Journey; which Bill in ordered to be Paid as aforesaid.

Forms of Bills of Exchange.
Philadelphia May 1, 1727.
AT Ten days after fight of this my only Bill, pray pay or cause to be paid to
Mr. J. S. or to his Order the Sum of Twenty Pounds, current Money of -- -- Make
good Payment, and place the same to account of

Your Friend and Servant, David Long.
To Mr. Thomas Haveit, Merchant in New York,




When this Bill comes to hand you must go with it to J. S. and show it to him,
and if he accepts to pay it, he must write under it, thus,

Accepted by me this 10th Day of June, 1727. J. Short.

Which Acceptance obliges J. S. to pay the said Bill Ten days after he so
accepts it.

A Foreign Bill of Exchange.
New York, April 6 th 17^7.
AT Thirty Days after fight of this my first Bill of Exchange, my Second and
Third of the same Tenor and Date, not being paid, pay or cause to be paid to
Mr. T. T. or to his order, the Sum of Fifty Pounds lawful Money of Great
Britain for the value received here by me of Mr. -- -- Make good payment, and
place to account, as per Advice of

Your Humble Servant. John Sharp.
To Mr. Rich. Honesty, Haberdasher in London.




When this Bill comes to Mr. Trades he has (...) to pay that (...) to another
Man; and therefore withred being at its (...) of receiving and paying said
Money, be (...) the (...) and gives is to the other Man to receive, which is
thus. viz.

Pay the Contents of the within Bill for me to Thomas Gold, (...) to his order,
for value (...) of him.

T. Trader.


But of Mr. Richard Honesty refuses or neglects to pay the said Bill of
Exchange, then you must go to the Notary Public, and Protest the said Bill,
which runs thus, viz.

A Protest of a Bill of Exchange.
KNow All Persons whom this present Writing may concern, that the 22th Day of
June, in the Year of Our Lord, (...) at the Request of Mr. Thomas Trader, of
London, Merchant, I ^. A. Public Notary, Sworn and Admired (...) of his (...)
Majesty, did go to the Dwelling (...) or Molestation or Mr. R. H. upon whom the
above (...) Bill of Exchange is drawn, and showed the Original unto the said
Mr. R. H. demanding his acceptance of the same Who answered me, be should not
accept the said Bill, for some Reason he should write to Mr. J. S. the Drawer.
Wherefore I the said Notary did Protest, and do by these Presents Protest, as
well against the said J. S. the Drawer, as likewise against the said R. H. upon
whom it is drawn, as also against all other Persons, Endorsers, or others
therein concerned, for all Changes, Rechanges, Damages and Interests,
whatsoever; In Presence of C. R. and J. K. called for Witnesses, to this
present Act done in my Office in London, the Day and Year abovementioned.

R. A. Notary Public.

A Bill of Sale for a Vessel.
To All Christian People, To whom these Presents shall come. Know Ye, (...) J.
^.of the City of (...) ships Wright Sole Owner of the good Sloop or Vessel,
called, The Ann, of the Burden of Fifty Tons, or thereabouts, For and in
Consideration of the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds current Money of the Province of
Pensilvania to me in hand and before the Ensealing and Delivery of these
Presents, by R. S. of the City of Phil, Mariner, the Receipt whereof he corn
hereby acknowledge and himself there with fully Satisfied, Contented and Paid,
has Granted, Bargained and Sold, and he these Presents does Grant, Bargain and
Sell unto the said R. S., his Heirs, Executors and Assigns all that -- H^ll of
the said good Sloop or Vessel, called, The Ann Together with Mast -- Boom,
Bolt-sprit -- and all other Necessarys thereto Appertaining and belonging, Unto
the said R. S. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, To the Sole and only
proper-use, benefit and behoof of him the said R. S. his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns Forever. And the said J. L. does, covenant for himself his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, To and with the said R. S. his Heirs Executors
and Assigns. To Warrant and Defend the said Sloop and all other the
beforementioned Appurtenances for the during the Full Term and Space of one
Year and a Day, according to the Laws and Customs of Oleron in such Cases made
and provided [Fire, Enemies, Restraint of Princes, Perils and Dangers of the
Seas only excepted] In Testimony whereof the said J. L. has hereunto set his
Hand and Seal this 23d Day of May in the First Year of his Majestys Reign
Annoque Domini. 1727.

A Declaration in Trust.
TO all People to whom this Present Writing shall (...): I R. B. of, etc. Gent.
send Greeting. Whereas J. B. of, etc. by Deed of Sale, or Writing under his
Hand to Seal, bearing date the Day of, etc. being the day before the Date
hereof, has bargained, sold, Transfered, and set over unto me the said R. B.
one equal 16th Part of the new Ship, or Vessel, called the, etc. of the Burden
of, etc. or thereabouts; now Riding at Anchor in the River of D. and also one
Equal 16th Part of all and singular the Masts, Sails, Anchors, Cables, and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Ship or Vessel belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, To have and to bill, The said Equal 16th Part of the said Ship,
and all other the Premises in, and by the said Deed of sale mentioned, of (...)
to be granted, Transferred and set over, and every part thereof unto me the
said R. B. my Executors, Administrators and Assigns forever, as by the said
Writing or Deed of Sale more fully and largely appears. Now know ye, That I
the said R. B. do here declare, That the said Writing, or Deed of Sale, of the
Premises before mentioned, is made to me only in Trust to and for the only use
benefit and behoof of the said J. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns.
And that I the said R. B. paid no Money or other Consideration for the same;
but that the same Equal 16th Part of the said Ship or Vessel and all other the
Premises in and by the said Deed of Sale mentioned, to be no me granted are
the proper Goods and Chattles of the said J. B. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, for and notwithstanding the said Writing or Deed of Sale to be
made as aforesaid, and are to be and remain to and for the only proper use,
benefit and behoof of the said J. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns.
And I the said R. B. do hereby deny and disclaim the having any Right, Title,
Interest, Property, Claim or Demand of, in, or to the said Sixteenth Part of
the said Ship or Vessel, and other the Premises in and by the said Writing or
Deed of Seal to me granted as aforesaid, otherwise then in Trust as aforesaid,
to and for the use, benefit and behoof of the said J. B. his Executors
Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid. In Witness, etc.

A Defeazance on Lands forfeited.
T His Indenture made, etc. Between J. P. of, etc. of the one Part, and H. C.
of the other Part, Whereas the said J. P. by his Recognizance in the Nature of
a Statute (...), bearing even date with these Presents, taken and acknowledged,
before, etc. Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench at
Westminster is, and stands bound to the said H. C. in the Sum of, (...). And
whereas he said J. P. together with A. C. of, etc. and T. C. of, (...) bound in
H. C. in and by one Obligation bearing thee also with these Presents
conditioned for the Payment of the Sum of, etc. being the same Sum intended to
be secured by the said Recognizance on the, etc. day of, etc. next ensuing the
(...) hereof, at or in the, etc. as in and by the said Recognizings or Statute
Staple, and Obligations and Conditions thereof, may appear. Now this Indenture
Witnesses, and the said H. C. is contented and well pleased, and does for
himself, his Heirs Executors and Administrators, Covenant and Promise, That if
the said J. P. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, or any of them, shall
and do well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said H. C. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said Sum of, etc. on the said, etc
day of, etc. at or in the said, etc. According to the said Conditions of the
said Obligation, that then the said Recognizance at (...), to be void and of
non Effect, or else to remains and be in full (...) and virtue.

A brief Relation of the Kingdom of England.
ENGLAND is bounded or the (...) by part of the (...); on the West by St.
George's Channel; on the North by Scotland; and on the South by the English
Channel. The A^^ of this Country is mild, sweet and temperate, not P^ircing
Cold in Winter, nor Scorching in Summer. The longest Day in the Northmost Parts
is about Seventeen Hours and half, the shortest in the Southmost is almost
Eight Hours, and the Nights propo^^onably. The chief Commodities, are Corn,
Cattle, Tin, Copper Lead, Iron, Timber, Coal, Wool, Cloth, Stuffs, Linen,
Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese and Beer, etc.

The (...) of this Country are (1) the abundance of (...) of (...); whether for
(...), (...) those especially in (...); or Purging particularly those of the
(...) in (...) Northest, (...) and (...) in Middlesex. Here are also many other
remarkable Springs, whereof some abound of a (...), as that of Durtwich in
Worcestershire; or Sulphur, as the famous Well at Wiggin in Lancashire; or
(...) or (...) matter; as that at Pitchford in (...) of shire. Others (...) a
(...) quality, as particularly that near L^tter (...) and the remarkable
dropping West in the West riding of (...) shire. And Lastly, some Ebb and Flow,
but that commonly (...) a very (...) manner, as those in (...) in Derbyshire,
and (...) (...) Heir. 'To these we may add that extraordinary Fountain near
Richard's Castle in Herefordshire, commonly called (...)-Well, which is always
full of small Bones, (...) of Frog (...), though frequently (...) and cleared
of them.

Near (...) in Lancashire, is a remarkable Well, which being (...), there
presently breaks out a Sulphurous Vapo^^ which makes the Water bubble up as if
it bou'd and a (...) the being put thereto, it instantly catches Fire, and
burns his Brandy; during a Calmn, the flame will continue a where Da^, and by
it is Heat they can Boil Eggs, Meat, etc. and (...) the Water (...) is Cold: (2)
In W^^infield in Westmoreland, is the three Brother Tree, so called, because
there were three of them (the least whereof is this) which, a good way from the
Root, is Thirteen Yards and an half round. (3) In Drebyshire; is the Famous
Peak, and some hideous Cav^es, as those (...) Pool's Hole, Eden Hole, and one
more, which is known by the indecent Name of the Devil's (...). Near it is a
Spring, remarkable for consisting of both Hot and Cold, Water, so joined in the
same Stream, that a Man may at once put his Danger and Thumb of the same Hand
in the hot and the other in the Cold, Lastly, in the County of Sarry is the
River (...), which loses itself updes Ground, and arises again at some
considerable Distance; as does also (...), in the North riding of Yorkshire.

The Kingdom of England is a Famous Ancient and Hereditary Monarchy: A Monarchy
that affords very much to the Industry, Liberty and Happiness of the Subject,
and reserves enough for the Majesty and Prerogative of the King, who in willing
to own his People as Subjects, and not as Slaves. The Supreme Court of
Judicature is the High Court of Parliament. The Inferior Courts are the
King's Bench, the Court of Common Pleas, the High-Court of Chancery, the
Exchequer, and the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster; etc. As also the
Ecclesiastical-Courts in Subordination to the Archbishop of Canterbury;
besides these various Courts; the King, consulting the case, safety and
welfare, or the Subject; administers Justice by his Judges, and that in their
yearly Circuits through the Kingdom; and, for the better go vertuing and keeping
the Peace in particular Counties, Hundreds, Cities; Boroughs; and Villages,
County's have their respective Lords Lieutenants, Sheriffs, and Justices of the
Peace; Hundreds, their Bailiffs, High Constables, and Petty-Constables. Cities,
their Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, etc. Boroughs and Towns incorporate, have
either a Mayor or two Bailiffs, or Port-reeve, who, in power, are the same with
Mayor and Sheriffs, and during their Offices, are Justices of the Peace within
their own Liberties. And lastly; Villages are in subject on to the Lord of the
Manuor, under whom is the Constable or Head borough, to keep the Peace,
apprehend Offenders; and bring them before the Justice.

Historians report That Gomer, the eldest Son of Japheth the Son of Noah, gave
name to the Gomerains, who filled almost this part of the World; leading, as
Vilitb^^s faith, in the tenth year of Nimrod, a Colony out of Armenia into
Italy, which of Gomer were called Cowbri, and afterward Cimbri; when such as
departed from Italy went into the North parts, and gave in the Name of
Crimbrica; or Chersonesus from whence the Britains or English proceeded; who
came over at first from the Continent of France, England was Anciently called
Cumbri: these Britains as I may call them, were then as wild in many things as
the Indians in America are now, as in Curing, Marking and Painting their Flesh,
and in going Naked: Some of those Indians held that Souls depated, wandered up
and down and suffered Hunger, Thirst and Cold, and Buried their Bodies, (...)
Meat, and Gold and Silver with them in their Graves: But believed the Souls of
good Men art in Glory.

Their Married Woman were known by having on their Shoulders, Elbows and Knees,
the Pictures of the Heads of Lions, Griffins, and the like; on their Bellies
the Sun with its Beams, and on their Paps the Moon and Stars.

The Virgins had on the shapes of diverse flowers, made on them while Young, by
raising the Skin, and coloring it with the juice of Herbs, which remained on
them some Years.

The Men were (...) horrible so look on, having on their Flesh the Pictures of
ugly Beasts, Serpents and the like.

Their (...), to whom they Sacrificed Men's Flesh were almost in number equal to
the Idols of the (...).

The Men and Woman were swift of Foot, Warring with their. Enemies in Wagons
and Chariots, Armed at the end of the Axel-Times with Hooks and S^thes of Iron,
which with the Ratifing of their Chariot-Wheel; Amazed their Enemies, (...) of
Dainties, Fed upon Roots of Herbs, and Barks of Tree, not T^^^ing any Ground,
nor sowing Corn, otherwise him (...) it on the Untilled Earth, and Harrowing it
(...) Bushes; Cattle, Fowl and Fish they had, but one none of them.

Their Trading, for the most part, was among themselves, and that but mean;
their chief Riches consisting (as (...) faith) in (...) Boxes, Sheers, Bits,
Bridles, Chains of Iron. Wreath, Glass colored, and the like, which they
usually delivered to each other as Current Coins for what their Necessary
required, Living in Huts, and going Naked, and (...) in Leather Boats, until
the Romans taught them to build both Ships and Houses, etc.

This Land has been Conquered five several times, First by the Romans, under
Julius Caesar, who made the first Attempt upon it Fifty one Years before the
Birth of our Savior Christ. He Subjected it to the Roman Yoke, and caused them
to become Taeibutary to the Romans, who often defended them from the (...) and
Scots, who came out of Scotland, and robed and spoiled the Countrys-to prevent
which Servants, one of the Romans Emperors, caused a Wall to be made from Sea
to Sea, between England and Scotland; that is, from Eden to Tine.

Diverse of the Emperors were here in Person, as Alxender and Severus, who is
reported to be buried at York, Anno 236. Here also was Constantius, Father to
Constantius the Great, be from hence Married Helena, a Woman of this Land, who
was afterward Mother to the Renowned Constantine (from whom Constantinople had
its name, the Chief City of the Great Turk.

But when the Roman Empire was much weakened, partly by their Own Discord, and
partly by the Irruptions of the Goths and Vandals, and such like Invaders, the
Romans were forced to re^^d their Soldiers from Britain, after they had Ruled
483 Years, and so leaving the Land Naked, the Scots, and certain of the same
Country, called Pic^^, did break in, who miserably wasted and spoiled England.

To relieve them from the Cruelty and Oppression of these Scots and Picts, the
Saxons were (in the third Place) by some of the Land called in, who finding the
sweetness of the Soil, and the weakness of the Inhabitants, did repair hither
by great Troops, and so seated themselves here, that there were at one time
seven several Kingdoms of them in the Compass of England, commonly called the
Heptarchy.

These Saxons did bear themselves with more Moderation, toward those few of
the Country that remained, than the (...) had done: But they growing to
Contention, one King with as then, partly concerning the Bounds of their
Territories, or Dominicans and partly concerning other Quarrels, they had (...)
each with the other.

Their Kingdoms were these, 1. The Kingdom of Kert, under the Succession of
seventeen Kings, began by (...), Anno 455. and ended in Baldred, Anno 827.

2. The Kingdom of South Saxons, containing Suffex and (...) under the
Succession of Five Kings, began by (...) Anno 483. and ended in Huthum, Anno
601.

3. The Kingdom of the West Saxons, containing (...), Dorsershire, Sun (...),
Wiltshire, (...), (...), under the Succession of 1-King, (...) Anno 519. And
ended by (...) Anno 818.

4. The Kingdom of the East Saxons, containing, (...) and Middlesex, under the
Succession of 16 Kings begun by (...) Anno 527. and ended in Suthred, Anno 827.

5. The Kingdom of Northumberland, containing Yorkshire, (...), Lancashire,
Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Newthumberland; under the Succession of 23 Kings
begun by Ella and Ida, Anno 547. and ended in Ofred, Anno 916.

6. The Kingdom of Mercia, containing Huntington, Rutland, Lincoln,
Northampton, Leicester, Darbyshire, Nattinghampshire, Oxfordshire, Cheshire,
Shropshire, Glo^^estershire, (...), Staffordshire, Warwickshire,
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hartfordshire, under the Succession of 20
Kings, begun by Cr^da, Anno 582. and ended in Burdred. Anno 226.

7. The Kingdom of East-Angels, containing Suffulk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire,
and ^ly-Island, under the Succession of 15 Kings, begun by Uffa, Anno 575 and
ended in Edward, Anno 914.

But in process of (...) Eghert the 17 King of the West Saxons aforesaid,
became (...) Monarch of England, about the Year of Christ, 830.

And then the fourth, and most grievous Conquest and ^^ourge of this Nation,
was by the Danes, who made a violent Irruption, under King Ethelred, the Saxon;
and so far prevailed, that he was contented to pay them Yearly 10000 l. which
they at last enhanced to 41000 l. This Tyrany Ethelred not able to endure,
privately Commanded his Subjects to Massacree the Danes, which was Executed on
the 22 th of November at Night: upon which Swain, King of Denmark, came with a
Navy of 250 Ships into England, drove Ethelred into Normandy, and Tyranized
over the English with a very high hand, every English house maintaining one
Da^e, whom they called Lord, who lived Idly, by the Labor of the English. And
basely, when some of the English were Drinking, used to stab them, or cut their
Throats; Therefore (...) avoid which Villainy, the Party then Drinking,
requested some of the next to him to be his Surety, or Pledge for his Life;
from whence came the Expression used to this Day of Pledging, one another, when
the party Drank to, takes his turn, and Drink; next after him.

Now the Cause being through Gods Mercy taken away, there is no need of (...)
the Custom of tempting any to Drink more than good nature (...); but as it is
now (...) the more sober English at Meals; who, though they Drink to the another,
desire no Pledges, but let the party (that wants Drink) call for it.

"Forced- Health, ( says a worthy Men) at great Feasts, is a Barbarous Fashion
(used by some Church Men.) At (...) Feast every Man's Rules was his own choice,
and the (...) of very Pagans commanded Liberty of their Cups, (...) Courem: p.
276.) But Health-Drinking is by good Christians called the Shoeing-Horn of
Excess. "These Strong-Liquor Worshippers, (says he) will sometimes be on their
Knees to Drink a great Man's Health [(...) Health Depart from themselves] and so
make Gods of others, and Swine of themselves.

But the Feast our Savior Christ approves of, you may see, Luke 16. 19. 26.
Inviting the (...) etc. that cannot Invite again. But Bishop Sanderson says,
viz. Temperance is the best Physic, Patience the best Law, and good Conscience
the best Divinity.

After the Reign of three Kings the English (...) off the Danish Yoke, and the
Saxons were Re-inthroned.

Note, That it is said of King Edgar that he Built above four several (...),
and some other Kings were, in their Ignorance, so devoted to the Popish
Superstitions, that they resigned their Crowns, and superstitiously Traveled to
Rome, there to lead the Lives of Private Men.

Also (...) the Danish King, being taught by some Men, that St. Peter had
received from Christ the great Power of Binding and Loosing, and that be was
also the Key-bearer of Heaven Gates, for which cause (lest St. Peter should not
open the same unto him, when he should come thither) he went on Pilgrimage to
Rome.

The Fifth and last Conquest was by the Normans, under the leading of Duke
William of Normandy, who pretending he had Right to the Crown of England,
promise of Adoption, of some other conveyance from King Harold, did with his
Normans, Anno 1066. in 896 ships arrive at Pensey in Suffex, and obtained a
great Victory October the 14th in which were ^ain Herald with 66000 of the
English. William took upon him the Kingdom as Conqueror, for he seized all into
(...) stands, gave out Aarons, Lordships and Manner from himself; reversed the
former Laws and Custom, and instructed here the Manners and Orders of his own
Country, which have proceeded on, and been, by little and little, bettered to
(...).

This (...) may see, the English Blood, at this Day is a (...) Normans and
Saxons, not without a Tincture (...) and British Blood.

OF AMERICA.
AMERICA may be properly called the New-World, as (...) by Christopher Columbus
about 290 Years (...). (...) though there have been several Conjectures that is
(...) known in former Ages, yet they seem uncertain, and (...), so that there
is not Dependence upon any of them; and we may conclude, that Columbus gave the
World the first Notice of this immense Country. He was a Genoese by Birth, and
bred a Matinee, trading into Syrid, and (...), from whence he had Opportunity
to view the Coasts of Africa, and observing that at certain Seasons of the
Year, the Winds blew long together from the West, and judging they (...) from
some Place beyond the Sea, and that by the Motion of the Sun there must be
another World to which that glorious Planer (...) impart both its Heat and
Light, he resolved to seek after it. He was about 40 Years old, and in 1486,
proposed his Design to the State of Genoa, assuring them; That if they would
furnish him with Ships, he did not doubt but to find (...) Way by the West, to
the spice Islands in the Indies, but they rejected it, as an idle Fancy. He
(...) the same Offer with like success to (...) King of (...), upon which he
sent his Brother Bartholomew to King (...) VIIth of England, who being
unhappily taken by Pirates in his Voyage in England, he after long Imprisonned
arrived in England, and repairing to Court, presented King Henry with a Map of
the World with his Brother's Offer of Discovery: The Motion was readily
entertained, and Christopher sent for into England, who hearing nothing from
his Brother, he went to Spain, where he sped in his Suit, and arrived at the
Court of Castile in 1446; but (...), and Isabella, King and Queen of Spain,
being in War with the Moors in Granada, he was neglected till the Archbishop
of Toledo procured him Audience, and after the Wars were ended, he was
furnished with three Ships at the King's Charge, and 16000 Ducats in Money,
which seemed (...) to be for Discovery, than a Conquest. In 1492, Columbus with
about 130 Mariners sailed for Gomera, (...) of the (...) Island; where having
refreshed, after many Days, they encountered the Sea, called Sargassa, from a
Plant like Sampire, appearing like a green Field; this Sight so discouraged
them, that it had occasioned their Return, had not the sight of some Birds
encouraged them with Hopes of Land not (...). After 33 Days sailing, despairing
of Success the Company (...), threatening to throw Columbus into the Sea, what
being a Genoese Stranger, had deluded them; at length with soft Words, and
strong Promises, he assured them, That if no Land appeared in three Days, he
would return: The Time was just expiring when Columbus observed the Clouds to
be clearer then before, and in the Evening of the last Day, one of the Company
from the (...)-mast descried (...) and soon after the Land appeared: This
Person expecting a great Reward from the King of Spain, of which he was
frustrated upon his Return, in a Rage renounced Christianity, and turned
Mohammedan.

Upon Sight of Land, the next Day the Marineers, who were Yesterday for
destroying him, now embrace, and almost adore him, for so happily bringing them
to the Land of Promise. On Shore they go, and falling a Tree, erected to Cross,
and took Possession of this New-World, in the Name of the Catholic (...). They
first landed in an Island called (...). One of (...) which they named St.
Salvador, and sailed from thence to Hispaniola, where the Natives fed from
whence to the Mountains, but seizing one Woman, though gave her Meat, Drink, and
Clothes, and let her go, (...) declaring their Civility, they came in Troops to
the Ships, Side, judging the Spaniards to be some divine Nation for from
Heaven, though at first they thought them Can^I^als, or Man-eaters, and so indeed
they proved in some Sense, (...) leaving in some Parts 200 Indians alive of 4
Millions, that inhabited those Countries. Nothing more pleased the Stanards,
than the Gold which the innocent Inhabitants exchanged for Bells, Glasses,
Points and other Trifles.

Columbus built a Fort by Leave of the King of Hispaniola, leaving 38 Spaniards
therein, and taking with him 6 hedi^^s, returned to Spain, being highly
caressed by the King and Queen, and honored with the Title of Admiral, and in
riched with the Tenths of the Spanish Gains in the (...), He is then sent a
second Time with his Brother Bartholomew, (who was made Viceroy of
Hispaniola,) with 17 Sail of Ships, and 1500 Men: When he arrived, he found all
his Men murdered by the Indians, who laid the Blame on their insolemn Carriage
toward them.

Columbus now built Domingo, Isabella; and St. Thomas Fort in that Island,
where the Spaniards all died with Famine; for the Indians unwilling to have
such Neighbors, refused to plant their Maiz, and Jucea, and so starved both
themselves and their new Guests. He then discovered Cuba, Jamaica, and the
adjacent Isles, and at length returning into Spain, died in 1506, and was
buried at Sevil, leaving 2 Sons; the Eldest named Diego, succeeding him in the
Admiralty of the Indies.

Columbus having led the Way, was seconded by American Vesputius, a Florentine,
employed by Emanuel, King of Portugal in 1502, who had been his Companion in
the first Expedition. He with a competent Number of Ships and Men, (...) the
Equinoctial, and discovered the Coasts of Guiana, and Brasil, beyond the
Tropic of Capricorn, to 32 Degrees of South Latitude, and the Height of the
Streights of Magellane. (as they were afterward called). But Americas meeting
with soul Weather, was forced to return Home by the Coast of Africa. The next
Year he designed a Voyage to Insula Real in Brasile, but his Provisions being
lost upon the Coast of Guinea in Africa, he was forced to return, but how long
he lived after, is not Recorded, yet he had the Honor and Happiness, (to the
great Injury of Columbus) to give his Name to the fourth Part of the World,
which from him was called America.

Ferdinando Cortez, was another great Adventurer, who went Clerk to the
Treasurer of Cuba, where getting Money by carrying over Sheep and Ki^e, and
receiving Gold in exchange, he returned to Spain, and furnishing himself with
11 Ships, and 550 Men, he arrived at St. ^ Cruce, and discovering many new
Provinces, he (...) up the River Tabasx, where the People of (...) refusing to
sell him Provisions, he plundered the same. The (...) enraged, raised an Army
of ^0000 Men, but Cortez with Horse and (...) soon defeated them, they
imagining the Horse and Man to be but one Creature. He proceeded then toward
Mexico, and at St. John de Ulla, the Governor came to him with 1400 Indians,
adoring and burning Frakincense ^n him, and preserved him with Victuals,
Jewels, Gold and Silver, which Cortez (...) with a Collar of Glass, and other
Things of small Value: Cortez asked the Governor whether their great Emperor
(...) had any Gold, who answering, Yea; I am glad of that, said Cortez, for my
Companions are troubled with a Disease at the Heart, for which Gold was the
only sovereign Remedy, so desired him to (...) him with the greatest Quantity
he could of that Mortal, who accordingly sent two Wheels, each two Yards broad,
one of Silver, representing the Moon the other of Gold like the Sun, to the
Value of 20000 Duckces; he likewise promised to pay whatever Tribute the King
of Spain should require, and all Necessaries, but was unwilling that Cortez
should visit him, which yet he resolved he would; and being arrived at Mexico,
he received him withal Solemnity. But Cortez being full of ambitious Thoughts,
seized upon the King, and put him in Chains, with a Spanish Guard of so Men;
whereupon (...) Nephew fled in Arms, but by the Treachery of his own People,
was delivered to his Uncle, whom Cortez permitted to exercise a seeming (...)
Authority, and by whose Order he (...) an Assembly of (...) Chief of his
People, where he obliged him to make an Oration, declaring, That his
Predecessors were not born in this Country, but came from a strange Land, and
that their Kings of old had promised to send such as should rule them, and had
accordingly sent these Spaniards, and that they ought to submit to the Emperor
of Spain,: Which they did, though with many Tears on either Side, for the Loss of
their Liberty. He then presented Cortez with a vast Sum of Gold and Jewels, in
the Nature of a Tribute valued at one Million six hundred Thousand Castilians:
After this one of Cortez's Captains, (who was gone upon an Expedition) resolved
to make the Spaniards terrible to the Indians: It happened the Nobility and
Commons of the City used all Kind of the Spores and Recreations, to diverse
their Captive King, among which were above 2000 Youths, the Flower of the City,
whom he fell upon with a Party of 100 Spaniards, and cut them all off. The
Indians beholding this Cruelty and Injustice, now fly all to Arms, whereupon
the Villian setting a Dagger to (...) Breast, (...) to kill him, unless he
would look out of the Window, and command them to lay down their Arms, but they
knowing he was under a Force, out threw a Stone and struck the King on the
Temples, of which he died three Days after, and though Cortez had some
Thousands of Flax^tians, who were Enemies to the Mexicans, to assist him, yet
the Spaniards and Indians were forced to fly out of the City: the Mexicans
cutting off their Bridges, made great Slaughter, the Spaniards losing much of
their ill-got Treasure; and their Numbers increasing to 200000, they pursued
them: But Cortez having the good Fortune to kill (...). (...)-Bearer, the
Indians forsook the Field. At length after three Months Siege, Mexico is taken
and razed to the Ground, but soon after rebuilt with an hundred Thousand Houses.

After Columbus and other Spaniards had discovered this rich immense Country,
other Nations were encouraged to take a more strict Survey of every Part, both
North and South. The Portuguese first settled in Brasile and other Places. The
French took Possession of Canada on the North and several Englishmen attempted
to find a N. W. (...) China, and the East Indies; namely Sir Sebastian Cabot,
as the Charge of King Henry VIIIth, in 1493; after him Sit Martin Frobisher, in
the Reign of Q. Elizabeth; then the Captains, Davis, Weymouth, Hall, Borough,
Pet, Jackman, (...), Baffin, Smith and Hudson, the Result of whose endeavors
were the finding some cold Islands, to which they gave Names, and among other
to Hudsons Straight, or Bay, which is in Possession of the English at this
time, (...) Company, and driving a considerable Trade in Furs, which they
Purchase of the Natives. Other Englishmen attempted to find out a N. E.
Passage to Cathay, and with better Fortune found the Way to Russia, since that
Time made a common Voyage, by passing down the River Volga to the Caspian Sea.
Sir Tho. Cavendish, and Sir Francis Drake, Likewise surrounded the Globe,
sailing through the Streights of Magellane, to the Philippine-Islands in the
East Indies, and so by the Cape of Good Hope to England; and many other
Discoveries were made by Sir Walter Rawleigh, and (...) since; so that a this
Time the King of England has several very considerable (...) and Colonies on
the W. Continent of America, contiguous to each other, containing about 1500
Miles from North to South; of which I shall give a brief Account, as well as of
the several rich Islands of which the English are possessed in this Part of the
World. I shall begin with

NEW FOUND LAND, first discovered by (...) for King Henry VIIth, not thought at
first to be an Island, but now found to be so, and as big as England, where are
many Natives who pretend to believe in on, God, that (...) all Things, but have
many ridiculous Opinions concerning him a (...) or a King (...) English, there
was one God, one Son, one Mother, and the Sun, which were Four, (...) God was
above them all. The English have some Towns have, about the great Bank, which
is covered with Water when the Tide flows, but is dry on the (...), and on all
side 200 (...) deep, there is great (...) by the English for God yearly, of
which there are such prodigious Numbers, that one (...) in an Hour's Time. The
Lord (...) had a (...) (...) a starley House and Fort at Ferryland, where no
(...) a Plantation, and lived there for some Time; his Son is Proprietor of
this Island, as well as (...); I shall now give an Account of our Acquisitions
on the Continent of America, and first of

NEW ENGLAND. It was discovered with the other Northern Coasts, by Seb Cabot in
1497, and in 1534. P. Am^dus and A. Parlow, were the first Christians who took
possession thereof. It lay long neglected; (...) 1612, King James Is It, granted
a Patent to several Adventures, of this vast Trast of Land, from 40 to 48
Degree, North yet little Improvement was made of these Grants, the Proprietors
building only a (...) for Fishermen on the Coast.

(...) after one Mr. Robinson, a Presbyterian Minister, or ^^ther Independent
Preacher, and several other English then at (...) in Helland, whither, upon
Archbishop (...) impossing new Ceremonies upon the Clergy, they had withdrawn
themselves, foreseeing, (...) could not so well provide for these Posterity in
a foreign Nation, petitioned King James Is It, for Liberty to (...) themselves in
those Parts of America, and had a (...) for some Territory near Hudsons Bay.
They see sail from Plymouth in September, 1612. for the South Part of
New England, but were, through many Dangers, cast upon the South Cape of the
Massachusetts Bay, called Cape God, from the Plenty of those Fish upon that
Coast; and (...) approaching so fast, they had no Opportunity to remove, but
the Goodness of the Soil, and the Kindness of the Indians, encouraged them to
(...) there, laying the Foundation of a new Colony, and named it New-Plymouth,
the last Town they failed from in England. From this Time, in a few Years
New England was much increased in Buildings, and began to (...) in all Manner
of Accommodations, so that they have now near 80 Towns with English Names, of
which Boston is the Chief. The Air is clear, healthful and agreeable to the
English; it is well water^^ with Rivers, has Varity of Beasts, wild and (...)
several (...) of Fruits; the Commodities, it (...) are Rich Furs, Esex, Linen,
(...), Iron, (...) and other (...), whereas berevt trade to other (...) and
send great Quantities of Goods to (...) from whence they import all Sorts of
Goods which they want, and are now grown one of the most thriving Colonies in
the West Indies.

NEW YORK, so called from the Duke of York, before he came to the Crown,
formerly named New-Netherlands, being Part of that New England, possessed by the
Hollanders, but the English having a prior Right since the Reign of King James,
1st, in 1664, King Charles IId, sent over Commissioners to reduce the Colonies
into Bounds, who marching with 300 Red Coats to Manhattens, took from the Dutch
their chief Town, called New-Amsterdam, now New York, turning out the Governor
with the Silver Leg, suffering all those that owned Subjection to the King of
England, to enjoy their Houses and Estates as before, and in 13 Days after, the
English got three Handsome Towns, three strong Forts, and a Castle without the
Loss of one Man. The Climate is the same with New England, and abounds with the
like natural Productions, as well as with Corn, and other Grain. Hudson's River
is on the North, toward the Head of which is feared, New Albany, a Place of
great Trade with the Indians, having above 100 Miles good Corn Land, and other
Accomodations.

NEW JERSEY is Part of the Province of New Albany, has 7 considerable Towns,
and is plentifully supplied with lovely Springs, Revolers, and Inland Rivers,
it has Store of Oak Timber, Masts for Ships, and other Wood, and produces
plentiful Crops of all Sorts of English Grain; is stored with wild Deer,
Rabbits, and wild Fowl of all Sorts; also delicious Fruits, which come not to
Perfect on in England are the natural Product of this Country; they have
likewise Numbers of Horses, Cows, Hogs, and Sheep. Their Wh^l^ Oil, and Whale
Furs, Bevers, Monkies, Racoon, and Martins Skins, they Transport for England.
It is considerably peopled, and adjacent to New York and Long Island both well
peopled (...).

PENSILVANIA is a Member of that Part of America, which the King of England
Ancestors have taken care to preserve and improve; and King Charles IId, in
Consideration of the Services of Sir William Pen, upon the Petition of his Son
William Pen Esquire made him a Grant of that Tract of Land in America, which he
named Pensilvania; which in a few Years from a small Beginning is grown a
populous and rich Plantation, inhabited principally by Quakers, and other
likewise; there being Places of Worship for People of (...) Denominations. They
abound will all Things, both Beast Sheep, Fowl, Horses, Deer, Fruits, Wheat,
Barley, are all other Necessaries (...) their Neighbors enjoy.

They (...) begun and almost finished a large City, which is (...) situate upon
a Neck of Land between two navigable (...) De la Ware, and Sk^lkil, whereby it
has (...) the Water, each a Mile, and two from River to River, where ships may
ride in good Anchorage, and (...) huge Space (...) Ground increases daily, in
building (...) with a Distance between each to prevent Fire.

(...) A. D. is bounded on the North with Pennsilvania, (...) De la Ware River,
and the Atlantic Ocean (...) plain and even, the Soil Rich and (...)
Commodities found in the other (...) of the English there, is Tobacco, 100
(...) one Year been sent to England, and (...); it is divided into 10 Counties,
(...) to the Lord Baltimore, and his Heirs. (...), and royal Prerogatives, and
Jurisdictions; (...) Honors, coining Money, etc. (...) Acknowledgment to the
King and his (...) Arrows at Windsor Castle upon Easter (...) Lordship and the
Assembly have established (...) of the Inhabitants, with Toleration to (...) in
CHRIST.

VIRGINIA. This Country, with the adjacent Coasts, was discovered (...), for
King Henry the VIIth. (...) Sir Francis Drake, and after ^ard by Sir (...)
Rawleigh, who named Virginia (...) in honor (...) Queen Elizabeth: and after
its first Discovery occasioned great (...) and Expense, before it became a
(...). It is finance (...) (...) South of Haryland, and abounds in all Things
common (...) the others Plantations, particularly Tobacco, which they (...)
change for all other Commodities among one another (...) which they purchase
whatever Goods they have occasion for either from England or the neighboring
Islands. James River is of most account, where James Town is commodiously
seated, navigable 150 Miles, in this Town are (...) and well built brick
Houses, and the Courts of (...) it, with all public Offices are kept here. The
country is governed by the Laws of England, and divided into (...) Counties, in
which are held Petty-Courts every Month, from which there may be Appeals to the
Quarter Sessions at James Town. They have Store of wild Beasts, as Lions,
Beats, Leopards, Tigers, Deers, Hares, Martine, Flying Squirrels; and for tame
Beasts, Horses, Cows, Sheep, Goats, and Hogs.

CAROLINA, So called from K. Charles IId, is that Part of Florida, joining to
Virginia, between 29 and 36 Degrees North Latitude. The East is washed with the
Atlantic Ocean Bounded on the West with the South Sea, and within these Bounds
is contained the most fertile and pleasure Part of Florida, so much commended
by the Spanish Authors. This Province was in 1662, by Letters Parent, granted
by King Charles IId, to the Earl of Clarendon, and several other Noblemen and
Knights, who have there settled a Constitution of Gover^^^^ (...) whereby no
Money can be raised without Consent of their Representatives in an Assembly,
with inn^e Liberty of Conscience; this Country is in the same Climate and
Temperature with Aleppo, Smyrna, Antioch in Judea, and the Province of Nanking,
the richest in China, and will produce any Thing which those Parts do, were the
Seeds brought and sowed in it; it is 600 Miles nearer the Sun than England, and
so healthy; that several phthisical and consumptive People who came from
England have recovered, and others that have been affected with the Stone, have
been quite cured, neither is the (...) known in this Colony, they enjoy all the
Blessings which we have mentioned in others, both for Health and Pleasure, and
some others that they are not Partakers of. They have five Sorts of Grapes
growing naturally in the Fields, which the French that are (...), will make
very good Wine, and some of the Lords Proprietors have taken care to send them
Plants of (...), Canary, Claret, Muscat, Madera, and Spanish Grapes, and the
Wine they have made already, is very good both for taste and color; several
Olive Trees are planted there, and thrive exceedingly. Tobacco grows very well,
and Mulberry trees to feed their Silk Worms, of which they make some
Improvements. But their chief Produce is Rice, of which they make great
Quantities of that which is very good, and load 14 or 15 large Ships every year
for England, chiefly with Rice, and there is nothing wanting but People to
inhabit this happy Country. These are all the Colonies the English have upon
the West Continent of America which from Newfoundland North is near 1500 Miles.

FINISH.

