THE HISTORY OF THE RISE, INCREASE, and PROGRESS, Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE
called QUAKERS: Intermixed with Several Remarkable Occurrences.

Written Originally in LOW DUTCH, and also Translated into ENGLISH,

By WILLIAM SEWEL.

The THIRD EDITION, Corrected.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by SAMUEL KEIMER in Second Street. MDCCXXVIII.

To GEORGE, King of Great Britain, Ireland, etc. and Prince Elector of
Brunswick Lunenburg, etc.
Great and Mighty PRINCE,
AS there is great Variety in the inclinations of Men in general, so it is
particularly remarkable in those who addict themselves to the Studies of Nature
and Humane Literature: For some with great Eagerness enquire into the
Operations of Nature, and the Natural Causes of Things; some endeavor to dig
up Antiquities from the Dark, by searching out the Signification of Statues and
Inscriptions of Antique Stones, and old and almost worn out Medals; and others
peruse with unwearied Diligence the Histories both of Modern and Ancient Times,
and not without good Cause: For History is not unjustly called the Looking
glass of humane Life; not only because it shows unto us Matters of Fact which
are either commendable, or reproveable, and we behold therein that which is
past, as if it were present; but also because from Things which have already
happened we may learn what is best for us to do, and what we ought to avoid.
And therefore great Benefit may be reaped from the Reading of Histories,
besides the Pleasure which the Variety of Transactions affords to our Senses,
when Matters are accompanied with singular Circumstances and unexpected Events.

NOW since the Reading of Historical Treatises was one of the most pleasant
Diversions of my Youth, this drew me; when I attained to some Maturity of Age,
to enquire after many Things that had happened in thy Kingdoms and Dominions,
which by many were almost forgotten. And having gathered great Store of very
remarkable Cases, which I thought worthy to be kept upon Record; and not buried
in Oblivion, I was induced to compose an History, which for the rare
Occurrences, and unusual Matter contained therein, I believe are not easily
paralleled.

AND after a long and difficult Labor, having at length finished the Work so
far as to expose it to public View; and then thinking to whom I should
dedicate it, it presently came into my Mind, that this could not be done more
suitably to any than to the King of these Countries, which are the chie^
Theater of this History; and the rather, because therein is described the Rise
of a People, who are no small Part of his faithful Subjects: For so I may
safely call them, since they never (how much soever wronged and oppressed)
offered any Resistance to the Government: And when for Conscience sake they
could not comply with what was required of them, by patient Suffering they
showed their Subjection and Obedience to the higher Power. Nay, when
Opportunity was offered to revenge themselves; of their Enemies, even then they
would not, but left it to the Lord; and thus at all Times they behaved
themselves like a peaceable People.

AND since I have also had Occasion in this History to mention some Illustrious
Branches of thy Royal Family, to whom could I then with more Justice offer this
Work, than to Thee, O King of Great Britain! Who, having already made thy self
gloriously renowned by thy eminent Clemency bestowed even upon such who by
their unnatural Rebellion had forfeited it, did rather choose to establish
thy Throne thereby, than by Severity, and thus effectually to observe this
Lesson of the wisest of Kings, Prove. xx. 28.
Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy.

ALL this has emboldened me, GREAT KING, to dedicate this Work to Thee with
due Regard, and in a Way of humble Address to approach thy Royal Presence. Be
pleased therefore, according to thy wonted Goodness, to excuse this modest
Freedom, and to know, that though it be offered by a Foreigner, yet it proceeds
from him who heartily wishes that God may Vouchsafe Thee long to reign in
Peace and Tranquillity over thy Subjects; and when removed hence from an earthly
and perishing Diadem, to grant Thee an heavenly and incorruptible Crown of
Glory. Which is the unfeigned Desire of,

Great and Mighty PRINCE, Thy Affectionate and Sincere Well-wisher, WILLIAM
SEWELL.

THE PREFACE.
AFTER a Labor of more them five and twenty Years, this History at length
appears in public View; to the compiling of which I was induced from the
Consideration that the Rise and Increase of that Religious Society, which in
this Work I have given a circumstantial Account of, is indeed so rare and
wonderful a Thing, that I think few will be met with in Modern Histories, which
in the like Respect may be compared therewith; because the Quakers so called
are become a great People, under such heavy Oppression as is herein
after-mentioned; and that not by any human Power, or making Resistance, but
merely by an harmless Deportment, and the exercising of Patience; for the
bearing of Arms, and the resisting of the Wicked by Fighting, they always have
counted unlawful, and contrary to the Doctrine of our Savior. Thus they who
had no King, Prince nor Potentate to protect them, and who in the Beginning had
not among themselves any Men of Renown or Literature; but relying on their
Integrity, and trusting to God alone, have at length triumphed over the Malice
of their Opposers, by suffering, (which rose to that Degree, that it was at the
Expense of the Lives of many of them) and under violent Oppression from High
and Low, and the Opposition of Learned and Unlearned.

ALL this having been searched after, and found out by assiduous Diligence it
appeared so wonderful to me, that I resolved to give a Relation thereof,
notwithstanding the great Labor I soon perceived this Work required. To this
may be added, that when I considered that several Authors, both Germans and
others, had published Books and Accounts of this People, stuffed with gross
Untruths, I was the more spurred on thereby to set down in due Order, for my
Countrymens Sake, what I knew of the Matter; for it seems indeed to be of small
Advantage, that when any Thing is well known to us, we keep that Knowledge only
to our selves, Scire tuam nihil e^t, nisi te soire hoe s^iat alt^r. Pers. Sat.
1.
without imparting it to others.

NOW how difficult soever I found this Labor, yet having made a Beginning, I
resolved to go on; and so I did, though often stopped by several Accidents, and
also other Work: For during this Labor, I have not only translated several
bulky Books into Dutch, besides Kennet's Antiquities of Rome, but also composed
several Treatises of Moment, and among these my Great Dictionary English and
Low Dutch. And notwithstanding all these Impediments, I continually resumed
this Work by Intervals so often, that I have written it almost thrice to make
it complete: For doubting of some Things, and finding others defective, it made
me write to England for better Information; which having gotten at length after
much Pains and long Waiting, I was several Times obliged to lay aside Part of
my former Description, and make a new one; which happened so often, that had I
not been supported by an unwearied Application, the Difficulty of the Labor,
which has been much greater in Holland than if I had composed the Work in
England, would have made me give it over. But I went on, and so finished this
History in that Form as it now appears.

AND I am not without Thoughts, that I was prepared to be instrumental for such
a Work as this: For several remarkable Things I have made Use of, I noted down
before ever I thought of composing such a History; and even is my young Years,
when I was in England, I copied out from Manuscripts several Pieces and
Letters, which are inserted in this History, it may be hardly to be found
elsewhere.

AT the first Sight perhaps some will be ready to think that I might have
superseded this Labor; since the learned World has long ago seen a Book
written in Latin by Gerard Croese, with the Title of Historia Quakeriana. But
be it known to the Reader, that though the Author got the chief Contents thereof
from me, yet that Relation which he gives of the Rise and Progress of the
Quakers, is very imperfect and defective; and that he presumed to relate Things
of which he had no true Knowledge. I gave him indeed many Things in Writing;
but not all I had collected; besides having since that Time written to my
Acquaintance in England, I got Narratives of many remarkable Occurrences given
forth in Print there, and many Authentic Pieces in Manuscript. Now though this
Collection was, as Ovid calls the Chaos, Rudis indigestaque Moles, [a rude
and undigested Heap;] yet from thence, and from my own Collection of Matters
known to me, I have compiled the greatest Part of this History: But as to the
Life and Transactions of G. Fox, who is largely treated of in this Work, I took
them chiefly from his Journal: And the greatest Part of other Occurrences, or
the Lives and Transactions of others, I have taken from the Works of deceased
Authors, and out of Abundance of small Books published in Print not long after
the Things happened, and not contradicted by whatever I could learn.

THVS I have endeavored to assert nothing but what I had good Authority for;
which in regard of some Circumstances, would have been yet far more difficult
after the Expiration of some Years: For now Time gave Opportunity to be
informed of many Things, which some ^ancient People had yet Remembrance of, and
which after their Decease perhaps should have been buried in Oblivion.

I CANNOT well omit here publicly to acknowledge the signal Kindness and
Diligence of my well-beloved and much esteemed Friend Theodore Eccleston of
London, who has furnished me with Abundance of Materials, not only very
useful, but also absolutely necessary for the compiling of this Work: From him
I had Intelligence on that Account, and have exchanged a Multitude of Letters.
And thus by a long continued Correspondence I came to be acquainted with many
Things and Circumstances, which after some Years might have been more difficult
to obtain.

ADD to this, that I have described several Things well known to me, which few
besides my self within these thirty or forty Years had better Knowledge of. I
have also mentioned several remarkable Cases, which I noted down from the
Mouths of credible Persons, who have been dead many Years ago; and thought not
that at any Time I should have published them in Print. In the mean while I
took Account of what seemed to me worthy to be left upon Record; and I
collected a great Quantity of Books, wherein many Occurrences, mentioned in
this History were related. Of such Kind of Relations and Accounts I have made
Use, without taking from thence all that was remarkable: For it has not been
for Want of Matter that this History has not run out far her, since I could
have made it thrice as big, if I had been minded so to do. But as I was
unwilling to extend my Work any further than my Strength and Fealth in all
Probability should permit, so I would not glut my Reader with many Things of
one and the same Nature; but have endeavored by Variety of Matter, to quicken
his Appetite; and therefore have intermixed the serious Part sometimes with a
facetious Accident.

YET I have not thought my self bound to take Notice of every odd Case that may
have happened among the Quakers so called: For there have conversed among them
such, who acted some particular Things that were not approved of by those of
that Society. And if any one swayed by human Passion commits any Excess, which
is disapproved of by his Fellow Members of the Church, such an Act may not be
duly imputed to the People he makes Profession with. Among such Particulars may
be reckoned the Case of one Hester Biddle, which Croese makes mention of, about
the End of his History: For though it was told him from the Relation she gave of
it at Amsterdam, not with any Intention that he should publish it, yet this was
a particular Case which she her self must be responsible for; since Experience
has taught that Imagination sometimes works so powerfully on the Mind, that
one thinks himself obliged to do a Thing which were better left undone.

YET for all that it is true, that Men fearing God, may mistake, and through
Ignorance do something, which others not without Reason might judge not
commendable. Also it may happen that some again from a godly Fear have acted or
omitted what others, no less pious, would not have scrupled. And though some
among the Quakers, in the Beginning of their Rise, for Fear of transgressing
Christ's Command, Matt. xxviii. 8.
Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, speaking to
Persons in Authority, called them by the Name of Friend; yet others of the same
Persuasion have not therefore thought themselves bound to refuse to Magistrates
their distinguishing Titles of Magistracy. Nay, if any for some special Reason
may not have given a full or direct Answer to a Query, yet others of the same
Society have not looked upon this as a Pattern to imitate. For the most eminent
Valiants among this People in the Beginning were not Men of Note or Learning,
though of great Courage, insomuch that their immovable Stedfastness sometimes so
exasperated their Enemies, that their Fear of doing or omitting any Thing which
they judged would displease God, often has been stamped with the odious
Denomination of Stubbornness and Stiffneckedness; but they have born this
patiently, believing that it was their Duty to persevere immoveably in minding
their Christian Profession, and in frequenting their religious Assemblies. And
that such a Stedfastness was the Duty of a Christian, seems also to have been
the Judgment of the Authors of the Confession of Faith of the reformed Churches
in the Netherlands, Art. xxviii. where it is said, That it is the Office or
Duty of all Believers, to separate themselves according to the Word of God from
those that are not of the Church; and to join to this Congregation, in what
Place soever God has placed them, though the Magistrates and Edicts of Princes
were against it, and that Death, or any corporal Punishment was annexed to it.

IT is true, there have been such among the Quakers, who were exceeding bold in
representing to their Enemies their evil Behavior and Deportment: But this
has been a peculiar Talent of pious Men, of whom Examples was extant in the
Books of Martyrs, viz. That some of them (...) very plain Terms told their
Persecutors of their Wickedness. Very remarkable in that Respect, is the Speech
of John Molleus, who about the Year 1653, being Prisoner at Rome, without any
Dissimulation, exposed to public View the wicked Lives of the Cardinals and
Bishops, who were ordered by the Pope to examime him. The like Boldness appears
also in the Letter of Hans van Hovendam, to the Magistrates of Ghem in (...) in
the Mirror of Martyrs of the Baptists. From whence it appears, that the Quakers
have not been the only People, who have told their Persecutors very boldly of
their wicked Deportment and Cruelty.

IT cannot be denied that there have been at Times, among the Society, some
People of an odd Behavior, who in Process of Time embraced strange Opinions
and perverse Notions: But that is no new Thing; since this has happened also
among those of other Persuasions, though none of these would allow that this was
the Consequence or Effect of their Doctrine. We find in Sacred Writ, that even
in the Primitive Christian Church there were Apostates, either such as
maintained strange Doctrine, as the Nicolaitanes, or such who finding the
strait Way too narrow for them, left it, and like Demas, falling in Love again
with the World, entered into the broad Way. And therefore it can now no more
than then, be argued from thence, that the Exorbitances to which some launched
out, were the Effects of the Doctrine they forsook.

SINCE in this History some Predictions are also mentioned, and that some
biased by Prejudice, will perhaps look upon them as frivolous, imagining that
the Quakers pretend to have the Spirit of Prophecy; I Will answer to this, That
though among Thousands of them there may have been One that prophetically
foretold a Thing, which afterward truly happened; yet others of that Society
presumed to have that Gift, no more than to have that of being a Preacher: And
all are not called to that Work. There must be Antecessors and Leaders in the
religious Economy, as well as in the Politic State: For if every one not
qualified should assume the Office of Governing, Things would soon run into
Confusion. Now though some have had this false Conceit, that to be able to
predict future Things was a Quality the Quakers attributed to themselves, as
proceeding from their Doctrine, that Christians ought to be led by the Spirit
of God; yet this is a very sinister and preposterous Conceit: For what they say
concerning the Leading and Guiding of the Spirit of God, is agreeable with the
Doctrine of the Apostle, Romans viii. 14.
who says, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
And this was also the Doctrine of the first Reformers. What must we think then
of those who will not be led by this Spirit, but call this Doctrine by the
odious Denomination of Enthusiasm? The same Apostle tells us also, (...) viii.
9.
If any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And he also says, 1
Cor. xli. 7.
The Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. But
from thence it does in no wise follow, that the Spirit of Prophecy is given to
every one; neither that although it might please God to reveal to One a Thing
which was yet to come, such an One therefore was endued with a Prophetical
Spirit, that he was able at any Time, to predict future Things.

IF this Position be true, then those of other Persuasions might also lay Claim
to that Prerogative; because among them sometimes there have been pious Men,
who predicted remarkable Things, which afterward really happened; as amongst
the rest, James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland; who
foretold the Rebellion in Ireland Forty Years before it came to pass; besides
the intestine War and Miseries that befell England, and other Things that were
fulfilled; which leads us not to reject as frivolous his Prediction of the
dreadful Persecution that would fall upon all the Protestant Churches by the
Papists: For though one of his Friends once objected to him, That since Great
Britain and Ireland had already suffered so deeply, there was Reason to hope
that the Judgments of God in respect of these Kingdoms might have been past;
yet he replied to it, Fool not your selves with such Hopes; for I tell you, all
you have yet seen has been but the Beginning of Sorrows to what is yet to come
upon the Protestant Churches of Christ, who will ere long fall under a sharper
Persecution than ever yet has been upon them. And therefore look you be not
found in the outward Court, but a Worshipper in the Temple before the Altar:
For Christ will measure all those that profess his Name, and call themselves
his People; and the outward Worshippers he will leave out, to be trodden down
by the Gentiles. The outward Court is the formal Christian, whose Religion lies
in performing the Outside Duties ot Christianity, without having an inward Life
and Power of Faith and Love uniting them to Christ: And these God will leave to
be trodden down, and swept away by the Gentiles. But the Worshippers within the
Temple, and before the Altar, are those who do indeed worship God in Spirit and
in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is honored and adored in
the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and
vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him: And these God will hide in
the Hollow of his Hand, and under the Shadow of his Wings. And this shall be
the great Difference between this last, and all the other preceding
Persecutions: For in the former, the most eminent and spiritual Ministers and
Christians did generally suffer most, and were most violently fallen upon; but
in this last Persecution these shall be preserved by God as a Seed to partake
of that Glory which shall immediately follow, and come upon the Church, as soon
as ever this Storm shall be over: For as it shall be the sharpest, so it shall
be the shortest Persecution of them all, and shall only take away the gross
Hypocrites and formal Professors; but the true Spiritual Believers shall be
preserved till the Calamity be over-past.

IF any now adays should speak at this Rate, it is credible, that many who
think themselves to be good Christians, would decry this as mere Enthusiasm.
But the said Bishop is still in such great Repute with the Learned, and has
obtained such an high Esteem by his Writings, that his Words are likely to be
of more Weight with many, than those of other pious Men. And therefore I was
willing to renew them, and revive his Memory, if perhaps this might make form
Impression upon the Minds of any: For this is a certain Truth, that no outward
Performances will avail any, if they do not worship God in Spirit and in Truth;
for such Worshippers God seeks, according to what our Savior himself said:
Mat. vii. 21, 22, 23.
Besides, that Not every one that says to him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven: Nay, when many in that Day will say to him, Lord, Have
we not prophesied in thy Name? He will say to them, I never knew you; Depart
from me ye that work Iniquity.

AS the many singular Cases related in this History will afford no unpleasing
Entertainment to curious Readers, so they will be found also instructive; for
we shall not only meet with Instances of true Piety and Love to one's
Neighbor, and of Saints triumphing on their Deathbeds, and also with
remarkable Examples of Sinners truly penitent at the Hour of Death: but we may
also find here Abundance of Proofs of a peaceable Behavior: For the Quakers,
so called, have not plotted against the Government, nor meddled with
treasonable Practices or Rebellions: And how much soever they were oppressed,
yet they always were quiet, and never made any Resistance, but with an harmless
Patience they have born their most heavy Oppressions and Injuries, and so it
length overcame: For to be subject to Magistracy has always been one of their
Principles; and that they were really dutiful Subjects, they have showed at all
Times, by paying Obedience to the Higher Power, in all they could do with a
good Conscience. And when any Thing was required of them, which from a
reverential Respect to God they durst not do, or omit, they have showed their
Obedience by suffering, without making any Resistance, or joining with others
who were inclined thereto.

NOW though many have made it their Business to represent them in odious Col^^rs,
and to write great Untruths concerning them, nay to s^^^en Doctrines upon them
which they never approved, and that not a fe^ of the L^^^n^d have contended
against them with their Pens, yet among these, there have also been such, who'
though they never joined with, yet gaved a good Account and favorable Testimony
concerning them; as may be seen in Richard Claridge's Answer to a Book of
Edward Cockson, page 266, and seq. And at Amsterdam in Holland many Years ago a
Learned Man published a Book called, Lucerna super Cande^abrum, wherein is very
eminently defended the Doctrine of the Inward Light; and this Book was
published in Dutch, and afterward also into English with the Title of The
Light upon the Candlestick; and since the Name of William Ames, a zealous
Preacher among the Quakers, was placed upon the Title, many have believed him
to be the Author of that Book, because his Doctrine of the Divine and Inward
Light was so effectually asserted therein. That he approved the Contents of the
Book I know; but I know also that it never proceeded from his Pen. And many
Years afterward it was published under the Name of one Peter Balling as the
Author, though there were those who fathered it upon Adam Boreel, because it is
found printed in Latin among his Scripta Posthuma. And this Opinion it not
altogether improbable; for among his Works are found also some other Writings,
that contain several Positions asserted by the Quakers: Besides, he and some
other of the Collegians, and among th^se also Dr. Galenus Abrahamson, were so
effectually convinced of the Doctrine preached by William Ames, when he first
came to Amsterdam, that they approved of it; though afterward from a
Misapprehension they opposed it. Now if we presuppose that Adam Boreel was the
Author of the said Latin Book, Peter Balling might be the Translator thereof
into Dutch; for that it was originally written in Latin, seems to me very
probable.

BUT however this be, it appears plainly, that the Author would not publicly
be known, for the Title seemed designedly composed so, that the Readers should
believe W. Ames to be the Author of it, viz. The Light on the Candlestick,
serving for Illustration of the Principal Matters in the Book called, The
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, etc. against Galenus Abrahamson, and his
Assenters, treated of, and written by W. Ames. And this Name stood in Capital
Letters underneath, in such a Manner as the Name of an Author is usually placed
upon a Title though the Publisher meant no more, but that W. Ames was the Author
of the Book called, The Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. And there was no
Printer's Name added to it, but only, Printed for the Author, 1662.

NOW though I cannot tell certainly who was the Author, yet I have thought fit,
since the said Book is not easily to be got in Latin, to insert it in the
Appendix of this History; from whence it may appear, as well as from the
Writings of some others, that there have been such as either commended the
Quakers, or defended their Doctrine, though they themselves never could resolve
to join with them publicly.

BUT notwithstanding all this, there have been others, who to render the
Doctrine, the Deportment, and Carriage of the Quakers suspected and odious,
have been ready to represent their honest Behavior and religious Life as
Pharisaical Righteousness; although Christ and his Apostles so earnestly
recommended such a Life. v. 18.
Pray what mean these Words of our Savior, Be (...) perfect, even as your
Father in Heaven is perfect; but that we ought to endeavor to the utmost of
our Power, to lead a virtuous and godly Life? When those that heard the Apostle
Peter preach, Acts ii. 37, 38.
were thereby pricked in their Hearts, and said, Men and Brethren, what shall
we do? He answered them, Repent; Acts iii. 19.
and at another Time, Repent ye, and be converted, that your Sins may be
blotted out. Romans xii. 2.
The Apostle Paul says, Be not conformed to this World, but be ye transformed
by the renewing of your Mind. And the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. i. 14, 15.
agreeable to this, says, As obedient Children, not fashioning your selves
according to the former Lusts in your Ignorance: But as he which has called
you is holy, so be ye holy in all Manner of Conversation. All which clearly
implies that a Christian ought to be very strict and careful in his
Conversation; and of this Judgment were also the first Reformers. And that
Archbishop Tillotson was also of the same M^nd, appears from many Passages that
are to be found in his Sermons.

BUT though the Quakers have endeavored to make their Life and Conversation
agree with their Christian Profession, yet this has raised Envy, Grudge and
Malice against them: And among the Clergy there have been such, who to render
them odious, did not stick to represent them as disguised Papists,
notwithstanding these were none of their meanest Enemies. For, after a due
Reflection and Consideration, it has seemed to me, that when King Charles the
Second was on the Throne, the Romanists, and such among the Church of England
as favored them, were the chief Promoters of Persecution. And these, to pursue
their wicked Ends, would not proceed according to Law, in the Trials of
imprisoned Quakers; but they continually strove to introduce an arbitrary
Power; and so, from Time to Time, they did not omit to prosecute the Quakers
severely, thinking that when they were once suppressed, the other Dissenters
must fall of Necessity, though they were not for Non-Resistance. But Providence
acted very remarkably; for when a Popish Prince afterward would introduce
Liberty of Conscience, the Eyes of the most moderate Maintainers of the Church
of England came to be so opened, that in the Reign of King William III. they
promoted a general Liberty of Conscience, by which the People called Quakers,
at length obtained Liberty to perform their public Worship without Molestation.

THVS far the Limits of this History are extended; and being arrived there, I
did not think my self bound to enlarge any farther; what follows being no more
than an Overplus.

I HAVE related nothing in this Work, but what I believed to be unquestionably
true: For what seemed doubtful to me I rather choose to pass by, having never
been of so credulous a Temper, as easily to take Things on Trust without due
Examination: For we often see that high-soaring Imaginations make People
believe Things that are far from being true. But for all that, we ought not to
reject as untrue every Thing that appears strange or unusual; since Experience
convinces us of the contrary, viz. that sometimes we have seen a Thing, which
if we had not beheld with our own Eyes, we could hardly have believed.
Wherefore I would not reject as untrue what was extraordinary or unusual, when
it was told me by credible Persons, or confirmed by Eyewitnesses. And
therefore, though my Reader may meet with some very singular Occurrences, yet
this is true, that I have endeavored to the utmost to relate nothing, but what
after a nice Enquiry seemed to me to be true, or at least very probable. And
yet I have silently passed over some Cases which I did not question to be true,
lest any might think me too credulous.

AS to the Transactions of State Affairs, I have taken them mostly from The
History of the Rebellion and the Civil Wars in England, written by Edward Earl
of Clarendon, and from the Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow: Yet some few Things
relating to State Affairs, that have not been mentioned by them, nor in any
other public History that I know of, I thought worthy to be delivered to
Posterity by my Pen.

FOR my Style, I know it is but indifferent: I do not pretend to Elegancy in
the English Tongue; for being a Foreigner, and never having been in England but
about the Space of ten Months, and that near Fifty Years ago, it ought not to
be expected that I should write English so well as Dutch, my Native Language.
If therefore my Pen sometimes has been guilty of a Belgicism, I beg Excuse of
my Reader. And since my Absence has hindered me from correcting the Printer's
Mistakes, either in Omissions or other Errors, such Faults I don't think my
self responsible for, because I have been fain to trust the Oversight and
Correction of my Work to others, who may have been more liable to let Errors
escape, than my self should have been. This I hope will suffice to excuse me
with discreet Persons.

WHAT the Envious may judge of this Work I little care for, well knowing that
the most eminent Authors have been exposed to Envy, and been obnoxious to the
Censures of Pedantick Critics. Whatever any may think, this I am well assured
of, that my chief Scope has been by the Relation of many unusual Occurrences,
not only to delight my Reader, but also to lead him to Virtue. If I may be so
happy as to have contributed thereto, I shall think my Pains well rewarded; and
if not, I shall have at least this Satisfaction, that according to my Ability I
have endeavored to be beneficial to others, and to ed^^^ my Fellow-Mortals in
that which is good: Which I cannot but think to be wellpleasing to God. And if I
have performed any Thing that is good, the Honor and Glory thereof belongs to
him, who is the Giver of all good Gifts; and it is from Him alone I have
received all my Ability to do any good Thing. Thus concluding, I wish the
Reader Discretion, and an impartial Judgment.

THE HISTORY OF THE RISE and PROGRESS OF The CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS.
The FIRST BOOK.
THAT the marvelous Work of Reformation has been small and of very little
Esteem in its Beginning, 1415
and yet been advanced with remarkable Progress, will, I believe, be denied by
none, that have read with Attention and a due Consideration the History of its
first Rise; since God, the Beginner and Author of this glorious Work,
proceeding by Steps and Degrees, has used therein such singular Wisdom and
Prudence, that, (every Circumstance duly considered) instead of censuring any
Part thereof, they will be obliged to cry out Thou, O Lord, alone know the
right Times and Seasons to open the Eyes of People, and to make them capable of
thy Truth! For if we look to the first Beginnings, J.Hus
to go back no farther than John Hus, we shall find, that tho in many Things he
was considerably enlightened, yet he remained still in several gross Errors; for
although he had a clear Sight of the vain Doctrines of Purgatory, Praying to, and
Worshipping of Images, etc. nevertheless it is reported of him, that he
favored the Invocation of Saints, the Seven Sacraments, Auricular Confession,
and other Tenets of the Church of Rome; and yet Christian Charity constrains us
to believe (though we find Protestant Writers who deny him the Name of a Martyr)
that by his Death, which he suffer d in the Flames at Constance in Germany, on
the Sixth of the Month called July, in the Year 1415, he has been an
acceptable Sacrifice unto God: And with what a sedate and well composed Mind he
suffered Death, may be concluded from this, That he seeing a Country-Fellow
very zealously carrying Wood to burn him, said, with a smiling Countenance, O
holy Simplicity! and that after the Fire was kindled, he sang with Joy in the
Flames, his Mind being firmly established on God; for he had been faithful
according to his Knowledge, and had not hid his Talent in the Earth, but
improved it, having shown himself a zealous Promoter of that small Illumination
which God was pleased to grant him; it being, without Question, great enough in
that grievous Night of Darkness, when Idolatry had so universally blinded
Mankind, that morally speaking, it would have been impossible for them to have
understood the Declaration of an entirely reformed Religion; whereas it is
evident that the most sober and discreet People of that Age were capable to
understand the Doctrine and Sermons of that honest Man.

To give a clearer Prospect into this Matter, let it be considered, that if a
Man had been kept shut up a long Time in a dark Prison, where he could neither
behold the Light of the Sun or Moon, and should have been let out on a sudden
at clear Noonday, he would not only not be able to endure the bright
Daylight, but would also, if he strove to open his Eyes with Force, be
endangered of losing, his Sight, and falling into a worse Condition than he was
in before; whereas if he had been brought into the open Air at the Time of
Twilight, he would by Degrees have learned to discern the Objects, and come to
an Ability of beholding every Thing in a clear Day aright.

Agreeable to this, in the Reigns of King Henry the VIIIth and the bloody Queen
Mary, the principal Test in England was, Whether a Man owned the Corporal
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; and he who denied this, was to be burnt as
an Heretic; also in the Netherlands, 'twas enough ^o bring a Man to the Stake,
if he confessed that he had been ^e-baptized. Insomuch that it seems the Lord
did raise in those Days zealous Men chiefly to testify against the Idolatry of
the Host and the Error of Infan^-Baptism, that so gradually he might break down
the great Structure of humane Inventions.

Now how small foever the Beginnings of this great Work of Reformation were,
yet it increased from time to time, and oftentimes singular Instances were seen
of the Workings of the Power and Spirit of God.

In the Year 1513, 1513 J. Le Clerc.
I find that one John Le Clerc of Meaux in France, being at M^tz in Lorrain,
was filled with such Zeal against Idolatry, that he broke to pieces the Images
in a Chapel, which the next Day were to have been worshipped in a very solemn
Manner. And being taken Prisoner for this Fact, and cruelly tortured to Death,
he was so eminently strengthened, even to the Amazement of the Beholders, that
in the Height of the Torments, being torn with red hot Pincers, he said from
Psalm cxv. Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the Work of Men's Hands. Aymond a
Vie.
Not less was the Zeal of one Aymond a Vie, imprisoned in France, about the
Year 1541, 1541
because he had preached the Gospel undauntedly; and though he had been advised
to fly, yet he would not be persuaded thereto, but said with an heroic Mind, I
would rather never have been born than commit such a base Act; for it is the
Duty of a good Pastor not to fly from Danger but to stay in it, lest the Sheep
be scattered. He was tortured cruelly to betray his Fellow-Believers; but no
Torment, how cruel soever, could extort the Name of any from him; and he
suffered Death valiantly for the Testimony of Jesus, feeling himself very
powerfully strengthened by the Spirit of God, which worked so gloriously in the
Martyrs of those Times, Merindol
that those of Merindol in Provence said, The Holy Ghost is an infallible
Teacher, by whose Inspiration all Christians receive the Knowledge of Truth:
This Spirit dwells in them, he regenerates them to a new Life, he slays the
Old Man in them, and he makes them alive to every good Work, consolating them
in Tribulations, and strengthening them in Adversities, etc. And of the pious
Professors at Meaux, I find mentioned in the Year 1546, 1546
that though a great Number of Men and Women were led Prisoners by but a few,
they yet made no Resistance, but showed themselves harmless, not sad with
Grief, but singing with Joy; nay, so powerfully God did work in Gabriel
Beraudin, who was executed at Chambery in Savoy, 1550
in the Year 1550, that after his Tongue was cut off by the Hangman, he spoke
intelligibly to the People, Claude Morier.
and celebrated God's Praise in a miraculous Manner. Claude Morier being burnt
very cruelly at Lions in France, wrote whilst in his Prison, Let us pray our
Heavenly Father continually, that he create in us a clean Heart, that he give
us a new Heart, and that he guide our Will by the Leadings of his Spirit.
Godfried de Hammelle.
Very re^^^^^ble it is also, that Godfried de Hammelle a Year after that, being
imprision'd at Tournay in the Netherlands, and being told that the Apostle in
his Epistle to the Ephesi^ns, 1551
had call d Marriage a Sacrament, said in a Letter, That though at first this had
puzzled him, yet the Lord had not long left him in this Difficulty, but put him
in Mind by his Spirit, that the Word there was not Sacrament, but Mystery. For
the Martyrs of those Times did not stick to profess with the primitive
Christians, that the Children of God must be led by his Spirit. And so Peter
Schryver, burnt at Lions, about the Year 1552, 1552 P.Schryver
wrote from Prison, That he having heard God's pure Word preached, believed it,
because the Spirit of God gave him a Testimony [or Evidence] of it in his
Heart, and did so confirm it to him, that he "could not question it in the
least." He also says in his Letter, That once having prayed to God, he had been
so refreshed by the Virtue of his Spirit, and so strengthened, that though he sat
in a dark nasty Place, yet he felt such a Consolation and Joy, that overcame
all Sorrow and Anguish. Nay, said he, the least Comfort and Joy I feel now in
my Bends, surpasses all the Joys that ever I had in my Life; for now the Holy
Ghost puts me in Mind of those gracious Promises that are made to those who
suffer for his Name's-sake. And being asked how he knew that which he asserted,
to be the pure Word of God? He answered, Because it did agree with the Doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, and that of Jesus Christ; and that the Holy Ghost
gave him a certain Evidence thereof. Concerning the Indwelling of God s Spirit
in Man, he also speaks very notably in his Letter to John Chambon, (whose
wonderful Conversion in Prison was an eminent Proof of the Truth of his
Sayings) telling him, That his Heavenly Father was near him, and by his Spirit
dwelt in his Heart. That this was also the Doctrine of John Calvin, appears
from his Letters to the said Man and his Fellow Prisoners, where he says:
Don't doubt but God will, in those Things wherein he will use your Service,
give you that Power, by which the Work in you being begun, will be perfected,
for that he has promised to do: And we have many Examples and Instances of
that excellent Faith, by which we clearly know, that God never in any Thing
has failed those who have been led and guided by his Spirit. Trust firmly,
Brethren, that when it is needful you will become so strong and steadfast, that
you shall not faint under any Burden of Temptations, how great and heavy
soever. -- The Fight is now at hand, to which the Holy Ghost exhorts us, not
only that we should go, but even that with all Alacrity of Mind we should run.
Many other excellent Testimonies of eminent Men of those Times might be
produced: And it also is very remarkable that Peter Bergier being Prisoner at
Lions, in the Year 1553, 1553 P. Bergier
and afterward suffering Death, cried in the midst of the Flames, I see the
Heavens opened. Now that the Doctrine of being taught by the Spirit of God, was
generally received by the Martyrs of those Times, we learn from many of their
Writings. Denis Peloquin burnt in the said Year at Ville Franche, Denis
Peloquin.
said in his Confession, That it was the Holy Ghost that gave him Witness in
his Conscience, that the Books of the Old and New Testament were the Holy
Scripture. Lewis de Marsac, Lewis de Marsac.
being about the same Time put to Death by Fire at Lions, said, when he was
asked how he knew the Holy Scriptures to be the Gospel? God has taught me so
by his Spirit: And being also asked, Whether it was his incumbent Duty to read
the Holy Scriptures, and who had instructed him concerning them? He answered,
That God by his Spirit had effected it, that he got some Knowledge thereof; and
that without his Grace, and the enlightening of his Spirit, he could not
comprehend and understand any Thing in the Gospel. John Calvin did also write
to the aforesaid Peloquin and Marsac: God will cause that the Confession which
you will make according to the Measure of the Spirit he has given you, will
produce a greater Fruit of Edification than all others that might be sent you.
And to Matthew Dymonet, Prisoner at Lions, he wrote thus; Submit modestly to
the Guidings of God's Spirit; answer with all Moderation and Discretion,
keeping to the Rule of the Scriptures. I have believed, and therefore I will
speak; but let not this hinder thee to speak freely and sincerely, being
persuaded that he who promised to give us a Mouth, and such Wisdom as the
Gainsayers cannot withstand, will never forsake thee. More of the like Instances
of the Operations of the Spirit of God in his Witnesses I could allege, if I
had so intended; but I give here only a slender Draught of the Sincerity and
the Principle of those that were but come to the Dawnings of the Reformation;
for higher I cannot esteem that Time, because the Eyes of the most zealous Men
of those Days were yet so much covered with the Fogs which then were, and the
Prejudice of the old Leaven, that they did not discern all Things in a full
Clearness; for one ^aw the Error of one Thing, and the other of another; but
humane Affection did work too strong, and thereby they judged one another, as
is abundantly mentioned in History.

If we rightly look into this, it seems very absurd to think that the
Reformation (which in former Times had been pretty much advanced by some
eminent Men; as Luther, Melancthon, Oecolompadius, Calvin, Men^o, and others)
then was brought to Perfection; for we perceive that even those Reformers
themselves at first had not such a clear Sight into many Things, as afterward
they got; which to demonstrate at large, I count unnecessary; since England
being the chiefest Stage, on which the Things I intend to describe, have been
transacted, I Will turn, my Face thitherward, to take a View cursorily of the
Beginning and Process of the Reformation there. Passing by Wickliff and others,
I begin with Thomas Cranmer; T. Cranmer.
who, because of his sincere and good Life, being advanced by King Henry the
VIIIth to the Archbishop's See of Canterbury, did all that was in his Power to
reform the Errors crept into the Church of Rome, 1536
and therefore in the Year 1536, he exhorted the King, who much loved him, to
proceed to a Reformation, and that nothing in Religion should be determined
without clear Proofs from Scripture, and therefore he proposed that these
Points, Whether there was a Purgatory? Whether deceased Saints ought to be
invocated? and how Images were to be regarded; well needed to be enquired into;
since it began to appear, that several Things were Errors, for which some
People not long before had suffered Death. T.Cromwell.
Some Time after, Thomas Cromwell, a chief Minister of the Kingdom, and a great
Friend of Cranmer, published some Injunctions in the King's Name, wherein all
Churchmen were required, no more to recommend to People, Images, Relics, or
Pilgrimages, but to teach them the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments in English. This was a great Step toward the Translation of the
Bible into English, which being also furthered by Cranmer, the next Year came
out in Print; 1537
and by the King's Warrant, the Clergy were required to set up Bibles it their
Churches; so that now, all that could might read the Holy Scripture in their
native Tongue. Cranmer not content with this, 1539
obtained in the Year 1539, a Permission for all People to have the Bible in
their Houses; yet for all that, he still was an Assertor of the corporal
Presence of Christ in the Host, until in the Year 1549, 1549 N.Ridley.
in the Reign of King Edward VI. when the Times were more free, he was induced
by Nicholas Ridley, a zealous Reformer, and afterward a Martyr under Queen
Mary, to enquire better into the Thing, and to discover cover the Absurdity of
it; from whence he did not only oppose and suppres that Superstition, but also
many others; and it is likely, that if Opportunity had been given him, he would
have reformed more Things. Nevertheless, it cannot but be wondered at, that he
who seems to have been a Man of a meek Temper, could give his Vote for the
Burning of those whom he looked upon to be Heretics; as John Nicholson, alias
Lambert, in the Reign of Henry VIII. for denying of the corporal Presence of
Christ in the Sacrament; and Joan Bocher and George Parr under Edward VI. the
first for denying that Christ had taken Flesh from the Virgin Mary, and the
latter for not believing the Deity of Christ: From whence we may see what a
wrong Zeal for Religion is able to effect: But without question he was become
of another Mind, 1556
when in the Year 1556, under the bloody Reign of Queen Mary, this was not only
laid in his Dish, but he also was forced to undergo the same Lot of being burnt
alive.

Now though after his Death the Bishops under Queen Elizabeth were content with
the Reformation made by Cranmer, yet it pleased God in the Year 1568, 1568
to raise other Persons that testified publicly against many of the remaining
Superstitions; and although Coleman, Burton, Hallingham, and Benson, were
imprisoned by the Queen's Order, yet they got many Followers, Puritans.
and also the Name of Puritans. And notwithstanding the Archbishop, to prevent
this, drew up some Articles of Faith, to be signed by all Clergymen, yet he met
with great Opposition in this Undertaking: For one Robert Brown, Robt. Brown.
a young Student of Cambridge, (from whom the Name of Brownists was afterward
borrowed) and Richard Harrison, R. Harrison.
a Schoolmaster, 1583
published in the Year 1583 some Books, wherein they showed how much the Church
of England was still infected with Romish Errors; which was of such Effect,
that the Eyes of many People came thereby to be opened; who so valiantly
maintained that Doctrine which they believed to be the Truth, 1593 H.Barrow. J.
Greenwood, J. Penry.
that some of the most zealous among them, viz. Henry Barrow, John Greenwood,
and John Penry, about the Year 1593 were put to Death because of their
Testimony, more (as may very well be believed) by the Instigation of the
Clergy, than by the Desire of the Queen: For some time after it happened that
she asked Dr. Raynolds his Opinion of those Men, especially Barrow and
Greenwood: To which he answered, That it would not avail any Thing to show his
Judgment concerning them, seeing they were put to Death. But the Queen yet
pressing him farther, he said, That he was persuaded if they had lived, they
would have been two as worthy Instruments for the Church of God, as had been
raised up in that Age. At which the Queen sighed, and said no more. But
afterward riding by the Place where they were executed, and calling to Mind
their Death, she demanded of the Earl of Cumberland that was present when they
suffered, What End they made? And he answered, A very godly End; and they
prayed for your Majesty and the State. Moreover one Philips, Philips.
a famous Preacher, having seen Barrow's Preparation for Death, said, Barrow,
Barrow, my Soul be with thine.

After the Death of Queen Elizabeth, when James I. had ascended the Throne, the
Followers of those Men suffered much for their Separation from the Church of
England: But very remarkable it is, that even those of that Persuasion, of
which many in the Reign of King Charles I. went to New England, to avoid the
Persecution of the Bishops, afterward themselves turned cruel Persecutors of
pious People, by inhumane Whippings, etc and lastly by putting some to Death by
the Hands of a Hangman: A clear Proof indeed, that those in whom such a Ground
of Bitterness was left still, though it had not always brought forth the like
abominable Fruits, were not come yet to a perfect Reformation; for though the
Stem of humane Traditions and Institutions sometimes had been shaken strongly,
yet much of the Root was (...) Therefore it pleased God, who is used to
enlighten Men gradually (...) make yet a clearer Discovery of his Truth, which
in some Places already darted forth its Beams to Mankind, in a Time when many
godly People were zealously seeking after a farther Manifestation of the Will
of God, from a Sense that, notwithstanding all their outward Observations of
religious Performances, there still stood a Partition Wall, whereby the Soul
was hindered from living in perfect Peace with its Creator. For in that Time
there were in England many separate Societies, and amongst the rest also such
as were called Seekers, who at first seemed to promise great Matters; but the
Sequel showed that their Foundation was not the Rock of Ages; and so diverse of
them soon lost their first Integrity. Now those People who began to take Heed
to a divine Conviction in the Conscience, and accordingly preached to others
the Doctrine of an inward Light, wherewith Christ had enlightened Men, in the
latter End of the Time of King Charles I. began to increase in Number, and they
became a separate Society among Men, and in Process of Time the Name of QVAKERS
was in Scorn imposed on them; and in most Countries of Europe they have been
accused of many exorbitant. Absurdities, both in Life and Doctrine. I have
designed to describe impartially, and according to Truth, the first Beginnings
and Rise, and also the Progress of that People, and to stretch out the Relation
of their Increase and Transactions so far as my Time of Life and Leisure will
permit.

I enter upon a W^^ which, consisting of many very singular Instances, in its
Beginning appears hard and difficult, and in the Process often sad and
dreadful. For among the manifold Adversities, we shall not only meet with
bitter Revilings, scornful Mockings, rude Abuses, and bloody Blows from the
foolhardy Rabble, but also severe Persecutions, hard Imprisonments, grievous
Banishments, unmerciful Spoil of Goods, cruel Whippings, Cutting off of Ears,
Smotherings in Prisons, and also putting to Death by the Hands of an Hangman,
by Order of the Magistrates: Afterward some Quiet and Rest; then again severe
Persecution, until the furious Promoters of it, at last wearied, desisted from
their mischievous Labor for a Time, more by being at their Wits-end, than out
of Mercy. And among all these Vicissitudes, notable Instances have been seen of
unfeigned Godliness, sincere Love, much True-heartedness, extraordinary
Meekness, singular Patience, ardent Zeal, undaunted Courage, and unshaken
Stedfastness, even among the Female Sex, which though the weakest, yet in the
hardest Attacks showed a more than manly Spirit; insomuch, that seldom any Age
has afforded Matter where more powerful Examples to Virtue have been seen. The
first I find that was thus immediately reached in his Mind, was a young Man
called George Fox, born at Drayton in Leicestershire, George Fox.
in England, in the Month called July, in the Year 1624, from Parents that were
Members of the public Church, or Church of England, Drayton. 1624 Leicestersh.
as appears to me from a Paper, in his Lifetime drawn up by his Order, at my
Request, and sent me. His Father was Christopher Fox, a Weaver by Trade, an
honest Man, and of such a virtuous Life, that his Neighbors were used to call
him Righteous Christer. His Mother was Mary Lago, an upright Woman, and of the
Stock of the Martyrs. This George Fox was even in his Minority endued with a
Gravity and Stayedness of Mind, that is seldom seen in Children; so that he
seeing how old People carried themselves lightly and wantonly, had such an
Aversion to it, that he would say within himself, 1641 Geo. Fox's Journal, p. 2.
If ever I come to be a Man, surely I will not be so wanton.

His Parents in the mean while endeavored to train him up, as they did their
other Children, in the common Way of Worship, his Mother especially
contributing thereto, as being eminent for Piety: But even from a Child he was
seen to be of another Frame of Mind than his Brethren; for he was more
religious, retired, still, and solid, and was also observing beyond his Age, as
appeared from the Answers he gave, and the Questions he asked concerning
religious Matters, to the Astonishment of those that heard him. His Mother
seeing this extraordinary Temper and Godliness which so early did shine through
him, so that he would not meddle with childish Plays, did not think it fit to
trouble him about the Way of Worship, but carried herself indulgent toward
him. Mean while he learned to read pretty well, and to write so much as would
serve him afterward to signify his Meaning to others. When he was come to
eleven Years of Age, he endeavored to live a pure and righteous Life, and to
be faithful in all Things, viz. inwardly to God, and outwardly to Man; since
the Lord by his good Spirit had showed him, that he was to keep his Word
always, and that he ought not to commit Excess in eating or drinking. He thus
growing up in Virtue, some of his Relations were for having him trained up in
the Schools, make a Priest of him; but others persuaded to the contrary; and so
he was put to a Shoemaker that dealt also in Wool and in Cattle. Being
employed then by his Master, he took most Delight in Sheep, and was very
skilful in what belonged thereto, for it was an Employment that very well
suited his Mind; and his thus being a Shepherd, was, as an eminent Author
says, a just Emblem of his after Ministry and Service. He did acquit himself
so diligently in his business, and minded it so well, that his Master was
succesful in his Trade whilst George was with him. He often used in his
Dealings the Word verily, and then he kept so strict to it, that People that
knew him would, say, If George says verily, there is no altering him.

Now though my Design is not to give a Description of State Affairs, yet I find
it necessary to mention something of the chief temporal Occurrence in England,
in as much as they may have Relation to the Affairs of the Church; lest my
History might seem an incomplete Work. Transiently therefore I will say, that
in England about this Time appeared the Beginnings of a Civil War, in which
Religion had some Share; for the Bishops began to introduce several
Innovations, and caused not only Rails to be made about the Communion Table,
which now was called the High Altar; but those that approached it bowed thrice,
and a Bow was made at the Pronouncing of the Name of Jesus. Thus Ceremonies
increased from Time to Time; and those Preachers that were really religious,
and spoke most to Edification, were slighted and set by; the Bishops, in their
Visitations, minding chiefly to promote such Rites as favored Popery. And this
was not only done in England, but in Scotland also Endeavors were made to
bring in Episcopacy. This caused a Ferment among the People, which when it came
to an Insurrection, they generally believed that it was for Religion's-Sake,
which made some cry in the open Streets, where there was any Con^^uence of
People, To your Tent^, O Israel. And because the Parliament was of Opinion that
King Charles I. encroach'd upon their Privileges, which they would not suffer;
this so exasperated that Prince, that he brought together an Army and set up
his Standard, first on the Castle of Nottingham, where it was blown down the
same Evening, on the 25th of the Month called August in the Year 1642. 1642
But before that Time, the King had taken Possession of some fortified Places,
and the Parliament on the other hand had also got some in their Power. Some
time after a Battle was sought between the Royali^s and the Parliament, near
Edgehill in Warwickshire, where neither Party prevailed much. About this Time
George Fox, who more and more endeavored to lead a godly Life, being come to
the nineteenth Year of his Age, it happened at a Fair, that a Cousin of his and
another coming to him, asked whether he would drink a Jugg of Beer with them?
He being thirsty, said Yes, and went with them to an Inn: But after each had
drank a Glass, they began to drink Healths, and said, that He that would not
drink, should pay for all. This grieved George much, seeing that People who
professed to be religious, behaved themselves thus, and therefore he rose up to
be gone; and putting his Hand into his Pocket, he took a Groat, and laid it
down upon the Table, saying, If it be so, I ll leave you; and so he went away;
and when his Business was done, he returned home; but did not go to Bed, that
Night, but prayed and cried earnestly to the Lord; and it seemed to him that
his Supplications were answered after this Manner, Thou see how young People
go together into Vanity, and old People into the Earth; therefore thou must
forsake all, both Young and Old, and be as a Stranger to them. This, which he
took to be a Divine Admonition, made such a powerful Impression on his Mind,
that he resolved to break off all familiar Fellowship and Conversation with
Young and Old, and even to leave his Relations, and to live a separate and
retired Live. 1643
On the ninth of September, in the Year 1643, he departed to Lutterworth, where
he stayed some Time, and from thence went to Northampton, where he also made
some Stay, and then passed to Newport-Pagnel in Buckinghamshire; and after
having stayed a while there, he went to Barnet, 1644
whither he came in the Mon^h called June in the Year 1644.

Whilst he led thus a solitary Lite, he fasted often, and read the Holy
Scriptures diligently, so that some Professors took Notice of him, and sought
to be acquainted with him. But he soon perceiving they did not possess what
they profess d, grew afraid of them, and shunned their Company. In this time he
fell into a strong Temptation, almost to Despair, and was in mighty Trouble,
sometimes keeping himself retired in his Chamber, and often walking solitarily
to want upon the Lord. In this State he saw how Christ had been tempted; but
when he looked to his own Condition, he wondered, and said, Was I ever so
before. He began to think also that he had done amiss against his Relations,
because he had forsaken them; and he called to Mind all his former Time, to
consider whether he had wronged any. Thus Temptations grew more and more; and
when Satan could not effect his Design upon him that Way, he laid Snares for
him to draw him to commit some Sin, thereby to bring him to Despair. He was
then about twenty Years of Age, and continued a long while in this Condition,
and would fain have put it from him; which made him go to many a Priest to look
for Comfort, but he did not find it from them. In this miserable State he went
to London, in Hopes or finding some Relief among the great Professors of that
City: But being come there, he saw them much darkened in their Understandings.
He had an Uncle there, one Pickering, a Baptist, and those of that Persuasion
were tender then; yet he could not resolve to impart his Mind to them, or join
with them, because he saw all, Young and Old, where they were. And though some of
the best would have had him staid there, yet he was fearful, and so returned
homewards; for having understood that his Parents and Relations were troubled
at his Absence, he would rather go to them again l^st he should grieve them.
Now when he was come into Leicestershire, his Relations would have had him
married; but he prudently told them, He was but a Lad, and must get Wisdom.
Others would have had him in the Auxiliary B^nd among the Forces of the
Parliament, which being entered now into an intestine War with the King, had,
with their Forces this Year, beaten not only the King's Army under Prince
Rupert, but also conquered the City of York. But to persuade George to list
himself a Soldier, was so against his Mind, that he refused i^, an ^ went to
C^^^ntry where he look a Chamber for a while at a Professors House, where he
s^aid some Time, there being many People in that Town who endeavor d to live
religiously. 1645
After some time he went into his own Country again, and was there about a
Year, in great Sorrows and Trouble, walking many Nights by himself. Then
Nathaniel Stevens, the Priest of Drayton, (the Town of George's Birth) would
often come to him, and George to the Priest; and when Stevens visited him he
would sometimes bring another Priest along with him, and then George Fox would
ask them Questions, and did reason with them. Once Stevens ask d him, Why
Christ cry d out upon the Cross, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? And
why he said, If it be possible let this Cup pass from me; yet not my Will, but
thine be done? To this George Fox answer d thus; At that Time the Sins of all
Mankind were upon Christ, and their Iniquities and Transgressions with which he
was wounded, which he was to bear, and to be an Offering for them, as he was
Man, but died not as he was God: And so, in that he died for all Men, and
tasted Death for every Man, he was an Offering for the Sins of the whole World.
When George Fox spoke this, he was in a Measure sensible of Christ's
Sufferings, and what he went through. And his saying so, did so please the
Priest, that he said, It was a very good full Answer, and such an one as he had
not heard. He would also applaud and speak highly of George Fox to others, and
what George said in Discourse to him, that he would preach of on the First Days
of the Week: For which George did not like him. After some Time he went to an
ancient Priest at M^^setter in Warwickshire, and reasoned with him about the
Ground of Despair and Temptations; but he being altogether ignorant of George's
Condition, bid him take Tobacco, and sing Psalms. But George signified that he
was no Lover of Tobacco, and as for Psalms, he was not in a State to sing. Then
the Priest bid him come again, and that then he would tell him many Things. But
when George came, the Priest was angry and pettish, for George's former Words
had displeased him; and he was so indiscreet, that what George Fox had told him
of his Sorrows and Griefs, he told again to his Servants, so that it got among
the Milk-Lasses; which grieved him to have opened his Mind to such an one; and
he saw they were all miserable Comforters. Then he heard of a Priest living
about Tamworth, who was accounted an experienced Man, and therefore he went to
him, but found him like an empty hollow Cask. Hearing afterward of one Dr.
Craddock of Coventry, he went to him also, and asked him whence Temptations and
Despair did arise, and how Troubles came to be wrought in Man. The Priest,
instead of answering, asked him, Who was Christ's Father and Mother? And George
told him, Mary was his Mother, and he was supposed to be the Son of Joseph, but
he was the Son of God. Now as they were walking together in Dr. Craddock's
Garden, it happened that George in turning, set his Foot on the Side of a Bed,
which so disturbed that Teacher, as if his House had been on Fire, and thus all
their Discourse was lost; and George Fox went away in Sorrow, worse than he was
when he came, seeing he found none that could reach his Condition. After this
he went to one Macham, a Priest of high Account; and he, no more skilful than
the others, was for giving George some Physic and for bleeding him; but they
could not get one Drop of Blood from him, either in the Arms or the Head, his
Body being, as it were, dried up with Sorrows, Grief, and Trouble, which were
so great upon him, that he could have wished never to have been born, to behold
the Vanity and Wickedness of Men; or that he had been born blind, and so he
might never have seen it; and deaf, that he might never have heard vain and
wicked Words, or the Lord's Name blasphemed. And when the Time called C^r^^^mas
came, while others were ^easting and sporting themselves, he went from House to
House, looking, for p^or Widows, and giving them some Money. And when he was
invi^ed to Marriages (as sometimes he was) he would go to none at all; but the,
next Day, or soon after, he went and visited those that were newly married; and
if they were poor, he gave them some Money; for he had wherewith both to keep
himself from being chargeable to others, and to administer something to the
needful.

Whilst the Mind of George Fox was thus in Trouble, the State of England was
also in a great Stir; for the Parliament was for turning out of Bishops, and
introducing the Presbyterian Directory; which however as yet could not well be
effected, although William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, had been made to stoop
to the Block; and the Power of the King by this Time was much weakened; for his
Army was this Summer near Naseby, not far from Leicester, overcome by an Army
of untrain d Bands, and about six Thousand Men, among which many great Officers
were taken Prisoners, and his Cabinet, with abundance of Letters of great
Moment, was seized; insomuch, that though some Skirmishes were held, yet no
decisive Battle was ^ought afterward.

But since a circumstantial Description of these State Affairs is not within my
Design, I ll return again to George Fox, who in the Beginning of the Year 1646,
1646
as he was going to Coventry, and entering, toward the Gate, a Con^ideration
arose in him, how it was said, that All Christians are Believers, both
Protestants and Papists: And it was opened to him, that if all were Believers,
then they were all born of God, and passed from Death to Life, and that none
were true Believers but such: And though others said they were Believers, yet
they were not. At another Time as he was walking in a Field on a First Day
Morning, it was discover d unto his Understanding, that to be bred at Oxford,
or Cambridge was not enough to make a Man to be a Minister of Christ. At this
he wonder d, because it was the common Belief of People; but for all that, he
took this to be a divine Revelation, and he admir d the Goodness of the Lord,
believing now the ordinary Ministers not to be such as they pretended to be.
This made him unwilling to go any more to Church, as it was called, to hear the
Priest Stevens, believing that he could not profit thereby: And therefore
instead of going there, he would get into the Orchard, or the Fields, by
himself with his Bible, which he esteemed above all Books, seeking thus to be
edified in Solitariness. At this his Relations were much troubled: But he told
them, Did not John the Apostle say to the Believers, that they needed no Man to
teach them, but as the Anointing teaches them? And though they knew this to be
Scripture, and that it was true, yet it grieved them, because he would not go
to hear the Priest with them, but separated himself from their Way of Worship:
For he saw now, that a true Believer was another Thing than they looked upon it
to be; and that being bred at the Universities did not qualify a Man to be a
Minister of Christ. Thus he lived by himself, not joining with any; nay, not of
the Dissenting People, but became a Stranger to all, relying wholly upon the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Sometime after it was opened in him, That God, who made the World, did not
dwell in Temples made with Hands. And though this seemed at first strange to him,
because both Priests and People used to call their Churches Dreadful Places,
Holy Ground, and Temples of God, yet it was immediately showed him, that the
Lord did not dwell in these Temples which Man had erected, but in People's
Hearts, and that his People were the Temple he dwelt in. This was discovered to
him when he was walking in the Fields to the House of one of his Relations. And
when he came the^e, it was told him, that Nathaniel Stevens, the Priest, had
been there, and told them, he was afraid of Fox, for going after new Lights.
This made him smile, because now he saw the true State of the Priests. But he
said nothing of it to his Relations, who though they saw that something more was
required than the vulgar Way of Worship, yet they continu d therein, being
grieved because he would not also go to hear the Priests. Only he told them
there was an Anointing in Man, to reach him; and that the Lord would teach his
People himself. He had great Openings now concerning the Things written in the
Revelations; and when he spoke of them, the Priests and Professors would say,
That was a sealed up Book. But to this he said, Christ could open the Seals;
and that the Things contain d in that Book, very nearly concerned us; since the
Epistles of the Apostles were written to the Saints of those Times, but the
Revelations to point at Things to come. In England in those Days were People of
very odd Notions, and among the rest such as held, that Wom^n have no Souls. He
lighting on some of these, could not forbear reproving them, since the
Scripture, as he told them plainly, held forth the contrary; for the blessed
Virgin Mary said, My Soul does magnify the Lord; and my Spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior. He also came among a People that ^^ly d much on Dreams; but he
told them, Except they could distinguish between Dream and Dream, their
Observations would be nothing but Confusion, since there were three Sorts of
Dreams; for Multiplicity of Business sometimes caused Dreams; and there were
Whisperings of Satan in the Night-Season; and there were also Speakings o^ God
to Man in Dreams. But because these People were more in Want of a clear
Discerning, than of good Will, they at length came out of those Imaginations,
and at last became Fellow-Believers with him; who' though he had great Openings
in his Understanding, yet great Trouble and Temptation many Times came upon
him; so that when it was Day, he wished for Night, and when it was Night he
wished for Day. Nevertheless, among all those Troubles, his Understanding was
so opened, that he could say with David, Day unto Day utters Speech, and
Night unto Night shows Knowledge; for even in the^e Troubles he had great
Openings of many Places in Scripture.

As to State Affairs, Things continu d in a distracted Condition; for the King,
who after his Army had been beaten, was gone to the Scots, was by them
delivered up to the English; to whom now he could no more prescribe Laws, but
was fain to receive them. And the Churchmen were also at Variance; for the
Independents (several of which sat also in Parliament) began to say, that
between Episcopacy, (against which they had fought conjunctly) and Presbytery,
the Difference was only in the Name, and some few outward Circumstances, since
People of a tender Conscience might apprehend no less Oppression from the
Presbyterians, than from the Episcopalians: And that this Fear was not vain or
idle, Time afterward has shown abundantly.

But let us return to George Fox, who in the Beginning of the Year 1647, 1647
Darbyshire.
feeling some Drawings to go into Darbyshire, went thither, and meeting there
with some Friendly People, had many Discourses with them. Then passing farther
into the Peak-Country, he met with more such People, and also with some that
were swayed by empty and high Notions. Nottinghamshire.
And traveling into Nottinghamshire, there he met with a tender People, and
among these one Elizabeth Hooton, of which Woman more will be said in the
Sequel: With these he had some Meetings and Discourses. But his Troubles and
Temptations still continued, and he fasted much, and walked often abroad in
solitary Places, taking his Bible with him; 1647
and then sat in hollow Trees, and lonesome Places till Night came on; and
frequently in the Night he walked mournfully about, being surrounded with many
Sorrows in the Times of these first Workings of the Lord in him.

During all this Time he never joined in Profession of Religion with any, but
gave up himself to the disposing of the Lord, having so taken not only all evil
Company, but also taken Leave of Father and Mother, and all other Relations;
and so he traveled up and down as a Stranger on the Earth, which Way he felt
his Heart inclined: And when he came into a Town, he took a Chamber to himself
there, and carried sometimes a Month, sometimes more, sometimes less in a
Place; for he was afraid of staying long in any Place, lest, being a tender
young Man, he should be hurt by too familiar a Conversation with M^n.

Now though it might seem not very agreeable with the Gravity of my Work, to
mention what kind of Clothes he wore in these first Years of his Peregrination;
yet I don t count it absurd to ^ay here, that it is indeed true what a certain
Author, Ger. Croes. Leather (...)
viz. Gerrard Croes relates of him, that he was clothed with Leather; but not,
as the said Author adds, because he could not, nor would not, forget his former
Leather-Work; but it was partly for the Simplicity of that Dress, and also
because such a Clothing was strong, and needed but little mending or repairing,
which was commodious for him who had no steady Dewlling Place, and every where
in his traveling about fought to live in a lonely State: For keeping himself
thus as a Stranger, he ^ought heavenly Wisdom, and endeavored to get Knowledge
of the Lord, and to be weaned from outward Things to rely wholly on the Lord
alone. Now though his Troubles were great, yet they were not so continual, but
that he had some Intermissions, and was sometimes brought into such an heavenly
Joy, that admiring the Love of God to his Soul, he would say with the Psalmist,
Thou, Lord, make a fruitful Field a barren Wilderness, and a barren
Wilderness a fruitful Field. Now he regarded the Priests but little, because he
clearly saw that to be trained up in the Universities, and to be instructed in
Languages, liberal Arts, and the like Sciences, was not sufficient to make any
one a Minister of the Gospel: But he looked more after the Dissenting People:
Yet as he had forsaken the Priests, so he left the separate Preachers also,
because he saw there was none among them all that could speak to his Condition.
And when all his Hopes in them, and in all Men were gone, then he heard,
according to what he relates himself, a Voice which said, There is one, even
Christ Jesus, that can speak to thy Condition. He having heard this, his Heart
leapt for Joy; and it was showed him why there was none upon the Earth that
could speak to his Condition, namely, that he might give the Lord alone all the
Glory, and that Jesus Christ might have the Pre-eminence. He then
experimentally knowing that Christ enlightens Man, and gives him Grace, Faith,
and Power, his Desires after the Lord, and his Zeal in the pure Knowledge of
God grew stronger, so that he wished to increase therein without the Help of
any Man, Book, or Writing. Yet he was a diligent Reader of the Holy Scriptures,
that speak at large of God and Christ, though he knew him not but by Revelation,
as he, who had the Key, did open. Thus he entered into no Fellowship with any
Society of People, because he saw nothing but Corruptions every where, which
made him endeavor to keep Fellowship only with Christ; since in the greatest
Temptations, when he almost despaired, it was showed him, that Christ had been
tempted by the same Devil; but that he had overcome him, and bruised his Head,
and that therefore through the Power, Light, Grace, and Spirit of God, he himself
might also overcome. Thus the Lord assisted him in the deepest Miseries and
Sorrows, and he found his Grace to be sufficient: Insomuch that, though he had
yet some Desires after the Help of Men, his Thirst was chiefly after the Lord,
the Creator of all, and his Son Jesus Chist; because nothing could give him any
Comfort but the Lord by his Power; and he clearly saw that all the World, though
he had possessed a King's State, would not have profited him. In this Condition
his Understanding came more and more to be opened, so that he saw how Death in
Adam had passed upon all Men; but that by Christ, who tasted Death for all Men,
a Deliverance from it and an Entrance into God's Kingdom might be obtained.
Nevertheless his Temptations continued, so that he began to question whether he
might have sinned against the Holy Ghost. This brought great Perplexity and
Trouble over him for many Days; yet he still gave up himself to the Lord: And
one Day, when he had been walking solitarily abroad, and was come home, he
became exceeding sensible of the Love of God to him, so that he could not but
admire it. In this Condition it was showed him, that all was to be done in and
by Christ; that he conquers and destroys the Tempter, the Devil, and all his
Works; and that all these Troubles and Temptations were good for him for the
Trial of his Faith. The Effect of this was, that though at Times his Mind was
much exercised, yet he was stayed by a secret Belief, and his Soul (by a firm
Hope) which was to him as an Anchor, was kept unhurt in the disolute World,
swimming above the raging Waves of Temptations. After this (as he relates
himself) there did a pure Fire appear in him; and he saw that the Appearance ot
Christ in the Heart was as a Refiner's Fire, and as the Fuller's Soap; and that
a spiritual Discerning was given to him, by which he saw what it was that
veiled his Mind, and what it was that did open it: And that which could not
abide in Patience, he found to be of the Flesh, that could not give up to the
Will of God, nor yield up it self to die by the Cross, to wit, the Power of
God. On the other hand, he perceived it was the Groans of the Spirit which did
open his Understanding, and that in that Spirit there must be a waiting upon
God to obtain Redemption.

About this Time he heard of a Woman in Lancashire that had fasted twenty two
Days; and he went to see her; but coming there he saw that she was under a
Temptation: And after he had spoken to her what he felt on his Mind,
Duckenfield^ Manchester.
he left her, and went to Duckenfield and Manchester, where he stayed a while
among the Professors he found there, and declared to them that Doctrine which
now he firmly believed to be Truth; and some were convinced, so as to receive
the inward divine Teaching of the Lord, and take that for their Rule. This, by
what I can find, was the first Beginning of George Fox's Preaching, G. F's
first Preaching.
which, as I have been credibly informed, in those early Years chiefly
consisted of some few, but powerful and piercing Words, to those whole Hearts
were already in some measure prepared to be capable of receiving this Doctrine.
And it seems to me that these People, and also Elizabeth Hooton, (already
mentioned) have been the first who by such a mean or weak Preaching came to be
his Fellow-Believers: Though there have been also some others who by the like
immediate Way, as George Fox himself, have been convinced in their Minds, and
came to see that they ought diligently to take Heed to the Teachings of the
Grace of God that has appeared to them. And thus it happened that th^se
unexpectedly and unawares came to meet with Fellow-Believers, which they were
not acquainted with before, as will be more circumstantially related hereafter.

But to return again to George Fox: It set the Professors of those Times in a
Rage, that some of their Adhe^ents hearkened to his Preaching; for they could
not endure to hear Perfection spoke of, and of a holy and sinless Life, as a
State that could be obtained here. Not long after he traveled to Broughton in
Leicestershire, and went there into a Meeting of the Baptists, where some
People of other Notions also came. This gave him Occasion to preach the
Doctrine of Truth among them, and that not in vain; for since he had great
Openings in the Scriptures, and that a special Power of the Lord^s Workings
began to spring in those Parts, several were so reached in their Minds, that
they came to be convinced, and were turned from Darkness to Light, partly by
his Preaching, and partly by reasoning with some. Yet he himself was still
sometimes under great Temptations, without finding any to open his Condition
to, but the Lord alone, unto whom he cried Night and Day for Help. Some time
after he went back into Nottinghamshire, and there it pleased the Lord to show
him, that the Natures of those Things which were hurtful without, were also
within in the Minds of wicked Men; and that the Natures of Dogs, Swine, Vipers,
and those of Cain Ishmael, I sa^, Pharaoh, etc. were in the Hearts of many
People. But since this ^^d grieve him, he cried to the Lord, saying, Why should
I be thus, seeing I was never addicted to commit those Evils! And inwardly it
was answer^d him, That it was needful he should have a Sense of all Conditions;
how else should he speak to all Conditions? He also saw there was an Ocean of
Darkness and Death; but withal an infinite Ocean of Light and Love, which
flowed over the Ocean of Darkness; in all which he perceived the infinite Love
of God. About that Time it happened that he walking in the Town of Mansfield,
by the Steeple-house Side, it was inwardly told him, That which People trample
upon must be thy Food; and at the saying of this, it was opened to him, that it
was the Life of Christ People did trample upon; and that they fed one another
with Words, without minding that thereby the Blood of the Son of God was
trampled under Foot. And though it seemed at first strange to him, that he should
feed on that which the high Professors trampled upon, yet it was clearly opened
to him how this could be.

Then many People came far and near to see him; and though he spoke sometimes, to
open religious Matters to them, yet he was fearful of being drawn out by them.
Now the Reason of People thus ftocking to him might proceed partly from this:
There was one Brown, who upon his Deathbed spoke by way of Prophecy many
notable Things concerning George Fox, and among the rest, that he should be
made instrumental by the Lord to the Conversion of People. And of others that
then were something in Show, he said, That they should come to nothing. Which
was fulfilled in Time, though this Man did not live to see it, for he was not
raised from his Sickness But after he was buried, George Fox fell into such a
Condition, that he not only look^ like a dead Body, but unto many that came to
see him he seemed as if he had been dead really: And many visited him for about
fourteen Days Time, who wondered to see him so much altered in Countenance. But
at length his Sorrows and Troubles began to wear off, and Tears of Joy dropped
from him, so that he could have wept Night and Day with Tears of Joy in
Brokenness of Heart. And to give an Account of his Condition to those that are
able to comprehend it, I Will give his own Words. I saw says he, into that which
was without End, and Things which cannot be uttered, and of the Greatness and
Infiniteness of the Love of God, which cannot be expressed by Words: For I had
been brought through the very Ocean of Darkness and Death, and through and over the
Power of Satan, by the eternal glorius Power of Christ: Even through that
Darkness, was I brought which covered all the World, and which chained down
all, and shut up all in the Death. And the same eternal Power of God, which
brought me through those Things, was that which afterward shook the Nation,
Priests, Professors, and People. Then could I say, I had been in Spiritual
Babylon, Sodom, Egypt, and the Grave; but by the eternal Power of God I was
come out of it, and was brought over it, and the Power of it, into the Power of
Christ. And I saw the Harvest white, and the Seed of God lying thick in the
Ground, as ever did Wheat, that was sown outwardly, and none to gather it: And
for this I mourned with Tears. Thus far George Fox's own Words, of whom now a
Report went abroad, That he was a young Man that had a Discerning Spirit:
Whereupon many Professors, Priests, and People came to him, and his Ministry
increased; for he having received great Openings, spoke to them of the Things
of God, and was heard with Attention by many, who going away, spread the Fame
thereof. Then came the Tempter, and ^et upon him again, charging him that he
had sinned against the Holy Ghost; but he could not tell in what; and then
Paul's Condition came before him, how after he had been taken up into the third
Heavens, and seen Things not lawful to be uttered, a Messenger of Satan was
sent to buffet him, that he might not exalt himself. Thus George Fox, by the
Assistance of the Lord, got also over that Temptation. Now the 47th Year of
that Century drew to an End; and State Affairs in England grew more and more
clouded and intricate; for the King not thinking himself any longer safe at
Hampton Court, whither he had been brought from the Army, he withdrew to the
Isle of Wight, whilst the Parliament still insisted on the Abrogation of
Episcopacy, and would be Master of the Military Forces: Which the King not
being willing to yield to, was now kept in closer Custody, and no more regarded
as a Sovereign, to whom Obedience was due from the Parliament.

Under these intestine Troubles the Minds of many People came to be fitted to
receive a nearer Way and Doctrine of Godliness; and it was in the Year 1648,
1648
that several Persons seeking the Lord were become Fellow-Believers, and entered
into Society with George Fox; insomuch that they began to have great Meetings
in Nottinghamshire, Nottinghamshire.
which were visited by many. About that Time there was a Meeting of Priests and
Professors at a Justice's House, and George Fox went among them, and heard them
discourse concerning what the Apostle Paul said, He had not known Sin but by
the Law, which said, Thou shall not lust. And since they held that to be spoken
of the outward Law, George Fox told them, Paul spoke that after he was
convinced; for he had the outward Law before, and was bred up in it, when he
was in the Lust of Persecution; but it was the Law of God in his Mind, which he
served, and which the Law in his Members warred against. This Saying found so
much Entrance, that those of the Priests and Professors that were most
moderate, yielded, and consented, that it was not the outward Law, but the
Inward, that showed the inward Lust, which the Apostle spoke of. After this he
went again to Mansfield, where was a great Meeting of Professors and other
People; and being among them, and moved to pray, such an extraordinary Power
appeared, and seized on the Hearts of some in so eminent a Manner, that even
the House seemed to be shaken: And after Prayer, some of the Auditory began to
say, that This resembled that in the Days of the Apostles, when on the Day of
Pentecost, the House where they were met was shaken.

Not long after this, there was another great Meeting of Professors, where G.
Fox came also; who hearing them discourse about the Blood of Christ, he cried
out among them: Do ye not see the Blood of Christ? Ye must see it in your
Hearts, to sprinkle your Hearts and Consciences from dead Works, to serve the
living God. This was a Doctrine which startled these Professors, who would have
the Blood of Christ only without them, not thinking that it was to be felt
inwardly. 1648
But a certain Captain, whose Name was Amos Stoddard, was so reached, that
seeing how they endeavored to bear G. Fox down with many Words, A. Stoddard.
he said, Let the Youth speak, hear the Youth speak; and coming afterward to
be more acquainted with G. Fox, he had Opportunity to be farther instructed in
the Way of Godliness of which he came to be a faithful Follower. Some Time
after G. Fox return^d to Leicestershire, Leicester-sh.
his own Country, where several tender People came to be convinced by his
Preaching. And passing thence into Warwickshire, he met with a great Company of
Professors, who being come together in the Field, were praying and expounding
the Scriptures. Here the Bible was given him, which he opened on the 5th of
Matthew, where Christ expounded some Parts of the Law; from whence G. Fox took
Occasion to open to them the inward and outward State of Man. And that which he
held forth getting some Ground, they fell into a fierce Contention among
themselves, and so parted.

Then he heard of a great Meeting to be at Leicester for a Dispute, wherein
those of several Persuations, as Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists and
Episcopalians were said to be all concern^d. This Meeting being appointed to be
in the Steeple-house, he went thither, where Abundance of People were met, some
of those that spoke being in Pews, and the Priest in the Pulpit. At last after
several Reasonings, a Woman started a Question, and asked, What that Birth was
the Apostle Peter spoke of; viz. a being born again of incorruptible Seed, by
the Word of God, that lives and abides for ever? The Priest, instead of
answering this Question, said to her, I permit not a Woman to speak in the
Church, though he had before given Liberty for any to speak. This kindled G.
Fox's Zeal, so that he stepped up and asked the Priest, Do thou call this Place
(the Steeple-house) a Church? Or do thou call this mixed Multitude a Church?
But the Priest not answering to this, asked What a Church was? And G. Fox told
him, The Church was the Pillar and Ground of Truth, made up of Living Stones,
Living Members, a Spiritual Household, which Christ was the Head of: But he was
not the Head of a mixed Multitude, or of an old House, made up of Lime, Stones,
and Wood. This caused such a Stir, that the Priest came down out of his Pulpit,
and others out of their Pews, whereby the Dispute was marred. But G. Fox went
to a great Inn, and the^e disputed with the Priests and Professors of all
Sorts, maintaining what he had said, till they all went away; yet several were
convinc^d that Day, and among these the Woman who asked the Question aforesaid.

After this, Nottinghamshire.
G. Fox returned again into Nottingamshire, and went into the Vale of Beavor,
where he preached Repentance to the People: And he staying some Weeks there,
and passing through several Towns, many were convinced of the Truth of his
Doctrine. About that Time, as he was sitting by the Fire one Morning, a Cloud
came over him, and a Temptation beset him; and he sitting still, it was
suggested, All Things come by Nature; and he was in a Manner quite clouded; but
he continuing to sit still, the People of the House perceived nothing: At
length a living Hope arose in him, and also a Voice, that said, There is a
living God, who made all Things; and immediately the Cloud and Temptation
vanished away, whereby his Heart was made glad, and he praised the Lord.

Not long after, he met with some People that had a mischievous Notion, That
there was no God, but that all Things came by Nature. But he reasoning with
them, so confounded them, that some were fain to confess that there was a
living God. Then he saw that it was good for him to have been tried under such
a Cloud. Now in th^se Parts he had great Meetings; and a divine Power working
in that Country and thereabouts, many were gathered. Then coming into
Darlyshire, Darlyshire. ^.ton. Mansfield.
there was a great Meeting of his Friends at ^on, where many of them began to
preach the Doctrine of Truth, who afterward were moved to declare the Truth in
other Places also. G. Fox coming about this Time to Mansfield, heard that in a
Town about eight Miles off, there was to be a Sitting of Justices, to
deliberate about hiring of Servants; and he, feeling a Constraint upon his
Mind, went thither, and exhorted them, ^ot to oppress the Servants in their
Wages, but to do that which was right and just to them: And the Servants, many
of which were come there, he admonished To do their Duty, and serve honestly:
And they all received his Exhortation kindly. He felt himself also moved to go
to several Courts and Steeple Houses at Mansfield, and other Places, warning
them to leave on Oppression, Deceit and other Evils. And having heard at
Mansfield o^ one in the Country, who was a common Drankard and a noted
Whore-master, and a Poet also, he went to him, and reproved him in an awful
Manner for his evil Courses; which so struck him, that coming afterward to G.
Fox, he told him, That he was so smitten when he spoke to him, that he had
scarce any Strength left in him. And this Man was so thoroughly convinced, that
he turned from his Wickedness, and became an honest sober Man, to the
Astonishment of those that knew him before. Thus the Work of G. Fox's Ministry
went forward, and many were thereby turned from Darkness to Light; and diverse
Meetings of his Friends, who were much increased in Number since the Year 1646,
were now set up in several Places. Now G. Fox was come up to quite another
State than formerly he had lived in; for he knew now not only a Renewing of the
Heart, and a Restoration of the Mind, but the Virtues of the Creatures were
also opened to him; so that he began to deliberate whether he should practice
Physic for the Good of Mankind. But God had another Service for him; and it
was showed him that he was to enter into a Spiritual Labor; and also that
those who continued faithful to the Lord, might attain to a State in which the
sinful Inclination was subdu^d. Moreover the three great Professions in the
World, viz. Physic, Divinity, (so called) and Law, were opened to him, whereby
he saw that the Physicians wanting the Wisdom of God, by whicn the Creatures
were made, knew not their Virtues: That the Lawyers general^y were void of
Equity and Justice, and so out of the Law of God, which went over the first
Transgression, and over all Sin, and answered the Spirit of God that was
oppressed in Man: And that the Priests, for the most Part, were out of the true
Faith, which Christ is the Author of, and which purifies the Heart, and brings
Man to have Access to God. So that these Physicians, Lawyers, and Priests, who
pre^ended to cure the Body, to establish the Property of the People, and to
cure the Soul, were all without the true Knowledge and Wisdom they ought to
possess. Yet he felt there was a Divine Power, by which all might be reformed,
if they would receive, and bow unto it. And he saw also, that though the Priests
did err, yet they were not the greatest Deceivers spoken of in the Scriptures;
but that these great Deceivers were such, who, as Cain, had heard the Voice of
God, and who, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their Company, were come out of
Egypt, and through the Red Sea, and had praised God on the Banks of the
Seashore; and who being come as far as Balaam, could speak the Word of the
Lord, as having heard his Voice, and known his Spirit, so that they could see
the Star of Jacob, and the Goodliness of Israel's Tents, which no Enchantment
could prevail against: These that could speak so much of their Divine
Experience, and yet turned from the Spirit of God, and went into the
Ga^nsaying, these he saw would be great Deceivers, far beyond the Priests. He
saw also that People generally did read the Scriptures, without having a true
Sense of them; for some cried out much against Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Corah,
Balaam, (...), etc. not regarding that the Nature of these was yet alive in
themselves; whereby they always applied to others that Nature in which they
themselves lived.

The Lord had also opened to him now, that Every Man was enlightened by the
Divine Light of Christ; and he saw that they that believed in it, came out of
Condemnation, and became the Children of the Light: But they that hated it, and
did not believe in it, were condemned by it, though they made a Profession of
Christ. All this he saw in the pure Openings of the Light. He also saw that God
had afforded a Measure of his Spirit to all Men, and that thereby they could
truly come to serve the Lord, and to worship him; and that his Grace, which
brings Salvation, and had appeared to all Men, was able to bring them into the
Favor of God.

And on a certain Time, as he was walking in the Fields, he understood that it
was said to him Thy Name is witten in the Lamb^s Book of Life, which was before
the Foundation of the World. This he took to be the Voice of the Lord, and
believed it to be true. Then he felt himself powerfully moved to go abroad into
the World, which was like a briery thorny Wilderness; and he found then that
the World swelled against him, and made a Noise like the great raging Waves of
the Sea. For when he came to proclaim the Day of the Lord amongst the Priests,
Professors, Magistrates, and People, they were all like a disturbed Sea. Now he
was sent to turn People from Darkness to the Light, that they might receive
Christ Jesus; for he saw, that to as many as should receive him in his Light,
he would give Power to become the Sons of God: And that therefore he was to
turn People to the Grace of God, and to the Truth in the Heart; and that by
this Grace they might be taught, and thereby obtain Salvation; since Christ had
died for all Men, and was a Propitiation for all, having enlightened all Men
with his Divine and Saving Light, and the Manifestation of the Spirit of God
being given to every Man to profit withal. He now being sent thus to preach the
Everlasting Gospel, did it with Gladness and endeavored to bring People off
from their own Ways, to Christ, the new and living Way, and from their
Churches, which Men had made and gathered, to the Church in God, the general
Assembly written in Heaven, which Christ is the Head of; and from the World's
Teachers, made by Men, to learn of Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life; and of whom the Father said This is my beloved Son, hear ye him; and off
from the World's Worship, to the Spirit of God in the inward Parts, that in it
they might worship the Father, who seeks such to worship him.

Now he found also that the Lord forbad him to put off his Hat to arry Men,
high or low; and he was required to Thou and Thee every Man and Woman, without
Distinction, and not to bid People Good Morrow or Good Evening; neither right
he bow, or scrape with his Leg to any one. This was such an unusual Thing with
People, that it made many of all Persuations and Professions rage against him;
but by the Assistance of the Lord he was carried over all, and many came to be
his Fellow-Believers, and turned God, in a little Time; although it is almost
unspeakable what Rage and Fury arose, what Blows, Pinchings, Beatings, and
Imprisonments they underwent, besides the Danger they were sometimes in of
losing their Lives for these Matters: So indiscreet is Man in his natural
State. For here it did not avail to say, That the Hat-Honour was an Honor from
below, which the Lord would lay in the Dust, and stain it; that it was an
Honor which the Proud looked for, without seeking the Honor which came from
God alone; that it was an Honor invented by Men in the Fall, who therefore
were offended if it were not given them; though they would be looked upon as
Church Members, and good Christians; whereas Christ himself said, How can ye
believe, who receive Honor of one another, and seek not the Honor that comes
from God only? That it was an Honor, which in Relation to the outward
Ceremony, viz. the Putting off the Hat, was the same which was given to God; so
that in the outward Sign of Reverence, no Distinction or Difference was made
betwixt the Creator and the Creature: Nay, that the Saying of You to a single
Person went yet a Degree further; for not only Kings and Princes formerly among
the Heathens and Jews had not been offended at it when they were Thee'd and
Thou Would, but Experience showed that this still was the Language wherewith God
was daily spoken to, both in Religious Assemblies, and without, But all these
Reasons found little Entrance with Priests, Magistrates, and others: Bitter
Revilings, ill Usage, and shameful Abuses, were now become the Lo^ and S^are of
those who, for Conscience Sake, could no longer follow the ordinary Custom: For
though it was pretended that the Putting off of the ^at was but a small Thing,
which none ought to scruple; yet it was a wonderful Thing to see what great
Disturbance this pretended small Ma^ter caused among People of all Sorts; so
that even such that would be looked upon as those that practiced Humility and
Meekness, soon showed what Spirit they were of, when this worldly Honor was
denied them. But all this served to strengthen the Fellow-Believers more and
more in their plain Carriage, and made them live up faithfully to the
Convincement of their Conscience, without Respect of Persons.

In the mean while the Troubles of the Land continu^d. We have left the King in
the foregoing Year in the Isle of Wight, in Effect unking'd. Some time after
the Duke of York, being then past fourteen Years of Age, and second Son to the
King, was fled to Holland, disguised in Woman's Apparel; and his eldest Brother
the Prince of Wales, who two Years before was fled to France, came now to
Helvoot-Sluce in Holland, and went from thence with some English Men of War,
whose Commanders were for the King, to the Downs in England, with Intention to
take the Ships coming from London. He also published, by the spreading of a
Declaration, that he came to release his Father. Now there was also a
Negotiation on Foot between the King and the Parliament, and there seemed some
Hopes of an Accommodation, had not the Army, the chiefest Instrument of
breaking down the Royal Power, opposed it, by calling for Justice against all
those who had wronged the Country, none excepted. This broke off the Treaty,
several suspected Members were turned out of the Parliament, and the King was
carried to Windsor about the Time of Christmas; and it was resolv^d henceforth
to send no more Deputations to him, or receive any from him; who now was no
more named King; but only Charles Stuart: A very strange Turn of mundane
Affairs, and a mighty Evidence of the fluctuating Inconstancy thereof. But
Things made no Stand here, for it was concluded to bring him to a Trial; and
the Parliament appointed General Thomas Fairfax, and Oliver Cromwell,
Lieutenant General, with more than an Hundred other Persons, to be his Judges.
These being formed into a Court of Justice, the King was conducted from Windsor
to St. Ja^ and from thence brought before them in Westminster Hall, where he
was arraigned as guilty of High Treason, for having levied War against the
Parliament and People of England. But he not owning that Court to be lawful,
nor acknowledging their Authority, said, I am not entrusted by the People, they
are mine by Inheritance. And being unwilling to answer to the Charge, he was on
the 27th of the Month called January sentenced to Death, as a Tyrant, Traitor,
Murderer, and a public Enemy to the Commonwealth. But before this Sentence
was pronounced, the King desired that he might be permitted to make a
Propostion to both Houses of Parliament in the painted Chamber, designing, as
was since said, to propose his own Resignation, and the Admission of his Son,
the Prince of Wales, to the Throne. But this Request was denied by the Court.
Now though the said Prince of Wales, considering his Father^s Danger, had applied
himself to the States General of the United Provinces at the Hague for
Assistance; and that these sent two Ambassadors to the Parliament, who coming
to London on the same Day the fatal Sentence was pronounced, could not obtain
Admission till next Day, to the Speakers of both Houses, and were afterward
with Fairfax and Cromwell, and other Commanders; and one of them had also his
Audience in the Parliament to interceed with them for the King's Life; yet all
proved in vain: For on the 30th of the foresaid Month, the King was brought on
a Scaffold erected before the Banqueting House, and his Head severed from his
Body. The same Day the Parliament ordered a Declaration to be published,
whereby it was declared Treason to endeavor to promote the Prince of Wales,
Charles Stuart, to be King of England, or any other single Person to be the
chief Governor thereof. And then after having abolished the House of Pee^s,
they assumed to themselves the chief Government of the Nation, with the Title
of, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

No sooner the News of the King^s Death was come into Scotland, but Charles,
Prince of Wales, was proclaimed at Edinburgh, King of Great Britain, provided
he should, before assuming the Royal Authority, give Satisfaction about some
Matters concerning Religion. And tho this displeased the English, yet the Scots
asserted that they might as well do so, as the English, who had done the same
at the Death of the late King's Father, in the Year 1625.

Leaving now State Affairs, 1649
Let Us return to G. Fox, who in the Year 1649 was much exercised to declare
openly agninst all Sorts of Sins; and therefore he went not only to the Courts,
crying for Justice, and exhorting the Judges and Justices to do Jusitce, but he
warned also those that kept Publick-Houses for Entertainment, not to let People
have more Drink, than what would do them good. He also testified against Wakes,
May-games, Plays, and Shows, by which People were led into Vanity, and drawn
off from the Fear of God; the Days that were set forth for Holy Days, being
usually the Times wherein God was most dishonored. When he came in Markets, he
also declared against deceitful Merchandising, and warned all to deal justly,
and to speak the Truth; and he testified against the Mountebanks playing Tricks
on their Stages: And when Occasion offered, he warned the Schoolmasters and
School-mistresses to teach their Children to mind the Fear of the Lord; saying,
that they themselves ought to be Examples and Patterns of Virtue to them. But
very burdensome it was to him, when he heard the Bell ring to call People
together to the Steeple-house; for it seemed to him just like a Market-Bell, to
gather the People, that the Priest might set forth his Ware to Sale. Going once
on a First Day of the Week, Nottingham.
in the Morning, with some of his Friends to Nottingham, to have a Meeting
there; and having (...) from the Top of a Hill the great Steeple-house of the
Town, he felt it required of him to cry against that Idol-Temple and the
Worshippers therein: Yet he said nothing of this to those that were with him,
but went on with them to the Meeting, where after some Stay, he left them, and
went away to the Steeple-house, 1649
where the Priest took for his Text these Words of the Apostle Peter: We have
also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take Heed, as
unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star
arise in your Hearts. And he told the People that this was the Scripture, by
which they were to ^y all Doctrines, Religions, and Opinions. G. Fox hearing
this, felt such mighty Power and Godly Zeal working in him, that he was made to
cry out, O no, it is not the Scripture, but it is the Holy Spirit, by which the
Holy Men of God gave forth the Scriptures, whereby Opinions, Religions, and
Judgments are to be tried. That was it which led into all Truth, and gave the
Knowledge thereof. For the Jews had the Scriptures, and yet resisted the Holy
Ghost, and rejected Christ, the bright Morning Star, and persecuted him and his
Apostles; though they took upon them to try their Doctrine by the Scriptures; but
they erred in Judgment, and did not try them aright, because they did it
without the Holy Ghost. He thus speaking, the Officers came and took him away,
and put him into a nasty stinking Prison. At Night he was brought before the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of the Town; and they examining him, he told
them, That the Lord had moved him to come there into the Steeple-house: And
though the Mayor at first appeared peevish and fretful, yet he was allayed:
However, after some Discourse G. Fox was sent back to Prison, But sometime
after, the Head-Sheriff John Reckless sent for him to his House: And when G.
Fox came in, the Sheriff^s Wife met him in the Hall, and taking him by the
Hand, said, Salvation is come to our House: For his Speech in the Steeple-house
had so amazed many, that they could not get the Sound of it out of their Ears;
and not only this Woman was wrought upon, but also her Husband, Children, and
Servants were much changed by the Power of the Lord.

G. Fox thus coming to lodge at this Sheriff's House, had great Meetings there,
and some Persons of Quality in the World, came to them; and they were reached
very eminently in their Minds by an invisible Power. J. Reckless
Reckless being of this Number, sent for the other Sheriff, and for a Woman
they traded with; and he told her in the Presence of the other Sheriff, that
they had wronged her in their Dealings with her, and that therefore they ought
to make her Restitution; to which Reckless exhorted the other Sheriff, being
himself made sensible that this was an indispensable Duty: For a mighty Change
was now wrought in him, and his Understanding came to be opened; so that on the
next Market Day, as he was walking with G. Fox in the Chamber, in his Slippers,
he said, I must go into the Market, and preach Repentance to the People: And
accordingly he went in his Slippers into the Market, and into several Streets,
preaching Repentance. Some others also in the Town were moved to speak to the
Mayor and Magistrates, and to the People, exhorting them to repent. But this
the Magistrates could not endure; and to (...) their Passion on G. Fox, they
sent for him from the Sheriff's Hou^^ and committed him to the common Prison,
where he was kept till ^sizes came on, and then he was to have been brought
before the Judge, but that the Sheriff's Man being somewhat long in fetching
him, the Judge; was risen before G. Fox came to the Session-House; however, the
Judge was a little displeased, having said, He would have admonished the Youth
(meaning G. Fox) if he had been brought before him. So he was carried back
again to Prison. In the mean while such a wonderful Power broke forth among his
Friends, that many were astonished at it, so that even several of the Priests
were made tender, and some did confess to the Power of the Lord. Now though the
People began to be very rude, yet the Governor of the Castle was so moderate,
that he sent down Soldiers to disperse them. G. Fox having been kept Prisoner a
pretty long Time, 1649 Mansfield-Woodhouse.
was at length set at Liberty, and then traveled as before, in the Work of the
Lord. Coming to Mansfield Woodhouse, he found there a distracted Woman under a
Doctor^s Hand, being bound, and with her Hair loose; and the Doctor being about
to let her Blood, could get no Blood from her; which made G. Fox desire to
unbind her; and after this was done, he spoke to her, and bad her in the Name
of the Lord, to be quiet and still. This proved of such Effect, that she became
still; and her Mind coming to be settled, she mended, and afterward received
the Doctrine of Truth, and con^nued in it to her Death. Whilst G. Fox was in
this Place, he was moved to go to the Steeple-house, and declare there the
Truth to the Priest and the People; which doing, the People fell upon him, and
struck him down, almost smothering him, for he was cruelly beaten and bruised
with their Hands, Bibles, and Sticks. Then they haled him out, who was hardly
able to stand, and put him into the Stocks, where he sat some Hours: And they
having brought Horse-Whips, threatened to whip him. After some Time they had
him before the Magistrates, at a Knight's House; who seeing how ill he had been
used, set him at Liberty, after much Threatening. But the rude Multitude stoned
him out of the Town; and though he was scarce able to go, yet with much ado he
got about a Mile from the Town, where he met with some People that gave him
something to comfort him, because he was inwardly bruised. But it pleased the
Lord soon to heal him again; and some People were that Day convinced of the
Truth, which had been declared by him in the Steeple-house, at which he
rejoiced. Leicestershire. Barrow.
Now he went out of Nottingham-shire into Leicestershire, accompanied by
several of his Friends; and coming to Barrow, he discoursed with some Baptists;
and one of them saying, What was not of Faith, was Sin; He asked, What Faith
was, and how it was wrought in Man? But they turning off from that, spoke of
their Water Baptism: Which gave Occasion to G. Fox, and his Friends, to ask,
Who baptized John the Baptist, and who baptized Peter, John, and the rest of
the Apostles: But they were silent at those Questions. After some other
Discourse, they parted. On the next First Day of the Week, G. Fox, and those
that were with him, Bagworth.
came to Bagworth, and went to a Steeple-house; and after the Priest had done,
they had some Service there by speaking to the People. Then passing from
thence, he heard of a People that were in Prison in Coventry for Religion;
Coventry
and as he was walking toward the Goal, the Word of the Lord (as he relates)
came to him, saying, My Love was always to thee, and thou art in my Love. By
this he was overcome with a Sense of the Love of God, and much strengthened in
his inward Man. But coming into the Goal, a great Power of Darkness struck at
him; for instead of meeting such as were imprisoned for Religion, he found them
to be Blasphemers, who were come to that Degree, that they said, They were
Gods; and this their wicked Opinion (...) endeavored to maintain by Scripture,
misapplying what was (...) the Apostle Peter, when the Sheet was let down to
him, viz. Wh^ sanctified, he should not call common or unclean: And the Words
of (...) Apostle Paul, concerning God's reconciling all Things to himself,
Things in Heaven, and Things on Earth, G. Fox, who was greatly grieved at this
Profaneness, told them that these Scriptures were nothing to their Purpose. And
seeing they said, They were God, he asked them, If they knew whether it would
rain tomorrow? And they saying, They could not tell; he told them, God could
tell. He asked them also, If they thought they should be always in that
Condition, or should change? And they answering, That they could not tell; G.
Fox told them. That God could tell it, and that he did not change. This
confounded them, and brought them down for that Time; so after having reproved
them for their b^asphem^ us Expressions, he went away. Not long after this, one
of these Ran^ers, whose Name was Joseph Salmon, gave forth a Book of
Recantation, upon which they were set at Liberty. Atherstone.
From Coventry, G. fox went to Atherstone, where, going into the Chapel, he
declared to the Priests and the People, That God was come to teach his People
himself, and to bring them off from all their Man-made Teachers, to hear his
Son. Ana ^ho' some few raged, yet they were generally pretty quie^, and some
were convinced.

After this Service, Market-Bosworth.
he went to Market-Bosworth, and coming into the public Place of Worship, he
found Nathaniel Stevens preaching, who, as has been said already, was Priest
of the Town where G. Fox was born; here G. Fox taking Occasion to speak,
Stevens told the People, he was mad, and that they should not hear him; tho he
had said before to one Colonel Pur^oy concerning him, That there was never such
a Plant bred in England. The People now being stirred up by this Priest, fell
upon G. Fox and his Friends, and stoned them out of the Town. Nevertheless this
wrought on the Minds of some others, so that they were made loving.

G. Fox now traveling on, Twy-Cross.
came to Twy-Cross, where he spoke to the Excise-men, and warned them to take
heed of oppressing the Poor. There being in that Town a great Man, that had
long ^am sick, and was given over by the Physicians, he went to visit him in
his Chamber; and after having spoken some Words to him, he was moved to pray by
his Bedside; and the Lord was entreated so that the sick Man was restored to
Health. But G. Fox being come down, and speaking to some that were in a Room
there, a Servant came with a naked Rapier in his Hand, and threatened to stab
him; but he looking steadfastly on this Man, said, Alack for thee, poor
Creature! What will thou do with thy carnal Weapon? It is no more to me than a
Straw. This Servant being stop^d thus, went away in a Rage, and his Master
hearing of it, turn^d him out of his Service, and was afterward very loving to
Friends; and when G. Fox came to that Town again, both he and his Wife came to
see him. After this he went into Darbyshire, Darby-shire. Chesterfield.
Britland.
where his Fellow-Believers increased in godly Strength; and coming to
Chesterfield, he found one Britland to be Priest there, who having been partly
convinced of the Doctrine of Truth, had spoken much in Behalf of it, and saw
beyond the common Sort of Priests. But when the Priest of that Town died, he
got the Parsonage. G. Fox now speaking to him and the People, endeavored to
bring them off from Man's Teaching, unto God's Teaching: And though the Priest
was not able to gainsay, yet they had him before the Mayor, and threatened to
send him to the House of Correction: But when it was late in the Night, the
Officers and the Watchmen led him out of the Town.

Concerning State Affairs it has been said already, that Charles II. had been
proclaimed King by the Scots; but he being still in Holland, they sent to him
there, that he would subscribe the Covenant, and so abrogate Episcopacy in
Scotland: It was also desired that he would put some Lords from him. But those
that were sent, received only an Answer from the young King in general Terms,
which made them return home again, where we will leave them, to see in the mean
while how it went with G. Fox.

He having been sent away, as has been said, from Chesterfield, came to Darby
in the year 1650, Darby 1650
and lay at a Doctor's House, whose Wife was convinced of the Truth he
preached. Now it happened, as he was walking there in his Chamber, that the
Bell rung; and he hearing it, asked the Woman of the House, What the Bell rung
for? And she told him, There was to be a great Lecture there that Day; so that
many of the Officers of the Army, and Priests and Preachers were to be there,
as also a Colonel that was a Preacher. Then he felt himself moved to go to that
Congregation; and when the Service was done, he spoke to them what he believed
the Lord required of him, and they were pretty quiet. But there came an
Officer, who took him by the Hand, and said, that he, and the other two that
were with him, must go before the Magistrates. He then coming about the first
Hour in the Afternoon, before them, they asked him, Why he came thither? To
which having answered, That God had moved him to it; he farther said, that God
did not dwell in Temples made with Hands; and that all their Preaching,
Baptism, and Sacrifices would never sanctify them; but that they ought to look
unto Christ in them, and not unto Men; because it is Christ that sanctifies.
They then running into many Words, he told them, They were not to dispute of
God and Christ, but to obey him. But this Doctrine did so displease them, that
they often put him in and out of the Room, and sometimes told him scoffingly,
That he was taken up in Raptures. At last they asked him, Whether he was
sanctified? And he answering, Yes, they then asked, If he had no Sin? To which
he said, Christ my Savior has taken away my Sin, and in him there is no Sin.
Then he and his Friends were asked, How they knew that Christ did abide in
them? And G. Fox said, By his Spirit, that he has given us. Then they
temptingly asked, If any of them was Christ? But he answered, Nay, we are
nothing, Christ is all. At length they also asked, If a Man steals, is it no
Sin? To which he answered with the Words of Scripture, All Unrighteousness is
Sin. So when they had wearied themselves in examining him, One Fretwell.
they committed him, and another Man, to the House of Correction in Darby for
six Months, as Blasphemers, as appears by the following M^ttimus.

To the Master of the House of Correction in Darby, Greeting.
WE have sent you herewithal the Bodies of George Fox late of Mansfield, in the
County of Nottingham, and John Fretwell, late of Staniesby in the County of
Darby Husbandman, brought before us this present Day, and charged with the
avowed uttering and broaching of diverse blasphemous Opinions, contrary to a
late Act of Parliament, which, upon their Examination before us, they have
Confessed. These are therefore to require you, forthwith upon Sight hereof, to
receive them, the said George Fox and John Fretwell into your Custody, and them
therein safely to keep during the Space of Six Months, without Bail or
Main-prize, or until they shall find sufficient Security to be of good
Behavior, or be thence delivered by Order from our selves. Hereof you are not
to fail

Given under out Hands and Seals this 30th Day of October, 1650. Ger. Bennet,
Nath. Barton.

G. Fox being thus, as has been said locked up, the Priests bestirred
themselves in their Pulpits to preach up Sin for Term of Life; and they
endeavour^d to persuade People that it was an erroneous Doctrine, to assert a
Possibility of being freed from Sin in this Life, as was held forth by the
Quakers; ^or this began now to be the Name whereby G. Fox's Fellow-believers
were called in a reviling Way: And since that Denomination has continu^d to
them from that Time downward, we cannot therefor pass by the first Rise of it
with Silence. Until this Time those who profened the Light of Christ as shining
in Man's Heart, and reproving for Sin, were not improperly called Professors of
the Light, or Children of the Light, (...). Bennet.
But ^ervas Bennet, one of the Justices of the Peace who signed the aforesaid
Mittimus, and an Independent, 1650
hearing that G. Fox bad him, and those about him, Tremble at the Word of the
Lord! took hold of this weighty Saying with such an airy Mind, that from thence
he took Occasion to call him, and his Friends, scornfully, QVAKERS. This new
and unusual Denomination was taken up so eagerly, and spread so among the
People, that not only the Priests there from that Time gave no other Name to
the Professors of the Light, but sounded it so gladly abroad, that it soon ran
over all England; and making no Stand there, it quickly reached to the
neighboring Countries, and adjacent Kingdoms, insomuch, that the said
Professors of the Light, for Distinction's-Sake from other religious Societies,
have been called every where by that English Name, which sounding very odd in
the Ears of some foreign Nations, has also given Occasion to many silly
Stories.

Now because in those early Times, among the many Adherents of this Persuasion,
were also some that having been People of a rude and dissolute Life, came so to
be pricked to the Heart, that they grew true Penitents, with real Sorrow for
their former Transgressions; it happened that not only they at Meetings did
burst out into Tears, but also were affected with such a singular Commotion of
the Mind, that some Shakings of their Bodies were perceived; some People
naturally being more affected with the Passions of the Mind, than others; for
even Anger does transport some Men so violently, that it makes them tremble;
whereas others will quake with Fear: And what Wonder then, if some being struck
with the Terrors of God did tremble? But this being seen by envious Men, they
took Occasion from thence to tell, that these Professors of the Light performed
their Worship with Shaking; yet they themselves never asserted that Trembling
of the Body was an essential Part of their Religion, but have occasionally said
the contrary; though they did not deny themselves to be such as trembled before
God; and they also did not stick to say, that all People ought to do so;
however thereby not enjoining a bodily Shaking.

We have seen just now, how one Fretwell was committed with G. Fox to the House
of Correction; but he not standing faithful in his Testimony, obtained, by
Intercession of the Jailor, Leave of the Justice to go see his Mother, and so
got his Liberty; and then a Report was spread, that he had said, That G. Fox
had bewitched and deceived him.

G. Fox was now become the Object of many People's Hatred; Magistrates,
Priests, and Professors were all in a Rage against him; and the Jailor, to find
something wherewithal to ensnare him, would sometimes ask him such silly
Questions, as, Whether the Door was latch'd, or not? thinking thereby to draw
some sudden unadvised Answer from him whereby he might charge Sin upon him: But
he was kept so watchful and circumspect, that they could get no Advantage of
him. Not long after his Commitment, he was moved to write both to the Priests
and Magistrates of Darby. Ger. Croese
Now since Ger. Croese in the Beginning of his History represents G. Fox as one
altogether unfit, not only to write legibly, but also to express his Mind
clearly in Writing, and that therefore he always was obliged to employ others
that could set down his Meaning intelligibly, it will not be besides the Purpose
to say, that this is more than any ever will be able to prove. For though it
cannot be denied, that he was no elegant Writer, nor good Speller, yet it is
true, that his Characters being tolerable, his Writing was legible, and the
Matter he treated was intelligible, though his Style was not like that of a
skilful Linguist. And albeit he employed others, because himself was no quick
Writer, yet generally they were young Lads, who as they durst not have
attempted to alter his Words and Phrases, so they would not have been skilful
enough to refine fine his Style. This I don't write from hearsay, but have
seen it at sundry Times. And how true it is what the same Author says, That
mostly all that G. Fox did write, was scarce any Thing besides a rough
Collection of several Scripture Places, may be seen by the Sequel of this
History, wherein will be found many of his Writings. The first of his Letters I
meet with, is the following which he wrote to the Priests of Darby, from the
House of Correction, where certainly he had not the Convenience of a
Writing-Clerk.

O Friends, I was sent unto you to tell you, That if you had received the
Gospel freely, you would minister it freely without Money or Price: But you
make a Trade and Sale, of what the Prophets and the Apostles have spoken; and
so you corrupt the Truth. And you are the Men, that lead silly Woman Captive,
who are ever learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth:
you have a Form or Godliness; but you deny the Power. Now as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do you resist the Truth; being Men of corrupt Minds
reprobate concerning the Faith. But you shall proceed no further; for your
Folly shall be made manifest to all Men, as theirs was. Moreover the Lord sent
me to tell you, that he does look for Fruits. You asked me, if the Scripture
was my Rule? but it is not your Rule, to rule your Lives by; but to talk of in
Words. You are the Men, that live in Pleasures, Pride and Wantonness, in
Fullness of Bread and abundance of Idleness: See if this be not the Sin of
Sodom. Lot received the Angels: but Sodom was envious. You show forth the vain
Nature: You stand in the Steps of them that crucified MY SAVIOVR, and mocked
him: You are their Children; you show forth their Fruit. They had the Chief
Place in the Assemblies; and so have you: They loved to be called Rabbi; and so
do you.

G. F.


That which he writ to the Magistrates, who committed him to Prison, was to
this Effect:

Friends,
I Am forced, in tender Love unto your Souls, to write unto you, and to beseech
you to consider, what you do, and what the Commands of God call for. He does
require Justice and Mercy, to break every Yoke, and to let the Oppressed go
free. But who calls for Justice? or loves Mercy? or contendeth for the
Truth? Is not Judgment turned backward? and does not Justice stand afar off? Is
not Truth silenced in the Streets? or can Equity enter? And do not they that
depart from evil, make themselves a Prey? Oh! Consider what ye do, in Time, and
take heed, whom ye do imprison: For the Magistrate is set for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well. Now, I entreat you, in
Time take heed, what you do: For surely, the Lord will come, and will make
manifest both the Builders and the Work: And if it be of Man, it will fail; but
if it be of God, nothing will overthrow it. Therefore I desire and pray, that
you would take heed, and beware what you do; left ye be found Fighters against
God.

G. F.


G. Fox having thus cleared his Conscience, continued waiting in Patience,
leaving the Event to God. And after some Time he felt himself constrained to
write to the Justices that had committed him to Prison, to lay their Doings
before them, that so they might come to a due Consideration thereof: One of
them (already mentioned) was Justice Bennet; the other Nathaniel Barton, Just.
Bennet. Just. Barton.
both a Justice and a Colonel, as also a Preacher: To these he wrote as follows;

Friends,
YOU did speak of the Good old Way, which the Prophet spoke of; but the Prophet
cried against the Abominations, which you hold up. Had you the Power of God, ye
would not persecute the Good Way. He that spoke of the Good Way, was set in the
Stocks: The People cried, Away with him to the Stocks, for speaking the Truth.
Ah! foolish People, which have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, without
Understanding! Fear ye not me, says the Lord, and will ye not tremble at my
Presence! O your Pride and Abominations are odious in the Eyes of God! You
(that are Preachers) have the chiefest Place in the Assemblies, and are called
of Men Master; and such were and are against my Savior and Maker: And they
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from Men, neither go in themselves, nor suffer
others. Therefore ye shall receive the greater Damnation, who have their
Places, and walk in their Steps. You may say, If you had been in the Days of
the Prophets, or Christ, ye would not have persecuted them: Wherefore be ye
Witnesses against your selves, that ye are the Children of them, seeing, ye now
persecute the Way of Truth. O consider, There is a true Judge, that will give
every one of you a Reward according to your Works. O mind where you are, you
that hold up the Abominations, which the true Prophet cried against! O come
down, and sit in the Dust! The Lord is coming with Power; and he will throw
down every one that is Exalted, that he alone may be Exalted.


Having thus written to them jointly, he after some Time wrote to each of them
apart. That to Justice Bennet was thus:

Friend,
THOU that do profess God and Christ in Words, see how thou do follow him.
To take off Burdens, and to visit them that be in Prison, and show Mercy, and
colth thy own Flesh, and deal thy Bread to the Hungry; these are God's
Commandments: To relieve the Fatherless, and to visit the Widows in their
Afflictions, and to keep thy self unspotted of the World; this is pure Religion
before God. But it thou do profess Christ, and followest Covetousness, and
Greediness, and Earthly-mindedness, thou deniest him in Life, and deceivest thy
self and others, and take him for a Cloak. Woe be to you Greedy Men, and Rich
Men; weep and houl for your Misery, that shall come. Take heed of Covetousness
and Extortion: God does forbid that. Woe be to the Man, that coveteth an evil
Covetousness, that he may set his Nest on high, and cover himself with thick
Clay. O do not love that, which God does forbid: His Servant thou art whom thou
do obey, whether it be of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness.
Think upon Lazarus and Dives: the one fared sumptuously every Day; the other
was a Beggar. See, if thou be not Dives? Be not deceived; God is not mocked
with vain Words: Evil Communication corrupts good Manners. Awake to
Righteousness, and sin not.

G. F.


And that to Justice Barton was thus worded:

Friend,
THOU that preachest Christ, and the Scriptures in Words, when any come to
fellow that, which thou have spoken of and to live the Life of the Scriptures,
then they, that speak the Scriptures, but do not lead their Lives according
thereunto, persecute them that do. Mind the Prophets, and Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles, and all the Holy Men of God; what they spoke was (...) the Life: But
they that had not the Life, but the Words, persecuted and Imprisoned them that
lived in the Life, which they had back-Hidden from.

G. F.


Now, Moyor of Darby.
though the Mayor of Darby did not sign the Mittimus, yet having had a Hand with
the rest in sending G. Fox to Prison, he also writ to him after this Manner:

Friend,
THOU art set in Place to do Justice; but in Imprisoning my Body, thou have
done contrary to Justice, according to your own Law. O take heed of pleasing
Men more than God, for that is the Way of the Scribes and Pharisees; They sought
the Praise of Men more than God. Remember who said, I was a Stranger, and ye
took me not in; I was in Prison, and ye visited me not. O Friend thy Envy is
not against me, but against the Power of Truth: I had no Envy to you; but Love:
O take heed of Oppression; for the Day of the Lord is coming, that shall burn
as an Oven; and all the Proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as Stubble;
and the Day that comes, shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts; It shall
leave them neither Root nor Branch. O Friend, if the Love of God were in thee,
thou would love the Truth, and hear the Truth spoken; and not Imprison
unjustly: The Love of God bears and suffers, and envieth no Man. If the
Love of God had broken your Hearts, you would show Mercy; but you do show
forth, what rules you. Every Tree does show forth its Fruit: You do show forth
your Fruits openly. For Drunkenness, Swearing, Pride, and Vanity, rule among
you, from the Teacher to the People. O Friend, Mercy, and true Judgment, and
Justice, are cried for in your Streets! Oppression, Unmercifulness, Cruelty,
Hatred, Pride, Pleasures, Wantonness, and Fullness, is in your Streets; but the
Poor is not regarded. O take heed of the Woe: Woe be to the Crown of Pride! Woe be
to them that drink Wine in Bowls, and the Poor is ready to perish. O remember
Lazarus and Dives. One fared deliciously every Day; and the other was a Beggar.
O Friend, Mind these Things, for they are near; and see, whether thou be not
the Man, that is in Dives (...) State.


To those of the Court at Darby he also wrote the following Exhortation.

I Am moved to write unto you, to take heed of Oppressing the Poor in your
Courts, or laying Burdens upon poor People, which they cannot bear; And of
false Oaths, or making them to take Oaths which they cannot perform. The Lord
says, I will come near to Judgment, and I will be a swift Witness against the
^^rcerers, against the false Swearers, and against the Idolaters, and against
those that do oppress Widows and Fatherless: Therefore take heed of all these
Things betimes. The Lord's Judgments are all true and righteous, and the
delights in Mercy: So love Mercy, Dear People, and consider in Time.


And because the Ringing of Bells for joy, Ringing of Bells.
is a Thing generally tending to stir up Vanity and Immorality, he also wrote a
few Lines to the Bell-Ringers of the Steeple-house, called St. Peter's in Darby.

Friends,
TAke Heed of Pleasures, and prize your Time now, while you have it; and do not
spend it in Pleasures, nor Earthliness. The Time may come, that you will say,
You had Time, when it is past. Therefore loo^ at the Love of God now, while you
have Time; for it brings to loath all Vanities and Worldly Pleasures. O
consider! Time is precious: Fear God and rejoice in him, who has made Heaven
and Earth.


Now whilst G. Fox was in Prison there, several of the Professors came to
discourse with him; Plea^ing for Sin.
and he perceiving that they came to plead for Sin and Imperfection, asked
them, Whether they were Believers, and had Faith? And they saying, Yes; he
farther asked them, In whom? To which they answering, In Christ; he replied, If
ye are true Believers in Christ, you are passed from Death to Life; and if
passed from Death, then from Sin that brings Death. And if your Faith be
true, it will give you Victory over Sin and the Devil, and purity your Hearts
and Consciences, (for the true Faith held in a pure Conscience) it will bring
you to please God, and give you Access to him again. But such a Language as
this they could not endure; for they said, They could not believe that any
could be free from Sin on this Side the Grave. To which he answered, That then
they might give over their Talking concerning the Scriptures, which were the
Words of Holy Men; whilst they themselves pleaded for Unholiness. At another
Time another Company of such Professors coming, and they also pleading for Sin,
he asked them, Whether they had Hope? To which they answered, Yes, God forbid
but we should have Hope. Then he asked, What Hope is it you have? Is Christ in
you, the Hope of your Glory? Does it purify you, as he is pure? But they could
not abide to hear of being made pure here; and therefore he bad them, Forbear
talking of the Scriptures, which were the Holy Men's Words; for the Holy Men
that writ the Scriptures (said he) pleaded for Holiness in Heart, Life, and
Conversation here, but since you plead for Impurity and Sin, which is of the
Devil, what have you to do with the Holy M^ns Words?

Now the Keeper of the Prison, who was also an high Professor, was much enraged
against G. Fox, and spoke wickedly of him. But it pleased the Lord one Day to
strike him so, that he was under great Anguish of Mind: And G. Fox walking in
his Chamber, heard a doleful Noise, and standing still to hearken, he heard him
say to his Wife: Wife, I have seen the Day of Judgment, and I saw George there,
and was afraid of him, because I had done him so much Wrong, and spoken so much
against him to the Ministers, and Professors, and to the Justices, and in
Tavern, and Alehouses. After this, toward the Evening the Keeper came up into
his Chamber, and said to him, I have been as a Lion against you; but now I come
like a Lamb, and like the Jailor that came to Paul and Silas trembling. And he
desired that he might lie with him? To which G. Fox answered, That he was in
his Power, he might do what he would. But said the other, Nay, I^ll have your
Leave; and I could desire to be always with you, but not to have you as a
Prisoner. G. Fox unwilling to deny his Desire, complied with it, and suffered
him to lie with him. Then the Keeper told him all his Heart, and said, He
believed what he had said of the true Faith and Hope, to be true: And he
wondered that the other Man that was put into Prison with him, did not stand to
it; for, said he, That Man was not right, but you are an honest Man. He also
confessed, that at those Times when G. Fox had asked him to let him go and
speak the Word of the Lord to the People, and at his Refusal had laid the
Weight thereof upon him, that then he used to be under great Trouble, amazed,
and almost distracted for some Time. The next Morning the Keeper being risen,
went to the Justices, and told them, That he and his House had been plagued for
G. Fox's Sake: To which one of the Juces, viz. Bennet, said, That the Plagues
were on them too, for keeping him. The Justices now to be rid of him, gave
Leave That he should have Liberty to walk a Mile. But he perceiving their End,
told the Jailor, If they would set down to him how far a Mile was, he might
take the Liberty of walking it sometimes: For he believed, they thought he
would go away; and the Jailor also told him afterward, that this was their
Intent. But he signified to him that he had no Mind to get his Liberty that Way
-- And so he remained Prisoner, and was visited by the Jailor's Sister, who was
so affected with what he spoke to her, that the coming down, told her Brother,
They were an innocent People, that did no Hurt to any, but Good to all; and she
desired that he might be treated civilly.

Now, since by Reason of his Restraint he had not the Opportunity of traveling
about to declare the Doctrine of Truth, he to discharge himself, wrote the
following Paper, and sent it forth for the Opening of People's Understandings
in the Way of Truth, and directing them to the true Teacher in themselves.

THE Lord does show unto Man his Thoughts, and discovers all the secret
Workings (...). A Man may be brought to see his evil Thoughts, and running
Mind, and vain Imaginations, and may strive to keep them down, and to keep his
Mind in; but cannot overcome them, nor keep his Mind within to the Lord. Now,
in this State and Condition submit to the Spirit of the Lord, that shows them,
and that will bring to ^ait upon the Lord; and he that has discovered them,
will destroy them. Therefore stand in the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ (who
is the Author of the true Faith) and mind him; for he will discover the Root of
Lusts and evil Thoughts, and vain Imaginations, and how they are begotten,
conceived and bred; and then how they are brought forth, and how every evil
Member does work. He will discover every Principle from its own Nature and Root.

So mind the Faith of Christ, and the Anointing, which is in you, to be taught
by it, which will discover all Workings in you: And as he teaches you, so obey
and forsake; else you will not grow up in the Faith, nor in the Life of Christ,
where the Love of God is received. Now Love begets Love, its own Nature and
Image: And when Mercy and Truth do meet, what Joy there is! And Mercy does
triumph in Judgment: And Love and Mercy does bear the Judgment of the World in
Patience. That which cannot bear the World's Judgment, is not the Love of God;
for Love bears all Things, and is above the World's Judgment; for the World's
Judgment is but Foolishness. And though it be the World's Judgment and Practice,
to cast all the World's Filthiness that is among themselves, upon the Saints;
yet their Judgment is false. Now the chaste Virgins follow Christ, the Lamb,
that takes away the Sins of the World: But they that are of that Spirit, which
is not chaste, will not follow Christ the Lamb in his Steps; but are
disobedient to him in his Commands. So the fleshly Mind does mind the Flesh,
and talks fleshly, and its Knowledge is fleshly, and not spiritual; but
savours of Death, and not of the Spirit of Life. Now some Men have the Nature
of Swine, wallowing in the Mire: And some Men have the Nature of Dogs, to bite
both the Sheep and one another: And some Men have the Nature of Lions, to tear,
devour and destroy: And some Men have the Nature of Wol^es, to tear and devour
the Lambs and Sheep of Christ: And some Men have the Nature of the Serpent
(that old Adversary) to sting, envenom and poison: He that has an Ear to hear,
let him hear, and learn these Things, within himself. And some Men have the
Natures of other Beasts and Creatures, minding nothing, but earthly and visible
Things, and feeding without the Fear of God. Some Men have the Nature of an
Horse, to praunce and vapor in their Strength, and to be swift in doing Evil.
And some Men have the Nature or Tall sturdy Oaks, to flourish and spread in
Wisdom and Strength, who are strong in Evil, which must perish, and come to the
Fire. Thus the Evil is but one in all, but works many Ways; and whatsoever a
Man's or Woman's Nature is addicted to, that is Outward, the Evil One will fit
him with that, and will please his Nature and Appetit^, to keep his Mind in his
Inventions, and in the Creatures from the Creator. O therefore let not the Mind
go forth from God; for if it do, it will be stained, and venomed, and
corrupted: And if the Mind go forth from the Lord, it is hard to bring it in
again. Therefore take heed of the Enemy, and keep in the Faith of Christ. O!
therefore mind that which is Eternal and Invisible, and him who is the Creator
and Mover of all Things: For the Things that are made, are not made of Things
that do appear; for the visible covers the invisible Sight in you. But as the
Lord, who is Invisible, does open you by his Invisible Power and Spirit, and
brings down the carnal Mind in you; so the Invisible and Immortal Things are
brought to Light in you. O therefore you, that know the Light, walk in the
Light! For there are Children of Darkness, that will talk of the Light, and of
the Truth, and not walk in it; but the Children of the Light love the Light,
and walk in the Light. But the Children of Darkness walk in Darkness, and hate
the Light; and in them the earthly Lusts, and the carnal Mind choke the Seed of
Faith, and that brings Oppression on the Seed, and Death over them. O
therefore mind the pure Spirit of the Everlasting God, which will teach you to
use the Creatures in their right Place; and which judges the Evil. To thee, O
God, be all Glory and Honor, Who art Lord of all Visibles and Invisibles ^ To
thee be all Praise, who bring out of the Deep to thy Self; O powerful God,
who art worthy of all Glory! For the Lord, who created all, and gives Life and
Strength to all, is over all, and Merciful to all. So thou, who have made all,
and art over all, to thee be all Glory! In thee is my Strength, Refreshments,
and Life, my Joy and my Gladness, my Rejoicing and Glorying for evermore! So to
live and walk in the Spirit of God, is Joy, and Peace, and Li^e; but the Mind
going forth into the Creatures, or into any Visible Things from the Lord, this
brings Death. Now when the Mind is got into the Flesh, and into Death, then
the Accuser gets within, and the Law of Sin and Death, that gets into the
Flesh; and then the Life suffers under the Law of Sin and Death: And then there
is Straitness and Failings. For then the Good is shut up, and then the
Self-Righteousness is set a Top; and then Man does work in the outward Law, and
he cannot Justify himself by the Law; but is condemned by the Light: For he
cannot get out of that State, but by abiding in the Light, and resting in the
Mercy of God, and believing in him, from whom all Mercy does flow: For there is
Peace in resting in the Lord Jesus. This is the Narrow Way, that leads to him,
the Life; but few will abide in it: Therefore keep in the Innocence, and be
obedient to the Faith in him. And take heed of Conforming to the World, and of
Reasoning with Flesh and Blood, for that brings Disobedience* and then
Imaginations and Questionings do arise, to draw from Obedience to the Truth of
Christ. But the Obedience of Faith destroys Imaginations and Questionings,
and Reasonings, and all the Temptations in the Flesh and Buffetings, and
Lookings forth, and fetching up Things that are past. Bu^ not keeping in the
Life and Light, and not crossing the corrupt Will by the Power of God, the Evil
Nature grows up in Man; and then Burdens will come, and Man will be stained
with that Nature. But Esau's Mountain shall be laid waste, and become a
Wilderness, where the Dragons lie: But Jacob, the second Birth, shall be
fruitful, and shall arise. For Esau is hated, and must not be Lord: But Jacob,
the second Birth, which is perfect and plain, shall be Lord; for he is beloved
of God.

G. F.


About the same Time he writ to his Friends the following Paper.

THE LORD is KING over all the Earth! Therefore all People praise and glorify
your King in the true Obedience, in the Uprightness, and in the Beauty of
Holiness. O Consider, in the true Obedience the Lord is known, and an
Understanding from him is received. Mark and consider in Silence, in the
Lowliness of Mind, and thou will hear the Lord speak unto thee in thy Mind: His
Voice is sweet and pleasant: His Sheep hear his Voice, and they will not
hearken to another: And when they hear his Voice, they Rejoice, and are
Obedient; they also sing for Joy. Oh, their Hearts are filled with everlasting
Triumph! They sing, and praise the Eternal God in Sion; their Joy shall never
Man take from them. Glory to the Lord God for Evermore!


And since many, that had been convinced of the Truth, turned aside* because of
the Persecution that arose, he writ for the Encouragement of the Faithful,
these Lines:

COme ye Blessed of the Lord, and Rejoice together! Keep in Unity and Oneness
of Spirit; Triumph above the World! Be joyful in the Lord; reigning above the
World, and above all Things that draw from the Lord; that in Clearness,
Righteousness, Pureness and Joy, you may be preserved to the Lord. O hear, O
hearken to the Call of the Lord, and come out of the World, and keep out of it
for evermore! And come, Sing together, ye Righteous Ones, the Song of the Lord,
the Song of the Lamb; which none can learn, but they who are redeemed from the
Earth, and from the World.


Now while G. Fox was at Darby, in the House of Correction, his Relations came
to see him, and being sorry for his Imprisonment, they went to the Justices, by
whose Order he was put there, and desired that he might be released, offering
to be bound in One Hundred Pounds, and others in Darby in fifty Pounds a-piece
with them, that he should no more come thither to declare against the Priests.
But he being brought before the Justices, would not consent that any should be
bound for him, because he believed himself to be innocent from any ill
Behavior. Then Justice Bennet rose up in a Rage, Justice Bennet.
and as G. Fox was kneeling down to pray to the Lord to forgive him, Bennet ran
upon him, and struck him with both his Hands, crying, Away with him, Jailor;
Take him away, Jailor. Whereupon he was carried back again to Prison, and there
kept, until the Time of his Commitment for six Months was expired. But now he
had Liberty of walking a Mile; which he made Use of, in his own Freedom: And
sometimes he went into the Market and Streets, and warned the People to
Repentance. And on the First-Days he now and then visited the Prisoners in
their Religious Meetings. Now the Justices having required Sure^ies for his
good Behavior, it ^ame upon him to write to them again, which was as follows:

Friends,
SEE what it is in you that does Imprison; and see, who is Head in you; and
see, if something do not Accuse you? Consider, you must be brought to Judgment.
Think upon Lazarus and Dives; the one fared sumptuously every Day; the other a
Beggar: And now you have Time, prize it, while you have it. Would you have me
to be bound to my good Behavior? I am bound to my good Behavior, and do cry
for good Behavior of all People, to turn from the Vanities, Pleasures and
Oppression, and from the Deceits of this World: And there will come a Time,
that you shall know it. Therefore take heed of Pleasures, and Deceits, and
Pride; and look not at Man, but at the Lord; for Look unto me, all ye Ends of
the Earth, and be ye saved, says the Lord.


Not long after he wrote to them again thus;

Friends,
WOuld you have me to be bound to my good Behavior from Drunkenness, or
Swearing, or Fighting, or Adultery, and the like? the Lord has Redeemed me
from all these Things; and the Love of God has brought me to loath all
Wantonness, blessed be his Name. They who are Drunkards, and Fighters, and
Swearers, have their Liberty without Bonds: And you lay your Law upon me, whom
neither you, nor any other can justly accuse of these Things, praised be the
Lord! I can look at no Man for my Liberty, but at the Lord alone; who has all
Men's Hearts in his Hand.


And after some Time, not finding his Spirit clear of them, he wrote again as
follows.

Friends,
HAD you known who sent me to you, ye would have received me; for the Lord sent
me to you, to warn you of the Woes that are coming upon you; and to bid you,
Look at the Lord, and not at Man. But when I had told you my Experience, what
the Lord had done for me, then your Hearts were hardened, and you sent me to
Prison; where you have kept me many Weeks* If the Love of God had broke your
Hearts, then would ye see what ye have done: Ye would not have imprisoned me,
had not my Father suffered you; and by his Power I shall be loosed; for he
opens and shuts, to him be all Glory ^ In what have I misbehaved my self,
that any should be bound for me? All Men's Words will do me no Good, nor their
Bonds neither, to keep my Heart, if I have not a Guide within, to keep me in
the upright Life to God. But I believe in the Lord, that through his Strength and
Power I shall be preserved from Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts. The Scripture
says; Receive Strangers; but you imprison such. As you are in Authority, take
heed of Oppression and Oaths, and Injustice and Gifts, or Rewards; for God does
loath all such: But love Mercy, and true Judgment and Justice; for that the
Lord delights in. I do not write with Hatred to you, but to keep my Conscience
clear: Take heed, how you spend your Time.


To the Priests of Darby he also did write again in this Manner,

Friends,
YOU do profess to be the Ministers of Jesus Christ in Words, but you show
forth by your Fruits, what your Ministry is. Every Tree does show forth its
Fruit: The Ministry of Jesus Christ is in Mercy and Love, to unloose them that
be bound, and to bring out of Bondage, and to let them that are captivated, go
fr^e. Now Friends, where is your Example (it the Scriptures be your Rule) to
imprison for Religion? Have you any Command for it from Christ? If that were in
you, which you do profess, you would walk in their Steps who spoke forth those
Words, the Scriptures, which you do profess. But he is not a Jew, who is one
outward, whose Praise is of Men; but he is a Jew, who is one inward, whose
Praise is of God. But if you do build upon the Prophets and Apostles in Words,
and pervert their Life, remember the Woes which Jesus Christ spoke against
such. They that spoke the Prophets Words, but denied Christ, they professed a
Christ to come; but had they known him, they would not have crucified him. The
Saints, whom the Love of God did change, were brought thereby to walk in Love
and Mercy; for he that dwells in Love, dwells in God. But where Envy,
Pride, and Hatred does rule, the Nature of the World does rule, and not the
Nature of Jesus Christ. I write with no Hatred to you; but that you may weigh
your selves, and see, how you pass on your Time.


He having thus cleared his Conscience to the Priests, it was not long before a
Concern came upon him to write again to the Justices, which he did as follows:

I AM moved to warn you to take Heed of giving Way to your own Wills. Love the
Cross, and satisfy not your own Minds in the Flesh; but prize your Time while
you have it, and walk up to that you know, in Obedience to God; and then you
shall not be condemned for that you know not, but for that you do know, and do
not obey. Consider betimes, and weigh your selves, and see where you are, and
whom you serve. For if ye blaspheme God, and take his Name in vain; if ye Swear
and Lie; if ye give way to Envy, Hatred, Covetousness, and Greediness,
Pleasures, and Wantonness, or any other Vices, be assured then, that ye do
serve the Devil: But if ye fear the Lord, and serve him, ye will loath all
these Things. He that loves God, will not blaspheme his Name; but where there
is Opposing of God, and serving the Devil, that Profession is sad and
miserable. O prize your Time, and do not love that which God does fo^^id;
Lying, Wrath, Malice, Envy, Hatred, Greediness, Covetousness, Oppression,
Gluttony, Drunkenness, W^^redom, and all Unrighteousness. God does forbid. So
consider, and be not deceived; Evil Communication corrupts good Manners. Be not
deceived, God will not be mocked with vain Words: The Wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness. Therefore obey that which does convince
you of all Evil, and tells you, that you should do no Evil: It will lead to
Repentance, and keep you in the Fear of the Lord. O look at the Mercie^ of God,
and prize them, and do not turn them into Wantonness. O eye the Lord, and not
earthly Things!


Besides this, N. Barton.
he wrote the following to Nathaniel Barton, who, as was hinted before, was
both a Justice, and a Preacher.

Friends,
DO not cloak and cover thy self; there is a God who knows thy Heart, and
will uncover thee: He sees thy Way. Woe be to him that covers, and not with
my Spirit, says the Lord. Do thou do contrary to the Law, and then put it
from thee? Mercy, and true Judgment thou neglectest: Look what was spoken
against such. My Savior said to such, I was sick and in Prison, and ye visited
me not; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not
in. And when they said, When saw we thee in Prison, and did not come to thee,
etc. He replied, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of these little Ones, ye did
it not to me. Friend, thou have imprisoned me for bearing Witness to the Life
and Power of Truth; and yet professest to be a Minister of Christ: But if
Christ had sent thee, thou would bring out of Prison; and out of Bondage, and
would receive Strangers. Thou have been wanton upon Earth, thou have lived
plenteously, and nourished thy heart, as in a Day of Slaughter: Thou have
killed the Just. O look where thou art, and how thou have spent thy Time! O
remember thy ^elt, and now, while thou have Time, prize it, and do not slight
the free Mercy of God, and despise the Long-suffering of God, which is great
Salvation; but mind that in thee which does convince thee, and would not let
thee Swear, nor Lie, no^ take God's Name in vain. Thou know, thou should
do none of these Things: Thou have learned that which will condemn thee;
therefore obey the Light, which does convince thee, and forsake thy Sins, and
look at the Mercies of God, and prize his Love in sparing thee till now. The
Lord says, Look unto me, all ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved: And Cease
from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils. And Friend, prize thy Time, and see
whom thou servest; for his Servant thou art, whom thou do obey, whether or
Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto Righteousness. If thou servest God, and
fear him, thou will not blaspheme his Name, nor Curse, nor Swear, nor take
his Name in vain, nor follow Pleasures and Wantonness, Whoredom and
Drunkenness, or Wrath, or Malice, or Revenge, or Rashness, or Headiness, Pride,
or Gluttony, Greediness, Oppression, or Covetousness, or foolish Jesting, or
vain Songs; God does forbid these Thing, and all Unrighteousness. I^ thou
professest God, and actest any of these Things, thou take him for a Cloak,
and servest the Devil. Consider with thy self, and do not love that which God
does hate. He that loves God, keeps his Commandments. The Devil will tell
thee, It is an hard Thing to keep God^s Commandments; but it is an easy Thing
to keep the Devil^s Commandments, and to live in all Unrighteousness and
Ungodliness, turning the Grace of God into Wantonness. But let the unrighteous
Man forsake his Ways, and turn unto me, says the Lord, and I will have Mercy:
Turn ye, Why will ^e die? says the Lord.

Howl, ye Great Ones, for the Plagues are pouring out upon you? Howl, ye
Oppressors* for Recompense and Vengeance is coming upon you! Woe unto them that
covetously join one House to another, and bring one Field so high unto another,
that the Poor can get no more: Ground* and that ye may dwell upon the Earth
alone: These Things are in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts. Woe unto him that
covetously gets evil-gotten Goods into his House, that he may set his Nest
o^ high, to escape from the Power of Evil.


It has been said already, that some of G. Fox's Friends were moved, a^ well as
he, to preach the Doctrine or Truth; and in this Year it also happened, Eliz.
Hooton.
that Elizabeth Hooton, of whom Mention has been made before, from a true
Experience of the Lord^s Work in Man, also felt her self moved publicly to
preach the Way of Salvation to others, being the first Woman-Preacher, by what
I am informed, among those that began now generally to he called by the Name of
Quakers. Yet I have found in a Dutch Book, printed at Dort, in the Year 1647,
and called, The History of the Troubles in England, Women Preachers.
concerning the various Sects risen there, that among other Pesuasions at
London, there were also Women that did preach, in large Meetings, and were
heard by many with great Satisfaction; so that the Preaching of a Woman was not
such a Novelty, as otherwise it might have been.

In the foregoing Year it has been said, Public Transactions.
that some Scotch Commissioners having been with Charles II. in Holland, were
returned to Scotland; and though the King at first seemed backward to consent to
the Presbyterian Covenant, yet seeing no other Way open to the Scot^sh Throne,
he came to other Thoughts, and so went over to Scotland, and made his Entry
into Edinburgh, through the Gate on which the Quarters of the Earl of Montross
were placed; who having endeavored not long before to subdue the Scots with
Arms, had been beaten with his Forces, and being taken Prisoner, was executed.
The young King now b^^ing come into Scotland, seemed willing to comply as much
as he could, thereby to ingratiate himself, not only with the Scots, but also
with the English, if possible: And in Order thereunto, he gave forth a
Declaration at his Court at Dunfirmling, dated the 16th Day of August, 1650,
and in the second Year of his Reign, as it is there said: in which Declaration
I meet with the following Words:

Though his Majesty, as a dutiful Son, he obliged to honor the Memory of his
Royal Father, and have in Estimation the Person of his Mother, yet does he
desire to be deeply humbled and afflicted in Spirit before God, because of his
Father's hearkening to evil Counsels, and his Opposition to the Work of
Reformation, and to the Solemn League and Covenant* by which so much of the
Blood of the Lord's People has been shed in these Kingdoms, and for the
Idolatry of his Mother.

Here the King confessed openly that his Father's House was guilty of great
Crimes, and plainly signified, that the Nation indeed had been wronged by his
Father's Behavior; and he seemed to promise Amendment, if he came to be
restored. In the mean while they began to see in England, that the Scots were
like to make Head against them; and therefore they ordered to send General
Fairfax with an Army thither; but he showed himself unwilling to go chiefly, as
it was believed, by the Advice of his Wife, who hearkened to the Counsel of the
Presbyterian Preachers; and these thought it would contribute to their own
Settlement, if those of their own Persuasion in Scotland were not resisted. But
the Parliament, many of whose Members were Independents, did not matter that;
but resolved, since Fairfax resigned voluntarily, to create Oliver Cromwell
General of the ^ational Forces, in the room of Fairfax. Which being done,
Cromwell was sent with an Army to Scotland, and beat the Scots not far from
Edinburgh, whereby that City not long after yielded to him.

In this Year was born in Holland, on the 14th of the Month called November, N.
S. William the IIId. Prince of Orange, whose Mother was Daughter of the late
King Charles the 1st. And this Prince, by a strange Revolution of humane
Affairs, has since been advanced to the English Throne; and is a^ present,
whilst I write this, King of Great Britain, etc.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The SECOND BOOK.
THE Year 1651 had scarce begun, 1651
when the Scots resolved, notwithstanding their Overthrow, to crown their new
King, which, after he had sworn to maintain the Covenant, they did in the
Beginning of the Month called January. But we leaving this* return again to G.
Fox, whom we left at Darby, in the House of Correction, where about this Time a
Trooper came to him, who said, that having been in the Steeple-house, hearing
the Priest, exceeding great Trouble was come upon him, and that a Voice (which
he took to be that of the Lord) said to him, Do thou not know that my Servant
is in Prison? Go to him for Direction. G. Fox speaking to his Condition, told
him, That which showed him his Sins, and troubled him for them, would also show
him his Salvation; because he that shows a Man his Sin, i^ the same that takes
it away. Whilst he was thus speaking, the Trooper's Understanding beg^n to be
opened concerning the Truth, and he was sensible of God^s Mercies, which made
him speak boldly in his Quarters amongst the Soldiers, and others, alleging
the Scriptures for what he now believed to be Truth. He also said, His Colonel
(which I take to be Barton) was as blind as Nebuchadnezzar, to cast the Servant
of the Lord into Prison. This so incensed his Colonel, that, when at the
Worcester Fight, the two Armies lying near one another, two from the King's
Army challenged any two of the Parliament's Army to fight with them, the said
Colonel made Choice of him and another to answer the Challenge: And when in the
Encounter his Companion was slain, he drove both his Enemies within a
Musket Shot of the Town, without firing a Pistol at them. Thus he returned
victorious; but then he saw the Deceit of the Officers, and how wonderfully the
Lord had preserved him; and in Process of Time becoming sensible that fighting
was unlawful for a true Chrstian, he laid down his Arms, henceforth to fight
under the Banner of the Prince of Peace, by entering into the Spiritual Warfare.

Now the Time of G. Fox's Commitment to the House of Correction being very near
out, and there being many new Soldiers raised, the Commissioners would have
made him Captain over them, and the Soldiers cried, They would have none but
him. So the Keeper of the House of Correction was commanded to bring him up
before the Commissioners and Soldier's in the Marketplace; and there they
proffered him that Preferment, (as they called it) asking him if he would not
take up Arms for the Commonwealth, against Charles Stuart? G. Fox, never
having been a Fighter, though it has appeared that he was bold and valiant, told
them. That he could not do so, as well knowing from whence all Wars did arise,
( viz. from the Lusts, according to the Doctrine of the Apostle James) and that
he lived in the Virtue of that Life and Power, that took away the Occasion of
all Wars. The Commissioners, to fawn upon him, said, They offered him the
Office in Love and Kindness, because of his Virtue. But he not mattering those
flattering Words, replied, If this be your Love and Kindness, I trample it
under my Feet. This bold Answer presently showed how shallow their pretended
Kindness was; for it so enraged them, that they said, Take him awayJailer, and
put him into the Dungeon amongst the Rogues and Felons. Thus G. Fox was put
into a lousy stinking Place, amongst thirty Felons, where he had no Bed, and
was kept almost half a Year, unless that at Times he was suffered to wa^k in
the Garden, for they believed of him that he would not run away. He now being
in this nasty Prison, it was said among the People, that he never should come
out: But he, trusting in God, believed the contrary, it being showed him from
the Lord (according to what he relates) that he was not yet to be removed from
that Place, there being a Service for him to do.

In the mean while it was noised abroad, that he was in Darby-Dungeon, and his
Relations came again to see him, they being much troubled about (...) they
thought it a great Shame to them, that he should lie thus (...). Besides, it
was a strange Thing to be imprisoned for Religion. But some judged him to be
mad, because he maintained the Doctrine of Purity, Righteousness, and
Perfection. Among others that came to see him, there was also a Soldier from
Nottingham, who said to him, Your Faith stands in a Man that died at Jerusalem;
and there was never any such Thing. This so grieved G. Fox, that he said to
him, How* did not Christ suffer without the Gates of Jerusalem, by the
Professing Jews, the Chief Priest, and Pilate? No, said the other, he did not
suffer there outwardly. Then G. Fox asked him, Whether there were not Jews,
Chief Priests, and Pilate outwardly? This puzzled the Soldier a little, so that
he could not deny it. Then he told him, As certainly as there was a Chief
Priest, and Jews, and Pilate, so certainly Christ did suffer there outwardly
under them. Yet this inconsiderate Person also said, That never any of the
Prophets, or Apostles, or Holy Men of God, suffered any Thing outwardly; but
that all their Sufferings were inward. Then G. Fox instanced to him many of the
Prophets and Apostles, how they suffered, and by whom they suffered, thereby to
confound his silly Imaginations. Yet such was the Malice of some, that a
Slander was raised among the People, That the Quakers denied Christ that
suffered and died at Jerusalem. This, indeed, is a singular Evidence of the
Credu^ity of People, taking upon Trust any Story, how false soever, when it
relates to those that are become the Object ot vulgar Odium. Now as G. Fox was
often visited by those that came out of Curiosity, it is not to be wondered,
that sometimes he was contradicted by presumptuous and self-concei^ed Persons.
Once there came to him some that pretended they were Triers of Spirits; Triers
of Spirits.
and these he asked, What was the first Step to Peace? And what it was by which
a Man might see his Salvation? But they being or an airy Mind, took this to be
such a strange Question, that they did not stick to say, He was mad. Thus it
appeared, that these who pretended to try Spirits, did not know what Spirit
they themselves were of, and that they had not sufficient Knowledge to make a
good Judgment of the Corporal Constitution, saying he was mad, who was in no
wise out of his Senses.

In the Time of his Imprisonment he was much exercised in Mind about the
Proceedings of the Magistrates, because Men were put to Death for stealing of
Cattle, Money, etc. and he was the more troubled about it, because this
Practice was contrary to the Law of God in old Time. Wherefore he writ the
following two Letters to the Judges.

I AM moved to write unto you to take Heed of putting Men to Death for stealing
Cattle, or Money, etc. for the Theives in the old T^me were to make
Restitution; and if they had not wherewithal, they were to be sold for their
The^t. Mind the Laws of God in the Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them
forth; and let them be your Rule in executing Judgment: And show Mercy, that
you may receive Mercy from God, the Judge of all. And take Heed of Gifts and
Rewards, and of Pride, for God does forbid them, and they do blind the Eyes of
the Wise. I do not write to give Liberty to Sin; God has forbidden it: But
that you should judge according to his Laws, and show Mercy: For he delights
in true Judgment, and in Mercy. I beseech you to mind these Things, and prize
your Time, now you have it; and fear God, and serve him; for he is a consuming
Fire.

The other Letter was thus;

I AM moved to write unto you, that ye do true Justice to every Man, and see
that none be oppressed, nor wronged; nor no Oaths imposed; for the Land
mourns because of Oaths, and Adulteries, and Sorceries, and Drunkenness, and
(...). O consider, ye that be Men set in Authority: (...), and in Lowliness
consider these Things. Show Mercy to the ^^^^^^less, and to the Widows, and to
the Poor: And take Heed of Rewards, or Gifts, for they do blind the Eyes of the
Wi^e: The Lord does loath all such. Love Mercy and true Judgment, Justice, and
Righteousness, for the Lord delights in such. Consider these Things in Time,
and take Heed how ye do spend your Time: Now ye have Time, prize it, and show
Mercy, that ye may receive Mercy from the Lord: For he is coming to try all
Things, and will plead with all Flesh, as by Fire.

Whilst G. Fox was in Prison among the Felons, it grieved him to hear their
foul Language; and he often reproved them for their wicked Words, and evil
Carriage toward each other; and People did admire that he was so preserved
among this bad Company, without being defiled by their Conversation: But the
Fear of God so prevailed in his Heart, that he could not be charged with any
evil Word or Action all the Time he was there: Yet he perceived that it was
dangerous to converse with such a naughty Crew, and therefore he laid before
the Judges what an hurtful Thing it was, that Prisoners should lie long in
Jail, because they learned Wickedness one of another, in talking of their bad
Deeds; and that therefore speedy Justice ought to be done.

Now whilst he was confined here, there was a young Woman in the Jail for
robbing her Master of some Money; and she being to be tried for her Life, he
wrote concerning her to the Judge and Jury, showing them, how contrary it was
to the Law of God of old, to put People to Death for Stealing; and that it was
an incumbent Duty to show Mercy. But notwithstanding his Writing so, she was
condemned to die, and a Grave was made for her. G. Fox having heard this, writ
a few Words, containing, A Warning for all People to beware of Covetousness,
and to ^ear the Lord, and prize their Time, while they have it; that so they
might avoid Wickedness. And when the Woman, at the Time appointed, was carried
forth to Execution, he gave this Writing to be read at the Gallows; but when
she was upon the Ladder, with a Cloth over her Face, and ready to be turned
off, she was reprieved, and was brought back again to Prison, where afterward
she came to be convinced of the Truth, as held forth by G. Fox, and his Friends.

In the Jail there was also detained a wicked Man, who was said to be a
Conjurer; this Man threatened G. Fox, and also the Jailor, That he would raise
the Devil, and break the House down; so that he made the Jailor afraid. But G.
Fox went to him, and said, Come, let us see what thou can do, and do thy
worst: The Devil is raised high enough in thee already; but the Power of God
chains him down. At this undaunted Speech the Fellow ^^unk away.

Now the Justices to get rid of G. Fox, resolved (...) press him for a Soldier,
seeing he would not voluntarily accept (...); ^mand; and Bennet sent Constables
to give him Press-Money: But he told them, That he was brought off from outward
War, and was dead to it. And though the Commissioners over and again proffered him
Money, yet he would not take it; at which they grew so angry, that he was
committed close Prisoner. Hereupon G. Fox wrote to the Justices, and those that
were concerned in his Commitment, the following Lines.

YOU, who are without Christ, and yet use the Words, which he and his Saints
have spoken, Consider, neither he nor his Apostles did ever Imprison any; but
my Savior is Merciful even to the Unmerciful and Rebellious. He does bring out
of Prison and Bondage: But M^^, while the carnal Mind does rule, do Oppress and
Imprison. My Savior says, Love your Enemies, and do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you: For the
Love or God does not persecute any; but loves all, where it dwells: He that
hates his Brother, is a Murderer. You profess to be Christians, and one of you
a Minister of Jesus Christ; yet you have Imprisoned me, who am a Servant of
Jesus Christ. The Apostles never Imprisoned any; but were Imprisoned
themselves: Take heed of speaking of Christ in Words, and denying him in Life
and Power. O Friends, the Imprisoning my Body is to satisfy your Wills; but
take heed of giving Way to your Wills, for that will hurt you. If the Love of
God had broken your Hearts, ye would not have Imprisoned me; but my Love is to
you, as to all my Fellow Creatures; and that you may weigh your selves, and see
how you stand, is this written.

About this Time he gave forth a Paper to those that were convinced of the
Truth, to show them the Deceit of the World, and how the Priests had deceived
the People, viz.

CHRIST was ever hated; and the Righteous for his Sake. Mind, who they were,
that did ever hate them. He that was born after the Flesh, did persecute him
that was born after the Spirit; and so it is now. And mind, who were the
Chiefest against Christ; even the great Learned Men, the Heads of the People,
Rulers and Teachers, that did profess the Law and the Prophets, and looked for
Christ. They looked for an outwardly-glorious Christ, to hold up their outward
Glory: But Christ spoke against the Works of the World; and against the
Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, and their hypocritical Profession. He that
is a Stranger to Christ, is an Hireling; but the Servants of Jesus Christ are
Freemen. The false Teachers always laid Burdens upon the People: And the true
Servants of the Lord did speak against them. Jeremiah did speak against
Hirelings, and said, It was an horrible Thing; and said, What will ye do in the
End? for the People and Priests were given to Covetousness. Paul did speak
against such, as did make Gain upon the People; and exhorted the Saints to turn
away from such as were Covetous Men and Proud Men, such as did love Pleasures
more than God; such as had a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof.
For of this sort (said he) are they, that Creep into Houses, and lead Captive
silly Women, who are ever learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge of
the Truth; Men of corrupt Minds, Reprobrate concerning the Faith; and as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so (says he) do these Resist the Truth: but they
shall proceed no further, for their Folly shall be made manifest unto all Men.
Moses forlook Honors and Pleasures, which he might have enjoyed. The Apostle
in his Time saw this Corruption entering, which now is spread over the World, of
having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power. Ask any of your Teachers,
whether you may ever overcome your Corruptions or Sins? None of them does
believe That; but as long as Man is here, he must (they say) carry about with
him the Body of Sin. Thus Pride is kept up, and that Honor and Mastership,
which Christ denied; and all Unrighteousness: Yet Multitudes of Teachers; Heaps
of Teachers; the Golden Cup full of Abominations! Paul did not preach for
Wages; but labored with his Hands, that he might be an Example to all them
that follow him. O People, see who follows Paul! The Prophet Jeremiah said, The
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means; but now
the Priests bear Rule by the Means they get from the People: Take away their
Means, and they will bear Rule over you no longer. They are such as, the
Apostle said, Intruded into those Things, which they never saw; being vainly
puffed up with a fleshly Mind; and, as the Scriptures declare of some of old,
They go in the Way of Cain, (who was a Murderer) and in the Way of Balaam, who
coveted the Wages of Unrighteousness. The Prophet Micah also cried against the
Judges, that Judged for Reward; and the Priests, that taught for Hire; and the
Prophets, that prophesied for Money; and yet leaned on the Lord, saying; Is not
the Lord amongst us? Gifts do blind the Eyes of the Wise: And the Gift of God
was never purchased with Money: All the holy Servants of God did ever cry
against Deceit: And where the Lord has manifested his Love, they do loath it,
and that Nature, which holds it up.

He also wrote a serious Exhortation to the Magistrates of Darby, to consider
whom they imprisoned:

Friends,
I Desire you to consider in Time, whom ye do Imprison: for the Magistrate is
set for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and for the Praise o^ them that do well.
But when the Lord does send his Messengers unto you, to warn you of the Woes
that will come upon you, except you Repent; then you persecute them, and put
them into Prison, and say, We have a Law, and by our Law we may do it. For you
indeed Justify your selves before Men; but God knows your Hearts: He will
not be worshipped with your Forms and Professions, and Shows of Religion.
Therefore Consider, ye that talk of God, how ye are subject to him; for they
are his Children, that do his Will. What does the Lord require of you, but to
do Justice, to love and show Mercy, to walk humbly with him, and to help the
Widows and Fatherless to their Right? But instead thereof ye Oppress the Poor?
Do not your Judges judge for Rewards, and your Priests Teach for Hire? The Time
is coming, that he who sees all Things, will discover all your Secrets. And
know this assuredly, The Lord will deliver his Servants out of your Hands, and
he will recompense all your unjust Dealings toward his People. I desire you to
Consider of these Things, and search the Scriptures, and see, whether any of
the People of God did ever Imprison any for Religion; but were themselves
Imprisoned. I desire you to Consider, how it is written, that when the Church
is met together, they may all Prophesy, one by one; that all may hear, and all
may learn, and all may be comforted: And then, If any Thing be Revealed to him
that sits by, let the first hold his Peace. Thus it was in the true Church;
and thus it ought to be. But it is not so in your Assemblies; but he that
Teaches for Hire, may speak, and none may contradict him. Again, Consider the
Liberty that was given to the Apostles, even among the unbelieving Jews; when
after the Reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue said
unto them, Ye M^n and Brethren, if ye have any Word of Exhortation for the
People, say on. I desire you to Consider in Stilness, and strive not against
the Lord; for he is stronger than you. Though ye hold his People fast for a Time;
yet when he comes, he will make known, who are his; for his Coming is like the
Refiner's Fire, and like Fuller's Soap. Then the Stone, that is set at naught
of you Builders, shall be the Head-stone of the Corner. O Friends, lay these
Things to Heart, and let them not seem light Things to you. I wrote unto you in
Love, to mind the Laws of God, and your own Souls, and do, as the Holy Men of
God did.


During his Imprisonment there; he was under a great Exercise and Travel in
Spirit, because of the Wickedness of that Town; for though some were convinced
there of the Doctrine of Truth, yet generally they were a hardened People. And
he seeing the Visitation of God's Love pass away from them, he mourned, and
wrote following Lamentation.

O Darby! As the Waters run away, when the Floodgates are up; so does the
Visitation of God^s Love pass away from thee, O Darby! Therefore look, where
thou art, and how thou art grounded; and Consider, before thou art utterly
forsaken. The Lord moved me Twice, before I came to Cry against the Deceits and
Vanities that are in thee: and to warn all to look at the Lord, and not at Man.
The Woe is against the Crown of Pride, and the Woe is against Drunkenness and
vain Pleasures, and against them that make a Profession of Religion in Words,
and are high and lofty in Mind, and live in Oppression and Envy. O Darby! thy
Profession and Preaching stinks before the Lord. Ye do profess a Sabbath in
Words, and Meet together, dressing your selves in fine Apparel; and you uphold
Pride. Thy Women go with stretched-forth Neeks, and wanton Eyes, etc. which the
true Prophet of old Cried against. Your Assemblies are odious, and an
Abomination to the Lord: Pride is set up, and bowed down to; Covetousness
abounds; and he that does wickedly, is honored: So Deceit does bear with
Deceit; and yet they profess Christ in Words. O the Deceit that is within thee!
It does even break my Heart to see, how God is dishonored in thee! O Darby!

After he had written this, he perceived that his imprisonment there would not
continue long; for the Magistrates grew uneasy about him, and could not agree
what to do with him: One while they would have sent him up to the Parliament,
and another while they would have banish^d him to Ireland. At first they called
him a Deceiver, and a Blasphemer; and afterward, when the Judgments of God
be^el them, they said he was an honest, virtuous Man. But their well or
ill-speaking was nothing to him; for the one did not lift him up; nor did the
other cast him down. At length they turned him out of Jail about the Beginning
of the Winter, in the Year 1651, after he had been Prisoner in Darby about a
Yea^, six Months whereof in the House of Correction, and the rest of the Time
in the common Jail and Dungeon. Being now set at Liberty, he went into
Leicestershire, Leicester-shi. Nottinghamshire.
and had Meetings where he came, preaching so effectually, that several were
convinced. He went after to Nottinghamshire again, and from thence into
Darbyshire, where having visited his Friends, he passed into Yorkshire, and
coming into Doncaster, and other Places, he preached Repentance. Yorkshire.
Doncaster. Pa^by. Rich. Farnsworth. Wakefield. J. Naylor. W. Dewsbury.
Afterward he came to Balby, where Richard Farnsworth, and several others,
were convinced, by his Preaching. And coming afterward into the Parts about
Wakefield, James Naylor came to him, and also acknowledged the Truth of that
Doctrine he held forth; likewise William Dewsbury, with many more; and these
three named, became in Time also Ministers of the Gospel. But by the way, I
must say that William Dewsbury was one of those that had already been
immediately convinced, as G. Fox himself was, who coming to him, found himself
in Unity with him; G. Fox. Jun.
and of these was also George Fox the Younger, of whom more hereafter. But I
return to the other G. Fox, who coming about Selby, passed from thence to
Beverly, where he went into the Steeple-house, and after he that preached there
had done, Selby. Beverly.
G. Fox spoke to the Congregation, and said, that They ought to turn to Christ
Jesus as their Teacher. This struck a Dread amongst the People, and the Mayor
spoke to him; but none meddled with him. In the Afternoon he went to another
Steeple-house, about two Miles off, where, after the Priest had done, he spoke
to him and the People, showing them the Way of Life and Truth, and the Ground
of Election and Reprobation. The Priest saying he could not dispute, G. Fox
told him, He did not come to dispute, but to hold forth the Word of Truth, that
they might all know the one Seed, to which the Promise was, both in the Male,
and in the Female. Here his speaking did so please the Auditory, that he was
desired to come again on another Day, and to preach there. But he directed them
to their Teacher Christ Jesus, and so went away. The next Day he came to
Crantsick, Crantsick. Capt. Pursloe. Justice Hotham.
to Captain Pursloe's, who accompanied him to Justice Hotham's, and entering
into Discourse with G. Fox, told him, He had known that Principle about ten
Years, and was glad that the Lord did publish it abroad among the People. While
G. Fox was there, there came a great Woman of Beverly to speak with the said
Justice about some Business, who in Discourse said, That the last Sabbath Day
(as ^he called it) there was an Angel or Spirit came into the Church at
Beverly, and spoke the wonderful Things of God, to the Astonishment of all that
were there: And that when it had done, it passed away, they not knowing whence
it came, nor whither it went; but it astonished all, both Priest and
Professors, and the Magistrates of the Town. This Relation Justice Hotham gave
him afterward; and then G. Fox told him, that it was he who had been that Day
at Beverly Steeple-house, and had declared Truth there. The next first Day of
the Week Captain Pursloe came to G. Fox, and they both went to the
Steeple-house, where G. Fox, when the Priest had done, spoke to both Priest and
People, and directed them where they might find their Teacher, the Lord Jesus
Christ, viz. inwardly, in their Hearts; which was of such Effect, that some
received that Doctrine of Truth, and continued in it. In the Afternoon he went
to another Steeple-house, about three Miles off, where one preached that bore
the Title of Doctor: He took his Text from Isaiah LV. Every one that thirsts,
come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat, yea
come, buy Wine and Milk, without Money, without Price. G. Fox staid till the
Priest had done, and well knowing what kind of Teacher he was, he was kindled
with such a Zeal, that he said, Come down thou Deceiver: Do thou bid People
come freely, and take of the Water of Life freely, and yet thou take three
Hundred Pounds a Year of them! May not thou blush with Shame! Did the
Prophet Isaiah and Christ do so, who spoke the Words, and gave them forth
freely? Did not Christ say to his Ministers, whom he sent to preach, Freely ye
have received, freely give? The Priest being amazed, hastened away, and so gave
G. Fox as much Time as he could desire, to speak to the People; who then
directed them to the Light, and the Grace of God, and to the Spirit of God in
their inward Parts, to be taught and instructed thereby.

Having thus cleared himself amongst that People, he returned to Justice
Hotham's House that Night, who embracing him, said, My House is your House; and
also signified, that he was exceeding glad at the Work of the Lord, and that
his Power was revealed.

From thence G. Fox went through the Country, and came at Night to an Inn, where
he bid the Woman of the House, if she had any Meat, to bring him some. But
because he said Thee and Thou to her, she looked strangely on him. Then he
asked her, if she had any Milk? and she said, No: He believing she spoke
falsely, and seeing a Churn stand in the Room, would try her farther, and asked
her, If she had any Cream? But she denied that she had any. Then a little Boy
playing about the Churn, put his Hands into it, and pulling it down, threw all
the Cream on the Floor. Thus the Woman appeared to be a Liar, and she being
amazed, took up the Child, and whipped it sorely: But he reproved her for her
Lying, and going out of the House, went away, and that Night lay in a Stack of
Hay, York.
in Rain and Snow. The next Day he came to York; and the first Day of the Week
being come, he went to the Cathedral: When the Priest had done, he said, He had
something from the Lord God to speak to the Priest and People. Then said a
Professor, Say on quickly; for it was very cold Weather. Then G. Fox told them,
This was the Word of the Lord God unto them, that they lived in Words; but God
Almighty looked for Fruits among them. As soon as these Words were out of his
Mouth, he was hurried out, and thrown down the Steps. But he got up again
without Hurt, and went to his Lodging. Yet several of the People were so
reached that they became convinced of the Truth.

He having now done his Service in York, went from thence, and came the next
Day to Burraby, Burraby.
and coming into a certain Meeting, where there was a Priest also, he had
Occasion to declare the Truth, and many were convinced; and the Priest himself
confessed to the Truth, though he came not to live up to it. The following Day G.
Fox passed to Cleaveland, Cleaveland.
where having a Meeting, some were convinced. The first Day of the next Week he
went to the Steeple-house, and when the Priest had done, he directed the People
to their Teacher w^^hin, Christ Jesus, who had bought them. The Priest then
coming to him, he had a little Discourse with him, and put him soon to Silence.

From thence he wen^ to Stath, Stath.
where he had great Meetings, and many received the Truth he preached; amongst
whom was Philip Scarth a Priest, P. Scarth.
that afterward came to be a Minister of the Gospel among those called
Quakers, who now began thereabout to increase in Number, and had great
Meetings. It happened here that a certain Scotch Priest, Scotch Priest.
walking with G. Fox, asked him many Questions concerning the Light, and the
Soul: to all which he answered fully: But after they parted, this Scotch Priest
met Philip Scarth, and breaking his Cane against the Ground, said in Anger, If
ever he met with G. Fox again, he would have his Life, or Fox should have his;
adding, that he would give his Head, if G. Fox was not knocked down within a
Month. Yet what is mavelous, this same Scotch Priest, after some Years, came
to be one or the People called Quakers, and afterward G. Fox visited him at
his House. Not much unlike to this, was, that a Woman of Note among the
Independents, being swayed by Prejudice against G Fox, said, She would
willingly have gone to have seen him hanged: But when she heard him preach, she
was so reached, that the being convinced of the Truth he declared, came to be
one of his Friends. Oftentimes he had Opportunity to speak with the Priests,
who, when they heard of his coming, would hide themselves; for it was a
dreadful Thing to them, when it was told them, The Man in Leather Breeches is
come; for this was indeed his D^ess in those Days, not on^ of any Supe^st^tion,
but because Leather Clothes being strong, it was not unsuitable for one that
traveled so much as he did.

He now coming to Malton, Malton.
had great Meetings; but it was thought such a strange Thing to preach in
Houses, that many du^st not come there, for Fear of their Relations; and
therefore he was much desired to come and preach in the Churches, as the
Steeple Houses are commonly called: Priest Boys.
Nay, one of the Priests himself, called Boys, (who was so taken with him,
that he called him Brother) did invite him to preach in his Steeple-house: But
G. Fox had little Inclination to that, because both Priests and People called
that Place of Worship, The House of God; whereas the Apostle said to the
Athenians, God dwells not in Temples made with Hands: And therefore he
endeavored to draw People o^f from them, and to make them sensible, that God
and Christ ought to dwell in their Hearts, that so their Bodies might be made
the Temples of God. Yet for that Time he went into the Steeple-house at Malton,
where there were not above eleven Hearers, to whom the Priest was Preaching;
but after it was known in the Town that G. Fox was there, it was soon filled
with People. And when the Priest had done, he sent the other that had invited
him thither, to bring him up into the Pulpit. But G. Fox sent him Word, That he
needed not to go into the Pulpit. The Priest not satisfy^d with this Refusal,
sent again, desiring him to go up into it, for, said he, It is a better Plate
to be seen of the People: But G. Fox answered, That he could be seen and heard
well enough where he was; and that he came not there to hold up such Places,
nor their Maintenance and Trade. This created some Displeasure, and it was
said, That false Prophets were to come in the last Times: But this Saying
grieved many of the People, and some began to murmur at it* Whereupon G. Fox
stood up, and desiring all to be quiet, he st^pt upon an high Seat; and since
somewhat had been spoken of False Prophets, he declared to the Auditory, the
Marks of those Prophets, and he showed, That they were already come, and were
out of the Steps of the true Prophets, and of Christ and his Apostles. He also
directed the People to their inward Teacher, Christ Jesus, who would turn them
from Darkness to Light: And having opened diverse Scriptures to them, he
directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they might come to
God, and also come to know who the false Prophets were. And having thus had a
large Time to preach to the People, he went away without any Disturbance.

After some Time he came to Pickering, Pickering.
where the Justices held their Sessions in the Steeple-house; Justice Robinson
being Chairman. At the same Time G. Fox had a Meeting in the School-house,
where many Priests and Professors came, and asked several Questions, which were
answered to their Satisfaction, so that many Persons, and amongst these, four
chief Constables, were convinc^d that Day; and Word was carried to Justice
Robinson, Justice Robinson.
that his Priest, whom he loved more than all the others, was over thrown and
convinc^d. After the Meeting was done, they went to an Inn, and the said Priest
was very loving, and would have paid for G. Fox^s Dinner; but this he would not
suffer by any Means. Then he offer^d, that he should have his Steeple-house to
preach in; but he refused, and told him and the People, That he came to bring
them off from such Things to Christ. The next Morning he went with the four
chief Constables to visit Justice Robinson, who meeting him at his
Chamber Door, G. Fox told him, He could not honor him with Man's Honor: To
which the Justice said, He did not look for it. Then he went into his Chamber,
and spoke to him concerning the State of the False Prophets, and of the True;
and also concerning Election and Reprobation, ^^ewing that Reprobation stood in
the First Birth, and Election in the Second; and what it was that the Promise
of God was to, and what the Judgment of God was against. All this so pleased
the said Robinson, that he not only confessed it to be Truth; but when another
Justice that was present, made some little Opposition, he informed him; and at
their Parting, he said to G. Fox, It was very well that he did exercise that
Gift which God had given him. And he took the chief Constables aside, and would
have given them some Money for G. Fox, saying, He would not have him to be at
any Charge in their Country: But they told him, That they themselves could not
get him to take any Money. G. Fox passing from thence, Priest Boys went along
with him. But the Year being now come to an End, let us take a short View how
it stood with State Affairs.

It has been said already, Public Transactions.
that Charles the II. had been crown^d King by the Scots; but having been
beaten, with his Forces, by Cromwell, he marched afterward with a new Army into
England, and took Worcester without Opposition: Yet, in the Month of September,
his Forces were so entirely routed by Cromwell, that King Charles, to prevent
being taken Prisoner after the Battle, hi^ himself a whole Day in a ho^low Oak;
and afterward, being clothed like a Servant, and called by Name of William,
passed the Country, and through many Hazards escaped out of England, and arrived
on the Coast of Normandy in France, where we will leave him to return again to
G. Fox; Priest Boys.
who coming with Priest Boys into a Town to bait, and hearing the Bells ring,
asked what that was for: They told him, That it was for him to preach in the
Steeple-house. Walking thither, he saw the People were gathered together in the
Steeple-house Yard. The Priest who accompanied him, would have had him to go
into the Steeple-house: But he said, It was no Matter. This seemed strange to
the People, that he would not go into that which they called the House of God.
But he stood up in the Steeple-house Yard, and declared to them, That he came
not to hold up their Idol-Temples, nor their Priests, nor their Tithes, nor
their Jewish and Heathenish Ceremonies: That the Ground on which these their
Temples stood, was no more Holy than any other Piece of Ground: That the
Apostles going into the Jews Synagogues and Temples, was to bring People off
from that Temple, etc. and from the Offerings and Tithes, and covetous Priests
of that Time: That such who came to be converted, and believed in Christ,
afterward met together in Dwelling-houses: And that all who preach Christ, the
Word of Life, ought to preach freely, as the Apostles did, and as Christ had
commanded: And that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth had sent him to preach
freely, and to bring People off from the outward Temples made with Hands, in
which God dwells not; that so they might know their Bodies were to become the
Temples of God and Christ. Moreover, that they ought to leave all their
superstitious Ceremonies, Traditions, and Doctrines of Men; and not regard such
Teachers of the World, that took Tithes, and great Wages, preaching for Hire,
and divining for Money, whom God and Christ never sent, according to their own
Confession, when they say, They never heard God's Voice. That therefore People
ought to come to the Spirit and Grace of God in themselves, and to the Light of
Jesus in their own Hearts; that so they might come to know Christ their free
Teacher, to bring them Salvation, and to open the Scriptures to them. This
Speech had such Effect, 1652
that many then declared they were convinced of the Truth.

From this Place he went to another Town, and Priest Boys went along with him.
Thither came several Professors, but h^ sat silent for some Hours; which made
them often ask the Priest, When will he begin? When will he speak? To which the
Priest said, Wait: And told them, That the People waited upon Christ a long
while before he spoke. Now though G. Fox by Silence was to famish People from
Words, yet at length he felt himself moved to speak, which he did so
effectually, that many were reached, and there was a general Convincement
amongst them.

From hence he passed on, the Priest continuing to go with him, as did several
others. And as they went along, some People called to the Priest, and said, Mr.
Boys, We owe you some Money for Tithes, pray come and take it. But he throwing
up his Hands, said, He had enough, and would have none of it; they might keep
it; and he praised the Lord he had enough. The Moors.
At length they came to this Priest's Steeple-house in the Moors; and when they
came into it, the Priest went before, and held open the Pulpit-Door: But G. Fox
told him, he would not go into it. And this Steeple-house being very much
painted, he told him, and the People, That the painted Beast had a painted
House. Then he spoke to them concerning the R^^e of all those Houses, and their
superstitious Ways; and he told them, That at the End of the Apostle^s going
into the Temple and Synagogues, was not to hold them up, but to bring People to
Christ the Substance; so the End of his Coming there was not to hold up these
Temples, Priests, and Tithes, but to bring them off from all these Things to
Christ the Substance. Moreover, he declared to them what the true Worship was,
which Christ had set up; and he distinguished Christ, the true Way, from all
the false Ways, opening the Parables to them, and turning them from Darkness to
the true Light, that by it they might see themselves and their Sins, and Christ
their Savior; that so believing in him, they might be saved from their Sins.

After this he went to the House of one Birde^, Birde^.
where he had a great Meeting, and the Priest Boys accompanied him still,
leaving his Steeple-house. Then he returned toward Crantsick, Crantsick.
to Captain Pursloe's and Justice Hotham's, who received him kindly, being glad
that Truth was spread, and so many had received it. And Justice Hotham said, If
God had not raised up this Principle of Light and Life, which G. Fox preached,
the Nation had been overrun with Ranterism, and all the Justices in the Nation
could not have stopped it with all their Laws: Because (said he) they would
have said as we said, and done as we commanded, and yet have kept their old
Principle still: But this Principle or Truth overthrows their Principle, and
the Root and Ground thereof.

Now though G. Fox found good Entertainment, yet he did not settle these, but
kept in a continual Motion, going from one Place to another, to beget Souls
unto God. I don't intend to relate all his Occurrences, but will give a short
Hint only of some of the Chief.

Coming then toward Night into Patrington, Patrington.
he walked through the Town, and meeting the Priest in the Street, he wa^^ed both
him and the People to repent, and turn to Lord: And People gathering about him,
he declared to them the Word of Life, directing them to the inward Word, viz.
the Light wherewith they were enlightened. And going afterward to an Inn, for
it was dark, he desired Lodging; but it was denied him: Then he asked for a
little Meat, or Milk, offering to pay for it; But this also was refused him.
Being thus put off; he walked out of the Town, and some rude Fellows follo^ing,
asked him, What News? To which his Answer was, Repent and fear the Lord. After
he was gone a pretty Way out of the Town, he ca^e to another House, where he
desired to have some Meat, Drink, and Lodging for his Money; but they would not
suffer him to stay there: Then he went to another House, but met with the like
Re^usal. By this Time it was grown so dark, that he could not see the Highway,
but perceiving a Ditch, he got a little Water, and so refreshed himself. Then
he got over the Ditch, and being weary, he sat down amongst the Furz-bu^^es,
till it grew Day; and tnen he got up, and passing on through the Fields, a^ Man
came after him with a Pike-sta^f, and went along with him to a Town, where he
raised the People, with the Constable and chief Constable, before the Sun was
up. G. Fox, seeing the Multitude, warned them of the Day of the Lord that was
coming upon all S^n and Wickedness, and exhorted them to repent. But they
laying hold on him, carried him back to Patrington, and guarded him with
Halberds, Pikes, Staves, etc. Being come to the said Town, all was in an
Uproar; and the Priest and Constable consulting together what to do with him,
he too^ that Opportunity to exhort the People to Repentance, and to preach the
Word of Life to them. At last a discreet Man called him unto his House, where
he got some Milk and Bread, not having eaten for some Days before. Then he was
carried about nine Miles to a Justice; and when he was come near his House,
there came a Man riding a^^e^, and asked him, Whether he was the Man that was
apprehended? G. Fox asking him Why? The other said, For no Hurt. Then he told
him, He was; and so the Man rode away to the Justice. Now the Men that (...) G.
Fox said, It would be well, if the Justice was not drunk when they came to him,
because he used to be drunk early. G. Fox being now brought in before him, and
not putting off his Hat, and saying Thou to him, the Justice asked the Man that
rode thither before, Whether he was not mazed, or fond? But the Man said, No;
It is his Principle so to behave himself. Now G. Fox, who was unwilling to let
any Opportunity slip, without admonishing People to Virtue, warned the Justice
to repent, and bid him Come to the Light which Christ had enlightened him with,
that by it he might see all his evil Words and Actions, and so return to Christ
Jesus whilst he had Time, and that he ought to prize that Time. Ay, Ay, said
he, the Light that is spoken of in the Third of John. G. Fox desired him that
he would mind it, and obey it; and laying his Hand upon, him, he was so brought
down by the Lord's Power, that all the Watchmen stood amazed. Then he took G.
Fox with him into a Parlour with the other Men, and desired to see what he had
in his Pockets, of Letters, or Intelligence; for it seems they suspected him to
be an Enemy to the Commonwealth. Then he pulled out his Linen, and showed
that he had no Letters; which made the Justice say, He is not a Vagrant, by his
Linen; and set him at Liberty. Then G. Fox went back, to Patrington again,
with that Man who had rid before to the Justice, and who lived in that Town.
Coming to his House, he desired G. Fox to go to Bed, or to lie doan upon it:
Which he did, that they might say, they had seen him in a Bed, or upon a Bed;
for there was a Report, that he would not lie on any Bed, raised doubtless,
because about that Time he had lain often without Doors

When the First Day of the Week was come, he went to the Steeple-house, and
declared the Doctrine of Truth to the Priest and People, without being
mo^ested. Then presently after he had a great Meeting at that Man^s House where
he lay, and many were convinced that Day of the Truth he preached; and they
were exceeding sorry that they had not given him Lodging when he was there
before. From thence he traveled through the Country, warning People, both in
Towns, and in Country-Villages, to repent, and turn to Christ Jesus their
Teacher.

On a First Day of the Week he came to one Colonel Overton's House, Col.
Overton.
and had a great Meeting of the ^^^ef of the People of that Country; where he
opened many Things out of the Scriptures, which they never heard before* Coming
afterward again to Patrington, he understood that a Tailor, and some wild
Blades in that Town, had occasioned his being carried before the Justice: This
Tailor came to ask him Forgiveness, fearing he would complain of him: The
Constables also were afraid, lest he should trouble them: But he forgave them
all, and exhorted them to turn to the Lord, and to amend their Lives. Now that
which made them the more afraid, was, that he having been not long before in
the Steeple-house at Oram, there came a Professor that gave him a Push on the
Breast, and bid him, Get out of the Church. To which G. Fox said, Do thou
call the Steeple-house the Church? The Church is the People, whom God has
purchased with his Blood, and not the House. But Justice Hotham having heard of
this Man's thus abusing G. Fox, Just. Hotham.
s^^t a Warrant, and bound the said Man over to the Sessions. So zealous was
this Justice to keep the Peace, that he had asked G. Fox before, whether any
People had abused him: But he esteeming it his Duty to forgive all, told him
nothing of that Kind.

From Patrington he went to several great Men's Houses, warning them to repent.
Some received him lovingly, and some slighted him. Passing thus through the
Country, at Night he came to another Town, where he desired Lodging and Meat,
offering to pay for it; but they would not lodge him, unless he went to a
Constable to ask Leave, which they said was the Custom of Strangers. But he
told them, That Custom was for suspected Persons, and not for such as he, who
was an innocent Man. So after he had warned them to repent, and to mind the Day
of their Visitation, and directed them to me Light of Christ, and Spirit of
God, he passed away. As it grew dark, he spied an Hay-stack, and went and sat
under it till Morning. The next Day he came to Hull, where he admonished the
People to turn to Christ Jesus, that they might receive Salvation. And being
very weary with traveling on Foot so far, he got that Night a Lodging there.

From thence he went to Nottinghamshire, Nottinghamshire. Lincolnshire.
Gainsborough.
visiting his Friends there; and so passed into Lincolnshire, where he did the
like. And coming to Gainsborough, where one of his Friends had been preaching
in the Market, he found the Town and People all in an Uproar; the more, because
a certain Man had raised a false Accusation, reporting, that G. Fox had said,
He was Christ. Here going into the House of a friendly Man, the People rushed
in after him, so that the House soon was f^lled; and amongst the rest was also
this false Accuser, who said openly before all the People, That G. Fox said he
was Christ; and that he had got Witnesses to prove the same. G. Fox kindled
with Zeal, stepped upon the Table, and said to the People, That Christ was in
them, except they were Reprobates; and that it was Christ the eternal Power of
God, that spoke in him at that Time unto them; not that he was Christ. This
gave general Satisfaction, except to the false Accuser himself, to whom G. Fox
said, That he was a Judas, and that Judas 's End should be his; and that That
was the Word of the Lord through him [Fox] to him. The Minds of the People coming
thus to be quieted, they departed peaceably. But very remarkable it was, This
Judas shortly after hanged himself, and a Stake was driven into his Grave. Now
though this was a well known Thing in this Country, yet some Priests spread a
Report, That a Quaker had hanged himself in Lincolnshire, and had a Stake
driven through him. And though this was taken upon Trust by Hearsay, yet, out of
mere Malice, a certain Priest gave out this Falsehood in Print, as a true
Matter. But this wicked Slander prevailed so little, that many People in
Lincolnshire were convinced of the Truth preached by G. Fox.

After this he passed into Yorkshire, Yorkshire. Warnsworth.
and coming to Warnsworth, went to the Steeple-house in the Forenoon, but found
no Acceptance; and being th^u^^ out, he was sorely beaten with Staves, and
Clods and Stones were thrown at him; yet he exhorted to repent and turn to
Christ. In the Afternoon he went to another Steeple-house; but the Sermon was
finished before he got thither; so he preached Repentance to the People that
were not departed, and directed them to their inward Teacher, Christ Jesus.
Doncaster.
From hence he came to Doncaster, where he had formerly preached in the Market;
but now on the First Day of the Week he went into the Steeple-house; and after
the Priest had done, he began to speak, but was hurried out, and haled before
the Magistrates, who threatened him with Death, if ever he came thither again.
But notwithstanding all this, G. Fox bid them Mind the Light of Christ in them,
saying, That God was come to teach his People himself, whether they would hear
or not. After a while being put out with some of his Friends, that were with
him, they were stoned by the rude Multitude. A certain Innkeeper, that was a
Bailiff, seeing this, came and took them into his House, but one of the Stones,
that were thrown, hit his Head, so that the Blood ran down his Face. The next
First Day G. Fox went to Tichhil, Tichhil.
where he went into the Steeple-house, and there found the Priest, and the
Chief of the Parish in the Chancel, to whom he began to speak; but they
immediately fell upon him, and the Clark struck him with his Bible so violently
on the Face, that the Blood gushed out, and he bled exceedingly. Then the
People thrust him out of the Steeple-House, and beating him, threw him down,
and dragged him along the Street, so that he became besmeared with Blood and
Dirt, and his Hat was taken away. When he was got up again, he spoke to the
People, and showed them how they dishonored Christianity. Some Time after the
Priest coming by, scossingly called G. Fox and his Friends, Quakers. But he was
spoken to, in such an Authority and Dread, that he fell a trembling; which made
one of the People say, Look how the Priest trembles and shakes, he is turned a
Quaker also. Some moderate Justices now, hearing how G. Fox and his Friends had
been abused, came to examine the Business; and the Clark was afraid of having
his Hand cut off, for striking him in the Church: But G. Fox, as a true
Christian, forgave him, and would not appear against him.

Thus far G. Fox only has been mentioned as a Preacher of Repentance; but now
some others of his Persuasion began also to preach publicly, T. Aldam. R.
Farnsworth. W. Dewsbury. Warnsworth.
viz. Thomas Aldam, Richard Farnsworth, and, not long after, William Dewsbury.
This made such a Stir, that the Priest of Warnsworth produced a Warrant from
the Justices against G. Fox and Thomas Aldam. The Constable, who came with this
Order which was to be executed in any Part of the West Riding of Yorkshire,
took Tho. Aldam, and carried him to York, and G. Fox went with him twenty
Miles; but though the Constable had a Warrant for him also, yet he meddled not
with G. Fox, saying, He was loath to trouble Men that were Strangers; but Tho.
Aldam was his Neighbor. About this Time Richard Farnsworth went into an
eminent Steeple-house, Wakefield
in, or about Wakefield; where he spoke ^o powerfully, that the People were
amazed. The Priest of that Place whose Name was Marshal, spread a slanderous
Report, That G. Fox carried Bo^^les about with him, and made People drink
thereof, which made them follow him. And that he rid upon a great black Horse,
and was seen in one Country upon that Horse, and in the same Hour in an other
Country threescore Miles off. But these horrid Lies were so far from turning to
the Priest's Advantage, that he preached many of his Hearers away from him; for
it was well known, that G. Fox had no Horse at that Time, but traveled on
Foot. He coming now into a Steeple-house not far from Bradford, the Priest took
his Text from Jer. V. 31. My People love to have it so; leaving out the
foregoing Words, The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by
their Means. G. Fox unwilling to let this pass unregarded, showed the People
the Priest's unfair Dealing, and directing them to Christ, the true inward
Teacher, declared, That God was come to teach his People himself, and to bring
them off from all the World's Teachers and Hirelings, that they might come to
receive freely from him; concluding his Speech with a Warning of the Day of the
Lord that was coming upon all Flesh. He passed from thence without much
Opposition, and traveled now for some Time with Richard Farnsworth, with whom
he once passed a Night in the open Field, on a Bed they made of Fern.

Then parting from him, Wentzerdale.
he came to Wentzerdale, where he went into the Steeple-house; and after the
Lecture, he spoke to the People much in the same Terms as he used to do on the
like Occasions; and had not much Opposition there. Thus he went from Place to
Place, and often met with strange Occurrences, some of which were more jocose
than serious; others very rude, and even dangerous to his Life. But he trusted
in God, really believing that he had sent him to preach Repentance, and to
exhort People to a true Conversion.

Thus traveling on, Sedburgh. Just. Benson.
he came near Sedburgh; there he went to a Meeting at Justice Benson's, where a
People met that were separated from the public Worship; and by his Preaching,
he gave such general Satisfaction, that most of the Hearers were convinced of
the Truth declared by him. Thus the Number of his Fellow-Believers increased
so, that now they had Meetings by themselves, in many Places of the Country.
About this Time there being a Fair at Sedburgh, G. Fox declared the Day of the
Lord through the Fair; and afterward went into the Steeple-house-Yard, where
Abundance of People came to him: Here he preached for several Hours, showing,
That the Lord was come to teach his People himself, and to bring them off from
all the World's Ways, and Teachers, to Christ, the true Teacher, and the true
Way to God. Moreover, he showed the declining State of the modern Doctors and
Teachers; and exhorted the People to come off from the Temples made with Hands,
and wait to receive the Spirit of the Lord, that they might know themselves to
be the Temples of God. None of the Priests, several of whom were there, spoke
against what he had declared; but a Captain said, Why will you not go into the
Church; for this is not a fit Place to preach in? G. Fox told him, That he did
not approve of their Church. Then stood up one Francis Howgil, F. Howgil.
who was a Preacher, and though he never had seen G. Fox before, yet he was so
affected with him, that he answered the Captain, and soon put him to silence:
For, said, Howgil, This Man speaks with Authority, and not as the Scribes.
After this G. Fox opened to the People, That that Ground and House was not more
holy than another Place; and that the House was not the Church, but the People,
whom Christ was the Head of. Then the Priests coming to him, he warned them to
repent; upon which one of them said, He was mad: Capt. Ward. Firbank^ Chapel
in Westmorland.
But notwithstanding, his saying so, many were convinced there that Day; and
amongst these, one Captain Ward. The next First Day G. Fox came to Firbank
Chapel in Westmorland, where the foresaid Francis Howgil, and one John Audland
had been preaching in the Morning. The Chapel at that Time was so full of
People, that many could not get in: J. Audland.
And Howgil said afterward, He thought G. Fox looked into the Chapel, and his
Spirit was ready to fail. But G. Fox did not look into it; however, Howgil had
been so reached when he heard him preach in the Steeple-house-Yard at Sedburgh,
that he was, as it were, checked, and so quickly made an End of his Sermon;
thinking as well as others, that G. Fox would preach there that Day, as indeed
he did: For having refreshed himself at Noon with a little Water out of a
Brook, he went and sat down on the Top of a Rock hard by the Chapel,
intending to have a Meeting there. At this People wondered, because they looked
upon the Church (so called) as an holy Place, requisite for Worship. But G. Fox
told them afterward, That the Ground whereon he stood, was as good as that of
the Steeple-house; besides, we find, that Christ himself did preach on a
Mountain, and also at the Seaside. Now in the Afternoon the People gathered
about him, with several of their Preachers, and amongst these, F. Howgil, and
J. Audland. To this Auditory, which was judged to consist of more than a
thousand People, G. Fox began to preach, and spoke about the Space of three
Hours, directing all To the Spirit of God in themselves, that so they might be
turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan, which they had been
under, unto God; by which they should become Children of the Light, and, by the
Spirit of Truth, be led into all Truth, and so sensibly understand the Words of
the Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles; and come to know Christ to be
their Teacher to instruct them; their Counselor to direct them, their Shepherd
to feed them, their Bishop to oversee them, and their Prophet to open divine
Mysteries to them; that so their Bodies might be prepared, sanctified, and made
fit Temples for God and Christ to dwell in. Moreover, he explained the
Prophets, and the Figures, and Shadows, and directed his Hearers to Christ the
Substance. He also opened the Parables and Sayings of Christ, and showed the
Intent and Scope of the Apostles Writings, and Epistles to the Elect. Then he
spoke also concerning the State of the Apostasy, that has been since the
Apostles Days; how the Priests had gotten the Scripture, without being in that
Spirit which gave them forth; and how they were found in the Steps of the false
Prophets, Scribes, and Pharisees of old, and were such as the true Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles cried against; insomuch, that none that were guided by
the Spirit of God now, could own them. Whilst G. Fox was thus preaching, many
old People went into the Chapel, and looked out at the Windows, thinking it a
strange Thing to see a Man preach on a Hill, and not in the Church (as they
called it.) He perceiving this, said, That the Steeple-house, and the Ground
whereon it stood, was no more holy than that Hill; and that those Temples,
which they called the dreadful Houses of God, were not set up by the Command of
God and Christ: nor their Priests instituted, as Aaron's Priesthood was; nor
their Tithes appointed by God, as those amongst the Jews were. But that Christ
was come, who ended both the Temple, and its Worship, and the Priests and their
Tithes; and that therefore all ought to hearken unto him; for he said, Learn of
me; and God said of him, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;
hear ye him. In Conclusion, he said, That the Lord God had sent him to preach
the Everlasting Gospel, and Word of Life amongst them; and to bring them off
from all these Temples, Tithes, Priests, and Rudiments of the World, which were
gotten up since the Apostles Days, and had been set up by such as had erred
from the Spirit and Power the Apostles were in. G. Fox sent to preach the
Gospel, and bring off from outward Temples, Tithes, Priests, Rudiments, etc.
The powerful Effect of hi^ Sermon.
Thus preached G. Fox, and his Ministry was at that Time accompanied with such
a convincing Power, and so reached the Hearts of the People, that many, and
even all the Teachers of that Congregation, who were many, were convinced of
that Truth which was declared to them.

After this Meeting was over, G. Fox went to John Audland's, who, as well as
Francis Howgil, and others, had been quite brought over by his effectual
Preaching. And as these had been zealous Preachers amongst those of their
former Persuasion, so it was not long before they became Publishers of that
Doctrine, which now, by the Ministry of G. Fox, they had embraced; In
particular on J. Audland, and F. Howgil.
and were so far from approving their former Service, that they gave back the
Money they received for their Preaching to the Parish of Colton in Lancashire;
being now resolved to give freely what they had received freely. They became
Publishers of the same Doctrine.
And here I shall make some small Digression, in saying something concerning
these two excellent Men.

John Audland was a young Man, of a comely Countenance, and very lovely
Qualities. Colton in Lancashire. Character of J. Audland.
When he was but seventeen or eighteen Years old, he was very religious, and a
zealous Searcher of the Holy Scriptures and having a good Understanding, and
strong Memory, he thereby gathered a large Treasure of Scripture-Learning,
became an eminent Teacher amongst the Independents, and had a very numerous
Auditory. But when he heard G. Fox preach, he was thereby so reached to the
Heart, that he began in Process of Time to see the Emptiness of his great
Literal Knowledge, and that all his Righteousness was but as filthy Rags. This
brought him to a State of Mourning; for now he saw that all his Profession and
Wisdom could not bring him to true Happiness. But the Lord, who does not break
the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, did pity him in this State of
deep Humiliation, and bore him up again by his supporting Power; whereby in
Time he came to be prepared to that Service he was appointed to by God.

Concerning Francis Howgil; And of F. Howgil.
he was also a religious Man, who having seen the Superstitions of the
Episcopal Church, had left it, and applied himself to the Independents. But
although he, who had been trained up in the University to be a Minister, became a
Teacher amongst the Independents, and was zealous in Virtue; yet he remained
dissatisfied in himself, finding, that notwithstanding all his Fasting,
Praying, and good Works, the Root of Sin still remained in him: And although the
common Doctrine was, that Christ had taken the Guilt of Sin upon himself, yet
this could not satisfy him; because his Conscience told him, His Servant thou
art, whom thou obeyest. Thus increasing in Understanding, it was revealed to
him, that the Lord, according to what the Prophets had foretold, would teach
his People himself; and it seemed also to him, that this Time was near at Hand.
Some while after it happened, as has been said already, that he was present
when G. Fox preached, and when he heard him say, That the Light of Christ in
Man was the Way to Christ, he believed this to be the Word of Truth; and he saw
how he had been ignorant of the Principle of true Religion. Submitting then to
the Reproofs of this inward Light, he saw the Unfruitfulness of all his Labor;
and Anguish and Sorrow seized on him; and Judgment went over all his former
Actions: But he being given up, and resigned in that State, saying with
himself, Thou, O God, art just in all thy Judgments, it pleased the Lord in due
Time to fill his Heart with Joy, and to make him a Minister of his Everlasting
Word. But no sooner did he enter into that Service, but both Priests and
Magistrates, of whom he formerly had been beloved, became his Enemies; and Envy
was so kindled against him, that he was locked up in a nasty Place, at Appleby
in Westmorland, and was kept there Prisoner for some Time.

But let me now return to G. Fox, Appleby in Westmorland Kendal.
who coming to Kendal, had a Meeting there in the Town Hall, where declaring
the Word of Life, he showed the People, How they might come to the saving
Knowledge of Christ, and to have a right Understanding of the Holy Scripture;
opening to them what it was that would lead them into the Way of Reconciliation
with God. This was of such Effect, that several became convinced of the Truth
published by him; and others were so well affected to him, Under-Barrow.
that when he went to Vnder-Barrow, several People accompanied him, and he had
great Reasonings with them, but especially with one Edward Borough, E.
Borough.
who, though of extraordinary Parts, and acquired Knowledge, was not able to
withstand the efficacious Sayings of G. Fox. And because this Borough became
an eminent Man among the Quakers, so called, being endued with Courage and
Understanding, fit to overcome his Opposers, and to break even stony Hearts,
I Will mention here a little of his Descent and Quality.

He was born in the Barony of Kendal in Westmorland, His Character.
of Parents, who for their honest and virtuous Life, were in good Repute; he
was well educated, and trained up in such Learning as that Country did afford.
His Knowledge and Understanding soon passed his Years; for being but a Boy, he
had the Spirit of a Man, and in his Youth was endued with Wisdom above his
Equals in Years: Moreover, he was very religious, conversing frequently with
those that were in Esteem for their Piety and godly Life. Neither was he
inclined to the ordinary Pleasures of Youth; but it was his Delight to be
exercised in reading of the Holy Scripture, wherein he was well versed. By his
Parents he was trained up in the Episcopal Worship; yet when but twelve Years
of Age, he often went to the Meeting of the Presbyterians, because their
Doctrine in many Things seemed to him to approach nearer to Truth, than that of
the public Church; wherefore he became a Follower of the Presbyterians, although
he was reviled for it by his Acquaintance. But being come to the Age of about
seventeen Years, and growing more and more sensible of his own Condition, he
was often struck with Terror, and when he had been praying, he heard, as it
were, a Voice, Thou art ignorant of God; thou know not where he is, nor what
he is: To what Purpose is thy Prayer? This brought him under such a Concern,
that he began to take diligent Heed to his Life, so that he abstained not only
from all Vanities, but when Occasion offered, he reproved others for their vain
Conversation and Wickedness; but because of this, he was derided, and looked
upon scornfully by many; yet continued to live religiously, and felt sometimes
sweet Refreshments to his Soul. But though he had the Truth in his Comprehension,
yet he wanted the real and experimental Knowledge of it, and so became darkened
again, losing what he once possessed: And being too ready to flatter himself,
would say, Whom God loves once, he loves for ever. Now he grew weary of hearing
any of the Priests, for he saw they did not possess what they spoke of to
others; and sometimes he began to question his own Experiences. Being thus many
Times put to a Stand, he seemed almost to be at a Loss. In this Condition he
heard G. Fox preach, and afterward reasoned with him; and it pleased the Lord
so to open his Understanding, that he perceived (as he relates himself) that he
was in the prodigal State, above the Cross of Christ, and not in the pure Fear
of the Lord. Being thus convinced, he entered into the Society of the despised
Quakers, though he was now rejected by his Relations, and by a blind Zeal, turned
out of his Father's House. This he bore patiently, and continued faithful in
the Doctrine he had embraced. And in Process of Time he so advanced in true
Knowledge, that he became a very eminent Minister of the Gospel. But what
Adversities did he not undergo! Reviling, Slandering, Buffeting, and Caning was
often his Lot; Watching and Fasting were many Times his Portion; and
Imprisonment, great Jeopardies, and Danger of Life, he was not unacquainted
with. But nothing could make this Hero shrink: He always was laborious, and
seldom had any Hours of Rest. In his Preaching he was very acceptable, and
eloquent in his Speech, and had the Tongue (according to what an eminent Author
relates, that knew him from his Youth) of a learned Orator, to declare himself
to the Understandings and Consciences of all Men he met with. He was also a
great Writer, and often would engage in Disputes with those of other
Persuasions, sparing no Pains where he thought he could serve the Lord, and the
Church. Thus much for this Time of E. Borough.

Let Us return now to G. Fox, Under-Barrow.
whom we left at Vnder-Barrow, where, with the Consent of the Inhabitants, he
had a great Meeting in the Chapel, and many were convinced, and received the
Truth preached by him. From thence he went to Lancashire, and having in some
Places spoken in the Steeple Houses, Ulverstone. Swarthmore. Judge Fell.
he came to Vlverstone, and so to Swarthmore, to the House of Thomas Fell, a
Judge in Wales, where many Priests frequently came. The Judge was at that Time
abroad, employed in the Exercise of his Office; and his Wife Margaret was also
gone abroad that Day. G. Fox in the mean while coming thither, met the Priest
William Lampitt, W. Lampitt.
who was a high Notionist, and rich in Words. But G. Fox soon perceiving that
he was without the Possession of what he professed, opposed him boldly. Before
it was Night Margaret Fell returned home, and her Children told her, That
Lampitt and Fox had disagreed, which did somewhat trouble her, for the making
much of the Priests, especially admired Lampitt. That same Night G. Fox had
much Reasoning there, and declared the Truth to her and her Family. The next
Day Lampitt came again, and G. Fox discoursed with him in the Presence of
Margaret Fell, who then began clearly to discern the Priest. The following Day
being appointed for an Humiliation, Margaret went with her Children to the
Steeple-house at Vlverstone, having asked G. Fox before to go with her: But he
replying, That he must do as he was ordered by the Lord, left her, and walked
into the Fields; and there he felt a strong Motion to go also to the
Steeple-house. When he came there the People were singing, but what they sung
was, according to his Opinion, altogether unsuitable to their States. After
they had done, he stepped up on a Form, and asked Leave to speak: The Priest
consenting, G. Fox began thus: He is not a Jew that is one outwardly; neither
is that Circumcision which is outward: But he is a Jew that is one inwardly;
and that is Circumcision which is of the Heart. And so he went on, and said,
That Christ was the Light of the World, and enlighteneth every Man that comes
into the World, and that by this Light they might be gathered to God, etc.
Margaret Fell standing up in her P^^^, wondered at this Doctrine, having never
heard any such before. In the mean while G. Fox went on, and opening the
Scriptures said, That they were the Prophet's Words, and Christ's, and the
Apostle's Words; and that what they spoke, they enjoyed and possessed, and had
it from the Lord. What have any to do, said he, with the Scriptures, if they
come not to the Spirit that gave them forth? You will say, Christ says this,
and the Apostles say this; but what can thou, O Man, say thy self concerning
this? Art thou a Child of the Light? Do thou walk in the Light? And what thou
speak, is it inwardly from God? He showed also, That God was come to teach
his People himself, by his Spirit, and to bring them off from their Churches,
and Religions, and their Ways of Worship, etc. These his Words did so
effectually reach the aforesaid Margaret, that she sat down in her Pew again,
and weeping bitterly, cried in her Spirit to the Lord, We are all Thieves! We
are all Thieves! We have taken the Scriptures in Words, and know nothing of
them in our selves. G. Fox still going on, declared against the false Prophets,
and said, That their Way of Worship was but talking of other Men's Words, and
that they themselves were out of the Life and Spirit, which those were in who
gave them forth. Then cried out a Justice of Peace, called John Sawrey, Take
him away: J. Sawrey.
But Margaret Fell said to the Officers: Let him alone: Why may not he speak as
well as any other? The Priest Lampitt, (it is like to please her) said also, Let
him speak. G. Fox then speaking yet a while, was at length led out by the
Constable, according to the Order of the said Justice Sawrey; and then he spoke
to the People in the Grave-Yard. In the Evening he came again into the House of
Judge Fell, where he took Occasion to speak to the Servants, and those of the
Family, who most of them came so effectually to be convinced by him, that they
embraced the Truth which he preached. Among these was also William Caton, W.
Caton.
of whom more hereafter. Margaret Fell in the mean while being come home, was
so reached, that she scarce kn^w what to do, her Husband being from home; for
she clearly perceived what she had heard G. Fox preach, was Truth. The First
Day after he went to Aldenham-Steeple-house, Aldenham.
where, when the Priest had done, he spoke to the People, and admonished them
to return to the Lord. From thence he went to Ram-side, Ram-side.
where was a Chapel, in which one Thomas Lawson, T. Lawson.
who was an eminent Priest, used to preach; who having some Notice of G. Fox's
coming, preached in the Morning, and told his People that G. Fox was to come
there in the Afternoon; by which Means very many People were gathered together.
When he came, he saw there was no Place so convenient to speak to the People,
as the Chapel, and therefore he went into it. The Priest Lawson willing to
give a full Opportunity to G. Fox, went not up into the Pulpit, but left all
the Time to him. And G. Fox so powerfully declared the Doctrine of Truth, that
many received it, and among those the Priest himself, who left off his
preaching for Hire, and in Process of Time came to preach the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his glorious Gospel freely; which however did not hinder him to
exercise himself in the Knowledge of Herbs, wherein he came to be so
experienced, that he was, as I have been told, one of the most skilful
Herbalists in England; which gave Occasion to an eminent Botanist, who at first
seemed a little shy of him, when he perceived his great Skill, to love him as a
singular Friend. But this transiently.

Now I return again to G. Fox, who having performed his Service about Ram-side,
went somewhere else, and came also to Becliff, where he found some People that
told him, Beclif.
They could not dispute* But he bid them to fear the Lord, and not to speak the
Words of God in an airy Manner, but do the Things required. Moreover, that they
ought to mind the Light of Christ, and take heed to his Spirit in their Hearts,
whereby they would come to see their evil Thoughts, Words, and Actions; for
this Light (he said) would show them their Sins, and by following this Light,
they should also see that their Savior Christ Jesus saved them from Sin: And,
he said, the first Step to Peace was to stand still in the Light, which showed
them their Sins and Transgressions; by which they should see they were in the
Fall of the old Adam, in Darkness and Death, alienated from the Covenant of the
Promise, and without God in the World; and that Christ who died for them, was
their Savior and Redeemer, and their Way to God. After G. Fox had spoken thus,
he went to a new built Chapel near Gleaston, Gleaston.
wherein none had yet preached. Hither came a great many People, unto whom he
preached, and many were convinced. From thence he returned to Swarthmore again:
For Margaret Fell being full of Fear, Marg. Fell.
and expecting her Husband's Return home, had desired G. Fox to come; since
some of the great Ones of the Country being gone to meet her Husband, had
inform^d him, That a great Disaster had befallen his Family; and that the
Quakers were Witches, and had turned them from their Religion; and that he must
send them away, or all the Country would be undone. Without all Question this
was a very sad Message to Judge Fell, Judge Fell.
for he came home greatly offended: And one may easily think what a Condition
his Wife was in, being in Fear, that she should either displease her Husband,
or offend God. At that Time Richard Farnsworth and James Naylor were at her
House, R. Farnsworth, and James Naylor.
and she desired them to speak to her Husband; which they did very moderately
and wisely. And though at first he was displeased, yet after he had heard them
speak, he was better satisfied. And they making as if they would go away, she
desired them to stay, because she expected G. Fox that Evening; and she wished
for an Opportunity, that both he and they might speak to her Husband, whereby
he might satisfy himself farther about them. Dinner in the mean Time being
ready, Judge Fell, and his Wife Margaret, sat down at Table, and whilst they
were sitting, an extraordinary Power seizing on her, made such an Operation on
her Mind, that he was struck with Amazement, and knew not what to think of it;
but he was quiet and still; and the Children also were become so grave and
modest, that they could not play on their Music they were learning. At Night
G. Fox came, and Judge Fell sitting in the Parlour, Margaret asked him, If G.
Fox might come in; and he said, Yes. George then coming in without any
Compliment, began to speak presently; at which the Family, as well as J. Naylor
and R. Farnsworth entered. He now speaking, declared what the Practice of
Christ and the Apostles was in their Day; and showed how the Apostasy came in
since; and what was the Practice of the modern Priests in the Apostasy. He also
answered all the Objections of Judge Fell, and so thoroughly satisfied him by
the Scriptures, that he was convinced in his Judgment, Justice Robinson.
and asked, If he was that George Fox whom Justice Robinson had spoken so much
in Commendation of amongst many of the Parliament Men? To this G. Fox answered
him, That he had been with the Justices Robinson and Hotham in Yorkshire; that
they had been very civil and loving to him, and that they were convinced in
their Judgments by the Spirit of God, that the Principle he bore Testimony to,
was the Truth; and that they saw beyond the Priests of the Nation. All this so
satisfied Judge Fell, that he was very quiet that Night, and went to Bed. The
next Morning came Lampitt, the Priest of Vlverstone, and walking with the Judge
into the Garden, spoke much to him there, to render the Doctrine of the Quakers
odious to him, having also said to others, that G. Fox held strange Notions.
But Judge Fell had seen the Night before so much, that the Priest got little
Entrance upon him. Priest Lampitt.
And when Lampitt came into the House again, G. Fox spoke sharply to him, and
asked him, When God spoke to him, and called him to preach to the People? The
Priest not liking such Questions, it was not long before he went away. Now
whilst some were speaking how several in those Parts were convinced of the
Truth now declared, and that they knew not where to get a Meeting Place; Judge
Fell hearing them, said of his own Accord, You may meet in my Hall if you will.
So the next First Day there was at his House a Meeting, and a large one indeed,
being the first Meeting of the People called Quakers, that was at Swarthmore;
and so it continued to be kept there until the Year 1690, when a new
Meeting House was built there. Judge Fell not being willing to appear in that
Meeting, went that Day to the Steeple-house, and none with him but his Clerk
and his Groom. Yet in Process of Time he came to be so well affected to the
Doctrine of the Quakers, so called, that though he did not enter publicly into
their Society, yet he loved them, and several Years before his Death, he did
not frequent the Steeple-house any more.

After G. Fox had stayed some Days at the House of Judge Fell, he went to
Lancaster, Lancaster.
and there preached in the Market; and on the next First Day, he had a great
Meeting in the Street, amongst the Soldiers, to whom he declared the Truth; and
in the Afternoon went to the Steeple-House: But speaking there, and directing
People to the Spirit of God, he was haled out, and stoned along the Street. And
after having traveled about some Time, and preached in some Places, sometimes
with rude Opposition, he returned to Swarthmore, where discoursing with several
Priests at Judge Fell's House, he asked them, Whether any of them ever heard
the Voice of God or Christ, commanding them to go to any People, and declare
the Word of the Lord to them? But none of them answered this with Yea: Yet one
saying, I can speak of my Experience as much as you; G. Fox told him,
Experience was one Thing, but to go with a Message, and to have the Word of the
Lord, as the Prophets and Apostles had, was quite another. T. Tailor.
An ancient Priest, whose Name was Thomas Tailor did ingenuously confess before
Judge Fell, That he had never heard the Voice of God, nor of Christ, but that
he spoke his Experiences, and the Experiences of the Saints in former Ages.
This very much confirm^d Judge Fell in the Persuasion he had already, that the
Priests were not what they pretended to be: For he had thought, as the
Generality of the People did then, That th^^ were sent from God. At this Time
the Saying of G. Fox wrought so close on the Mind of the said T. Tailor, that
he was convinced, and traveled with him into Westmorland; and coming into
Crosland Steeple-house, Crosland.
T. Taylor's Mouth was opened, so that he declared amongst the People, how he
had been before he was convinced; and like the good Scribe, brought forth
Things new and old from his Treasury, to the People; and showed them how the
Priests were out of the Way.

Now a great Rage arose among the Priests, and they began as much as they
could, to stir up to Persecution; for not only T. Tailor after some Time
preached the Gospel freely, but several others, viz. John Audland, J. Audland,
F. Howgil, J. Came, E. Borough, R. Hubberthorn. M. Halhead. Lancashire.
Ulverstone.
Francis Howgil, John Came, Edward Borough, Richard Hubberthorn, Miles Halhead,
and others, appeared zealous Preachers among those called Quakers, and often
declared the Doctrine they professed in Steeple Houses, and Markets, whereby
the Number of their Friends began greatly to increase.

In the mean while G. Fox returned into Lancashire, and went to Vlverstone,
where Lampitt before mentioned, was Priest. He now seeing how the People called
Quakers did set up Meetings, and met in private Houses, said, They forsook the
Temple, and went to Jeroboam's Calves-Houses; whereas formerly he had preached
of a People, that would own the Teachings of God; and that Men and Women should
come to declare the Gospel. Now it was told him, That the Old Mass-Houses,
which were called Churches, were more like Jeroboam's Calves-houses; though Men
strove to persuade People that such a Building was the House of God: Whereas
Christ was the Head of the Church, and never was called the Head of an old
House; and that the Apostle speaking of Christ, said, Whose House we are, Heb.
iii. 6. This Passage puts me in Mind, how some of the Parliament Soldiers,
observing, over some of the Steeple-house-Doors, these Words of the Patriarch
Jacob, when God had appeared to him in a Dream, This is none other but the
House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven, could not endure to see this
gross Conceit concerning those Buildings, but rased out the Words, of God, and,
of Heaven; so that nothing was left, but, This is none other but the House; and
This is the Gate: And certainly their Zeal was more reasonable than the Conceit
of those who think that in the Gospel-Days a building of Lime and Stone may be
called, The House of God. It seems also a silly Conceit to call a
Meeting House, furnished with a Steeple, a Church, and to deny that Name to the
Congregation-houses of Dissenters, calling them, and them only, Meeting Houses.
But this Notion has kept up the Esteem of those Mass-houses; and the Priests,
that they might not love their Gain of Burials, have endeavored to keep People
in the Belief, that the Ground of these Buildings was holy: And this gave
Occasion to the People called Quakers, to call those Buildings, Steeple Houses.
Occasion of the W^rd Steeple Houses.
Now since a fantastical Man I have very well known in Holland, conversing
there among the People of that Persuasion, undertook to translate that
Denomination into Dutch, Gespitste huyzen, it gave Occasion to some Latin
Writers in Germany, to complain, That the Quakers scornfully called their
Temples, Domus acuminatas. And though Croese also in his Historia Quakeriana
concerning them, Templa cuncti Quakeri contu^eliose vocabant aedes pyramidatas,
yet he knew better. But this Digression has led me off from G. Fox, whom I left
at Vlverstone, where he went to the Steeple-house, whilst Priest Lampit was
preaching. And when G. Fox began to speak, Just. Sawrey.
John Sawrey the Justice came to him, and said, If he would speak according to
the Scriptures; he should speak. G. Fox told him, He should speak according to
the Scriptures, and bring the Scriptures to prove what he had to say. But then
Sawrey; contradicting himself, said, he should not speak, and incensing the
People against him, they fell upon G. Fox, knocked him down, kicked him, and
trampled upon him. At last Sawrey came, took him from the People, and led him
out of the Steeple-house, bidding the Constables to whip him. Then he was
dragg^d out of the Town, and given up to the Rage of the rude Multitude, who
did so terribly beat him with Switches and Staves, that at length fainting, he
fell down upon the wet Common; but recovering again, and being strengthened by
an immediate Power, he stood up again, and stretching out his Arms, he said
with a loud Voice, Strike again, here are my Arms, my Head, and my Cheeks. Then
a Mason gave him such a heavy Blow over the Back of his Hand with his Rule,
that it was much bruised, and his Arm so benumbed, that he could not draw it to
him again, so that some of the People cried out, He has spoiled his Hand for
ever. But he being preserved through the Love of God, stood still, and after a
while, he felt such an extraordinary strengthening Power, that he instantly
recovered Strength in his Hand and Arm. This made the People fall out among
themselves; and some said, If he would give them Money, they would secure him
from the rest. But he, instead of doing so, showed them their false
Christianity, and told them, they were more like Jews and Heathens, than true
Christians; and that their Fruits were an Evidence of the unprofitable Ministry
of their Priests. Then he felt himself moved to return to Vlverstone, and went
into the Market there* And as he went, a Soldier meeting him, said Sir, I see
you are a Man, and I am ashamed and grieved that you should be thus abused. But
G. Fox told him, The Lord's Power was over all. And this he experienced also,
when he walked through the People in the Market; for none of them had Power to
touch him then, tho some of his Friends were abused. And he seeing the Soldier
among them, with his naked Rapier, bid him, put up his Sword again if he would
go along with him; for he was willing to draw him out of the Company, lest some
Mischief should be done: And yet a few Days after, seven Men fell upon this
Soldier, and beat him cruelly, because he had taken Part with G. Fox, and his
Friends.

G. Fox now having performed his Service at Vlverstone, came again to
Swarthmore, Swarthmore.
where he found several of his Friends dressing their Wounds and Bruises
received by the Hearers of Priest Lampitt. And now the Priests began to
prophesy again, That within half a Year the Quakers should all be put down and
gone. But they reckoned wrong; for it fa^ed with those People, as with Trees,
which grow best when most lopped. Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus, per damna,
per cades, ab ipso ducit opes animumque ferro.

G. Fox keeping in continual Motion, J. Naylor. Walney-Island. Cockan.
went with James Naylor to Walney-Island, having first had a Meeting at a
little Town called Cockan, after which a Man came to him with a Pistol, and
held it at him, but it would not go off. G. Fox then zealously speaking to him,
he was so struck, that he trembled with Fear, and went away. The next Morning
G. Fox went over in a Boat to James Lancaster's, J. Lancaster.
and as soon as he came to Land, about forty Men with Staves, Clubs, and
Fishing-Poles, fell upon him, beating and punching him, and endeavored to
thrust him backward into the Sea: But he pressing on, was knocked down, and
stunned. When he came to himself again, he saw James Lancaster's Wife throwing
Stones at his Face, and her Husband James was lying over him, to keep the Blows
and the Stones from off him: For the People had persuaded this Woman, that G.
Fox had bewitched her Husband, and promised her to kill him when he came
thither. But the Lord, by his invisible Power preserved him wonderfully, so
that they could not take away his Life. At length he got up, but was soon beat
down again into the Boat; which James Lancaster observing, came to him, and set
him over the Water. Being come to the other Side, they saw how the wicked Crew
was fallen upon James Naylor, with an horrible Cry, Kill him, kill him: For
whilst they had been beating of G. Fox, they had not minded Naylor, who was
walking up into a Field.

G. Fox being now come again to Cockan, met with no better Entertainment, for
the People came on with Pitchforks, Flails, and Staves, to keep him out of the
Town, crying, Kill him, Knock him on the Head. But he was preserved alive; and
after having been much abused, they drove him a pretty Way out of the Town, and
left him. Then James Lancaster went back to look after James Naylor. In the
mean while G. Fox went to a Ditch of Water, and washed himself from the Blood
and Dirt: After which he walked about three Miles to the House of one Thomas
Hutton, T. Hutton.
but was so bruised, that he could hardly speak; only he told where he left
James Naylor. Whereupon the said Hutton, and Thomas Lawson, Priest Lawson.
the Priest mentioned before, (who lodg^d then at Hutton's House) took each of
them a Horse, to see if they could find J. Naylor; and they lighting on him,
brought him thither that Night. Margaret Fell the next Day hearing what ^as
befallen G. Fox, Marg. Fell. Judge Fell defeats the Design of Justice Sawrey
and Thompson.
sent an Horse for him; but he was so sore bruised, that he was not able to
bear the Shaking of the Horse, without much Pain. When he was come to
Swarthmore, the Justices Sawrey and Thompson, gave forth a Warrant against him;
but Judge Fell coming home, made it ineffectual, and sent out Warrants into the
Isle of Walney, to apprehend all those riotous Persons: Whereupon some of them
^ed the Country. But what is remarkable, James Lancaster's Wife, who so
wickedly behaved her self, repented so of her Evil, that she became afterward
one of G. Fox's Friends.

Judge Fell now desired of G. Fox a Relation of what had befaln him: But he was
backward, and said, That those People could not do otherwise in the Spirit they
were; and that they manifested the Fruits of their Priests Ministry. Which made
the Judge afterward say to his Wife: G. Fox spoke of the Thing as a Man that
had not been concerned.

The Occasion upon which a Warrant was issued out against him, was, a Design
the Priests had laid to touch his Life; in Order to which, a Report was spread,
that in a certain Meeting he had spoken Blasphemy; and they to maintain this
Forgery, had suborned false Witnesses. The Time of the Sessions at Lancaster
being come, G. Fox went thither with Judge Fell, who on the Way told him, That
such a Matter had never been brought before him, and that he did not know what
to do in the Case. But G. Fox said, When Paul was brought before the Rulers,
and the Jews and Priests accused him of many false Things, he stood still all
that while, till they had done; and when they had done, Felix the Governor
beckoned to him to speak for himself. And so, said G. Fox, thou may do by me.

Being come to Lancaster, at the Sessions, there appeared about forty Priests
against him; Priest Marshal.
and these had chosen one Marshal, Priest of Lancaster, to be their Speaker;
and the Witnesses they had provided, were a young Priest, and two Priest's
Sons. A young Priest and two Priests Sons false Witnesses against G. Fox.
When the Justices were set, and had heard all the Charges of the Priests and
Witnesses; which were, that G. Fox had said, That God taught Deceit; and that
the Scripture contained but a Parcel of Lies; the Witnesses were examined upon
Oath; but they were so confounded, and at such a Loss, that one of them, not
being able to answer directly to what was asked him, said, The other could say
it; which made the Justices say, Have you sworn it, and do you now say, that
the other can say it? It seems you did not hear those Words spoken your self,
though you have given it i^ upon your Oath. There were several Persons in the
Court, who declared that they had heard one of the two Priests Sons say, If he
had Power, he would make George deny his Profession; and that he would take
away his Life. The young Priest, who also was a Witness, confessed, that he
should not have meddled with the Thing, had not another Priest sent for him,
and set him on Work. After all the Accusations had been heard, several Men of
Reputation in the Country affirmed in Court, That no such Words, as had been
sworn against G. Fox, were spoken by him at the Meeting; for most of the
serious Men on that Side of the Country, that were then at the Sessions, had
been at that Meeting, wherein the Witnesses swore he spoke the aforesaid
blasphemous Words. Colonel West, being a Justice of Peace, and then upon the
Bench, was so well pleased with these Evidences, that he (having long been weak
in Body) said, He blessed the Lord that had healed him that Day, adding, that
he never saw so many sober People, and good Faces together in all his Life. And
then turning himself to G. Fox, said, George, If thou have any Thing to say to
the People, thou may freely declare it. Then he began to speak; but Priest
Marshal, the Orator for the other Priests, went away presently. Now that which
G. Fox declared was, That the Holy Scriptures were given forth by the Spirit of
God; and that all People must first come to the Spirit of God in themselves, by
which they might know God and Christ, of whom the Prophets and Apostles learnt,
and also know the Holy Scriptures: For as the Spirit of God was in them that
gave forth the Scripture; so the same Spirit of God must also be in those that
come to know and understand the Scriptures: By which Spirit they might have
Fellowship with the Father, and with the Son, and with one another: And that
without that Spirit, they could know neither God, nor Christ, nor the
Scriptures, nor have right Fellowship with one another. No sooner had he spoken
these Words, but about half a Dozen Priests burst out into Passion, and one of
them, whose Name was Jackus, Priest Jackus greatly confused.
said, That the Spirit and the Letter were inseparable: Which made G. Fox
answer, Then every one that has the Letter, has the Spirit; and they might
buy the Spirit with the Letter of the Scripture: To which Judge Fell, and
Colonel West added, That according to that Position, they might carry the
Spirit in their Pockets, as they did the Scriptures. The Justices also bid
Jackus prove what he had said. But he finding himself caught, would have denied
it: And the other Priests endeavored to disguise his Words with a pretended
Meaning. But the Justices would admit no other Meaning, than the plain Sense of
the Words. And seeing the Witnesses did not agree, G. F. cleared in open
Sessions.
and perceiving that they were set on by the Envy of the Priests, they
discharged him: And after Judge Fell had spoken to the Justices Sawrey and
Thompson, concerning the Warrant they had given forth against G. Fox, showing
that this tended to encourage such Riots as those in the Isle of Walney, he and
Colonel West granted a Supersedeas to stop the Execution of the said Warrant.

G. Fox being thus cleared in open Sessions, Several Persons of (...) convinced.
many People rejoiced, and were that Day convinced of the Truth declared by him
in the Court; and among these, one Justice Benson, and the Mayor of Lancaster,
T. Briggs.
whose Name was Ripan; also one Thomas Briggs, who had been very averse to, and
an Opposer of the Quakers so called; and this same Briggs became afterward a
faithful Minister of the Gospel amongst them, and remained so to the End of his
Days.

G. Fox stay^d yet some Days at Lancaster. But to relate all that he and his
Friends met with, is not my Intention; for to set down at large all such
Occurrences, would be a Work requiring more Leisure and Strength than can be
expected of me: And therefore I intend on^y to describe what I find most
remarkable; though many notable Things have happened, of which I could not fully
be informed in every Circumstance, as Name, Place, Time, etc. But it is
probable that this may give Occasion in England to some other Author after me,
to make such Discoveries, that Posterity will wonder at it. For such Abuses as
G. Fox met with, was the Share also of many others of his Friends, especially
the Preachers, who this Year were no less than twenty five in Number; and
almost in every Place where they came, they met with Opposition, and became as
it were the Prey of the rude Multitude. But neither the Bea^ing, Buffeting, nor
Stoning of the mad Rabble, nor the Jails or Whippings that befell them from the
Magistrates, were able to stop the Progress of the Doctrine they preach^d to
the People in Marke^s, and Streets, and also in Steeple Houses: And many even
of those that had been en^ag'd like Wolves, became afterward like Lambs, and
suffered patiently from others, what formerly they themselves in a blind Zeal
had committed.

Thus the Quakers, so called, by a firm and lasting Patience, have surmoun^ed
the greatest Difficulties, and are at length become a numerous People, many not
valuing their own Lives, when they met with any Opportunity, for the Service of
God. And though their Enemies, on this Account, have charged them with
Stubbornness and Obstinacy, yet they meekly resigned to what befell them, well
knowing that thus to be accused has been always the Lot of those who suffered
for the Testimony of Truth. Neither could they be charged with Resistance, or
making head against their Persecutors; for one Man did sometimes lead a great
many of them to Prison, who never forsook their Religious Assemblies, how hot
soever Persecution was. That this was also the Practice of the Primitive
Christians, appears by what Cyprian (who died a Martyr) wrote to Dem^tr^^^,
viz. Nemo nostrum, quando apprehenditur, reluctatur: ne^ so adversus in^ustan^
violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copi^sus sit noster populus, ulc^^citur.
And therefore (...) my Reader think, that these that I have described, have been
the greatest Sufferings of this harmless People; for I believe them to have
been an hundred Times more than my Pen will be able to mention. But I take up
again the Thread of my Relation.

G. Fox being acquitted by the Court, as nath been said, it made the Priests
fret to hear it cri^d about, That the Priests had lost the Day, and that the
Quakers had kept the Field. To revenge this, they got some envious Justices to
join with them, who at the following Assizes at Lancaster, Judge Windham's
Contest with Colonel West about G. Fox (...) the Assizes.
informed Judge Windham against G. Fox; which so prevailed upon him, that he
commanded Colonel West, who was Clerk of the Assizes, to issue forth a Warrant
for apprehending him. But the said Colonel telling the Judge of his Innocence,
spoke boldly in his Defense. The Judge offended at this, commanded him again,
either to write a Warrant, or to go off from his Seat. Then the Colonel told
him in plain Terms, That he would not do it, but that he would offer up all his
Estate, and his Body also for G Fox. Thus the Judge was stopped; and G. Fox
coming that Night to Lancaster, heard of a Warrant to be given out against him,
and therefore judged it better to show himself openly, than to make his
Adversaries seek him. So he went to the Chambers of Judge Fell, and Colonel
West; and as soon as he came in, they smiled, and the Colonel said, What! are
you come into the Dragon's Mouth? But G. Fox was always undaunted, and did not
use to ^linc^h in Danger. So he stayed some Days in Town, and walked up and
down there, without being meddled with, or questioned by any. Yet his Friends
in the mean while did not suffer the less; for all Villainy or Insolence that
could be thought of, was not judged by some to be too bad to vex them. It was
about this Time that Richard Hubberthorn, and several others were haled out of
a Meeting by some wicked Men, R. Hubberthorn.
and carried some Distance off into the Fields, where they bound them, and left
them so in the Winter-Season.

G. Fox being now come again to Swarthmore, wrote several Letters to the
Magistrates and Priests who had raised Persecution thereabouts. That to Justice
John Sawrey was very sharp, and after this Manner:

Friend,
THOU wast the first Beginner of all the Persecution in the North: Thou wast
the first Stirrer of them up against the Righteous Seed, and against the Truth
of God; and wast the first Strengthner of the Hands of Evildoers against the
Innocent and Harmless: And thou shall not prosper. Thou wast the first Stirrer
up of Strikers, Stoners, Persecutors, Stockers, Mockers, and Imprisoners, in
the North, and of Revilers, Slanderers, Railers, and false Accusers, and
Scandal-Raisers: This was thy Work, and this thou stirredst up! So thy Fruits
declare thy Spirit. Instead of stirring up the pure Mind in People, thou have
stirred up the Wicked, Malicious and Envious; and taken Hand with the Wicked.
Thou have made the People's Minds Envious up and down the Country: This was thy
Work. But God has shortened thy Days, and limited thee, and set thy Bounds, and
broken thy Jaws, and discovered thy Religion to the Simple and Babes, and
brought thy Deeds to L^ght. How is thy Habitation fallen, and become the
Habitation of ^^v^ls! How is thy Beauty lost, and thy Glory withered! How have
thou showed thy End, that thou have served God but with thy Lips, and thy Heart
far from him, and thou in the Hypocrisy! How has the Form of thy Teaching
declared it self to be the Mark of the false Prophets, whose Fruit declares it
self! for by their Fruits they are known. How are the Wise Men turned backward!
View thy Ways, and take Notice, with whom thou have taken Part. That of God in
thy Conscience will tell thee; The Ancient of Days will reprove thee. How has
thy Zeal appeared to be the Blind Zeal; a Persecutor, which Christ and his
Apostles forbad Christians to follow! How have thou strengthened the Hands of
Evildoers, and been a Praise to them, and not to them that do well! How like a
Madman, and a Blind-man did thou turn thy Sword backward against the Saints,
against whom there is no Law! How will thou be gnawed and burned one Day, when
thou shall feel the Flame and have the Plagues of God poured upon thee, and
thou begin to gnaw thy Tongue for Pain, because of the Plagues! Thou shall have
thy Reward according to thy Works: Thou can not escape; the Lord's righteous
Judgment will find thee out, and the Witness of God in thy Conscience shall
answer it. How have thou caused the Heathen to blaspheme, and gone on with the
Multitude to do Evil, and joined hand in hand with the Wicked! How is thy
latter End worse than thy Beginning, who art come with the Dog to bite, and art
turned as a Wolf, to devour the Lambs! How have thou discovered thy self to be
a Man more fit to be kept in a Place to be nurtured, than to be set in a Place
to nurture! How wast thou exalted and puffed up with Pride! And now art thou
fallen down with Shame, that thou come to be covered with that, which thou
stirredst up, and broughest forth. Let not John Sawrey take the Words of God
into his Mouth, till he be Reformed: Let him not take his Name into his Mouth,
till he depart from Iniquity. Let not him and his Teacher make a Profession of
the Saints Words, except they intend to proclaim themselves Hypocrites, whose
Lives are so contrary to the Lives of the Saints; whose Church has made it
self mani^est to be a Cage of Unclean Birds. You having a Form of Godliness,
but not the Power, have made them that be in the Power, your Derision, your
Byword, and your Talk at your Feasts. Thy ill Savor, John Sawrey, the Country
about have smelled, and of thy unchristian Carriage all that fear God have been
ashamed; and to them thou have been a Grief: In the Day of Account thou shall
know it, even in the Day of thy Condemnation. Thou wast mounted up, and had
set thy Nest on high; but never gottest higher than the Fowls of the Air: But
now thou art run amongst the Beasts of Prey, and art fallen into the Earth; so
that Earthliness and Covetousness have swallowed thee up: and thy Conceitedness
would not carry thee through, in whom was found the selfish Principle, which
has blinded thy Eye. Thy Back must be bowed down always; for thy Table is
already become thy Snare.

G. F.


Sharp indeed was this Letter; but G. Fox thought himself moved thereto by the
Lord: And it is remarkable that this Justice Sawrey, who was the first
Persecutor in those Parts, The first; Persecutor in th^se Parts afterward
drowned. Westmorland Just. Benson.
afterward was drowned, and so died not a natural Death. To the Priest William
Lampitt he writ also, and another Letter to others, to reprove them for their
Wickedness. Some Time after he went to Westmorland, where Mischief was intended
against him; but it was prevented by Justice Benson, and some considerable Men
besides. Coming to Grayrigg, he had a Meeting there; where a Priest came to
oppose, but was confounded; and there being many People, Grayrigg.
some of the Milk-Pails that stood upon the Side of the House, tumbled down, by
Reason of the Crowd; from which the Priest afterward raised a Slander, That
the Devil frighted him, and took away one Side of the House. And though this was
a known Falsehood, yet it was given out as true in public Print.

Another Time this Priest came to another Meeting and fell to jangling, saying
first, That the Scriptures were the Word of God. To which G. Fox said, That
they were the Words of God, but not Christ, who is the Word: And when he urged
the Priest for Proof of what he had said, the Priest being at a Loss, was not
long before he went away. Some Time after he coming again to a Meeting, and
hearing that G. Fox directed the People to Christ Jesus, the Priest taking out
his Bible, said, It was the Word of God. Then G. Fox told him, It was the Words
of God; but not God, the Word. The Priest however persisted in what he had
said; and offered to prove before all the People, the Scriptures to be the Word
of God. But this Quarrel tending to vain Logomachies, or Contests about Words,
ended in Confusion; and many of the Priests Followers came to see the Vanity of
his Assertions.

The Year being now come to an End, Public Transactions.
and a War kindled between England and Holland, King Charles the II. then in
Exile, asked the Dutch to be received in their Navy, as a Volunteer, without
any Command: But this was courteously refused by the States General. Oliver
Cromwell, in the mean while, strove for the supreme Authority in England, the
more, because he perceived how some of the Parliament, jealous of his
increasing Greatness, endeavored to cross him in his Design. This made him
labor to get the Parliament dissolved: But they not going on so quickly as he
would have them, to put a Period to their Sitting, he resolved arbitrarily to
make an End of them. And entering the House in the Month called April, 1653,
after having rudely inveighed against them, by telling them, That they had made
a bad Use of their Authority, and that without their Dissolution the Realm
would not be safe, Oliver dissolves the Parliament.
etc. He at length cried out, You are no Parliament: And then ordering some
Musketeers to enter, he made the Members depart the House, and ordered the
Doors to be shut; putting thus an End to this Assembly, that had been sitting
nigh thirteen Years.

But what is remarkable, G. Fox not long before being come to Swarthmore, and
hearing Judge Fell and Justice Benson discourse together concerning the
Parliament, For^told by G. Fox.
he told them, That before that Day two Weeks the Parliament should be broken
up, and the Speaker plucked out of his Chair. And thus it really happened: For
at the breaking up of the Parliament, the Speaker being unwilling to come out
of his Chair, said, That he would not come down unless he were forced: Which
made General Harrison say to him, Sir, I will lend you my Hand; and thereupon
taking him by the Hand, the Speaker came down. This agreed with what G. Fox had
predicted. And a Fortnight after, Justice Benson told Judge Fell, That now he
saw George was a true Prophet; since Oliver had by that Time dissolved the
Parliament.

Now in Cumberland great Threatenings were spread, That if ever G. Fox came
there again, they would take away his Life. He hearing this, went thither;
Swartmore. Just. Pearson convinced.
but no Body did him any Harm. Returning then to Swarthmore, where Justice
Anthony Pearson was at that Time, he so effetually declared Truth, that this
Justice was convinced, and not long after entered into the Society of the
despised Quakers. Bootle in Cumberland.
G. Fox then going again into Cumberland, went to Bootle, and there found
preaching in the Steeple-house, a Priest from London, who gathered up all the
Scriptures he could think of, that spoke of False Prophets, Antichrists, and
Deceivers, 1663
and made Application of them to the Quakers. But when he had done, George
began to speak, and returned all those Scripture Places on the Priest; who
being displeased at this, said, That he must not speak there. But G. Fox told
him, That the Hourglass being run, and he having done, the Time was free for
him as well as for the Priest, who was himself but a Stranger there. He having
said this, went on, and showed who were the False Prophets, and what Marks the
Scriptures gave of them; directing People to Christ their Teacher. When he had
done, the Priest of the Place made a Speech to the People in the Steeple-house
Yard, and said, This Man has gotten all the honest Men and Women in Lancashire
to him; and now he comes here to do the same. To which G. Fox returned, What
will thou have left? And what have the Priests left them, but such as
themselves? For if it be the Honest that receive the Truth, and are turned to
Christ; then it must be the Dishonest that follow thee, and such as thou art.
Some Words were also exchanged about Tithes; and G. Fox told them, That Christ
had ended the Tything-Priestood, and had sent forth his Ministers to give
freely, as they had received freely.

From thence he went to Cockermouth, Cockermouth. J. Lancaster speaking under a
Tree.
near which Place he had appointed a Meeting; and coming thither, he found
James Lancaster speaking under a Tree, which was so full of People, that it was
in Danger of breaking. G. Fox now looked about for a Place to stand upon, for
the People lay spread up and down. But at length a Person came to him, and
asked, If he would not go into the Church? He seeing no Place more convenient
to speak to the People, told him, Yes. Whereupon the People rushed in on a
sudden; so that he coming, (the House was so full of People) had much ado to
get in. When they were settled, he stood up on a Seat, and preached about three
Hours; and several Hundreds were that Day convinced of the Truth of his
Doctrine.

From thence he went to other Places, Brigham.
and particularly to Brigham, where he preached in the Steeple-house with no
less Success. Afterward coming into a certain Place, and casting his Eye upon
a Woman unknown to him, he told her that she had lived a lewd Life: To which
she answered, That many could tell her of her outward Sins, but of her inward,
none could. Then he told her, Her Heart was not right before the Lord: And she
was so reached, that afterward she came to be convinced of God's Truth.

Then he came near Coldbeck, Coldbeck.
to a Market Town, where he had a Meeting at the Cross, and some received the
Truth preached by him.

From thence he went to Carlisle, Carlisle.
where the Teacher of the Baptists, with most of his Hearers, came to the Abbey
in which G. Fox had a Meeting. After the Meeting, the Baptist Teacher, who was
a Notionist, and an airy Man, came to him, and asked, What must be damned? And
he told him, That which spoke in him was to be damned. And this stopped his
Mouth. Then he opened to him the States of Election and Reprobation, so that he
said, He never heard the like in his Life; and came afterward also to be
convinced of the Truth. Then he went up to the Castle among the Soldiers, who
by beating of the Drum called the Garrison together. Amongst these he preached,
Directing them to the Measure of the Spirit of Christ in themselves, by which
they might be turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to
God: He warned them also to do no Violence to any Man, etc. G. Fox having thus
discharged himself, none opposed him, except the Sergeants, who afterward came
to be convinced. On the Market Day he went into the Market, 1653
though he had been threatened, that if he came there he would meet with rude
Treatment. But he willing to obey God more than Man, showed himself undaunted,
and going upon the Cross, he declared, That the Day of the Lord was coming upon
all deceitful Ways and Doings, and deceitful Merchandise; and that they should
put away all cozening and chea^ing, and keep to Yea and Nay, and speak the
Truth to one another.

On the First Day following, he went into the Steeple-house, and after the
Priest had done, he began to preach. Now the Priest going away, and the
Magistrate desiring G. Fox to depart, he still went on, and told them, He came
to speak the Word of Life and Salvation from the Lord amongst them. And he
spoke so powerfully, that the People trembled and shook, and they thought the
Steeple-house shook also; nay, some of them feared it would have fallen down on
their Heads. Some Women in the mean while making a great Bustle, at length the
rude People of the City rose, and came with Scaves and Stones into the
Steeple-house. Whereupon the Governor sent some Musketeers to appease the
Tumult; and these taking G. Fox by the Hand in a friendly Manner, led him out.
Then he came to the House of a Lieutenant, where he had a very quiet Meeting.
The next Day the Justices and Magistrates sent for him to come before them in
the Town Hall. So he went thither, and had a long Discourse with them
concerning Religion, and shew^d them, that though they were great Professors
(viz. Presbyterians, and Independents) yet they were without the Possession of
what they professed. But after a long Examination, they committed him to Prison
as a Blasphemer, an Heretic, and a Seducer. There he lay till the Assizes came
on, and then all the Talk was, That he was to be hanged: And the High Sheriff,
Willfrey Lawson, was so eager to have his Life taken away, Sheriff Lawson.
that he said, He himself would guard G. Fox to Execution. This made such a
Noise, that even great Ladies came to see him, as one that was to die. But though
both Judge and Magistrates were contriving how they might put him to Death, yet
the Judges Clark started a Question which puzzled them, and confounded their
Councils, so that he was not brought to a Trial, as was expected* which however
was contrary to Law. But such was their Envy against him, that the Jailor was
ordered to put him among Thieves and Murderers, and some naughty Women; which
wicked Crew was so lousy, that one Woman was almost eaten to Death with Lice:
But what made the Prison the worse, there was no House of Office to it, and in
this nasty Place, Men and Women were put together, against all Decency. Yet
these Prisoners, how naught soever, were very loving to G. Fox, and so
hearkened to his wholesome Counsel, that some of them became Converts. But the
Under-Jailor did him all the Mischief he could. Once when he had been a^ the
Grate to take in the Meat his Friends brought him, the Jailor fell a beating of
him with a great Cu^gel, crying, Come out of the Window, though he was then far
enough from it. But whilst the Jailor was thus beating him, he was so filled
with Joy, that he began to sing, which made the other rage the more, so that he
went and fetched a Fiddler, thinking thereby to vex him. But when this Fellow
played, he sang a Hymn so loud, that with his Voice he drowned the Sound of the
Fiddle, and thereby so confounded the Player, that he was fain to give over,
and go his Ways.

Not long after, Justice Benson's Wife felt her self moved to eat no Meat, but
what she should eat with G. Fox at the Bars of the Dungeon-Window. Afterward
she herself was imprisoned at York, when she was big with Child, for having
spoken, it is like, zealously to a Priest. And when the Time of her Travel came,
J. Parnel visiting G. Fox in Carlisle Dungeon, becomes a powerful Minister of
the Gospel.
she was not suffered to go out, but was delivered of her Child in the Prison.

Whilst G. Fox was in the Dungeon at Carlisle, there came to see him, one James
Parnel, a little Lad of about sixteen Years of Age; and he was so effectually
reached by the speaking of G. Fox, that he became convinced of the Truth of his
Sayings; and notwithstanding his Youth, was by the Lord quickly made a powerful
Minister of the Gospel, showing himself both with his Pen, and his Tongue, a
zealous Promoter of Religion, although he underwent hard Sufferings on that
Account, as will be mentioned hereafter. And so there were many others, who not
sticking at any Adversities, came to be zealous Preachers of Repen^ance. Among
these was also Thomas Briggs, T. Brigg's Message of Repentance.
already mentioned, who went through many Cities, Towns and Villages, with this
Message: Repent, Repent, for the mighty terrible Day of the Lord God of Power
is appearing, wherein no Worker of Iniquity shall stand before him, who is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; for he wills not he Death of a Sinner; and
if ye repent, and turn to him, he will abundantly pardon. Sometimes he went
into Markets and Steeple Houses, and was often cruelly abused. Once being in a
Steeple-house at Warrington in Lancashire, He is cruelly abused at Warrinton in
Lancashire.
and speaking a few Words after the Priest had done, he was very violently
knocked on his Head: After which, a Man taking hold of his Hair, smote him
against a Stone, and pulled off an Handful of it; which Thomas taking up from
the Ground, mildly said, Not one Hair of my Head shall fall without my Father's
Permission. At another Time he speaking to a Priest in Cheshire, as he was
going in his Journey, the Priest was much offended at him; and one of his
Hearers, as it were in Revenge of this pretended A^f^ont, struck him on the
Head, and knocked him down; but Thomas getting up again, and turning his Face to
the Smi^er, he smote him on his Teeth, so that the Blood gushed out
exceedingly; which some of the Standers by could not but cry out against. But
not long after, the Man that struck him thus, fell sick, and died, crying upon
his Deathbed, Oh that I had not smitten the Quaker! This Thomas once going
through Salisbury, and calling the Inhabitants to Repentance, was apprehended, and
brought before several Justices, who profer'd him the Oath, under Pretense of
his being a Jesuit. But he saying, He could not swear, because Christ had
commanded, not to swear at all, was sent to Prison, where he was kept a Month.
He also went up and down the Streets of Yarmouth, Yarmouth.
proclaiming The terrible Day of the Lord, that all might repent and fear Him
that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea. And being followed by a great
Multitude of rude People; and turning about, he spoke so powerfully to them,
and with such piercing Words, that they ran away for Fear. At length an Officer
came and took hold of him; but leading him gently, he had Opportunity to
continue preaching to the People, and to clear himself. And being brought
before the Magistrates, they ordered him to be led out of the Town; which being
done, Thomas came into the Town again by another Way, and having performed his
Service there to his Satisfaction, At Lin a Mast^ff Dog set at him fawns upon
him.
he departed the Town. Being come to Lin, and warning People to repent, a great
Mastiff Dog was set upon him; but the Dog coming near him, fawned upon him.
Thus he went through many Places, passing sometimes five or six Towns in one Day;
and though Swords were drawn against him, or Axes taken up to hew him down, yet
he went on, and spoke so awfully, that even some, who did not sue his Face,
were so reached by the Power that accompanied him, that they became Converts.
Coming to Clayzons in Wales, Great Stones cast upon him at Clayzons in Wales.
and many ^earing him attentively, the Constable stirr^d up the rude People,
and cried, Kill him, kill him, as if he had been a mad Dog; and they threw such
great Ston^^ upon him, that he admired they did not kill him; but he was
preserved by such a mighty Power, that, according to his Relation, they were to
him as a Nut, or a Bean. Many other rude Encounters he met with, but was
preserved wonderfully in the greatest Dangers; which strengthened him not a
little in the Belief, that God, who so miraculously sav^d him, did require this
Service from him. He was also in America, and dy^d in a good old Age, after
having labour^d about thirty Years in the Service o^ the Gospel.

Miles Halhead was also one of the first zealous Preachers among the Quakers,
M. Halhead the first of those called Quakers, impris^n^d at Kendal.
so called. He was the first of those of his Persuasion that was imprisoned at
Kendal. Once he went to Swarthmore to visit his Friends, and to assist at their
Meeting: By the Way he met the Wi^e of the Justice Thomas Preston; and because
he passed by her quietly, without the ordinary Way of Greeting, Just* Preston's
Wife's haughty and proud Carriage to him.
she grew so offended, that ^he commanded her Man to go back and beat him;
which he did: At which Miles being kindled with Zeal, said to her; O thou
Jezabel! thou proud Jezabel! Can thou not permit and suffer the Servant of
the Lord to pass by thee quietly? She then held forth her Hands, as if she
would have struck him, and spit in his Face, saying, I scorn to fall down at
thy Words. This made Miles say again, Thou proud Jezabel thou that hardenest
thy Heart, and brazenest thy Face against the Lord, and his Servant, the Lord
will plead with thee in his own Time, and set in Order before thee the Things
that thou have done this Day to his Servant. And so he parted with her, and
went to Swarthmore. About three Months after this he felt himself moved to go
and speak to her; and when he came to Houlker-Hall, he asked for Thomas
Preston's Wife. She then coming to the Door, and Miles not knowing her, asked
her, If she was the Woman of the House. To which she said, No; but if you would
speak with Mistress Preston, I will entreat her to come to you. Then, she went
in, and coming back with another Woman, said, Here is Mistress Preston. But
then it was manifested to him, that she her self was the Woman. It is true, he
had, as has been said, some Time before, seen her on the Way, and spoken to
her; but it may be she was then in so different a Dress, that by Reason thereof
he did not now know her; yet firmly believing that it was she, he said, Woman,
How dare thou lie before the Lord and his Servant? Thou art the Woman I came
to speak to. And she being silent, not speaking a Word, he proceeded, Woman,
hear what the Lord's Servant has to say unto thee: O Woman, harden not thy
Heart against thy Lord; for if thou do he will cut thee off in his sore
Displeasure; therefore take Warning in Time, and fear the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, that thou may end thy Days in Peace. Having said this, he went
away, she, now proud soever, not doing him any Harm, being withheld, without
knowing by what: But, notwithstanding that, she continued the same: For several
Years after, when G. Fox was Prisoner at Lancaster, she came to him, and
belch^d out many railing Words, saying, amongst the rest; That his Tongue
should be cut off, and he be hanged. But some Time after the Lord cut her off,
and she died, as it was reported, in a miserable Condition. But before I leave
this Woman, I must also say; that about three Years after she had made her Man
beat Miles, it happened that as he was riding from Swarthmore near to
Houlker-Hall, he met with a Person who said to him, Friend, I have something to
say unto you, which has lain upon me this long Time. I am the Man that, about
three Years ago, at the Command of my Mistress, did beat you very sore, for
which I have been very much troubled, more than for any thing that ever I did
in all my Life: For truly, Night and Day it has been often in thy Heart, that
I did not we^l in beating an innocent Man, that never did me any Hurt or Harm.
I pray you forgive me, and desire the Lord to forgive me, that I may be at
Peace and quiet in my Mind. To this Miles answered, Truly Friend, from that
Time to this Day, I never had any Thing in my Heart against thee, nor thy
Mistress, but Love; the Lord forgive you both; I desire that it may never be
laid to your Charge; for ye knew not what ye did. Here Miles stop^, and so went
his Ways. Many a notable Occurrence he had in his Li^e, and therefore he is to
appear yet more than once on the Course of this History.

Traveling once in Yorkshire, Laid for dead at Skipton in Yorkshire.
he came to Skipton, where declaring the Word of Truth, he was so sorely abused
and beaten, that he was said for dead; nevertheless, by the Lord's Power, he
was healed of all his Bruises, and within three Hours, he was healthy and sound
again, to the Astonishment of those that had so abused him, and to the
convincing of many that beheld him.

Then he went to Bradford, Is persecuted in other Places.
Leeds, and Hallifax, where he also declared the Doctrine of Truth amongst the
People; but not without meeting with great Persecution.

From thence he came to Doncaster, Sorely bruised, and left for dead at
Doncaster.
and there went on a First Day of the Week to a Steeple-house, where after the
Worship was done, he spoke to the Priest and People: But they, instead or
hearkening to what he said, fell upon him in a great Rage, and drove him out of
the Town; and he being sorely bruised, they left him for dead. But before his
going from home, he had been firmly persuaded, that the Lord would preserve him
in all Dangers; and it happened so to him according to his Belief; for he got
up again, and went to a Friend's House, where he laid himself down upon a Bed.
But not long after, he felt a very strong Motion to go to a certain Chapel,
and there to declare the Word of the Lord: Forthwith he felt also an inward
Assurance that if he gave up to do so, the Lord would heal him from his
Bruises. Then he rose, as well as he could, and came down Stairs with great
Difficulty, by taking hold of the Walls for a Stay; and going out, he began to
mend by Degrees; and coming at length into the Chapel, he spoke as he was
moved; and when he had cleared himself, he went back to the House from whence
he came, and the Lord made him sound of all his Bruises.

From thence he went to York, Travels through Yorkshire.
and there spoke to the Lord Mayor, and other Rulers of that City: And passing
through Yorkshire, he went into several Steeple Houses to exhort the People: And
though he met with great Hardships, yet he was supported by an invisible Hand. So
being clear of that Country, Returns to his House at Under-barrow in Westmorland
he returned to his House at Mountjoy in Vnder-barrow in the County of
Westmorland. But his going thus often from home, was an exceeding great Cross
to his Wife, who in the first Year of his Change, not being of his Persuasion,
was very much troubled in her Mind, and would often say from Discontent, Would
to God I had, married a Drunkard, then I might have found him at the Alehouse;
but now I cannot tell where to find my Husband. But after the Space of a Year,
it pleased the Lord to visit her. She had a little Son of about five Years of
Age, which Child the loved extraordinarily, insomuch, that she thought it was
her only Delight and Comfort. But it happen^d that this Darling dy^d, and some
Time after, she spoke thus to her Husband; A very remarkable Occurrence.
Truly Husband, I have something to tell thee: One Night, being in Bed,
mourning and lamenting with Tears in my Eyes, I heard a Voice, saying, Why art
thou so discontented concerning thy Husband: I have called and chosen him to my
Work; my Right Hand shall uphold him; therefore be thou content, and pleased,
that he serve me, and I will bless thee, and thy Children for his Sake; and all
Things shall prosper that thou shall take in Hand. But if thou will not be
content, but grudge, and murmur, and repine against me, and my Servant, whom I
have chosen to do my Work, I will bring a greater Cross upon thee. These Words
being fresh in my Mind both Night and Day; I often said within my self, What
Cross can this be, that would be greater than the Want of my Husband? But for
all this, I could not be content: All the Joy I had or could find, was in our
little Boy, who would often, when he saw me weeping and mourning, take me about
my Neck, and say, My dear Mother, pray be content, for my Father will come home
in a little Time. This Child would often comfort me in this Manner; but for all
that, I could not be content. Not long after it pleased the Lord to take from
me this my only Son, my chiefest Joy. Then the Voice which I had heard, came
into my Mind, and I perceiving that this was the Cross which the Lord would
bring upon me, smote upon my Breast, and said within my self, that I was the
very Cause why the Lord had taken away my little Son. A great Fear then seizing
upon me, I said, O Lord my God! give me Power to be content to give up my
Husband freely to do thy Will, lest, O Lord, thou take away from me all my
Children. From that Time I never durst oppose thee, my Husband, any more in the
Work of the Lord, for Fear that his Judgments might also fall upon me, and my
Children. This served not a little to strengthen Miles and to encourage him.
Some Time-after walking in his Garden, he felt a Motion to go to Stanly Chapel
in Lancashire. Stanly Chapel in Lancashire.
Now though he might expect to meet with rude Entertainment there, yet he
consulted not with Flesh and Blood, but went to the aforesaid Chapel. Being
come, he was not suffered to enter, but the Door was violently turned against
him. Then he walked in the Yard till the Worship was done, and then the People
that came out, (one may guess how edified) fell upon him with great Rage, Capt.
Rawlinson
and one Captain William Rawlinson took hold of his Arms and Shoulders, and
calling another Man to take him by the Feet and Legs, they threw him over the
Wall; by which Fall he was exceedingly bruised, so that he had much to do to
get home. By the Way it was inwardly said to him, That he must be content with
what was befa^n him that Day, and that if he was faithful in what the Lord
required of him, then he would heal him again. Being come home, he waited upon
the Lord to know his Will. In this Resignedness, within six Days, he was moved
to go to Windermore Steeple-house, and it was, as it were, said unto him, Fear
not the Face of any Man, but speak the Word of the Lord freely; and then thou
shall be made sound again of all thy Bruises. So he went to the said
Steeple-house, and having spoke to the Priest and the People the Word of the
Lord, without receiving any Harm, he was healed that Day of his sore Bruises.

Sometime after by another Motion he came to Furneiss in Lancashire, Furneiss
in Lancashire. Capt. Sands- Priest Lampitt.
to the House of Captain Adam Sands, where he found a great Number of
Professors gathered, and Priest Lampitt preaching. But as soon as Miles
entered, Lampitt was silent, which continuing a pretty while, Captain Sands
said to him, Sir, What Is the Matter? Are you not well? To which the Priest
answered, I am well, but I shall speak no more as long as this dumb Devil is in
the House. A dumb Devil, said the Captain, Where is he? This is he, said the
Priest, pointing with his Hand, that stands there. Then the Captain said,
This Man is quiet, and says nothing to you: I pray you, Sir, go on in the Name
of the Lord; and if he trouble or molest you in my House, I will send him to
Lancaster Castle. But the Priest said again, I shall not preach as long as this
dumb Devil is in the House. Then the Captain said to one Camelford, Priest
Camelford.
a Priest also, I pray you Sir, stand up, and exercise your Gift, and I will
see that you be not disturbed. But this Priest answered as the other, I shall
not speak as long as this dumb Devil is in the House. Then the People cried,
Lord, rebuke thee Satan, Lord, rebuke thee, Satan: What Manner of Spirit is
this that stops our Ministers Mouths? Then the Captain came to Miles, and
taking him by the Hand, led him out of the House. In all that Time he had not
spoke a Word, and saw now the Accomplishment of what he had been persuaded of
before, viz. That an invisible Power would confound by him the Wisdom of the
Priests, when he spoke never a Word. The said Camelford was one, who a good
while before had stirred up the Rabble against G. Fox; and the other was that
Lampitt, who has been mentioned already, and who had been so esteemed by
Margaret Fell, before she came to be acquainted with G. Fox.

Some Time after this Occurrence, Miles went to New Castle, and there said to
the Mayor, Rulers, and Priests of that Town, That God's Anger was kindled
against them, because they had shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and
would not enter themselves, nor suffer them that would. Because of this he was
imprisoned: But the Mayor being much troubled, sent for the Sheriff, (for these
two had committed Miles to Prison;) when come, he said to him, We have not done
well in committing an innocent Man to Prison: Pray let us release him. The
Sheriff consenting, Miles was set at Liberty. Then he declared the Word of the
Lord in those Parts, and many were convinced of the Truth held forth by him.
But now I part with this Miles Halhead, who hereafter is to be mentioned again.

About this Time, Secular Transactions.
viz. in the Summer, General Cromwell had called a new Parliament, consisting
mostly (as has been said by some) of Members of his own Choice; for it was a
certain Number of Persons out of each County and City in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, nominated by the Council of Officers, and sent for to meet at
Westminster: Into the Hands of these Cromwell delivered the Supreme Authority of
the Nation, by an Instrument, or Commission, signed by himself and the
Officers; but the Authority of this Meeting lasted scarce half a Year, as will
be said in the Sequel. To this Parliament a Report was made, That at Carlisle a
Person was imprisoned, who was to die for Religion. This was G. Fox, whom we
have left thus long in the Dungcon at Carlisle, G. Fox in Carlisle Dungeon.
and now are returning to him again. The Parliament then caused a Letter to be
sent down concerning him to the Sheriff, and other Magistrates: And G. Fox
knowing how scandalously he had been belied about speaking blasphemous Words,
gave forth a Paper, wherein he challenged all who found Fault with his
Doctrine, to appear in public; since he was ready to stand the Test of
whatsoever he might have spoken. He also wrote a significant Letter to the
Justices at Carlisle, wherein he showed them plainly the Injustice of their
Dealings, and the horrid Evil of Persecution, as having been always the Work of
the false Church. Mention has been made already of the Justices Benson and
Anthony Pearson: These had desired, more than once, Leave to visit G. Fox in
Prison; but this being denied them, they wrote a Letter to the Magistrates,
Priests, and People, at Carlisle; wherein they emphatically described the
Wickedness of Persecution, and what would be the Reward of Persecutors; saying
also, that these were worse than the Heathen, that put Paul into Prison;
because none of his Friends or Acquaintance were hindered by them from coming to
him. However, at length Pearson got an Opportunity to come with the Governor
into the Dungeon where G. Fox was kept; and they found the Place so bad, and o^
so noisome a Smell, that the Governor cried Shame of the Magistrates, for
suffering the Jailor to treat G. Fox after such a Manner; and calling the
Jailors into the Dungeon, required them to find Sureties for their good
Behavior, and put the Under-Jailor, who had been very cruel to G. Fox, into
the Dungeon with him. In the mean while, those who had imprisoned G. Fox, began
to grow afraid, the rather it may be, because the Parliament took Notice of
these Doings; and it was not long after, that he was released, and then coming
to the House of one Thomas Bewly, T. Bewly. Coldbeck in Cumberland.
near Coldbeck in Cumberland, there came a Baptist Teacher to oppose him; but
he sound what G. Fox spoke to be so efficacious, that he became convinced of
the Truth thereof. R.Widders.
At that Time there was also Robert Widders, who being moved to go to Coldbeck
Steeple-house, the Baptist Teacher went with him. Widders coming into the
Steeple-house, Hutton a Preacher.
there was one -- Hutton preaching; to whom he spoke; but the rude People threw
him down, and dragged him into the Yard, where they pusht and beat him, till
the Blood gushed out of his Mouth, so that he lay for Dead some Time: But a
certain Woman coming to him, held up his Head, so that at length he recovered
his Breath. The Baptist, who went along with him, had his Sword taken from him,
and was sorely beaten with it; yet this did not frighten or discourage him; and
he not only left off the Wearing of a Sword; but also freely gave up the
Inheritance of an Impropriation of Tithes. The same Day that this Preacher was
thus attacked with his own Sword, being the First of the Week, several of G.
Fox's Friends, and among them William Dewsbury, went, one to this, and others
to other Steeple Houses; and by such Means the Number of the said Friends
increased; though Dewsbury at that Time was so violently beaten by the People,
that he was almost killed; but the Lord's Power healed him again. But to return
to Robert Widders: He being recovered from the rude Treatment he met with, as
has been said, felt himself so encouraged anew, and strenghned in his
Undertakings, R. Widders reproves Priest Nichols at Ackton.
that he went, the same Day in the Afternoon, seven Miles to Ackton
Steeple-house, where he spoke to Priest Nichols, and calling him an Enemy of
Christ, told him also, that the Hand of the Lord was against him. Then William
Briscoe a Justice of Croston, commanded the Constable to secure Robert; which
he did, and carried him to the Priest's House, where being examined by the
Justice, the Priest began to fawn upon him: Thereupon Robert told the Priest,
That the Spirit of Persecution lodged in him. But the Priest said, No, he was
not such a Man. Yet presently after he said to the Justice, that Robert had
s^oln the Horse he came with, and that he could find in his Heart to be his
Executioner with his own Hands; which made Robert say, Did not I say unto thee,
that the Spirit of Persecution lodged in thee? For which Justice Briscoe gives
a Warrant to have him to Carlisle Jail.
Then the aforesaid Justice wrote a Warrant to send Robert to Carlisle Jail;
and after having given the Warrant to the Constable, he asked Robert, by what
Authority or Power he came to seduce and bewitch People? Robert answered, I
came not to seduce and bewitch People; but I came in that Power which shall
make thee, and all the Powers of the Earth, bend and bow before it, to wit, the
mighty Power of God. Whilst Robert was speaking thus, Recalls the Warrant, and
lets him go free.
the Dread of the Lord seized on the Justice, and so struck him, that he called
for his Warrant again, and took it out of the Constable's Hand, sufferring
Robert about Night to go away. He being thus freed, did not leave visiting the
Steeple Houses from Time to Time, for which he was sometimes imprisoned, and at
other Times was saved remarkably. Near Shipton in Yorkshire, speaks sharply to
Priest Webster, and Justice Coats.
Once coming near Shipton in Yorkshire, at the Steeple-house he spoke very
sharply to the Priest -- Webster; since he was one that had been partly
convinced of the Doctrine of the inward Light; but becoming disobedient
thereunto, was turned back again. He also spoke to the People, and to Justice
Coats, bidding them to mind the Word of God in the Heart, which di^id^d between
the Precious and the Vile. After having clear^d himself, he went to a Place
where a few of his Friends were met together; but he had not been long there,
when there came some Horsemen and Foot, who took him away, and carried him to
the said Justice; who examining him, said, He had broken the Law, by disturbing
the Minister and the People, and that he might send him Prisoner to
York-Castle. Robert answered, Send me to Jail thither, if thou dare; for I
appeal to the Witness of God in thy Conscience. who kindly lets him go.
But the Justice being a moderate Man, said, I neither dare nor will; and
taking Robert by the Hand told him, he might take his own Time in going away.

To relate all the Occurrences of this Robert Widders, would be too prolix;
therefore I Will only say, that as he was very zealous in speaking to the
Priests, so he suffered very much in his Estate, because for Conscience Sake he
refused to pay them Tithes; and on that Account there was taken from him, at
sundry Times, to the value of 143 l. besides what he suffered for Meetings, and
for Sunday Shillings, so called, which also amounted to a considerable Sum. And
this not only bef^l him, but it was the Portion of many Hundreds, nay perhaps
Thousands of those of his Persuasion: Wherefore I will not undertake to relate all
that might be mentioned of this Kind; for that would be beyond my Reach.
However, by this that has been said, may be seen, by what Means the Quakers,
so called, grew so numerous in those early Times. As on one Hand, there were
raised zealous Preachers; so on the other, there were Abundance of People in
England, who having searched all Sects, could no where find Satisfaction for
their hungry Souls. And these now understanding that God by his Light was so
near in their Hearts, began to take Heed thereunto, and soon found, that this
gave them far more Victory over the Corruption of their Minds, (under which
they had long groaned) than all the self-will^d Worships which they with some
Zeal had performed many Years. And besides those that were thus prepared to
receive a farther Manifestation of the Way of Life, there were also many of a
rude Life, who being pricked to the Heart, and brought over by the Christian
Patience of the despised Quakers, became as zealous in doing Good, as formerly
they had been in working Evil.

But perhaps some will think it was very indecent that they went so frequently
to the Steeple Houses, and there spoke to the Priests: But whatsoever any may
judge concerning this, it is certain that those Teachers generally did not
bring forth the Fruits of Godliness, as was well known to those who themselves
had been Priests, and freely resigned their Ministry, thenceforth to follow
Christ in the Way of his Cross; and these were none of the least zealous
against that Society among whom they formerly had ministered with an upright
Zeal. Yet they were not for using sharp Language against such Teachers, who,
according to their Knowledge, feared God; but they levelled their Aim chiefly
against those who were only rich in Words, without bringing forth true
Christian Fruits, and Works of Justice. Hence it was, that one Thomas Curtis,
T. Curtis writes to Priest Wel^s of Banbury
who was formerly a Captain in the Parliament Army, but afterward entered into
the Society of the People called Quakers, wrote, in a Letter to Samuel Wells,
Priest of Banbury, and a Persecutor of those of that Persuasion, amongst other
Things, these Words; To thy Shame, remember I know thee scandalous: How often
have thou sat Evening after Evening at Cards, and sometimes whole Nights
playing, and sometimes compelling me to play with thee for Money; yet then thou
wast called of the World a Minister; and now art thou turned Persecutor, etc.
None therefore need think it strange, that those called Quakers did look upon
such Teachers as Hirelings: And that there were not a few of that Sort,
appeared plainly when King Charles the II. was restored; for those who had
formerly cried out against Episcopacy, and its Liturgy, as false and
idolatrous, then became Turncoats, and put on the Surplice, to keep in the
Possession of their Livings and Benefices. But by so doing, these Hypocrites
lost not a few of their Auditors; for this opened the Eyes of many, who began
to enquire into the Doctrine of the despised Quakers, and saw that they had a
more sure Foundation, and that this it was which made them stand unshaken
against the Fury of Persecution.

Let us again take up the Thread of those Transactions which concern G. Fox: G.
Fox travels in the North of England.
Who now traveling through many Places in the North of England, had every where
great Meetings; but now and then met with some Opposition; sometimes with
Hands, and at other Times with the Tongue: Darwent-water.
Among the rest, at Darwantwater in Northumberland; where in a Dispute
recommending Perfection, he was contradicted; but to prove his Position, he
said, That Adam and Eve were perfect before they fell; and all that God made
was perfect; and that the Imperfection came by the Devil and the Fall; but that
Christ, who came to destroy the Devil, Mat. v. 48. Joh. iv. 17. Chapter xv. 15. Chapter
iv. 18.
said, Be ye perfect. To this one of the Professors answered, That Job said,
Shall mortal Man be more pure than his Maker? The Heavens are not clear in his
Sight. God charged his Angels with Folly. But G. Fox showed him his Mistake,
and told him, That it was not Job that said so, but one of those that contended
against him. Then the Professors said, The outward Body was the Body of Death
and Sin. But G. Fox replied, That Adam and Eve had each of them an outward
Body, before the Body of Death and Sin got into them; and that Men would have
Bodies, when the Body of Sin and Death was put off again, and they were renewed
into the Image of God again by Christ Jesus.

Thus G. Fox found almost every where Work, and passing to Hexam, he had a
great Meeting there on the Top of a Hill. The Priest indeed had threatened, that
he would come and oppose; but he came not.

G. Fox then traveling on, came into Cumberland, where he had a Meeting of
many Thousands of People, Langlands* Brigham.
on a Hill near Langlands. Once he came into Brigham Steeple-house, before the
Priest was there, and declared the Truth to the People; but when the Priest
came in, he began to oppose, but was wearied so, that at length he went away.
There being now also several others who preached the Doctrine of the inward
Light of God which convinces Man of Sin, the Number of those Professors of the
Light increased greatly: And as it had been said at first, That they should be
destroyed within a short Time; so now the Priests began to say, That they would
eat out one another: For many of them, after Meetings, having a great Way to
go, staid at their Friends Houses by the Way, and sometimes more than there
were Beds to lodge in, so that some lay on the Hay-Mows. This made some of the
public Church grow afraid, that this Hospitality would cause Poverty, and that
when these Friends had eaten out one another, they would come to be maintained
by the Parishes, and so be chargeable to them. But it sell out quite otherwise,
for these People wore the more blessed, and increased, without falling into
Want. This puts me mind of what one of the Daughters of Judge Thomas Fell once
told me, viz. That her Father having been abroad, and coming home with his
Servants, found the Shed so full of the Horses of strange Guests, (for Margaret
his Wife had cleared the Stable where they first stood, to make Room for her
Husband's own Horses) that he said to his Wife, This was the Way to be eaten
out, and that thus they themselves should soon be in Want of Hay. But to this
Margaret said in a Friendly Way, That she did not belie^, when the Year was at
an End, they should have the less for that. And it so fell out; for this Year
their Stock of Hay was such, that they sold a great Parcel of what they had in
Abundance. Thus the Proverb was verified, That Charity does not impoverish. The
Truth of this was also experienced by those called Quakers; for though many
People at first were shy, and would not deal with them, because of their
Nonconformity with the vulgar Salutation, and their saying Thou and Thee to a
single Person, instead of You, etc. insomuch, that some that were Tradesmen,
lost their Customers, and could hardly get Money enough to buy Bread: Yet this
changed in Time, when People found by Experience they could better trust to the
Words of these, than to that of those of their own Persuasion. Hence it was,
that often when any came into a Town, and wanted something, they would ask,
Where dwells a Draper, or Tailor, or Shoemaker, or any other Tradesman, that is
a Quaker? But this so exasperated others, that they began to cry out, If we let
these Quakers alone, they will take the Trade of the Nation out of our Hands.
Now the Cause of their Trade's thus increasing, was, because they were found
upright in their Dealing; for Integrity did then shine out among them above
many others: To this the true Fear of God led them, and to this they were
exhorted from Time to Time. G. Fox also wrote a General Epistle to them, which
was as follows:

To you all, Friends every where, scattered abroad.
IN the Measure of the Life of God wait for Wisdom from God, even from him,
from whence it comes. And all ye, who be Babes of God, Wait for the Living Food
from the Living to be nourished up to Eternal Life, from the one Fountain, from
whence Life comes; that orderly and in Order ye may all be guided and walk:
Servants in your Places, Young Men and Young-Women in your Places, and Rulers
of Families, that every one, in your respective Places may adorn the Truth,
every one in the Measure of it. With it let your Minds be kept up to the Lord
Jesus, from whence it does come; that a sweet Savor ye may be to God, and in
Wisdom ye may all be ordered and ruled: that a Crown and a Glory ye may be one
to another in the Lord. And that no Strife, nor Bitterness, nor Self-Will may
appear amongst you; but with the Light, in which the Unity is, all That may be
condemned. And that every one in particular may see to, and take Care of the
ordering and ruling of their own Family; that in the Righteousness and Wisdom
it may be governed, the Fear and Dread of the Lord in every one's Heart set,
that the Secrets of the Lord every one may come to receive, that Stewards of
his Grace you may come to be, to di^^ense it to every one as they have Need;
and so in savouring and right-discerning you may all be kept: That nothing,
that is contrary to the pure Life of God, may be brought forth in you, or among
you; but all that is contrary to it, may by it be judged: So that in Light, in
Life and Love, ye may all live; and all that is contrary to the Light, and
Life, and Love, may be brought to Judgment, and by that Light condemned. And
that no fruitless Trees be among you; but all cut down and condemned by the
Light, and cast into the Fire; so that every one may bear and bring forth Fruit
to God, and grow fruitful in his Knowledge, and in his Wisdom. And so that none
may appear in Words beyond what they be in the Life, that gave forth the Words:
Here none shall be as the untimely Figs; and none shall be of those Trees,
whose Fruit withers: Such go in Cain's Way, from the Light; and by it are
condemned. And that none amongst you boast your selves above your Measure; for
if you do, out of God's Kingdom you are excluded; for in that Boasting Part
gets up the Pride, and the Strife, which is contrary to the Light; which Light
leads to the Kingdom of God, and gives every one of you an En^^ance thereinto,
and an Understanding, to know the Things that belong to the Kingdom of God. And
there the Light and Life of Man every one receives Him, who was, before the
World was, by whom it was made; who is the Righteousness of God; and his
Wisdom; to whom all Glory, Honor, Thanks and Praise belongs, who is God
blessed for ever. Let no Image, nor Likeness be made; but in the Light wait,
which will bring Condemnation on that Part, that would make the Images; for
that prisons the Just. So to the Lust yield not the Eye, nor the Flesh; for the
Pride of Life stands in That, which keeps out of the Love of the Father; and
upon which his Judgments and Wrath remains, where the Love of the World is
sought after, and a Crown that is Mortal; in which Ground the Evil enters,
which is cursed; which brings forth Briars and Thorns, where the Death reigns,
and Tribulation and Anguish is upon every Soul, and the Egyptian Tongue is
heard: All which is by the Light condemned. And there the Earth is, which must
be removed. By the Light it is seen, and by the Power it is removed, and out of
its Place it is shaken; to which the Thunders utter their Voices, before the
Mysteries of God be opened, and Jesus revealed. Therefore, all ye, whose Minds
are turned to this Light (which brings Condemnation upon all those Things
before-mention^d, that are contrary to the Light) wait upon the Lord Jesus for
the Crown, that is Immortal, and that fades not away.

G. F.


This Epistle he sent to te read at the Meetings of his Friends. Morgan Floyd
of Wrexham in Wales, Priest, sends John ap-John to Prove the Quakers.
Not long after a certain Priest of Wrexham in Wales, whose Name was Morgan
Floyd, sent two of his Congregation into the North of England, to enquire what
Kind of People the Quakers were. These two coming thither, found the Doctrine
of the said People such, that they became convinced of the Truth thereof, and
so embraced it; and after some Stay, they returned home. One of these was
called John ap-John, and continuing faithful, became a Minister of the Gospel
he had thus received; but the other afterward departed from his Convincement.

Let Us now take a short View of State Affairs in England. Public Transactions.
We have seen already Cromwell's Power so great, that he ventured to dissolve
the Long Parliament, and that he called another in its Room. But before the
Year's End, this Parliament resigned their Power into the Hands of Cromwell,
from whom they had received it. Thus he, with his Council of Field-Officers,
saw himself again in the Possession of the supreme Government: And it was not
long before this Council declared: That henceforth the chief Rule of the Nation
should be entrusted to a single Person, and that this Person should be OLIVER
CROMWELL, Chief General of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland:
That his Title should be LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and all the Dominions belonging thereunto: A (...) ^e
was to have a Council of twenty one Persons to assist him in the Government.

This Matter being thus stated, the Commissioners of the ^reat Seal, and the
Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London were requir^d, on the 16th of December, to
attend Cromwell, and his Council in Westminster Hall. Being come thither, the
Instrument of Government was read, whereby Cromwell was declared Protector, he
standing all this while bareheaded, and Major General Lambert kneeling,
presented him with a Sword in the Scabbard, representing the Civil Sword; which
Cromwell accepting, put off his own, to intimate thereby, that he would no
longer rule by the Military Sword. The said Instrument, being writ on
Parchment, contained, That the Protector was to call a Parliament every three
Years: That their first Meeting should be on the 13th of September next
ensuing: That it should not be permitted to dissolve a Parliament before it had
sat five Months: That the Bills presented to him for his Consent, if he did not
confirm them within twenty Days, should have the Force of Laws: That he was to
have a Council, who were not to exceed the Number of Twenty one, and not to be
under Thirteen: That forthwith after his Death, the Council was to choose
another Protector: That no Protector after him should be capable of being Chief
General of the Army: And that it should be in the Power of the Protector to
make War and Peace. Whilst this Instrument was reading, Cromwell held his Hand
on the Bible, and afterward took the Oath, That he would perform all that was
contained therein. This being done, he covered himself, all the others
remaining uncovered. Then the Commissioners delivered the Seals to him, and the
Lord Mayor of London the Sword, all which he restored again, with an
Exhortation to use them well. Afterward General Lambert carried the Sword
before him to his Coach; in which he went to White Hall, where he was
proclaimed Protector, which was done also in the City of London. Now he was
attended like a Prince, and he created Knights, as Kings use to do. Thus
Cromwell, by a singular, and very strange Turn of mundane Affairs, saw himself
placed in the Palace, from whence he, and his Adherents had cast out King
Charles the 1st.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The THIRD BOOK.
OLiver Cromwell, 1654
in the Beginning of the Year, 1654, seeing himself invested with the Supreme
Authority of the Nation, required, both of the Soldiers and others, the Oath of
Fidelity. But ^^nce among the first, there were many, who, though convinced of
the Truth of the Doctrine of the Quakers so called, yet had not convenient
Opportunity to leave the Military Service, it now presented it self: For when
the Oath was tendered them, they declared that in Obedience to Christ's Command
they could not swear; whereupon they were disbanded. Among these was John
Stubs, J. Stubs, (...) learned Man, convinced by G. Fox in Carlisle Prison.
a Man skilled not only in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, but also in the Oriental
Languages, he was convinced by G. Fox, when in Carlisle Prison, and became
afterward a faithful Minister of the Gospel. But some of the Soldiers, who had
been convinced in their Judgment, not continuing steadfast, took the required
Oath, but not long outlived it; for marching afterward into Scotland, and
passing by a Garrison there, these thinking they had been Enemies, fired at
them, whereby several were killed.

G. Fox now seeing the Churches of his Friends in the North settled, passed
from Swarthmore (where he was about the Beginning of this Year) to Lancaster,
and from thence to Synder-hill-green, where he had a great Meeting of some
Thousands of People, among whom were many Persons of Note; and a general
Convincement there was, so that a great Number entered into the Communion of
those called Quakers; with whom about this Time was also united Ambrose Rigg,
A. Rigg professes the Truth, and is rejected by his Parents.
who having been inclined to Godliness from a Youth, hearing G. Fox preach, and
being convinced of the Truth of the Doctrine he taught, received it, and became
a Professor of it, though for that Reason he was cast out by his Parents and
Relations.

We have seen the first Rise of these Christians, called Quakers, in the North
of England, and how they increased under the Oppression of Persecution, so that
in most Places in those Parts, Meetings were settled: It remains to relate how
they spread farther.

There were how above sixty Ministers of the Word raised among them, and these
went out in the Service of the Gospel, to turn People, where they could have an
Opportunity, from Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan to God. Of
these Francis (...), and Edward Borough went to London; John Camm, and John
A^d^and to Bristol; Richard Hubberthorn, and George Whitehead to Norwich;
Thomas Holmes into Wales, and others other Ways. G. Fox well knowing this to be
a weighty Work, wrote a large Epistle to these Ministers, wherein he admonished
them to Prudence, advising them, To know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the
Head of the Serpent; also to know the Power of God, and the Cross of Christ: To
receive Wisdom from God by the Light; and not to be hasty, or to run in their
own Wills, but to continue in Pat^nce.

I^ll first mention somewhat of the Occurrences at London, where Edward
Borough and Francis Howgill, with Anthony Pearson, who had been a Justice of
Peace, E.Borough, F. Howgill, A Pearson, come to London. The two last are the
first of that People who prea^h'd there at R. Dring's in Watling-street.
came in the Forepart of the Summer. Howgill and Pearson were the first of the
People called Quakers that had a Meeting in this great City, where they
preached in the House of one Robert Dring, in Wa^ling-Street; and Borough was,
as I have been informed, that Day in an Assembly of a separate Society. Yet I
have been told also, that Ruth, Wife of William Crouch, Merchant in London had
said, that somewhat before that Time there had been in the said House, Meetings
of some few Persons, of whom she was one, and also Anna Downer, afterward
married to George Whitehead; that one Isabella Buttery, with another Woman,
having spread in London some Books, and among these, one of G. Fox's called,
The Way to the Kingdom, had met with this small Company, of which were but two
or three Men, one of which was Amos Stoddard, formerly a Military Officer,
mentioned already; and that the said Isabella sometimes spoke a few Words in
this small Meeting. But when F. Howgill, and E. Borough were come to London,
Things began to have another Face; for they laid hold of all Opportunities they
could light on, to preach the Gospel.

At London there is a Custom in Summertime, when the Evening approaches, and
Tradesmen leave off working, that many lusty Fellows meet in the Fields to try
their Skill and Strength in wrestling, where generally a Multitude of People
stands gazing in a Round. Now it so fell out, that E. Borough past by the
Place where they were wrestling, and standing still among the Spectators, saw
how a strong and dexterous Fellow had already thrown three others, and was
waiting for a fourth Champion, if any du^st venture to enter the Lists. At
length, none being bold enough to try, E. Borough stepped into the Ring,
commonly made up of all Sorts of People: And having looked upon the Wrestler
with a serious Countenance, the Man was not a little surprised, instead of an
airy Antagonist, to meet with a grave and awful young Man; and all stood as it
were amazed at this Sight, eagerly expecting what would be the Issue of this
Combat. But (...) was quite another Fight E. Borough aim^d at. For having
already sought against Spiritual Wickedness, that had once prevailed on him,
and having overcome in Measure by the Grace of God, he now endeavored also to
fight against it in others, and to turn them from the Evil of their Ways. With
this Intention he began very seriously to speak to the Standers by, and that
with such a heart-piercing Power, that he was heard by this mixed Multitude with
no less Attention than Admiration; for his Speech tended to turn them from
Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan to God. To effect this, he
labored with convincing Words, showing, How God had not left himself without a
Witness, but had given to Man a Measure of his Grace, and enlightened every one
with the Light of Christ. Thus he preached zealously: And though many might look
upon this as a Novelty, yet it was of such Effect, that some were convinced of
the Truth; for he was a Breaker of stony Hearts, and therefore, by a certain
Author, not unjustly called, A Son of Thunder; though he also omitted not in due
Season to speak a Word of Consolation to those that were of a broken Heart, and
of a contrite Spirit: But to thunder against Sin and Iniquity was his peculiar
Talent; insomuch, that once preaching very zealously in a Meeting, and
perceiving there were some contrite Souls, that wanted spiritually refreshing
Food, he was heard to intimate, That though his present Speaking was not Milk for
Babes, yet he would remember such a^on, and administer to them also; but now,
He must thresh the Whore. And indeed he was one of those Valiants, whose Bow
never turned back, nor Sword empty from the Slaughter of the Mighty: For the
Lord blessed his powerful Ministry with very glorious Success; nay, he was such
an excellent Instrument in the Hand of God, that even some mighty and em^n^nt
Men were touched to the Heart by the Power of the Word of Life which he
preached. And although Coals of Fire, as it were, came forth of his Mouth to the
consuming of Briars and Thorns, and he passing through unbeaten Paths, trampled
upon wild Thistles, and luxuriant Tares; yet his wholesome Doctrine dropped as
the Oil of Joy upon the Spirits of the Mourners in Sion. F. Howgill.
Hence it was that Francis Howgill not unjustly said of him when deceased:
Shall Days, or Months, or Years wear out thy Name, as though thou had had no
Being? Oh nay: Shall not thy noble and valiant Acts, and mighty Works which
thou have wrought, through the Power of him that separated thee from the Womb,
live in Generations to come? Oh yes! The Children that are yet unborn shall
have thee in their Mouths, and thy Works shall testify of thee in the
Generations, who yet have no Being.

The said Howgill, also an eminent and eloquent Man being now at London, went
to Court, to utter what was in his Mind to Oliver Cromwell: And after having
spoke to him, he thought it convenient to express himself farther in Writing,
as he did by the following Letter.

Friend,
I Was moved of the Lord to come to thee; to declare the Word of the Lord, as I
was moved of the Lord, and deal plainly with thee, F. Howgill^ Works, p. 5, 6,
as I was commanded, and not to petition thee for any Thing, but to declare
what the Lord had revealed to me, concerning thee; and when I had de^vered what
I was commanded, thou questionedst it, whether it was the Word of the Lord or
not, and soughtest by thy Reason to put it off; and we have waited some Days
since, but cannot speak to thee; therefore I was moved to write to thee, and
clear my Conscience, and to leave thee: Therefore hear the Word of the Lord,
Thus says the Lord, I chose thee out of all the Nations, when thou wast little
in thy own Eyes, and threw down the Mountains and the Powers of the Earth
before thee, which had established Wickedness by a Law, and I cut them down,
and broke the Yoaks and Bonds of the Oppressor, and made thee stoop before
thee, and I made them as a Plain before thee, that thou pa^^^^st over them, and
trod upon their Necks; but thus says the Lord, now thy Heart is not upright
before me; but thou take Counsel, and not at me; and thou art establishing
Peace, and not by me; and thou art setting up Laws, and not by me; and my Name
is not feared, nor I am not sought after; but thy own Wisdom thou establishest:
What says the Lord, have I thrown down all the Oppressors, and broken their
Laws, and thou art now going about to establish them again, and art going to
build again that which I have destroyed? Wherefore thus says the Lord, will thou limit me, and set Bounds to me, when, and where, and how, and by whom I
shall declare my self, and publish my Name? then will I break thy Cord, and
remove thy Stake, and exalt my self in thy Overthrow. Therefore this is the
Word of the Lord to thee, whether thou will hear, or forbear; if thou take not
away all those Laws which are made concerning Religion, whereby the People
which are dear in mine Eyes are oppressed, thou shall not be established; but
as thou have trodden down my Enemies by my Power, so shall thou be trodden down
by my Power; and thou shall know that I am the Lord; for my Gospel shall not be
established by thy Sword, nor by thy Law; but by my Might, and by my Power, and
by my spirit: Unto thee this is the Word of the Lord, Stint not the eternal
Spirit, by which I will publish my Name, when, and where, and how I will; for
if thou do, thou shall be as Dust before the Wind; the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, and he will perform his Promise: For this is that I look for at thy
Hands, says the Lord, That thou should undo the heavy Burdens, and let the
Oppressed go free: Are not many shut up in Prison, and some stocked, some
stoned, some shamefully entreated? and some are judged Blasphemers by those who
know not the Lord, (...)
and by those Laws which have been made by the Will of Man, and stand not in
the Will of God; and some suffer now, because they cannot hold up the Types,
and so deny Christ come in the Flesh? and some have been shut up in Prison,
because they could not swear, and because they abide in the Doctrine of Christ?
and some for declaring against Sin openly in Markets, have suffered as
Evildoers: And now if thou let them suffer in this Nature by those Laws, and
count it just, I will visit for those Things, says the Lord, I will break the
Yo^k from off their Necks, and I will bring Deliverance another Way, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord.

Moved of the Lord to declare and write this, by a Servant of the Truth for
Jesus's Sake, and a Lover of thy Soul, called, Francis Howgill.
The last of the First Month, about Ninth Hour wa^^^ng in James 's Park at
London.

How this was received, I am not acquainted; but this I have understood, that
some or Cromwell's Servants and among these one Theophilus Green, and Mary,
afterward Wife of John Stout, were so reach^d by F. Howgill's Discourse, that
after some Time, they entered into the Society of the Quakers so called.

Now in the said Letter, or Speech, we find Notice taken of Laws made
concerning Religion: These I do not look upon as made by the Induction of
Cromwell, but such as were made in former Times, which he could have alter^d if
he would have done it, as afterward many Pen^^ Laws were abrogated, under the
Reign of King William and Queen Mary, as will be said in its proper Place. For
I don't find that in Cromwell's Time any Laws were made to constrain People to
f^equent the Worship of the public or National Church. But notwithstanding the
Quakers, so called, were imprison^d for re^using to swear, or for not paying
Tithes, to maintain the Priests; and they were whipped like Vagabonds; for
preaching in Markets, or in other public Places; or they were ^ined for not
taking off their Hats before Magistrates; for this was called Contempt of the
Magistracy; and when for Conscience Sake they refused to pay such a Fine,
either the Spoiling of Goods, or Imprisonment became their Share. And thus
always a Cloak or Cover was found to persecute them; and Malice never wanted
Pretenses to vex them. And it also often happen^d, that E. Buroughs and F.
Howgill were opposed by the Chiefest of several Sects, whereby Disputes were
raised, which many Times gave Occasion for some of the Hearers to embrace the
Doctrine maitain'd by the said Buroughs and Howgill; which ^o en^ag^d their
Enemies, The first settled Meeting in London at Sarah Sawy^ in
Aldersgate Street.
that no Slanders were spared, and they sometimes branded them as Witches. In
the mean while the People called Quakers so increased in London, that they
began to have settled Meetings, the first of which was in Aldersgate Street, at
the House of one Sarah Sawyer. The first among Women of this Society that
preach^d at London publicky, was the already mentioned Anna Downer, afterward
married to one Cromwell, and being become a Widow, in Process of Time entered
into Matrimony with George Whitehead, Anna Downer the first Woman Preacher
there.
as has been hinted already.

The Number of the said People increasing at London from Time to Time, several
Meetings were now erected there, one of which was in the House of one -- Bates,
in Tower-Street; and another at Gerard Roberts's, in Thomas Apostles, until the
Church became so great, that a House known by the Name of the Bull and Mouth in
Martins le Grand near Aldersgate, The Bull and Mouth in Martins le Grand hired
for a Meeting House.
was hired for a Meeting House; and it being a Building that had belong^d to
some great Man, there was a large Hall in it that would hold many People, and
so was very convenient for a Meeting Place.

Abundance of Books were now spread against the Quakers, as Seducers and fal^e
Prophets; and these written by the Priests and Teachers of several Sects: For
they perceiving that many of their Hearers forsook them, left no Stone unturned
to stop it. But the Event did not answer their Hope, since Borough and Howgill
did not suffer those Writings to go unanswer^d, but clearly showed the Malice
and Absurdities of those Writers.

Leaving them busy with this Work, J. Audland and T. Airey at Bristol.
we'll take a Turn toward Bristol, to behold the Performances of John Audland,
and Thomas Airey, who came thither in the Month called July in this Year, and
going into the Meetings of the Independents and Baptists, they found
Opportunity to preach Truth there, and also had Occasion to speak to others, so
that many received their Testimony.

From thence they went to Plymouth in Devonshire, Go from thence to Plymouth
and London. Return to Bristol with J. Camm, where several Persons receive their
Testimony. Here Persecution arises,
and so to London, where they met with John Camm; but after some Stay there,
John Audland returned to Bristol with John Camm, and found there a Door opened
for their Ministry. Among those that did receive their Testimony, were Josiah
Cole, George Bishop, Charles Marshal, and Barbara Blaugdone, concerning which
Persons, more is to be said hereafter. It was not long ere F Howgill and E.
Borough, having gathered a Church at London, came also to Bristol, where
Persecution now began to appear with open Face: For the Magistrates commanded
them to depart the City and the Liberties thereof; to which they answered, That
they came not in the Will of Man; and that when He who moved them to come
thither, did move them also to depart, they should obey. That if they were
guilty of the Transgression of any Law, they were not unwilling to suffer by
it: That they were freeborn Englishmen, being free from the Transgression of
any Law: And that if by Violence thy were put out of the City, they were ready
to suffer, and would not resist. And so they departed out of the Presence of
the Rulers. But now the Priests, especially one Ralph Farmer, Through Instigation
of the Priests.
began to incite and enrage the People, and to set the City, as it were, on
Fire. Hence it was that J. Camm and J. Audland, intending to have a Meeting at
Brislington, about two Miles from Bristol, and passing over a Bridge, were
assaulted by the Rabble of the City, and several Apprentices of Farmer's
Parish, who having got Notice of their coming, were gathered there, and
violently abused them with Beating, Kicking, and a continual Cry, Knock them
down, kill them, or hang 'em presently: Thus they were driven back, and forced
into the City again, narrowly escaping with their Lives. But the Tumult did not
yet cease; for some of the Multitude were heard to say, That they should find
Protection from the Magistrates, than those Strangers, viz. Camm and Audland.
But the Officers of the Garrison thinking it unwarrantable to permit such a
Tumult, since it was not without Reason be feared, that the Royalists, or
Abettors of King Charles, might take hold of such an Opportunity, and raise ^n
Insurrection, caused three of the Ringleaders to be seized: But this made such
a Stir, that the next Day more than five hundred People, as it was thought,
were gather^d together in a seditious Manner, so that their Companions were see
at Liberty. This made the tumultuous Mo^ more bold and saw^y, the rather
because they saw that the Magistrates, hearing that J. Camm and J. Audland not
only had kept a Meeting at Brislington, but also had visited some in their
Houses at Bristol, had bid them to depart the Town. Now the riotous Multitude
did not stick to rush violently into the Houses of the Quakers, so called, at
Bristol, under a Pretense of preventing treasonable Plottings. And when some in
Zeal told the Priests, These were the Fruits of their Doctrine, they incited
the People the more, and induced the Magistrates to imprison some of those
called Quakers. This instigated the Rabble to that Degree, that now they
thought they had full Liberty to use all Kind of insolence against the said
People; beating, smiting, pushing, and often treading upon them till Blood was
shed; for they were become a Prey to every malapert Fellow, as a People that
were without the Protection of the Law. This often caused a Tumult in the Town;
and some said (not without good Reason) that the Apprentices durst not have
left their Work, had not their Masters given them Leave. And a certain Person
informed the Mayor and Aldermen upon his Oath, That he had heard an Apprentice
say, that they had Leave from their Masters, and were encouraged; Alderman
Hellier is said to encourage the Mob.
for Alderman George Hellier had said, He would dye rather than any of the
Apprentices should go to Prison. Now an Order of Sessions came forth, That the
Constables do once in every Fortnight, make diligent Search within their
several Wards, for all Strangers and suspicious Persons: And that all People be
forewarned not to be present at any Tumult, or other unlawful Assembly, or
gather into Companies or Multitudes in the Streets, on Pain of being punished
according to Law. But this Order was to little Purpose, for the tumultuous
Companies and Riots continued; and when once a Proclamation was read in the
Name of the Lord Protector, requiring every one to depart, some of the Rioters
were heard to say What do you tell us of a Protector? Tell us of King Charles.
In the mean while the Quakers, so called, were kept in Prison, and it plainly
appeared, that the Order against unlawful Assemblies was levell^d against their
Meetings: And though the Magistrates pretended that they must answer for it to
the Protector, if they did let the Quakers alone without disturbing their
Meetings, which, at that Time, for the most Part, were silent, and nothing was
spoken but when, now and then, one of their Ministers from abroad visited them;
yet this was not at all agreeable with the Protector's Speech he made on the
12th of the Month called September, to the Parliament in the painted Chamber,
where he spoke these Words:

IS not Liberty of Conscience in Religion a Fundamental? Protect^^'s Speech for
Liberty of Conscience.
So long as there is Liberty for the Supreme Magistrate, to exercise his
Conscience in erecting what Form of Church Government he is satisfied he should
set up, why should he not give it to others? Liberty of Conscience is a Natural
Right, and he that would have it, ought to give it, having Liberty to settle
what he likes for the Public. Indeed That has been the Vanity of our
Contests: Every Sect says, Give me Liberty: But give it him, and to his Power
he will not yield it to any Body else. Where is our Ingenuity? Truly that is a
Thing that ought to be very reciprocal. The Migistrate has his Supremacy, and
he may settle Religion according to his Conscience: And I may say it to you, I
can say it: All the Money in the Nation would not have tempted Men to fight
upon such an Account as they have engaged, if they had not had Hopes of
Liberty, better than they had from Epis^opacy, or than would have been afforded
them from Scottish Presbytery, or an English either, if it had made such Steps,
or been as sharp and rigid as it ^brea^ned when it was first set up. Thus I say
is a Fundamental, it ought to be so: It is for us and the Generations to come.

Cromwell spoke more in Confirmation hereof; and indeed he would have been a
brave Man, if really he had performed what here he asserted with binding
Arguments. But though now he seemed to disapprove the Behavior of Presbytery,
(for then he was for Independen^y) yet after some Time he courted the
Presbyterians; and these fawning upon him from the Pulpit, as their Preserver,
and the Restorer of in Church, he suffered the Quakers to be persecuted under
his Government, though he pretended not to know it, when he might easily have
stopped it. But by hearkening to the Flatteries of the Clergy, at length he lost
his Credit, even with those who with him had fought for the common Liberty; and
thus at last befell him after his Death, what he seemed to have imprecated on
himself in the foregoing Speech, if he departed from allowing due Liberty: For
he farther said. That many of the People had been necessitated to go into the
vast howling Wilderness in New England, for the Enjoyment of their Liberty; and
that Liberty was a Fundamental of the Government; adding, that it had cost much
Blood to have it so, and even the hazarding of all. And in the Conclusion he
said, That he could sooner be willing to be rolled into his Grave, and buried
with Infamy, than give his Consent to the wilful throwing away of that
Government, so testified unto in the Fundamentals of it. Now, who knows not
what infamy befell him afterward, when in the Reign of King Charles the ^^d.
it is said, his Corpse was dug up, and buried near the Gallows, as may be
farther mentioned in its due Place?

But I return now to Bristol, where several were ^pt in Prison still, and no
Liberty granted them; nay, they were even charged with what they utterly denied
themselves to be guilty of: Among these, one John Worring was accused of having
called the Priest, Samuel Grimes, a Devil: But Worring denied this, though he did
not stick to say, He could prove somewhat like it by his own Words. And it
being asked him, How? He answered, That the Priest had said at the Meeting,
that in all Things he did, be sinned; and if in all Things, then at well in his
Preaching, as in other Things; and he that sins, is of the Devil. If you
will not believe me, believe Scriptures. It may be easily conjectured, that
this Answer did not please the Priest's Followers, J. Worring. Eliz. Marshall,
and others imprisoned.
and therefore Worring and some others were kept in Prison, and among these
also Elizabeth Marshall, who in the Steeple-house, after the Priest John Kn^wls
had dismis'd the People, with what is called the Blessing, spoke to him, and
said, This is the Word of the Lord to thee: I warn thee to repent, and to mind
the Light of Christ in thy Conscience. And when the People, by Order of the
Rulers then present, violently assaulted her, giving her many Blows with Staves
and, Cudgels, she cried out, The mighty Day of the Lord is at Hand, wherein he
will strike Terror on the Wicked. Some Time before she spoke also in the
Steeple-house, to the Priest Ralph Farmer, Priest Farmer.
after he had ended his Sermon and Prayer, and said, This is the Word of the
Lord to thee. Woe, woe, woe, from the Lord to them who take the Word of the
Lord in their Mouths, and the Lord never sent them.

A good while after this the Magistrates gave out the following Warrant.

City of Bristol. To all the Constables within this City, and to every of them.
FOrasmuch as Information has been given us, Warrant against J. Camm and J.
Audland.
that John Camm, and John Audland, two Strangers, who were commanded to depart
this City, have in Contempt of Authority, come into this City again, to the
Disturbance of the public Peace: These are therefore to will and require you,
forthwith to apprehend them, and bring them before us to be examin^d, according
to Law.

Given this 22d of January, 1654. Signed, William Cann, Joseph Jackson, Gabriel
Sherman, Richard Vickris, Dept. Mayor. Henry Gibs, John Lock.


Camm and Audland were departed the Town before this Time, having never been
commanded (as the Warrant says) to depart the City, either by the Magistrates
themselves, or by any other at their Command; though F. Howgill and E. Borough
had been required to do so. So this Warrant proving ineffectual, the
Magistrates caused another to be formed in these Words:

City of Bristol. To the Constables of the Peace of the Ward of -- and to every
of them.
FOrasmuch as Information has been given us upon Oath, Warrant against J.
Camm, J. Audland, G. Fox, J. Naylor, F. Howgill, E. Buroughs, etc.
that certain Persons of the Franciscan Order in Rome, have of late come over
into England, and under the Notion of Quakers, drawn together several
M^ltitudes of People in London; and whereas certain Strangers, going under the
Names of John Camm, John Audland, George Fox, James Naylor, Francis Howgill,
and Edward Borough, and others unknown, have lately resorted to this City, and
in like Manner, under the Notion of Quakers, drawn Multitudes of People after
them, and occasioned very great Disturbances amongst us: And forasmuch as by
the said Information it appears to us to be very probable, and much to be
suspected that the said Persons so lately come hither, are some of those that
came from Rome, as aforesaid: These are therefore in the Name of his Highness,
the Lord Protector, to will and require you to make diligent Search through your
Ward for the aforesaid Strangers, or any of them, and all other suspected
Persons, and to apprehend and bring them before us, or some of us, to be
examined and dealt with according to Law: Hereof fail you not.

Given the 25th of Jan. 1654. Signed, John Gunning, Mayor, Gabriel Sherman,
Henry Gibs, George Hellier, Gabriel Sherman. William Cann, Joseph Jackson, John
Lock, Richard Vickris,


Hereunto these Magistrates affixed their Seals; and that Alderman Sherman
might be sure his Name was down, he wrote it twice. How frivolous this Pretense
of Persons of the Franciscan Order was, even a Child might perceive; for the
Quakers were by this Time so multiplied in the North of England, that they
could no more be looked upon as an unknown People. And as for G. Fox, and James
Naylor, they had not yet been at Bristol, and therefore it seemed absurd to
^eek for them there. But it was thought expedient to brand the Quakers with
odious Names, that so under the Cloak thereof, they might be persecuted as
Disturbers of the public Peace: T. Robertson and J. Cole committed to Newgate
in Bristol, for attempting to speak in a Steeple-house.
As appeared when one Thomas Robertson, and Josiah Cole being at Nicholas
Steeple-house, and standing both still, without speaking a Word, until the
Priest Hazard had ended, and dismissed the People, were very rudely treated; for
Thomas then lifting up his Voice, was presently, even when the Word was yet in
his Mouth, struck on the Head by many, as was also his Companion, though he did
not attempt to speak. But Thomas, after being a little recovered of a heavy
Blow, began to speak again, and said to the People, Tremble before the Lord,
and the Word of his Holiness. But this so kindled their Anger, that they were
both hurried out of the Steeple-house, and with great Rage driven to the
Mayor's, J. Hignel brought from his Sh^p and sent to Prison without a Mittimus,
for being Quaker.
who commanded them both to Newgate-Prison. Not long after one Jeremy Hignel,
being in his Shop attending his Calling, was sent for by the Mayor and
Aldermen, to come before them; which he presently doing, the Mayor asked him,
Whether he knew where he was? He answered, He did. Then the Mayor asked, where?
He replied, In the Presence of the Lord. Are you not, said the Mayor, in the
Presence of the Lords Justices? His Answer was, If you be the Lord's Justices,
I am. Whereupon one of the Aldermen said, without any more Words passing at
that Time, We see what he is; take him away to Newgate. For since he did not
take off his Hat, it was concluded he was a Quaker, and this was counted Cause
enough to send him to Prison; and so he was immediately brought thither, where
the Keeper received him without a Mittimus, and kept him close Prisoner
nineteen Days, D. Wastfield in like Manner kept close Prisoner thirty three
Days, and not suffered to see his dying Child.
permitting none to come to him but his Wife. No better was the Treatment ot
Daniel Wastfield who being ^en^ for by the Mayor, appeared before him, and
Alderman Vickris; Then ^he Mayor said to him, Wastfield, come hither; And he
thereupon drawing near, the Mayor asked him three several Times, What art thou?
though he knew him well enough, having called him by his Name, as abovesaid.
Wastfield answered, I am a Man. But what is thy Name? said the Mayor. My Name is
Daniel Wastfield, answered he. Then said the Mayor to one of his Officers, Take
him and carry him to Newgate; further adding, That he came thither to contemn
Justice: To which Wastfield replied, No, I came hither in Obedience to thy
Order; The Mayor's Word a Mittimus.
for the Mayor had sent for him, as has been said. Thus he was carried away
without a Mittimus, the Mayor saying, his Word was a Mittimus; and he was kept
a close Prisoner thirty three Days, and none suffered to come to him but his
Servants, notwithstanding he was a Widower, and must now leave his House and
Trade to their Management; and a Child of his died in the mean While and was
buried, and he kept from seeing it.

The Rulers thus having begun Persecution, became from Time to Time more
vigorous in it, insomuch, that several others were imprisoned, and among these,
C. Birkhea^ and others sent to Prison, chie^er at the Instigation of Priest
Farmer.
Christopher Birkhead, who standing still in Nicholas Steeple-house, with his
Hat on, and being asked by the Priest Ralph Farmer, What be stood there for;
answered, I stand in Obedience to the righteous Law of God in my Conscience: I
have neither offended the Law of God, nor of the Nation. A wonderful and
horrible Thing is committed in the Land. More he would have spoken, but was
stopped with beating and thrusting, and so carried to Prison. Now the Magistrates
were not a little incited to Persecution by the said Farmer; and there being
several that were very bold, they did not stick to write sharp Letters to him;
and his indecent Carriage was also told him to his Face by Word of Mouth in the
Steeple-house after Sermon; and those who did so, were sent to Prison. At
length these Prisoners were brought to Trial; and since it could not be proved
that they had transgressed any Law, some of the Rulers seemed inclined to set
them at Liberty, if they would have declared, That they were sorry for what
they had done. Among them (...) one William Ford, and nothing material being
found against him, (...) he was one of those called Quakers, M. Ford.
he was accused of having kept a Stranger at work; which he however esteemed to
be lawful, since his Trade of Wool-combing did not belong to the Company of
Milliners, who complained of him. Yet he was asked, Whether he was sorry for
what he had done? Which denying, as well as those who had reproved the Priests,
he that was not guilty was sent to Prison again, as well as those that were
pretended to be so. Among these last was also Sarah Goldsmith, S. Goldsmith.
who from a well meant Zeal to test^^y against Pride, having a Coat of
Sackcloth, and her Hair discheveled with Earth or Dust strewed on her Head, had
gone through the City without receiving any considerable Harm from the People,
because some looked upon her to be crack-brain'd. Tem. Hignel chused and
imprisoned.
There was also one Temperance Hignel, who having said in the Steeple-house to
the Priest, after he had ended his Sermon, W^ from the Lord God to thee Jacob
Brint, was presently struck down, and so violently abused, that Blood running
down her Face and she being committed to Prison, fell sick; and when they saw
her Life was in Danger, Which would the (...) of her (...)
she was carried out in a Basket, and died three Days after. The Reason she
gave, when in Prison, why she spoke in that Manner to (...), That he had scarce
any Hearers but what were Swearers, ^^^^^ards, Strikers, Fighters, and R^ilers,
etc. and that therefore his Ministry was in vain, since he Preached for Gain;
whereas he himself ought to have brought forth good Fruits. How long the others
were kept in Prison, I don't know certainly; however, it was a pretty long Time;
Th^se Doings ^ommitted to Writing.
for George Bishop and Dennis Hollis^er, who formerly had been a Member of the
Parliament, and three others, put all these Transactions in Writing at large,
and sent it to the Magistrates, in Hopes that thereby they might see the Evil
of Persecution; but this proving in Vain, they gave it out in Print five Months
after, And afterward printed.
that so every one might know how the Bristolers treated their Inhabitants,
which was to that Degree; that Authors said, Was such a tyrannical Iniquity and
Cruelty ever heard of in this Nation? or would the Ministers under King Charles
have ventured to do so? Was not Stra^ford but a mean Transgressor in Comparison
of these? And though Archbishop Laud was beheaded, yet it could not be proved
that the Episcopalians had persecuted so fiercely, as these pretended Assertors
of Liberty of Conscience had done, who being got into Possession of the Power,
did oppress more than those they had driven out. This made the Persecuted, some
of which formerly had also fought for the common Liberty, the more in Earn^t
aginst those that were now in Authority.

But I Will turn away from Bristol toward Norwich, Norwich R. Hubberthorn. and
G. Whitehead there. ^his last imprisoned.
whither Richard Hubberthorn and George Whitehead were gone. Here it happened
that R. Hubberthorn having spoken something to a Priest in a
Steeple-house-yard, and not having taken off his Hat before the Magistrates,
was imprisoned in the Castle, where he was kept great Part of the following
Year, and in the mean while wrote several Epistles of Exhortation to his
Friends; and the Preaching of him and his Companion G. Whitehead, had such
Effect, that a Meeting of their Friends was settled in that City.

But before I go on, Their Character.
it will be convenient to give some Account of the Quality of these two
Persons. R. Hubberthorn was born in the North of Lancashire, and descended from
very honest Parents: His Father was a Yeoman of good Reputation among Men; and
Richard was his only Son, and from a Youth inclined to Piety. Being come to
Man's Estate he became an Officer in the Parliament's Army, and from a Zeal for
Godliness, preached sometimes to his Soldiers. But entering afterward into the
Society of the Quakers so called, he left his Millitary Employment, and
testified publicly against it; for he was now become a Soldier under another
Banner, viz that of Christ Jesus, Prince of Peace; not sighting as formerly
with the outward Sword, but with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God. In hi^ (...) he had an excellent Gift, and though not so loud in Voice as
some other^, yet he was a Man of a quick Understanding, and very ^^^^ying in
his ^reaching.

G. Whitehead, who whilst I write this, is yet alive, was trained up to
Learning, and tho but a Youth, instructed others in Literat^^e, and continued
in that Calling sometime after he came to be convinced of that Truth which was
preached by the Professors of the Light; and he strove to bring up Children in
the Fear of the Lord. But before this Change, he was a (...) Hearer of the
World's Teachers, and usually frequen^ed the Steeple-house at Or^ton in
Westmoreland: Yet the Singing of David's Psalms became so burthensom to him,
that sometimes he could not join therewith; for he saw that David's Conditions
were not generally suitable to the States of a mixed Multitude; and he found
himself to be short of what they (...). This Consideration brought him into
such a Strait, that often he durst not sing those Psalms the Priests gave their
Hearers to sing, le^t he should have told Lies unto God. Now also he began to
see that the Priests Lives and Practices did not agree with their Doctrine; for
they themselves spoke against Pride and Covetousness, and yet lived in them.
This likewise made him go to hear some that were separated from the National
Church, and got into a more specious Form of Godliness: But he soon saw, that
tho there was a Difference in the Ceremonial Part, and that these had a more
true Form of Words than the Priests, yet they were such as ran before they were
sent by God, speaking Peace to that Nature in him, wherein he felt no true
Peace. And when he was about seventeen Years of Age, which was in the Year
1652, he first heard the Doctrine of Truth preach^d by those that were
reproachfully called Quakers; and their Testimony wrought so powerfully on his
Mind, that he received it, and so enter^d into their Communion. Now he found
that to grow up in the true Wisdom, and to become Wise in the living Knowledge
of God, he must become a Fool to that Wisdom, wherein he had been feeding upon
the Tree of Knowledge, having in that State no Right to the Tree of Life: And
he continuing in Faithfulness, it pleased the Lord to ordain him a Minister of
the Gospel; in which Service he acquitted himself well, to the convincing of
others, and the Edification of the Church.

But now leaving him, Cruel Usage of ^liz. Heavens and Eliz. Fletcher at Oxford.
let us go and see what happened at Oxford in the Year 1654. At the latter End
of the Month called June, there came two Women, named Elizabeth Heavens, and
Elizabeth Fletcher: These spoke in the Streets, to the People, and in the
College they exhorted the Scholars, who wickedly requiting their Zeal,
violently pusht Elizabeth Fletcher against a Gravestone, and then threw her
into the Grave; and their Ma^^^^ grew to that Pitch, that they tied these two
Women together, and drove them under the Pump; and after their being
exceedingly wetted with pumping Water upon them, they threw them into a mi^y
Ditch, through which they dragged Elizabeth Fletcher, who was a young Woman; and
so cruelly abused her, that she was in a painful Condition till her Death,
which fell out not long after. Some short Time after this rude Encounter, she
and her Companion, on a First Day of the Week, went into the Steeple-house at
Oxford, and when the Priest had ended, they began to admonish the People to
Godliness: But two Justices there present, commanded them to be taken into
Custody, and carried to the Prison called B^^ardo, where none but Felons were
used to be lodged. The Justices desiring the Magistrates to meet on this
Account, the Mayor would not meddle with it; but said, Let those who have
committed them, deal with them according to Law, if they have transgressed any;
adding, That he had nothing to say against them; The Man (...) his Consent to
the Proceedings of the other Magistrates.
but that he would provide them with Vi^^als, Clothes, or Money, if they wanted
any. Yet he came into the Assembly where these Women were examined, and whither
the Vice Chancellor of the University was also required to come, who charged
them, That they Blasphemed the Name of God, and did abuse the Spirit of God,
and dishonored the Grace of Christ, Dr. Owen charges them unjustly.
and asking them, Whether they did read the Scriptures? they answered, Yea,
they did. Then they were asked, Whether they were not to be obedient to the
Power of the Magistrate? To whi^^ (...) Answer was, They were obedient to the
Power of God, and to the Power that was of God they were subject for
Conscience Sake. Well, said the Vice Chancellor, you profane the Word of God,
and I fear you know not God, tho you so much speak of him. Then the Women being
made to withdraw, it was concluded that there was Matter enough for their
Commitment and Punishment, and agreed that a Paper should be drawn up for their
being whipped out of the City. When this was done, it was presented to the
Mayor to set his Hand to it, but he refused, and said, He was not willing to do
so. Then one of the Justices said, That it was the Privilege of the City, that
it any vag^ant was taken within the Franchises and Liberties thereof, a Paper
must be drawn up, that such a one, Mayor, had committed such and such Persons;
and that then it was to be sealed with the Office-Seal. But the Mayor refused
this as well as the other. Which made some say, That if he would not, it should
be done by them. And then it was agreed upon, That they should be whipped
soundly; which was also performed the next Morning, though with much
Unwillingness in the Executioner; and the Mayor had no Hand in it.

But leaving these, Barbara Blaugdon.
I Will turn to another, one Barbara Blaugdon, of whom Mention has already been
made, that she was one of those that received the Truth by the Ministry of John
Audland and John Camm. She was from her Youth inclined to Godliness, and her
Employment was to instruct Children. But being entered into the Society of
those called Quakers, she became plain, both in Speech and Habit, and thereupon
the Children she ^aught, were taken from her; and going sometimes into
Steeple Houses to bear Testimony against their Formalities, Imprisoned at
Bristol.
she was put in Prison, and kept there a Quarter of a Year at a Time.
Afterward she led a very severe Life, and abstain^d from all Flesh, Wine, and
Beer, Drinking only Water for the Space of a whole Year. In the mean while she
grew up and prosper'd in true Piety. Once it happen^d that coming from a
Meeting that was at George Bishop's House at Bristol, Wounded by a rude Fellow.
a rude Fellow ran a Knife or some sharp Instrument through all her Clothes into
the Side of her Belly, which if it had gone but a little farther, might have
killed her Then she went to Marlborough, It imprisoned at Marlborough.
where, in the Steeple-house and other Places, exhorting to fear God, the was
put into Prison for the Space of six Weeks, and there she fasted several Days
and Nights. When she was released, she went to Isaac Burges, Convinces him who
committed her.
the Man that committed her, and discoursing with him, he was really convinced
of the Truth, but could not resolve to take up the Cross; yet he was afterward
very loving to her Friends, and stood by them upon all Occasions, never more
persecuting any or them: And coming some Time after to Bristol, he went to her
House and confess^d That he knew her Doctrine was Truth, but that he could not
take up the Cross to walk in that Way. Imprisoned again at Milton, Barnstaple,
Bediford.
A While after she went into Devonshire to Milton, Barnstaple, and Bediford, in
all which Places a Prison was her Lot. She went also to him that after was Earl
of ^ath, where being acquainted, she had formerly vainly spent much Time, but
now she was moved to call this Family to leave off their Vanity. And she asked
to speak with the Lady; but one of the Servants that knew her, bid her go to
the Back Door, and their Lady would come forth that Way, to go into the Garden.
Barbara being come thither, A Mastiff-Dog set at her, turn^ away.
a great Mastiff Dog was set loose upon her; and he running fiercely at her, as
it to devour her, turned suddenly, and went away crying and ha^ting, whereby
the clearly saw the Hand of the Lord in it to preserve her from this Danger.
The Lady then came and stood still, hearing what Barbara spoke, and gave her
Thanks for her Exhortation, yet did not invite her to come in, though she often
had been lodged there, and had eaten and drunk at her Table. Then Barbara went
to Great-Torrington, At Great-Torrington, (...) by the Priest's Importunity the
Mayor sends her 20 Miles to Exeter.
and going into the Steeple-house, spoke somewhat to the People by Way of
Exhortation; but not having sufficient Opportunity to clear herself, went to
her Lodging, and sat to writing. After Noon the Constables cam^ to her, and
took away what she had written, and commanded her to go along with them to
their Worship. To which she answered, That they would not suffer her to speak
there, and that she knew no Law that could compel her to go thither twice in a
Day; and that they all knew she was there in the Morning. Being thus unwilling
to go, the next Day the Mayor sent for her; when come, she found him Moderate,
and loath to send her to Prison: But the Priest being present, was very eager,
and said, She ought to be whipped for a Vagabond. She then bid him prove where
ever she asked any one for a Bit of Bread: But he said, She had broken the Law
by speaking in their Church: And he so pressed the Mayor, that at length he made
him write a Mittimus, and send her to Exeter Prison, which was twenty Miles
distant: There she remained for some Time, until the Assizes came, but was not
brought forth to a Trial. And after the Sessions were over, she was put to
lodge one Night among a great Company of Gypsies, that were there in Prison;
and the next Day the Sheriff came with a Beadle, who brought her into a Room,
where he whipped her till the Blood ran down her Back, Is there cru^elly whipped.
and she never startled at a Blow; but sang aloud, and was made to rejoice that
she was counted worthy to suffer for the Name of the Lord; which made the
Beadle say, Do ye sing? I Will make you cry by and by; and with that he laid on
so hard, that one Ann Speed seeing this, began to weep: But Barbara was
strengthened by an uncommon, and more than human Power, so that she afterward
declared, if she had been whipped to Death, in the State she then was, she should
not have been terrified or dismayed. And the Sheriff seeing that all the Wrath
of Man could not move her, bid the Fellow leave off striking; and then Ann
Speed was suffered to dress her Stripes. The next Day she was turned out with
all the Gypsies, Is turned out of Town with Gypsies.
and the Beadle followed her two Miles out of the Town: But as soon as he left
her, she returned back again, and went into the Prison to see her Friends that
were Prisoners there, and having visited them, she went home to Bristol. But by
the Way coming to Bediford, Is taken up again at Bediford.
she was taken up, and put into the Town Hall, and searched to see whether she
had either Knife or Scissars about her. Next Day she was brought before the
Mayor, who discoursing much with her, And courteously treated by the Mayor.
had a Sense of what she spoke to him; and at last he set open two Doors, one
right against the other, and said, He would give her her Choice, which she
would go out at; whether she would go forth to Prison again, or go home. And
she told him, that she would choose Liberty rather than Bonds. So she went
homeward, and then he took his Horse and followed; and overtaking her, would
have had her ride behind him,; but when any whom he knew, met them, he would
slacken his Pace; and as soon as they were past, he came up again to her; which
she perceiving, refused to ride behind him; yet he rode three or four Miles
with her, and discoursed all the Way: And when they parted, she kneeled down
and prayed for him, all which Time he was very serious, and afterward grew
very solid and sober: She writ once to him; but not long after, he dyed.

Being now come home, At Basing-Stoke procures Liberty for two Friends.
she was moved to go to Basing-Stoke to endeavor to obtain Liberty for two of
her Friends, viz. Thomas Robinson and Ambrose Rigg, who were taken up at the
first Meeting that their Friends had had there. But when she came thither, the
Entrance of the Prison was denied her. And she having a Letter from John Camm
to them, put it in at the Chink of the Door, and then she went to the Mayor to
desire their Liberty; He told her, That if he saw the Letter which she brought
them, they should have their Liberty. She then said, He should see it; and so
went and fetched it; which he having read, told her, That she should have her
Brethren out; but that he could not let them out presently. Yet it was not long
before her Friends had their Liberty.

Now leaving Barbara for some Time, M. Halhead, J. Lancaster, and M. Bateman go
to Ireland.
we return to Miles Halhead. In the first Month of this present Year he was
moved to go to Ireland, and declare the Word of the Lord there; and speaking of
this to James Lancaster, and Miles Bateman, they quickly resolved to keep him
company, and so they went for Ireland, where they proclaimed the Truth in
Cities, Towns, Villages, and before Magistrates as Occasion offered, and their
Testimony was received by many. After they had discharged themselves, they
returned to England, where being come, Miles soon found himself moved to go to
Scotland: In his Way thither, he met his Friend James Lancaster, M. Halhead and
J. Lancaster go into Scotland.
who was very free to go with him; and so they went into Scotland; but were not
the first of those called Quakers in that Country; for Christopher Fell, George
Wilson, and John Grave had been there before; Some Friends were there before.
so that a little Church of those of their Communion was already planted in
that Kingdom, before Halhead went thither: And one Alexander Hamilton had, a
Tear before ever any Quakers appeared in Scotland, erected a Meeting at
Drumbowy, and also at Heads, and he received their Testimony when they came
there, Scotland early visited by K. Evans and S. Chivers.
as also his Wife Joan, James Gray, James Miller, and others. I find also that
Scotland was early visited by Katherine Evans, and Sarah Chivers, two eminent
Women, of whom something extraordinary is to be related in its due Time.

But I return to Miles Halhead, M. Halhead in Danger of being stoned.
who being come to Dunfries, went on a First Day of the Week into a
Steeple-house in that Town, where seeing many People gathered together, howling
and crying, and making great Lamentation, as if they had been touched with a
Sense of their Sins, he was silent until their Worship was done: But then being
grieved with their Deceit and Hypocrisy, he spoke as he was moved, but met with
great Opposition, many of the People being in such a Rage, that they drove him
and his Companion out of the Town, near to the Side of a great River, and it
was intended that the Women of the Town should stone them; but they prevented
this, by wading through the River.

Being thus safely past the Water, Visit Edinburgh and Leith,
they went to Edinburgh and Leith, where they staid about ten Days. During that
Time Miles spoke to' the People when Occasion offered, as also to the Garrisons,
and to the Captains and Officers of the Army, who were much affected, and
confessed that the Lord had been very good unto them; for Myles's Message was,
That the Anger of the Lord was kindled against them, because they had not
performed their Promises, which they made to Him in the Day of their Distress,
when their Enemies encompassed them on every Side; for then the Lord delivered
them, and gave tham Victory; but they had returned Him Evil for Good, and
committed Violence against those He sent to declare his Word amongst them.
Glascow and Sterling, and return to England.
This being told them at large by Miles, he went to Glascow and Sterling, where
he also spoke as he was moved; and so returned to England. But before I leave
Scotland, I may say, that as the first Meetings were kept at Drumbowy and
Heads, so it was not long ere Meetings were settled also at Garshore, Meetings
settled at Garshore, Edinburgh, and Aberdeen.
at Edinburgh, and also at Aberdeen. The first Scotch Preachers or those called
Quakers, I find to have been William Osburn, Richard R^e, and Alexander
Hamilton already mentioned. Of the said Hamilton, I may mention a singular
Instance. After he and his Wife, The first Preachers in Scotland.
with her and his Sister, had separated themselves from the Society of the
Independents, it happened that Thomas Charters, a Teacher of that Sect, A
remarkable Occurrence.
at Kilbride, not far from Drumbowy, seeing that he could not draw Hamilton,
and those of his Family back again, threatened them with Excommunication, and
appointed a Day for it, giving Notice thereof to Hamilton, some Days
beforehand. Hamilton warned him to forbear, or else the Anger of God would
seize on him. But he answered, It is but Alexander Hamilton that says so. To
which Hamilton return^d in the Presence of many Witnesses, That it was not only
he, but what he had said was of the Lord. But Charters persisting in what he
intended, and walking two Days before the appointed Time in the
Steeple-house-yard, where his Horse was feeding, stepped to him to stroke him;
but the Horse growing wanton, gave Charters such a violent Kick on his Side,
that he died about the same Hour which was appointed by him for the
Excommunication. Whether this Case happened in the Year I now describe, I am
not certain; but however, it was either in, or near it.

This Year Miles came to Berwick in Northumberland, M. Halhead visits the Mayor
of Berwick.
and went to the Mayor of that Town, and spoke to him in his Shop thus: Friend,
hear what the Servant of the Lord has to say unto thee. Give over persecuting
of the Lord's Servants, whom he does send in Love to this Town of Berwick, to
sh^^ you the Way that leads to Life Eternal. I charge thee, O M^n, touch not
the Lord's Anointed, nor do his Prophets any Harm, lest thou procure the Anger
of the Living Eternal God against thee. This bold Language so offended the
Mayor, that he sent Miles to Prison, where he was about ten Weeks, Is by him
sent to Prison.
and then was brought to the Sessions, where a Bill, that was drawn up against
him, was read in open Court: But he denied the Contents thereof, yet said, But
what I said to the Mayor of this Town, I will not deny. And then he related the
aforesaid Words (...) ^poke to the Mayor. Whereupon the Recorder said, Sirs, As
I understand by his own Words, if he cannot prove the Mayor of this Town a
Persecutor, in my Judgment he has wronged him. To this Miles answered, If the
Mayor of this Town of Berwick, dare say in the Presence of the Lord, whose
Presence is here, that he is no Persecutor, but the persecuting Nature is slain
in him, I will be willing to abide the Judgment of the Court. Then the Clerk of
the Court said, Mr. Mayor, If you will say that you are no Persecutor, but the
persecuting Nature is slain in you, he is willing to abide the Judgment of the
Court. To this the Mayor answered, I know not what to do; I would I had never
seen him: I pray you, let him go, and let us be no more troubled with him. Then
Miles said, "That he would prove this Mayor of Berwick the greatest Persecutor
in Town or Country." I was once (thus he went on) committed to Prison in this
Town before, for speaking the Word of the Lord in the Streets.
by some of the Justices that are now in this Court; but thou, O Man, have
exceeded them all; then have committed me, and kept me in close Prison for
about ten Weeks, for speaking to thy own Person in thy own Shop. Now I make my
Appeal to the Recorder of this Town of Berwick, as I am a freeborn Englishman,
whether my Imprisonment be Legal, according to the Law of this Nation, or not?
Then the Recorder of the Town stood up, and said, It is not very Legal for any
Minister of the Law, to imprison any Man in his own Cause. Then the Court
cried, Take him away. The Chief Priest of the Town then stood up, and desired
the Court that he might ask Miles one Question? Another remarkable Matter.
To this Miles said, The Lord knows thy Heart, O Man, and at this present has
revealed thy Thoughts to his Servant; and therefore now I know thy Heart also,
thou High Priest, and the Question thou would ask me: And if thou will
promise me before the Court, that if I tell thee the Question thou would ask
me, thou will deal plainly with me, I will not only tell thee thy Query, but I
will answer it. Then the Priest said, He would: Then Miles proceeded, Thy
Question is this; Thou would know whether I own that Christ that died at
Jerusalem, or not? To this the Priest, wondering, said, Truly, that is the
Question. Then Miles said, According to my Promise, I will answer it before
this Court. In the Presence of the Lord God of Heaven, I own no other Christ
than Him that died at Jerusalem, and made a good Confession before Pontius
Pilate, to be the Light and Way that leads fallen Man out of Sin and Evil, up
to God Eternal, blessed for evermore. More Questions were not asked him, but
the Jailor was commanded to take him away. He is released.
Yet within a short Time the Court gave Order to release him. Then going to
New Castle, he returned to his Wife and Children at Mount-joy, where we will
leave him for some Time, and in the mean While return again to G. Fox, whom we
left at Synder-hill-green, from whence he traveil^d up and down in Yorkshire,
G. Fox in Yorkshire.
as far as Holderness, visiting his Friends, and finding the Churches in a
flourishing State. To relate all his Occurrences there, would be beyond my Pale.

Passing then through the Countries, Goes to Lincolnshire.
he went to Lincolnshire, and to the Meeting where he was, came the Sheriff of
Lincoln, who made great Contention for a Time; The Sheriff convinced.
but at length the Power of the Lord so reached him, that he was convinced of
the Truth, as were several others also that did oppose.

Whilst G. Fox was in this Country, the Church of his Friends increased, and
many received the Doctrine preached by him, and amongst these was one Sir
Richard Wrey, Also Sir R. Wrey, and others.
with his Brother, and the Brother's Wife, who both continu^d steadfast till
they died; but Sir Richard found this Way so narrow, that he afterward ran
out; for Persecution in Time fell so fast on those called Quakers, that none
could abide in their Society, but such as were willing to hazard all.

G. Fox now went to Darbyshire, and the abovesaid Sheriff of Lincoln traveling
with him, they came into Nottinghamshire, and so into the Peak-Country, where
having a Meeting at Thomas Hammersly's, several Ranters came and opposed him;
and when he reproved them for Swearing, they said, In the Peak-Country is
opposed by Ranters.
Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph swore. But though G. Fox did not deny this, yet he
said, Christ, ( who said, Before Abraham was, I am,) Swear not at all. And
Christ ends the Prophets, as also the old Priesthood, and the Dispensation of
Moses; and he reigns over the House of Jacob, and of Joseph, and says, Swear
not at all. And God when he brings in the First-begotten into the World,
says, Let all the Angels of God worship him, to wit, Christ Jesus, who says,
Swear not at all. And as for the Plea that Men make for Swearing to end their
Strife, Christ, who says, Swear not at all, destroys the Devil and his Works,
who is the Author of Strife; for that is one of his Works. And God said, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. So the Son is to be
heard, who forbids Swearing: And the Apostle James, who did hear the Son of
God, and followed him, and preached him, forbids also all Oaths. Thus G. Fox
prevailed, T. Hammersly without an Oath Foreman (...) Jury (...) Verdict (...).
and many were convinced that Day. It is remarkable, that Thomas Hammersly
being summoned upon a Jury, was admitted to serve without an Oath; and when he
being Foreman, brought in the Verdict, the Judge did declare, That he had been
a Judge so many Years, but never heard a more upright Verdict than that Quaker
had then brought G. Fox traveling on, came to Swanington in Leicestershire,
where there was a General Meeting, to which many of his Friends came from
several Parts, A general Meeting at Swanington.
and among these, J. Audland, and F. Howgill from Bristol, and E. Borough from
London. After this G. Fox came to Twy-Cross, and some Ranters the^e sang and
danced before him; but he reproved them so earnestly, that some of them were
reached, and became modest and sober.

Then he went to Drayton, G. Fox at Drayton his Birthplace; has a (...) with
Priest Stephens etc. before many People.
his Birthplace, to visit his Relations; where Nathaniel Stephens the Priest,
having gotten another Priest, sent for him. G. Fox having been three Years
abroad, knew nothing of their Design, but yet at last he went to the
Steeple-house-yard, where the two Priests had gathered Abundance of People; and
they would have had him gone into the Steeple-house: But he asked them, What he
should do there? And it was answered him, Mr. Stephens could not bear the Cold.
At which G. Fox said, He may bear it as well as I. At last they went into a
great Hall, R. Farnsworth being with him, where they enter^d into a Dispute
with the Priests, concerning their Practice, how contrary it was to Christ and
his Apostles. The Priests asked, Where Tithes were forbidden, or ended?
Whereupon G. Fox showed them out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. vii. That
not only Tithes, but the Priesthood, that took Tithes, was ended; and that the
Law was ended and disanulled, by which the Priesthood was made, and Tithes were
commanded to be paid. Moreover, he knowing Stephens's Condition, laid open his
Manner of Preaching, showing, That he, like the rest of the Priests, did apply
the Promises to the first Birth, which must die; whereas the Promises were to
the Seed, not to many Seeds, but to the one Seed, Christ, who was one in Male
and Female: For all were to be born again, before they could enter into the
Kingdom of God. Then Stephens said, That he must not judge so. But G. Fox told
him, He that was spiritual, judged all Things. Stephens confessed, That this
was a full Scripture: But Neighbors, said he, this is the Business; G. Fox is
come to the Light of the Sun, and now he thinks to put out my Starlight. To
this G. Fox returned, That he would not quench the least Measure of God in any,
much less put out his Starlight, if it were true Starlight, Light from the
Morning Star: But that, if he had any Thing from Christ, or God, he ought to
speak it freely, and not take Tithes from the People for Preaching; seeing
Christ commanded his Ministers to give freely, as they had received freely. But
Stephens said, He would not yield to that. This Dispute being broke off for
that Time, The Dispute resumed by eight Priests.
was taken up again, a Week after by eight Priests, in the Presence of many
People: And when they saw that G. Fox remained unshaken, they fawningly said,
What might he have been, if it had not been for the Quakers! Afterward the
Dispute was resumed in the Steeple-house-yard, And afterward a third Time in
the Steeple-house-Yard.
where G. Fox showed, by Abundance of Scriptures, that they who preached for
Wages, were false Prophets, and Hirelings; and that such who would not preach
without Wages, or Tithes, did not serve the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
Bellies. This he treated on so largely, that a Professor said, George, What!
will thou never have done? To this his Answer was, That he should have done
shortly. And when he broke off, one of the Priests said, They would read the
Scriptures he had quoted. With all my Heart, said he: Then they began to read
Jer. xxiii. and when they had read a Verse or two, George said, Take Notice,
People. But the Priests cried, Hold thy Tongue, George. He then bid them read
the whole Chapter throughout: But they stopping, asked him a Question: And he
told them, That if the Mattar he charged them with, was first granted, then he
would answer their Question; for his Charge had been, That they were false
Prophets, and false Teachers, such as the true Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles cried against. Nay, said a Professor to That: But he said, Yes; for
you leaving the Matter, and going to another thing, seem to consent to the
Proof of the former Charge. Now, their Question was, Seeing those false
Prophets were adulterated, whether he did judge Priest Stephens an Adulterer.
To this he answered, That he was adulterated from God in his Practice, like
those false Prophets. Then they broke up the Meeting, and Stephens desired,
that G. Fox, with his Father and Mother, might go aside with him, that he might
speak to him in private. George, though his Relations yielded to it, was very
loath to do so; yet that it might not be said he was disobedient to his Parents,
he went: But many of the People being willing to hear, drew close to them. Then
Stephens said, If he was out of the Way, George should pray for him; and if
George was out of the Way, he would pray for him: Moreover, That he would give
to George a Form of Words to pray by. To this G. Fox replied, It seems thou
do not know, whether thou art in the right Way, or no; but I know, that I am
in the everlasting Way, Christ Jesus, which thou art out of: And thou would
give me a Form of Words to pray by, and yet thou deniest the Common Prayer Book
to pray by, as well as I. If thou would have me pray for thee by a Form of
Words, is not this to deny the Apostles Doctrine and Practice of praying by the
Spirit, as it gave Words and Utterance? Here, though some of the People fell a
laughing, yet others that were grave and sober, were convinced of the Truth,
and the Priests were greatly shaken; insomuch, that George's Father, though he
was a Hearer and Follower of the Priest, was so well satisfied, that, striking
his Cane upon the Ground, he said, Truly I see, he that will but stand to the
Truth, it will carry him out.

Now G. Fox did not stay long at Drayton, Goes from Drayton to Leicester and so
to Whetstone, where he is taken and brought before Colonel Hacker.
but went to Leicester, and from thence to Whetstone, where a Meeting was to be
kept; but before it began, there came about seventeen Troopers, of Colonel
Hacker's Regiment, who taking him up, brought him to the said Colonel, where
there was also his Major and Captains. Here he entered into a long Discourse
with them, about the Priests, and about Meetings; for at this Time there was a
Noise of a Plot against Cromwell: And he spoke also much concerning the Light of
Christ, which enlighteneth every Man, that comes into the World. The Colonel
hearing him speak thus, asked, Whether it was the Light of Christ that made
Judas betray his Master, and afterward led him to hang himself? G. Fox told
him, No; that was the Spirit of Darkness which hated Christ, and his Light.
Then the Colonel said to George, He might go home, and keep at home, and not go
abroad to Meetings. But he told him, He was an innocent Man, free from Plots,
and he denied all such Works. Then the Colonel's Son Needham, said, Father,
this Man has reigned too long; it is Time to have him cut off. G. Fox asked
him, For what? What have I done, or whom have I wronged from a Child? And who
can accuse me of any Evil? Then the Colonel asked him, If he would go home, and
stay there. To which G. Fox answered, That if he should promise him so, it
would imply, that he was guilty of something to go home, and make his Home a
Prison to himself: And if he went to Meetings, they would say, he broke their
Order. But that he should go to Meetings, as the Lord should order him; and
that therefore he could not submit to their Requirings: And having farther
added, That he and his Friends were a peaceable People: The Colonel said, Well
then, I will send you to morrow Morning by Six a-clock to my Lord Protector, by
Captain Drury, one of his Lifeguard. The next Morning, about the appointed
Time, he was delivered to Captain Drury. Then G. Fox desired, he would let him
speak with the Colonel, before he went; and so the Captain brought him to the
Colonel's Bedside, who again bad him go home, and keep no more Meetings. But G.
Fox told him, He could not submit to That, but must have his Liberty to serve
God, add go to Meetings. Then said the Colonel, you must go before the
Protector. Whereupon G. Fox ^n^eled on his Bedside, and prayed the Lord to
forgive ^im; since according to his Judgment he was as Pilate, though he would
wash his Hands; (for he was stirred up, and set on by the Priests) and
therefore George bad him, When the Day of his Misery and Trial should come upon
him, then to remember what he had said to him. Far was it now from Needham, who
would have had G. Fox cut off, to think, that one Time this would befall his
Father in an ignominious Manner at Tyburn. But what afterward happened, when
he was condemned as one of the Judges of King Charles the I. will be related in
its due Place.

G. Fox then having left Col. Hacker, Who sends him Prisoner by Capt. Drury to
the Protector at London.
was carried Prisoner by Captain Drury to London; where the Captain went to
give the Protector an Account of him; and coming again, he told G. Fox, The
Protector did require, that he should promise, not to take up a carnal Sword or
Weapon against him, or the Government, as it then was; and that he should write
this in what Words he saw good, and set his Hand to it. G. Fox considering
this, next Morning wrote a Paper to the Protector, by the Name of Oliver
Cromwell, wherein he did in the Presence of God, declare, That he denied the
wearing or drawing of a carnal Sword, or any outward Weapon, against him, or
any Man: And that he was sent of God to stand a Witness against all Violence,
and against the Works of Darkness; and to turn People from Darkness to the
Light, and to bring them from the Occasion of War and Fighting, to the
peaceable Gospel; and from being Evildoers which the Magistrate's Sword should
be a Terror to. Having written this, he set his Name to it, and gave it to
Captain Drury, who delivered it to O. Cromwell; And after some Time, returning
to the Maremaid, near Charing Cross, where G. Fox was lodged, he carried him to
White Hall, and brought him before the Protector, who was not yet dressed, it
being pretty early in the Morning. G. Fox coming in, With whom he has a long
Conference.
said, Peace be in this House, and bid the Protector, Keep in the Fear of God,
that he might receive Wisdom from him; that by it he might be ordered, and with
it might order all Things under his Hands to God's Glory. He had also much
Discourse with him concerning Religion, wherein Cromwell carried himself very
moderately, but said, that G. Fox and his Friends, quarrelled with the
Ministers, meaning his Teachers. G. Fox told him, He did not quarrel with them;
but they quarelled with him, and his Friends. But, thus (continued he) if we
own the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, we cannot uphold such Teachers,
Prophets, and Shepherds, as the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles declared
against; but we must declare against them by the same Power and Spirit.
Moreover, he showed, That the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles Preached
freely, and declared against them that did not declare freely, but preached for
filthy Lucre, and divined for Money, or preached for Hire, being covetous and
greedy, like the dumb Dogs, that could never have enough: And that they that
had the same Spirit, which Christ, the Prophets, and the Apostles had, could
not but declare against all such now, as they did then. He also said, That all
Christendom (so called) had the Scriptures, but they wanted the Power and
Spirit, which they had who gave them forth; and that was the Reason, they were
not in Fellowship with the Son, nor with the Father, nor with the Scriptures,
nor one with another. Whilst he was thus speaking, Cromwell several Times said,
I^ was very good, and it was Truth. G. Fox had many more Words with him; but
seeing People come in, he drew a little back: And as he was turning, Cromwell
caught him by the Hand, and with Tears in his Eyes, said, Come again to my
House; for if thou and I were but an Hour of a Day together, we should be
nearer one to another; adding, that he wished him no more Ill, than he did to
his own Soul. To this G. Fox returned, That if he did, he wronged his own Soul;
and bid him, Hear^en to God's (...), that he might stand in his Counsel, and
obey it; and if he did so, that would keep him from Hardness of Heart; And with
much Tenderness is discharged.
but if he did not hear God's Voice, his Heart would be hardened. This so
reached the Protector, that he said, It was true. Then G. Fox went out; and
Captain Drury following, told him, That the Lord Protector said, He was at
Liberty, and might go whither he would. Yet he was brought into a great Hall,
where the Protector's Gentlemen were to dine: And he asked, What they did bring
him thither for? They told him, It was by the Protector's Order, that he might
dine with them. But George bid them tell the Protector, He would not eat a Bit
of his Bread, nor drink a Sup of his Drink. But refuses his Entertainment.
When Cromwell heard this, he said, Now I see there is a People risen, and come
up, that I cannot win either with Gifts, Honors, Offices, or Places; but all
other Sects and People, I can. But it was told him again, That the Quakers had
forsook their own, and were not like to look for such Things from him.

It was very remarkable, that Captain Drury, who, while G. Fox was under his
Custody, What (...) Capt. Drury (...) being G. Fox with (...) Name of Quaker^
given first by the Independents.
would often scoff at him, because of the Nickname of Quakers, which the
Independents had first given to the Professors of the Light, afterward came to
him, and told him, That as he was lying on his Bed to rest himself in the
Daytime, a sudden Trumbling seized on him, that his Joints knocked together,
and his Body shook so, that he could not rise from his Bed; he was so shaken,
that he had not Strength enough left to rise. But he felt the Power of the Lord
was upon him, and he tumbled off his Bed, and cried to the Lord, and said, He
would never speak against the Quakers more, viz. such as trembled at the Word
of God.

The particular Occurrences that befell G. Fox, when he was at Liberty in
London, I pass by. He had great Meetings there, and the Throngs of People were
such, that he could hardly get to and from the Meetings, because of the Crowd.
In the mean while the Number of his Friends increased exceedingly, G. Fox
writes against Pride, gaudy Apparel, and Fashions.
and some belonging to Cromwell's Court were also convinced of the Truth
preached by him. He wrote about that Time several Papers, one of which was
against Pride, gaudy Apparel, and the World's Fashions.

I don't find, that about this Time there was at London any Persecution from
the Magistrates, but in other Places there was: And it was in this Year that
Anne, the Wife of John Audland, coming into a Steeple-house at Banbury said,
after the Priest had ended, That those that were without the Doctrine of
Christ, though they said, the Lord lives, yet spoke falsely, according to Jer.
v. 2. Because of this, Anne Audland imprisoned.
she was imprisoned, as guilty of Blasphemy, and two Boys swore against her,
that she had said, That the Lord did not live. Thus false Accusations
prevailed, and at this Rate Persecution was cloak'd.

The Year drew now to an End, Public Transactions.
and Cromwell concluded a Peace with the united Netherlands; to get Things the
more clear at home, it seems he endeavored to remove Troubles abroad. And
there being a Rumor spread of a Plot, as has been hinted already, to be the
more assured of the Parliament, he caused a Guard to be set upon the Door of
the House, to keep out those Members that refused to sign a Paper, whereby they
promised, To be faithful to the Lord Protector, and to make no Alteration in
the Government, so as it was settled, on a single Person, and a Parliament. But
several of the Members would not sign this Paper, Saying, that it was a
Violation of the Privileges of the Parliament, and a depriving them of their
Liberty; and therefore they were kept out; but others who subscribed the said
Paper, were admitted. Yet this Assembly not acting to the Satisfaction of
Cromwell, he dissolved them after a Session of five Months.

The young King Charles, who lived in Exile, had left France, and was come to
Cologn on the Rome, where he stayed for some Time. But I return to London,
where we le^t G. Fox, (...) was in that City continually at Work, discharging
his Duty every where, both with Mouth and Pen, suffering no time to be lost.
There being Commissioners appointed for the trying of Ministers, he wrote a
Paper to them, wherein he advised them To see whether they were not such whom
the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles disproved; and who would admire their
Persons because of Advantage, etc. He stayed at London till the Year 1655; and
after having cleared himself, G. Fox comes to J^. Crook's in Bedfordsh. who is
convinced, and turned out of Commission. A. Parker an early Minister.
he went to Bedfordshire, and came to the House of John Crook, a Justice of
Peace, where there was a great Meeting, and many were convinced of the Truth he
declared, of which Number John Crook also was one; but for this he was soon
turned out from being a Justice. Whilst G. Fox was in Bedfordshire, there was
also Alexander Parker, one of the early Ministers among those called Quakers.
But leaving them there, I now intend to speak of Willam Caton.

It has been said already, that he was one of the Family of Judge Fell: W.
Caton at (...), Companion to Judge Fell's Son.
For when he was but about fourteen Years of Age, his Father procured Leave for
him to dwell in the said Family; and his Behavior was so pleasing, that he was
allowed the Judge's Son as a Companion Night and Day; he ^at as he did, and
went with him a Hunting, Shooting, and Fishing, partaking of the same Pleasure
with him in every Thing, and ^^ving in Ease and Plenty; so that he had Cause of
Joy, that Providence had cast his Lot into such a noted Family; for not only
Judge Fell, but also his Wife Margaret, and their Daughters, were well
qualified. W. Caton conversing with such choice Company, grew up in Piety, and
was very Zealous in the performing of his private Devotions, staying often in
the Bedchamber, till the Judge's Son, his Bedfellow, was gone down, that so
he might the more ^^eely in Prayer pour out his Heart before God. And having
attained to the Age of fifteen Years, he was very diligent, when he had been at
a Lecture, to write down the chief Heads thereof; for such of the Family that
could make Repetitions of Sermons, and paraphrase thereupon, were held in
Esteem. But W. Caton found that what he reaped thereby could not satisfy the
Hunger and Thirst of his immortal Soul.

After he, and the Judge's Son, had for some Time learned Latin together in the
Family, where there was a Priest that instructed them, they were removed to a
School at Hauxhead: But here he found Company which he disliked more than that
in the Judge's Family.

It was in the Year 1652, about Mid-summer, that G. Fox, (as has been said in
its proper Place) first came to the House of Judge Fell at Swarthmore. Wonders
at G. Fox's Nonconformity to customary Salutations. Sees that the common
Diversions of Truth displease God.
His Nonconformity to the ordinary Salutations, W. Caton not a little wondered
at; but yet it did not hinder him from giving due Attention to the Doctrine G.
Fox preached, which in Substance was, To give He^d to the Light which Christ
Jesus had enlightened us withal, and which shining in our Hearts, convinces us
of Sin and Evil. This so reach^d W. Caton, that in due Time he began to be
subject to this inward Convincement, by which he came to be much restrained in
his Carriage, and could not allow himself so great Liberty as he was won^ to
do; for though he was no Ways extravagant, yet now he saw that a true Christian
must be weaned from all Vanity; and that the common Diversions of Youth
displeased God. This he clearly perceived, for the Witness of God had awakened
and reproved him of that which was contrary to true Gravity, and Sobriety of
Mind. He had not yet left the School: But (though he was pretty much advanced in
his Learning) the making of Latin Verses became a Burden to him, because he
could not give his Thoughts that Liberty for Invention a ^hers did; neither
could he well any longer give to the Master of the School the Compliment of the
Hat, as he was used to do: This I had from his own Mouth. One may easily guess
that hereby he was brought into a Straight: But Margaret Fell, seeing that he
long^d to be freed from the School, caused him to stay at home, where he was
employed by h^ in Writing, and teaching her Children. And when he was about
seventeen Years of Age, About 17, is more strengthened for Spiritual Warfare;
visits Places of public Worship and Markets, where he warns to repent; but is
buffeted and beaten.
he became more and more strengthened in the spiritual Warfare, and his Heart
was filled with Joy, because of the Mercy and Loving Kindness of the Lord to
him. Thus advancing in Godliness, he was frequently moved to go to the Places
of public Worship, and also to Markets, to warn People to Repentance; but then
beating and buffeting was his Share, and because of his Youth he was despised
by many; yet he fainted not: And esteeming it his Duty now to labor in the
Ministry of the Gospel, he desired to be discharged of his Service. Judge Fell
was very unwilling to part with him; but Margaret his Wife, though she could not
well give him up before, yet believing that the Lord required his Service, And
entering on the Ministry, leaves Judge Fell's Family, though not willing to part
with him. He then goes into Lancash. Yorksh. Darby-sh. Warwicksh. Norfolk. and
Wellingborough in Northamptonsh. then to Cambridge, and again to Norwich. and
so to London.
not only freely refin^d him, but also prevailed with her Husband to let him
go: For he did not desire his Liberty to serve other Men, but to enter into the
Service of the Lord, and to proclaim the everlasting Gospel.

About the End of the Year 1654, being eighteen Years of Age, he took his Leave
of that Family, which was not done without mutual shedding of Tears at parting.
He then went to visit his Friends in Lancashire, Yorkshire, Darbyshire, and
Warwickshire; from thence to Norwich in Norfolk, and so to Willingborough in
Northamptonshire, where he found an Opportunity to declare the Truth of God in
the Steeple-house. After that, he traveled to Cambridge, visiting his Friends
there; and then returned to Norwich, where he visited his Friends in Prison,
and had great Meetings in that City. Then he went to London, where he was very
kindly received by those of the Household of Faith. And on a First Day of the
Week was at two Steeple Houses, at one of which he had large Liberty to speak,
being indeed persuasive in Speech; and in the Afternoon at a Meeting of
Dissenters from the public Worship, he had Liberty to speak, and to publish
Truth without Opposition or Contradiction from any; and many were added to the
Faith: For at that Time there were Twelve ministering Brethren, most of them
(...) out of the North of England, Travels with J. Stubs to Dover in Kent,
where they visit the Steeple-house, and Baptist and Independent Places of
worship where they have good Service.
among whom was John Stubs, already mentioned, with whom he traveled into
Kent, and coming to Dover, where they were altogether Strangers, not knowing
any Body in the Town, they took their Lodging at an Inn. J. Stubs went on the
First Day of the Week to a Meeting of the Baptists, and W. Caton to the
Steeple-house, where he had but little Liberty to speak; but in the Yard he had
more Opportunity to clear his Conscience to the People. In the Afternoon he
went up to the Castle, where the Independents performed their Worship. Shortly
after he and J. Stubs went into the Baptists Meeting, unto which much People
resorted, and many began to be affected with their Testimony, and adhered to
it. This made such a Stir, But being forbid Entertainment by the Magistrates,
are received and protected by L. Howard, a Shoemaker,
that they were haled before the Magistrates, who examined them, and ordered
that none should entertain them on a certain Penalty; whereupon they were
turned out ot their Lodging. But one Luke Howard, a Shoemaker, who had already
heard W. Caton at London, and afterward at Dover, in the Steeple-house-yard,
though he little regarded him at London, but said to his Companion, I know more
than he can tell me, or more than either I, or he is able to live up to; yet
now he became so affected with W. Caton's Testimony, that he invited him and J.
Stubs to his House, who then (...) with them in Profess^on, and lets his House
be their Meeting Place.
where he entertained them; and not long after they had a Meeting there; and he
heard the Testimony of his Guests with no less Satisfaction than Agrippa of old
did the Speech of the Apostle Paul, when he said to him, Almost thou persuadest
me to be a Christian: For Luke Howard was not yet come so far, that he could
resolve to conform himself with the Quakers, so called; but yet, such was his
Love to them, that when the Mayor of the Town sent four Constables to his
House, with an Order to deliver them up, that so they might be carried out of
the Town, he refused to do so, relying on his Right as a Freeman of the
Corporation; and the Doors being shut, kept the Constables out of his House,
and told them from the Shop-Window, that the Mayor had no Lawful Authority to
have these Men haled out of his House, and sent out of the Town; there being no
Hue-and-Cry come after them. They staid yet some Days in his House, and he
became so strengthened by their Ministry, that he joined with them in
Profession, and also gave up his House to be a Meeting Place for their Friends.

Then W. Caton and J. Stubs departed the Town, From Dover they proceed to
Foulstone, Hide, Rumney and Lidd. Here by their Ministry, and that of A. Rigg
and T. Robinson, S. Fisher is convinced.
and went to Foulstone, and from thence to Hide, in both which Places they
found Opportunity to preach Truth.

After some Stay they went to Rumney, and also to Lidd. Here it was that Samuel
Fisher, both by their Ministry, and by that of Ambrose Rigg, and Thomas
Robinson, (who also now were gone forth in the Service of the Gospel) was
convinced, and brought over to their Society. He was one trained up to
Literature, and had studied diligently in the University; and though he was but
young then, yet of a pious Conversation, disliked many Ceremonies and Customs
usual in the Schools. When he had finished his Course there, S. Fisher's
Character.
he was ordained a Priest of the Church; and a certain great Man took him to be
his Chaplain; and afterward he got a Living at Lidd, worth about two hundred
Pounds a Year. But after having been thus employed some Time, he came to see
that Infant Baptism was an humane Institution, and to preach for Wages
unlawful. To this, may be added, that Luke Howard, some Time before he knew the
Quakers, so called, not being satisfied concerning the singing of David's
Psalms at the public Worship, so troubled his Master that he had been
Apprentice with, that he got Samuel Fisher, as a learned Minister, to come and
discourse with him, and to try to convince him: And S. Fisher talking with him,
L. Howard, told him, That God was a Spirit, and must be worshipped in Spirit and
Truth, of all those that would worship him acceptably. And also, That it was
contrary to Truth for a proud Man to sing, He was not puffed in Mind, he had no
scornful Eye, and he did not exercise himself in Things that were too high;
when he lived in Pride, wherein God beheld him afar off. And farther, that it
was very unbecoming for such an one to sing, Rivers of Tears run down mine
Eyes, because other Men keep not thy Laws, when he never knew a true Sorrow and
Repentance for his own Sins. This Reason of Howard's against the customary
Singing in their Worship, had so much Influence upon S. Fisher, that from that
Time he was stopped from any more giving David's Conditions to the People to
sing: And becoming in Time more and more uneasy to go on in acting what was
burdensome to his Conscience, he resolved to desist from his Ministry, and so
went to the Bishop, and delivered up the Commission that he had received from
him to preach: And tasting himself upon God's Providence, he took a Farm, and
turned Grasier, by which Means he maintained his Wife and Children much better
to his Content than before.

Departing thus from the Episcopalian Church, he went over to the Baptists, and
became a Zealous Teacher among them. It was about this Time that W. Caton and
J. Stubs came to Lidd, whom S. Fisher received into his House, remembering that
Scripture Exhortation, Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers, for many
thereby have entertained Angels unawares. W. Caton now went to the Meeting of
the Independents, and Stubs to that of the Baptists, where Fisher then
preached; and J. Stubs having got Opportunity to speak, declared Truth so
plainly, than S. Fisher being very much affected with it, began to paraphrase
upon it with Excellency of Speech. W. Caton and J. Stubs departing this Place,
went to another Town in this County, but not long after returning to Lidd they
found S. Fisher in Fellowship with themselves; for it happened that his
Fellow-Teacher George Hammond, in his Sermon, so violently inveighed against
those called Quakers, that S. Fisher could not be satisfied until he stood up
in the same Meeting, and bore a public Testimony against the Revisings of
Hammond, saying to him, Dear Brother, You are very dear and near to me, but the
Truth is nearer and dearer: It is the everlasting Truth and Gospel which they
hold forth: And speaking more Words to that Effect, he openly defended the
Doctrine of the reviled Quakers. This so vexed Hammond, that falling into a
greater Rage, he said, Our Brother Fisher is also bewitched. But Fisher
rendered not Reviling for Reviling, but continued witn Patience in the Faith.
This was he who afterward writ a Book, called Rusticus ad Academicos, wherein
he often encountered the Priests with their own Weapons; W. Caton amp; J. Stubs
go from Lidd to Ashford, Tenterden, Cranbrook, and Staplehurst, finding People
open and tender.
for he was very dextrous at that, and so well versed in the Ancient Poets,
that he sometimes with their Words gave home-Blows to his Adversaries, allowing
himself sometimes the Freedom of the Prophet Elijah against the Prophets or
Baal: He writ also a Paper in Hebrew to the Jews, in which Language he was well
skilled. But before I say more of him, I return to W Caton and J. Stubs. They
went from Lidd to Ashford, Tenterden, Cranbrook, and Staple-hurst, where they
found an open and tender hearted People who embraced their Doctrine; and some
would have given them Money, nay even have forced it upon them, yet they would
not take any; but as they had freely received, so they freely gave; telling
People, It was not theirs, but them, which they sought. Thence they traveled
to Maidstone, But at Maidstone are sent to the House of Correction, rifled,
stripped, set in the Stocks, and so whipped desperately.
where J. Stubs went to the public Place of Worship, and W. Caton to the
Meeting of the Independents: J. Stubs was taken at the Steeple-House, and W.
Caton, the Day following, from his Inn, and were both sent to the House of
Correction, where they were searched, and their Money, Inkhorns, and Bibles,
etc. taken from them. Afterward they were stripped, and their Necks and Arms
put in the Stocks, and in that Condition were desperately whipped. A hard
Encounter indeed! especially for such a young Man as W. Caton was: But they
were supported by an invisible Hand. Afterward Means were used to compel them
to work; and it was told them, He that would not work, should not eat. But they
were not free to consent thereto, because they esteemed this Demand unjust,
being not guilty of the Breach of any Law. Thus they were kept without Victuals
for some Days; only a little Water once a Day was allowed them. In the mean
while, the Malefactors that were there, would have given them of their Bread;
yea, the Women of the House, being moved with Compassion, would have given them
someting privately; but they were not free to accept of either. Now the Report
of this Cruelty being spread in the Town, many began to be offended at it; so
that an Officer was sent to make Restitution of some of their Things, which had
been taken from them, and then they bought Victuals with their own Money. Not
long after ^^ey were parted, 1655
and with Officers conveyed out of the Town, one at the one End of it, and
the other at the other. Afterward being parted, are conveyed out at each End of
the Town, but meet again at London; and it came upon them to return to
Maidstone, where, through Providence, none meddled with them.
At length W. Caton came to London, where he found his Companion J. Stubs: But
being there, it came upon them to return to the Town from whence they came,
which was no small Trial to them; but yet they resigned and gave up to what
they believed to be the Will of the Lord: Now Providence so ordered it, that
none meddled with them, though they, to be more fully seen, went on a First Day
of the Week to the Steeple-house. They went also to Canterbury, where, at the
Meetings of the Baptists and Independents, they had pretty good Liberty to
declare the Truth amongst them; and some being convinced of it, received their
Testimony. They were likewise at Sandwich, where W. Caton had some Service
among the Dutch People at their Steeple-house. It was now nigh Mid-Summer, when
he felt a Motion to go over to Calais in France; Declared Truth then to the
Baptists and Independents at Canterbury, and W. Caton to the Dutch Congregation
at Sandwich.
for that End he went to Dover, and so to Calais; where coming to their high
Place of Worship, his Spirit was very much grieved and burdened with the great
Idolatry in Vogue there; for he saw how some were worshipping before their dumb
Idols, and he could not well ease his Spirit for Want of the Language. Having
some Time walked about in the Town, he came to be known to some of the Chief of
the City, who desiring to speak with him, some of them came down in Person to
the Key, to look for him; and understanding he was aboard, W. Caton goes to
Dover and thence to Calais (...) France, where having cleared his Conscience,
he is suffered to depart quietly, and returning to England find^ J. Stubs at
Dover.
he was called ashore, and conveyed to a large House, where several of the
great Ones were come to see and hear him: so that he had a very good
Opportunity to declare the Truth among them, there being a Scotch Lord who
interpreted for him. And after he had cleared his Conscience, they suffered him
to depart quietly. Soon after he returned for England; and found his Companion
J. Stubs at Dover; and it being upon him to go for Holland; W. Caton was made
free to accompany him. With this Intent they went together to Yarmouth, but
could not find Passage there for Holland; and so they passed farther to the
North; and coming to Swarthmore, W. Caton found his Friends very glad to see
him, especially Margaret Fell, who had been as a nursing Mother to him. Both
intending for Holland, but finding no Passage, come to Swarthmore, thence to
Shields where was a Ship bound for Flanders, but not inclining thither, come
again to Yarmouth, and thence pass to Flushing in Zealand.
After some Stay there, having been abundantly re^re^^ed, they went to Shields,
where they heard of a Ship bound for Flanders; but having little Inclination to
go thither, came soon after to Yarmouth, where they found a Ship intended for
Flushing; in Zealand. With this Vessel they went over, and arrived safely at
the said Town. And on the First Day of the Week; they went to the Congregation
of the English and Scotch, where many wondered at them because of their
Nonconformity; and after they began to speak, there are arose a great Stir, so
that they were soon hurried out. The same Day they went to Middleburgh, whither
being come before the Afternoon's Worship was ended, one of them began to speak
after the Priest had done: But he stopped him presently, thinking at first they
were such as came thither begging; but perceiving the contrary, he and others
were the more violent. After that, he sent for them to his House, and reasoned
a while with them; There visit the English and Scotch Congregation, but are
hurried out.
but he being of a lofty Mind, they found but slight Entertainment there. After
a short Stay in Town, they embarked themselves for Rotterdam in Holland; where
being come, when they had been some few Days in the City, they got a Meeting at
an English Merchant's House: But he that interpreted for them, not rendering
their Words truly, And then go to Middleburg, but are slightly entertained.
Then^e go to Rotterdam in Holland,
it seemed not to satisfy the Hearers. After some Time they returned for
Zealand, and from thence again to England; where being arrived, W. Caton
journied to Swarthmore, and was received there with Joy; and having some
Drawings to Scotland, he went to Bishopric, where he found his Companion J.
Stubs again, with whom he traveled toward Scotland. where the^ got a Meeting
at an English Merchant's, but had not desired Success for Want of a good
Interpreter, and so in a little Time return to England. W. Caton goes to
Swarthmore, then to Bishopric, where he found J. Stubs, with whom he travels
to Herwick. Where W. Caton visits the Public, and J. Stubs the Baptists
Assembly. Then both go to Edinburgh in Scotland to a Meeting at W. Osburn's,
formerly a Lieut Col. but then a public Friend and edify the Church. W. Caton
visits the chief Steeple house, is heard by Genesis Monk with Moderation, and
returns to England.
It was about the Beginning of the Month called December, when they came to
Berwick upon Tweed, where W. Caton went into the great public Assembly, and
when the Priest had done, he stepped upon a Seat, and beginning to speak, none
seemed to make such Haste to get away, as the Priest; in the mean while W.
Caton spoke with great ^oldness, and had pretty good Liberty to declare the
Truth. But when he had done, he was taken hold of, and brought before the
Magistrates, who ordered that he should be turned out of the Town; which was
done. J. Stubs was that Day in a Meeting of the Baptists, and had some Service
there. Not long after, W. Caton, who wandering up and down, could not well get
any Lodging for his Money, returned, and came into the Town again, the Guard
suffering him very freely to pass; and then they both traveled to Edinburgh in
Scotland, where they found Things somewhat out of Order, through the
Unfaithfulness of some that were convinced of the Truth: But their Ministry was
so effectual among them, that they were brought into better Order again; and so
they edified the Church according to their Ability, the Meeting being kept at
the House of William Osburn, who had been a Lieutenant Colonel, and afterward
became a zealous Minister among the Flock there. While W. Caton was there, he
went once to the chief Steeple-house, where, after the Priest had done, he
spoke to the People; but the Multitude combining, he was not suffered to say
much, but was carried out, and coming into the Street, there was a Guard of
Soldiers, who conducted him with dra^n Swords to the Place where he desired to
be. He was about that Time also with General Monk, who behaved himself
moderately, and heard him. J. Stubs now returning to England, W. Caton went to
Sterling, where being carried to the Governor, he was at first high, but when
W. Caton, who was a Man of a meek behavior, had spoke a little to him, he
became cool and sedate. He then went to the English Chaplain's House, who was
kind to him. From Edinburgh he went to Glascow, where going into the Great
Cathedral, after the Service was done, he had some Liberty to speak to the
Multitude in the Yard, the rude People being kept under by the English
Soldiers, who were moderate, so that he had very good Service there. He also
went to Douglas, where his Service was no less, both in the Steeple-house and
elsewhere: So that having cleared himself in Scotland, he returned to England,
and came again to Swarthmore, where he was received as formerly, in very great
Love.

Leaving him there, W. Caton goes to Glascow, and has good Service in the Yard
of the Cathedral and afterward at Dowglass, and then comes again to Swarthmore
in England. G. Fox from Bedfordshire goes by London to Rumney in Kent, where
were also S. Fisher and his Wife; many are there convinced.
I turn again to G. Fox, whom we left in Bedfordshire. From thence he went by
London to Kent, and came to Rumney, not long after W. Caton and J. Stubs had
been there. Here he had a very large Meeting, whither Samuel Fisher also came,
and there was a great Convincement that Day, so that many were turned to the
Light of Christ: And after the Meeting, S. Fisher's Wife said, Now we may
discern betwixt Flesh and Spirit, and distinguish Spiritual Teaching, from
Fleshly.

From hence G. Fox went to Dover and Canterbury, and farther into Sussex, and
so to Reading, where they had a great Meeting, and many were convinced that
Day. There came also George Bishop of Bristol, who being a Captain, then wore a
Sword, though in Time he entirely left it off. G. Fox going from hence, passed up
to London, where leaving him for some Time, we will go and behold the Life and
Occurrences of James Parnel.

This young Man being born at Retford in Nottinghamshire, and trained up in the
Schools of Literature, labored very early in the Ministry of the Gospel,
having been convinced by G. Fox, when not quite sixteen Years of Age; and then
embraced the Truth, though for that Reason despised and rejected by his
Relations. He was (though of low Stature) endued with great Ability, and did not
fear, wherever he came, to call People to Repentance. From thence to Dover,
Canterbury, Sussex, and Reading.
Being imprisoned at Cambridge for his zealous Testimony, and afterward turned
out of Town like a Vagabond, he soon came back, and disputed with the Scholars
of the University; but met with rude and bad Entertainment from them. In the
Beginning of this Year he came into Essex, There came also Captain George
Bishop of Bristol with a Sword, which in Time he left off entirely.
being then about eighteen Years of Age, and preached the Gospel in several
Parts of that County, as Felsted, Stebben, Witham, Coggeshal, Halstead, and
other Places, and many received the Word by his Ministry. About the Middle of
the Summer he came to Colchester, and the^e preached the Gospel on a First Day
of the Week in a Steeple-house, after the Sermon; then in a great Meeting
appointed on Purpose, and after that disputed with the Town-Lecturer, and
another Priest, An Account of J. Parnel. By whom Stephen Crisp is convinced.
in the French School, all in one Day; so that many were convinced of the Truth
preached by him; and among these also Stephen Crisp, of whom more will be said
hereafter. J. Parnel spent that Week in the said Town, in Preaching, Exhorting,
and Disputing, to the convincing of many; though others were enraged, insomuch
that his godly Zeal was often rewarded with Blows; as once coming out of
Nicholas Steeple-house, he was struck by one with a great Staff, who said,
There, take that for Christ's sake. To which he meekly answered, Friend, I do
receive it for Jesus Christ's Sake. Many other grievous Affronts he bore,
without showing any Heat or Anger; so that he was a real Pattern of Patience
and Meekness. Having labored in the Gospel about ten Days in Colchester, he
went to Coggeshal, where a Fast was proclaimed, to be held upon the 12th of the
Month called July, to pray against the Errors of the People called Quakers. J.
Parnel being come thither, went into the Steeple-house, where he stood still,
till the Priest was coming out of the Pulpit. Now since this Priestmdash;
Sammes, who was an Independent, had cried out fiercely against the Quakers, as
Deceivers, J. Parnel esteemed it his Duty to say something to that; and the
first Words he spoke were, This is the Order of the true Church, that all may
speak one by one; and if any Thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the
first hold his Peace. Then he spoke on in the Behalf of those called Quakers:
But the Priest interrupting him, asked, What he would object against him? To
which J. Parnel answered, In that he reviled the People called Quakers, and
said they were built upon a sandy Foundation, and so called them Shakers. But,
said he, I^ll prove their Foundation not to be sandy, and thee to be a false
Prophet. After some more Words spoken by him, some accused him, That he owned
no Church: To which he said, It was false. Then it was asked him, What Church
he owned? And he answered, The Church in God. Then Priest Willis stood up, and
said, He spoke nothing but Nonsense. Parnel bad him Name one Word which he had
spoken that was Nonsense. At which Willis said, To say, The Church in God. Then
Parnel took out his Bible, and read 1 These. i. 1. where the Apostle writes to
the Church, which is in God the Father. The Priest was now at a Loss, and
Parnel told him, That he blasphemed in saying, the Church in God was Nonsense.
Then the Priest Stellum stood up, and accused Parnel with Lies and Slanders,
and not suffering him to clear himself from those Accusations, he got up into
the Pulpit, and began to pray: But Parnel not taking off his Hat, the
Magistrates called to him, to put it off. To which he returned, Order the
Priest to put off his Cap; and farther said, Before he should be subject to
their Wills, he would rather pass out of the Meeting Place; and so went out.
Not long after, Justice Dionysius Wakering followed him, and struck him with
his Hand upon his Back, saying, He arrested him in the Name of the Lord
Protector. Parnel not knowing him to be a Magistrate, asked him, Where his Writ
was. Wakering said, He had one; but he showed none. Then Parnel was hurried
into a House, and some of his Friends engaged, that he should be forthcoming
when their Worship was done. And accordingly he appeared where four Justices,
and six or seven Priests were met together. Then Justice Wakering pulled his
Hat off his Head, and threw it away; and they questioned him concerning many
Things; all which he answered, with many frivilous Questions asked to ensnare
him. At last he was committed to the common Jail at Colchester, where none of
his Friends were suffered to come to him. The Time of the Sessions at
Chelmsford being come, he, with several Felons and Murderers was fastened to a
Chain, and thus led about eighteen Miles through the Country, remaining chained
both Night and Day. Being then brought into the Court before Judge Hills, the
Jailor took off his Hat, and cast it upon the Floor. Then the Clerk read his
Indictment, and asked him, If he was guilty? To which he said, That he denied
all Guilt; and he called for his Accusers. The Judge then said, he might see
them; and that he ought to say, Guilty or not Guilty. On which Parnel told him,
He was not Guilty. Then a Jury of twelve Men was called; their Foreman was a
Drunkard: Priest Willis was also called, who swore against him, and so did two
Justices; one of their Men swearing, That they would speak nothing against him
but the Truth. The Accusations were, That in a riotous Manner he did enter into
the Parish Church at Great Coggeshall; that he there did stand up, and told the
Minister, he blasphemed, and spoke falsely, using many other reproachful Words
against him: And that he could not give a good Account where he was last
settled, or of his Life and Conversation, appearing to be an idle Person. He
was also accused with Contempt of the Magistracy and of the Ministry. To this
he answered, That he no Ways in a riotous Manner entered the Steeple-house, but
came thither quietly, and alone: For being followed by several Boys that would
have come in after him, he bad them go in before, rather than to go in
disorderly, whereby to occasion any Disturbance. That he had said to Priest
Willis, He blasphemed, by saying, The Church in God was Nonsense, he denied
not; but did not own himself to be a Vagabond and idle Person. And he did not
think it indecent, to call an unjust Judge, unrighteous; a Persecutor,
Persecutor; and a Deceiver, Deceiver. Thus Parnel pleaded his Cause. Yet the
Judge said to the Jury, That if they did not find him Guilty, the Sin would lie
upon their Heads; thus condemning the Prisoner before the Jury were entered
into Deliberation. Then J. Parnel began to speak, to inform them concerning his
Cause, but the Judge would not suffer him, though one of the Jury desired it.
After Consultation, the Jury had nothing to lay to his Charge, but a Paper in
which he had answered the Mittimus, though he had already owned this Paper to be
his Writing. But in that they were at a Loss, because in the Indictment he was
accused of a Riot: Yet the Judge and the Clerk strove to draw some Words from
the Foreman, which the other Jurymen did not consent to, and he himself was
unwilling to answer fully to their Questions. Then J. Parnel was made to
withdraw; and being called in again, the Judge fined him to the Value of about
Forty Pounds, for Contempt of the Magistracy and Ministry; for he said, The
Lord Protector had charged him to punish such Persons as should contemn either
Magistracy or Ministry. Hereupon J. Parnel was carried back again to the
Prison, being an old ruinous Castle, built as it is reported, in the Time of the
ancient Romans: Here he was to be kept until the Fine should be paid; and the
Jailor was commanded, not to let any giddy-headed People, (by which
Denomination they meant his Friends) come at him. The Jailor was willing enough
to comply with this Order, suffering none to come to him but such as abused
him; and his Wife, who was a wicked Sh^ew, did not only let her Man to beat
him, but several Times herself laid violent Hands on him and swore, She would
have his Blood: She also set other Prisoners take away the Victuals brought to
him by his Friends; and would not let him have a Trundle-Bed, which they would
have brought him to lie on, so that he was forced to lie on the cold and damp
Stones. Afterward he was put into the Hole in the Wall, a Room much like to a
Baker's Oven; for the Walls of that Building, which is indeed a direful Nest,
are of an excessive Thickness, as I have seen my self, having been in the Hole
where this pious young Man ended his Days, as will be said by-and-by. Being
confin^d in the said Hole, which was, as I remember, about twelve Foot high
from the Ground, and the Ladder too short by six Foot; he must climb up and
down by a Rope on a broken Wall, which he was forced to do to fetch his
Victuals, or for other Necessities, For tho his Friends would have given him a
Cord and a Basket to draw up his Victuals in, yet such was the Malice of his
Keepers, that they would not suffer this. Continuing in this moist Hole, his
Limbs grew benumbed; and thus it once happened, that as he was climbing up the
Ladder, with his Victuals in one Hand, and come to the Top thereof, catching at
the Rope with his other, he missed the same, and fell down upon the Stones,
whereby he was exceedingly wounded in his Head, and his Body so bruised, that
he was taken up for dead. Then they put him into a Hole underneath the other;
for there were two Rows of such vaulted Holes in the Wall. This Hole was called
the Oven, and so little, that some Bakers Ovens have been bigger, though not so
High. Here (the Door being shut) was scarcely any Air, there being no Window or
Hole. And after he was a little recovered from his Fall, they would not suffer
him to take the Air, though he was almost spent for want of Breath: And though some
of his Friends, viz. William Talcot, and Edward Grant, did offer their Bond of
40 l. to the Justice, Henry Barrington, and another, whose Name was Thomas
Shortland, to lie Body for Body, that Parnel might but have Liberty to come to
W. Talcot's House, and return, when recover^d; yet this was denied; nay, so
immoveably were they set against him, that when it was desired that he might
only walk a little sometimes in the Yard, they would not grant it by any Means:
And once the Door of the Hole being open, and he coming forth, and walking in a
narrow Yard between two high Walls, so incensed the Jailor, that he locked up
the Hole, and shut him out in the Yard all Night, being in the coldest Time of
the Winter. This hard Imprisonment did so weaken him, that after ten or eleven
Months he fell sick, and died. At his Departure there were with him Thomas
Shortland, T. Shortland and A. Langley are with J. Parnel at his Death in a
Hole in Colchester-Castle.
and Ann Langley: And it was one of these (that came often to him) who long
after brought me into this Hole where he died. Several Things which are related
here, I had from the Mouth of Eyewitnesses, who lived in that Town. When Death
approached, he said, Here I die innocently. A little after he was heard to say,
Now I must go: And turning his Head to Thomas, he said, This Death must I die,
Thomas I have seen great Things: Don't hold me, but let me go. Then he said
again, Will you hold me? To which Ann answered, No, dear Heart, we will not
hold thee. He had often said, That one Hour^s Sleep would cure him of all: And
the last Words he was heard to say, were, Now I go; and then stretched out
himself, and slept about an Hour, and breathed his last. Thus this valiant
Soldier of the Lamb conquered through Sufferings: And so great was the Malice and
Envy of his Persecutors, that to cover their Guilt and Shame they spread among
the People, That by immoderate Fasting, and afterward with (...) greedy
Eating, he had shortened his Days. But this was a wicked Lie; for though it be
true that he had no Appetite to eat some Days before he fell sick, yet when he
began to eat again, he took nothing but a little Milk, as was declared by
credible Witnesses. During his Imprisonment he writ several edifying Epistles
to his Friends.

By continuing this Relation without breaking off, E. Borough and F. Howgil
undisturbed at Dublin in Ireland. H. Cromwell then Lord De^uty.
I am advanced somewhat as to Time; but going back a little, let^s see the
Transactions of Edward Borough and Francis Howgil. It was in the Year 1655,
that they went together to Ireland, where they came in the Summer, and stand
more than six Months, having spent at Dublin about three Months, without being
disturbed, though they omitted no Opportunity to declare the Doctrine of Truth.
Henry Cromwell, Son of the Protector, was at that Time Lord Deputy of Ireland;
and it was in his Name that they were carried from Cork, (whither they were
gone) to Dublin; for since several received their Testimony, and adhered to the
Doctrine they preached, it was resolved upon, not to let them stay any longer
in Ireland. W. Ames a Baptist Teacher and strict Military Officer convinced
becomes a Minister among Friends, and ^s cast into Prison.
Here it was, as I have been told, that William Ames, by their Ministry, was
brought over into the Society of the Quakers, so called. He was a Baptist
Teacher, and also a Military Officer, who being of a strict Life himself, kept
his Soldiers under a severe Discipline. I remember how he used to te^l us, that
when any Soldier under his Colors had been guilty of any Immorality on a
First Day of the Week, he presently had him bound Neck and Heels. But being now
entered into the Society o^ the despised Quakers, and in Process of Time
becoming a Minister among them, it was not long before he was cast into Prison;
E. Borough and F. Howgil banished Ireland and the Day they left it. B.
Blaugdon arrives there safe after dreadful Storm at Sea.
of whom more may be said hereafter. Now E. Borough and F. Howgil were
banished out of Ireland; but on the same Day that they were sent away, Barbara
Blaugdon arrived there. She went from England in a Vessel bound for Cork, but
by foul Weather carried to Dublin. When the Tempest was high, the Seamen said
that she being a Quaker was the Cause of it, and they conspired to cast her
overboard. Aware of this Plot, she told the Master what his Men designed to
do, and said That if he did suffer this, her Blood would be required at his
Hands: So he charged them not to meddle with her. The Storm continuing, and it
being a First Day of the Week, she went upon the Deck, feeling her self moved
to speak to the Seamen by way of Exhortation, and to pray for them; for their
Priest, afraid like the rest, could not say any Thing among them. Having spoke
what was upon her, she concluded with Prayer; and all the Ship^s Crew was very
quiet and sedate, saying, They were more beholden to her than to their Priest,
because she prayed for them; and he for Fear could not open his Mouth to speak.
At leng^h they arrived safe at Dublin, without Damage, which indeed was
strange, and made the Master say, That he was never in such a Storm without
receiving any Loss. Barbara going ashore, went to the House of the Deputy; but
the People told her, There was for her no speaking with him; for she might
know, that he had banished two of her Friends out of the Nation the Day before.
Then she met with the Secretary, and desired him to help her to speak with the
Deputy. He answered, That he did not think he could. Then she told him, That if
he would be so civil, as to go up and tell the Deputy, that there was a Woman
below that would speak with him; if he refused, she was answered. So the
Secretary went up; and there came a Man to fetch her into the Withdrawing Room;
and after she had been there a while, a Person came out of the Deputy's
Chamber, and all that accompanied him, stood bare-headed (for they knew she
never saw the Deputy) but she had a Sense it was a Priest, who shew^d himself
covered to deceive her: And the Room being almost full of People, they asked
her, Why she did not do her Message to their Lord. To which she answered, When
see your Lord, then I shall do my Message to him. A little after the Deputy
came forth, Barbara, after an Attempt to impose on her, speaks with the Deputy,
wh^ is very much affected with her Message.
and sat down on a Couch: She then stood up, and speaking to him what was upon
her Mind, bad him, Beware that he was not found fighting against God, in
opposing the Truth, and persecuting the Innocent; but, like wise Gamaliel, to
let them alone; for if it was of God, it would stand; but if of Man, it would
fall. Farther, that the Enmity did not lie so much in himself, but he was
stirred up to it by evil Magistrates, and bad Priests; and that God's People
were as dear to him now, as ever; and they that touched them, touch^d the Apple
of his Eye. In the mean while, in his Name, and by his Power, there was much
Hurt done to the People of God, all over the Nation, and it would at last lie
heavy upon him. Moreover, that the Teachers of the People did cause them to
err, and that he knew the Priests Condition. She touching upon that, the Deputy
said to the Priest that stood by, Priest Harrison assents to the Truth of her
Testimony, (...) whom she speaks also.
There^s for you, Mr. Harrison: And she spoke with such a Power, that it made
the Deputy much concerned: And when she had done, he asked the Priest, What he
had to say to that which she spoke? And he said, It was all very true, and very
good, and he had nothing to say against it, if she did speak as she meant. Then
she told the Priest, That the Spirit of God was true, and did speak as it
meant, and meant as it spoke; but that Men of corrupt Minds did pervert the
Scriptures, by putting their own Imaginations and Conceivings upon it, and so
did deceive the People: But the Holy Men of God wrote and gave forth the
Scriptures as they were inspired of the Holy Ghost; and that they were of no
private Interpretation; and could not be understood but by the same Spirit that
gave them forth. After having thus spoken, she went away and returned to her
Lodging, which was at one Captain Rich's House, who coming home, said, That the
Deputy was so sad and melancholy, after she had been with him, that he could
not go to Bowls, or to any other Pastime. Barbara having now performed her
Service at Dublin, Goes then to Cork, is imprisoned in several Places, many
former Acquaintance afraid of her turned out of Doors, and goes home to Bristol.
went to Cork, where she had some Relations and Acquaintance; but great were
her Sufferings there-about; for she was imprisoned almost wherever she came,
being moved to follow those of her Acquaintance into several Steeple Houses;
yet wherever her Mouth was opened, there was some that received her
Testimony. Once she was made to speak in a Marketplace, where a Butcher swore
he would cleave her Head, and having li^ted up his Cleaver to do it, there came
a Woman behind him, and catching his Arms, stopped him, till the Soldiers came
and rescued Barbara. Many of her Acquaintance, with whom she formerly had been
very conversant, were now afraid of her; for sometimes she spoke so awfully to
them in their Houses, that it made them tremble; and some said, she was a
Witch; and running away, Returns for Ireland in a Ship which foundred near
Dungarvan, but she is wonderfully preserved.
their Servants turned her out of Doors. After having been there some Time, she
returned home to Bristol. But it was not very long ere she was moved to go to
Ireland again; and being come near Dungarvan, the Ship foundred near the Shore:
The Master and the Passengers got into the Boat, save one Man and a Woman, who
were cast away; and Barbara, who was still in the Cabin, was almost stilled by
Waves that beat in upon her; yet at length she got upon the Deck. The Master in
the mean while being come ashore, called to her, that if she would leap down,
he and another would venture to come into the Water to save her. Accordingly
they came up to their Necks; and she leaping down, they caught her; Comes to
Dublin, exhorts the Judges in Court for which she suffers severe Imprisonment.
but being entangled in the Ropes in leaping down, she was drawn from them
again: But presently a Wave came rolling, and beat the Ship outward, which was
their Preservation; for if it had beaten inward it might have killed them all
three; she was thus caught again, and drawn to Shore. Then she went to Dublin,
where coming into the Court of Justice, she spoke to the Judges; and exhorted
them to Righteousness. But this was taken so ill, that she was put into Prison,
where she lay upon S^raw on the Ground; and when it rained, the Wet and Filth
of the House of Office ran in under her. Being arraign^d at the Bar, she was
required to plead, Guilty or not Guilty. She answered, That there was no Guilt
upon any one^s Conscience for what was done in Obedience to the Lord God. But
she not answering in that Form of Words they bid her, was sent back to Prison
again, where she suffered much. In the mean while there happened a singular
Instance, which I cannot pass by with Silence.

At that Time there was in Prison an Innkeeper, A strange Account of a Murder.
with his Family, being accused of a Murder: Now the Brother of him that was
either murdered, or lost, could not enjoy some Land, except he could prove that
his Brother was dead, and in Order thereto, he brought a Fellow into the
Prison, who said, He would prove that the Man was killed at such an Inn, and
buried under a Wall: And he accused the Innkeeper and his Wife, and their Man
and Maid, and a Smith to be guilty of this Murder; they being already in
Prison. Barbara having heard of this, found Means to go to this desperate
Fellow; and asked him, How he could conceal this Murder so long, when he was,
according to Law, as guilty of it as any of them, if what he said were-true. At
this Question he trembled so exceed^ngly, that his Knees struck one against
another, and he confess^d, That he never before saw the said People with his
Eyes, nor ever was at the Place in his Life, nor knew any Thing of it, but only
he was drawn in by the Man that was to have the Land, and was persuaded to
witness the Fact. Other Prisoners heard this Confession also; and Barbara sent
to the Deputy, desiring him to send down his Priest, that he might hear the
said Confession. The Priest came, and the Fellow confessed the same to him as
he had done to Barbara, and he once also confess^d the same before the Judge.
But afterward he eat his Words; for the Man that had induced him, came every
Day, and made him drink plentifully, and also caus^d the Jailor to lock up
Barbara, that she might not come to him. Then she wrote to the Innkeeper, and
his Wife and Man, and also to Judge Pepes, and told him, The Day of his Death
did draw nigh, wherein he must give an Account of his Actions; and that
therefore he ought to take Heed, that he did not condemn innocent People,
having but one Witness, in whose Mouth so many Lies were found, the other all
saying they were innocent. For all that, the Judge went on, and condemned all
the Accused, and the Accuser also, as conscious to the Crime. Hereupon a Priest
came to speak with the Maid that was condemned, and was in the same Prison with
Barbara; but she would not see him, saying, Nay, he can do me no Good: I have
done with Man for ever: But God, thou know that I am innocent of what they
lay to my Charge. But however, they were all hanged, and the Witness first,
probably for Fear he should have made another Confession after he had seen the
others hanged.

Now some Friends of Barbara, viz. Sir William King, Colonel Fare, and the Lady
Brown, hearing she was in Prison, came to see her, and afterward went to the
aforementioned Judge, to get her released: But when they came to him, he told
them, That he was afraid of his Life. At which they laughed, and said, They had
known her from a Child, and there was no Harm in her at all. And being all very
earnest to get her Liberty, they at last obtained it. Then she went to the
Steeple-house, where this Judge was, and cleared her self of him. He being come
home, went to Bed, and died that Night. The Noise of which sudden Death being
spread, it made People say, that Barbara had been a true Prophetess unto him.

She now went to Limrick, where she was put into Prison; but after a while
being released, Comes to Limrick, is imprisoned and released; and in her Return
to England is robbed by a Privateer.
she took Shipping for England again; and at Sea was robbed of all that she had
by a Privateer, who coming on Board, took the Master away, (...) he should pay
them a Sum of Money for the Ship and Goods: But she came safe to England. She
traveled at her own Charge, paying for what she had.

But leaving her, I Will return to Miles Halhead, who, as he was following the
Plough in the Beginning of this Year, felt a Motion to go to London; taking
York and Hull in his Way, M. Halhead goes through York, Hull, Lincolnshire,
Leicestersh, to London, thence with T. Salthouse to Bristol, so to Exeter and
Plymouth, where he is imprisoned. Writes to his Wife.
and passing thence through Lincolnshire, and Leicestershire, he came to the City
of London, from whence, after some Stay, he went to Bristol with Thomas
Salthouse, and so to Exeter and Plymouth, where he suffered much Persecution,
and was imprisoned. He writ about that Time a Letter to his Wife, which I think
worth the while to insert here; and was as follows,

ANN HALHEAD,
MY dear Heart, my dear Love in the Bowels of Love, in the Lord Jesus Christ,
salutes thee and my Children. My Soul, my Soul is poured forth in Love to thee
daily, and the Breathings of my Soul to my Father is for thee, that thou may
be kept in the Fear of the Lord, and in his Counsel daily, and so thou may
come to Rest and Peace, that is laid up for all that fear him, and walk in
Obedience to the Light that Jesus Christ has enlightened them withal. So my
dear Heart, I declare to thee, in the Presence of the Living God, who is Lord
of Heaven and Earth, and before Men and Angels, there is no other Way that
leads to Peace and Eternal Rest, but walking in Obedience to the Light that
comes from Jesus Christ; and of this Light thou have received a Measure.
Therefore, my dear Heart, be faithful to the Lord in what is made known unto
thee, that thou may come to witness true Peace and Rest, that Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man, what is laid
up for all them that fear him. So, my dear Heart, as I have found Peace and
eternal Rest to my Soul from the Lord, so I am moved of the Lord in Love to thy
Soul, to show thee the Way that leads to Peace and eternal Rest, which Way is
Christ, who is the Light, and the Way that leads to the Father, from whence all
Light comes; and of this Light which comes from Christ, I bear Record thou have
received a Measure. Therefore in dear Love I exhort thee to walk in Obedience
to thy Measure, which thou have received from the Lord. So, in the Presence of
the Lord God do I declare, that walking in Obedience to this Light that comes
from Christ, is the Way that leads to eternal Rest and Peace. Therefore as thou
tenderest the eternal Good of thy Soul, be faithful to the Light that comes
from Christ, which Light bears Witness against Lying, and Swearing, and vain
Talking, and all Manner of Evil. So, my dear Wife, in Bowels of dear Love to
thy Soul, which is more precious than all the World, have I showed thee the
Way; if thou will walk in it, it will lead thee into the eternal Covenant of
Life and Peace. So, my dear Life, in Love, in Love I have cleared my Conscience
to thee, in the Presence of the Living God, as a true and faithful Husband to
thee, desiring thy eternal Good and Welfare as my own, the Lord God is my
Witness. Dear life, remember my dear Love to all my Friends and Countrymen
according to the Flesh; for I desire the eternal Good and Welfare of you all,
and that you all may come to believe in the Light in your own Consciences,
which Jesus Christ has enlightened you with; which Light bears witness against
Lying, and Swearing, and all Manner of Evil. This is the Light of Christ, and
walking in Obedience to this Light, is the Way that leads out of Sin and Evil,
up to God Eternal, blessed for evermore: And he that acts contrary to this
Light in his own Conscience, it is his Condemnation. Now, dear Friends, while
you have Time, prize it.

Thy Husband, and a Lover of thy Soul, MILES HALHEAD.
Wil^shire, the 7th of the 3d Month, 1655.

1655
This Year also he writ the following Epistle to his Fellow-Believers.

Dearly Beloved Friends and Brethren,
IN the North of England, And to his Friends.
even to the South, the Land of our Nativity, whom the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth has called and chosen in this the Day of his eternal Everlasting Love,
to serve him in Truth, and in Righteousness, who has received the Lord's Truth
in the Love of it, not only to believe in his Name, but to suffer Bonds and
Imprisonments, and hard Sentences for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of
God. Dear Friends, and beloved Brethren, my Prayers to the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, and my Soul's Desire is for you all, that you may all dwell together
as Children of one Father, in the eternal Bond of Love, and Oneness of the
Spirit; that you may all grow in the eternal living Truth of God, to be
established upon the Rock and sure Foundation, that the Gates of Hell and Death
cannot prevail against you, that under the Shadow of the Wings of the Almighty,
you may all be kept and preserved in Peace and Rest, now in the Day of Trial,
and Hour of Darkness, when Hell has opened her Mouth, and the raging Sea cast
out her proud Waves, even like to overflow the Banks: Glory, Glory, and eternal
living, Praises be given to the Lord God, and to the Lamb for evermore, of all
the Children of the Light, who has found out a Resting Place for all his dear
Ones, Lambs, and Babes, and Children of Light to flee into, in the needful Time
of Trouble, where none can make them afraid, nor take away their Peace, as they
abide faithful to him, who is our Way, our Light, our Life, our Strength, and
eternal Portion for ever. My dear Friends and Brethren, I beseech you in the
Bowels of dear and tender Love, that you walk as dear Children, faithful to him
who has called you with an honorable Calling, and loved you from the
Beginning with an everlasting Love, that all your Friends and Neighbors, and
Men of this World, that see your Life coupled with Fear, may be made to confess
and acknowledge, to the Honor and Glory of the Living Lord, that the God whom
ye serve and fear, is the only true God of Israel: And herein you become a
precious Savor unto the living eternal God, and a sweet smelling Savor unto
all the Children of Light, and no good Thing will the Lord God withold from
you; the Mouth of the Lord God of Hosts has spoken it, whose Promises are Yea
and Amen to his own Seed for evermore.

Miles Halhead.
Given forth the 14th of the 6th Month, 1655, when I was Prisoner at the
Prisonhouse in the City of Exeter in Devonshire, for the Testimony of Jesus,
and the Word of God.

A chief Cause why he was imprisoned there, The Cause of his Imprisonment, and
of T. Salthouse his Fellow-Traveller.
was, that Thomas Salthouse, with whom he traveled, (having heard that one
George Brooks, a Priest belonging to the Nightingale Frigate, said, after the
Declarations of M. Halhead and T. Salthouse at Plymouth, That it was the
eternal Truth, which they had spoken, with many other Words in Vindication of
what they said) told Brooks, That he had spoken many good Words and fair
Speeches; but asked him, Whether he lived the Life of what he spoke? Farther,
He that enters not by the Door, but climbeth up some other Way, is, as Christ
said, a Thief and a Robber. For T. Salthouse thought, and that not without
Reason, as will be shown by-and-by, that he did not want the Praises of this
Priest, that were not better than those of the Damsel possessed with a Spirit
of Divination, which she spoke concerning Paul and Silas, viz. These Men are
the Servants of the Most High God, which show unto us the Way of Salvation. Now
what T. Salthouse had spoken to the Priest, was called provoking Language; the
rather, because when the Priest was speaking of the Trinity, T. Salthouse had
asked him, Where that Word was to be found in the Scriptures? Saying farther, I
know no such Scripture that speaks of the three Persons in the Trinity; but the
Three that the Scripture speaks of, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
and these Three are One. From hence T. Salthouse, and M. Halhead were accused
as such that denied the Holy Three that are One. But because about this
Accusation they were at a Loss in the Court, something else was thought of to
ensnare them, viz. they were required to take the Oath of Abjuration of the
Pope. This Oath the Mayor of Plymouth had already tendered them, when they were
first apprehended; and they refusing to swear, were sent to Exeter Prison: And
now being brought to Trial, and the said Oath required of them, they answered
thus;

In the presence of the Eternal God, and before all this People, we do deny
with as much Detestation as any of you does, the Pope, and his Supremacy, and
the Purgatory, and all that is in the Form of the Oath mentioned, we declare
freely against^ And we do not deny to swear, because of any Guilt that is upon
us, but in Obedience to the Command of Christ, who says, Swear not at all: And
we will not come under the Condemnation of an Oath, for the Liberty of the
outward Man.

Thus refusing to swear, merely not to trespass against the Command of our
Savior, they were sent back to Prison again, as such that clandestinely
adhered to the Pope: And Use has been made of this Snare during the Space of
many Years, to vex the Quakers, so called. The next Day the Prisoners were
brought again before the Bench, and were asked,

Will ye confess that you wronged G. Brooks in calling him Thief, and be sorry
for it, and make him Satisfaction?

To this M. Halhead answered,

One of us did not speak one Word to him, and therefore I deny to make him
Satisfaction, or to be sorry for it: And what was spoken, was no such Thing;
therefore we will not lie for our Liberty, nor confess that we are sorry for
that which we never spoke.

Then the Court fined them five Pounds a-piece; They are fined and sent to
Bridewel.
and they were to go to the House of Correction till Payment, and to find
Sureties for their good Behavior: And for refusing to take the Oath, the Court
threatened to send into the North to seize on their Estates. So they were
returned to Prison; and what follows was entered as the Record of their
Proceedings.

July 10. 1655. Thomas Salthouse; and Miles Halhead, for provoking Words
against G. Brooks, Clerk, who refused to be tried by the Country, fined 5 l.
a-piece, committed to Bridewel till Payment, and finding Sureties for their
good Behavior.

What is said here of refusing to be tried by the Country, was a notorious
Untruth; and as to finding Sureties, that seemed of little Moment; for though the
giving of Security had been offered before when they were taken Prisoners, yet
that was not accepted of; and the Mayor John Page, had the Boldness to assert,
that they refused to give Security, as will appear by the Warrant by which he
sent them to the common Jail in Exeter, whereof the following is a true Copy.

Devon,
JOHN Page, Merchant, Mayor of the Borough of Plymouth, in the County
aforesaid, and one of his Highness's Justices of the Peace within the said
Borough: To the Keeper of his Highness's Jail at Exon Castle, or to his lawful
Deputy in that Behalf, Greeting. I send you herewithal by the Bearer hereof,
the Bodies of Thomas Salthouse, late of Dragglibeck, in the County of
Lancaster, Husbandman; and Miles Halhead, late of Kendal in the County of
Westmorland, lately apprehended here, as Disturbers of the public Peace, and
for diverse other high Misdemeanors against a late Proclamation, prohibiting the
Disturbing of Ministers and other Christians in their Assemblies and Meetings,
and against an Ordinance of his said Highness the Lord Protector, and his
Counsel, lately made against Duels, Challenges, and all Provocations thereto,
who have refused to give sufficient Security for their personal Appearance at
the next general Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the County of Devon; and
in the mean Time to be of good Behavior toward his Highness the Lord
Protector, and all his Liege People. These are therefore in his said Highness's
Name, to Will and Command you, that when the Bodies of the said Thomas
Salthouse and Miles Halhead shall he unto you brought, you them safely detain,
and keep them, until by due Course of Law they shall be thence delivered:
Hereof fail not at your Peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal of Plymouth aforesaid, the 28th Day of May, in
the Year of our Lord God, 1655. John Page, Mayor.

By this may be seen under what frivolous Pretenses those called Quakers were
imprison^d, Pretenses for their Imprisonment groundless.
viz. because of an Ordinance made against Duels, etc. and as for their having
refused to give Security, how untrue this was, as well as other Accusations,
may appear from the following Certificate.

We, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do testify, That the several
Particulars in an Answer made by our Friends, are true, to wit, That they did
not at all disturb the public Peace, nor were they at any other Meeting (but
that which was appointed by us) to disturb any Ministers, or other Christians
in their Assemblies and Meetings: Nor were they guilty of any Challenges,
Duels, and Provocations thereunto in the least Measure whilst they were amongst
us. And as for their Refusal to give Security, two of us, whose Names are
Robert Carry and Arthur Cotton, had given Security to the Mayor, by entering into
Recognisance for their Appearance at the next Sessions, the Day before their
sending to Prison, but that the Town Clerk made it void the next Day,
pretending it could not be according to Law.

Ralph Fogg, Arthur Cotton, Robert Carry, Richard Smith, Anthony Todde, John
Harris, Jun. Thomas Faulkener, Nicholas Cole, John Martindale, Richard
Lepincore, John Harris, Sen.


Now to what a Height of Confidence the aforesaid Mayor Page was come, in
saying, That Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead had refused to give Bail, nay,
that this was the Cause of their Confinement, may also appear from the
following Letter he writ to General Disbrow, to excuse his Proceedings against
them.

Plymouth, June 1. 1655. RIGHT HONORABLE,
CAptain Hatsell has communicated to me what you wrote him in Reference to
those two Men, Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead, of whom, and of their
Imprisonment, your Honor had heard something from some Persons of this Place,
and received a Copy of a Letter which they sent me. By the enclosed Copies of
their Examinations, your Honor will see some Part of the Cause of their
Confinement, which was on their Refusal to give Bail for their Appearance the
next general Sessions, to be held for the County of Devon, they being, as I
conceive, Offenders within the late Ordinance of his Highness the Lord
Protector, and Counsel, made against Duels, Challenges, and all Provocations
thereunto, and also his Highness's late Proclamation against Quakers; and they
still refusing to give Bail for their Appearance as aforesaid, went from hence
to the Jail at Exon on Tuesday last. Indeed, Sir, their Carriage here was not
becoming Men, much less Christians; and besides their Contempt of Authority,
all the while they were in Prison, they never sought God by Prayer at any Time,
nor desired a Blessing on any Creature they received, or gave Thanks for them.
And these very Men were about two Months past taken up by Colonel Cupplefton,
High Sheriff of our County, and after fourteen Days Restraint, were sent away
by him for Taunton, from Tithing to Tithing, as by their own Examination; and
they show no Occasion they have to come to these Parts. They are by Profession
Quakers, but Husbandmen by their Calling: One of them is a Lancashire Man, the
other of Westmorland; and they left their Families, Relations, and Callings
about three Months since, as they say, and do not work, nor employ themselves
in their Calling, to procure themselves a Livelihood, but wander up and down in
all Parts, to vent their wicked Opinions, and discover their irregular
Practices in the Breach of Peace, and Disturbance of good People. Indeed, Sir,
they hold many sad Opinions, destructive to the true Religion, and the Power of
Godliness. I have hereby, according to my Duty, given your Honor an Account of
what passed here in Reference to these Men. I could say much more in Reference
to their Examination and Discourse with them; but I fear I have already
trespassed upon your Honor's Patience in the Perusal of these Lines, and
humbly desiring your Excuse for giving you this Trouble, do most thankfully
acknowledge your Honor's continued Favors to this Place, for which we stand
very much obliged, desiring your Honor still to retain such an Opinion of us,
as those that desire to do nothing unbecoming Christians, and Persons that
desire the Welfare and Peace of this Commonwealth and Government, and shall
ever labor to appear

Your Honor's very humble Servant, (for my self and my Brethren,) JOHN PAGE,
Mayor.


That General Disbrow was but little satisfied with this Letter, seems not
improbable, because enquiring into the Matter, he let others have a Copy of it,
so that Thomas and Miles wrote an Answer to it; and it was also some Time after
given out in public Print at London, by Giles Calvert, with other Writings
relating thereunto. Now as to what is said in this Letter of His Highness's
Proclamation against Quakers, it was a gross Untruth; for in the Proclamation
the Quakers were not named; but it was against the Disturbing of Christians in
their Assemblies; and besides, the Quakers, so called, judged that their
public Worship was permitted them by the 37th Article of the Instrument of
Government, which said, That all that profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ,
shall not be restrained from, but be protected in the Profession of the Faith,
and Exercise of their Religion, etc. As concerning their Contempt of Authority,
the Mayor charged them with, it was nothing else, but that for Conscience Sake
they could not take off their Hats to the Magistrates; neither did they give
that Honor to any other but God alone. And as to what was said, That all the
While they were in Prison, they never sought God by Prayer, etc. This was no
other Matter, than that they did not follow the Formal Way of Prayers; for they
were indeed religious Men, who often prayed to God, and gave him Thanks, though
they were represented in the Letter as very wicked Men, and Vagabonds that had
left their Calling, and wandered up and down the Country; although it was well
known that they were honest Men, that traveled on Horseback, and lying at the
best inns on the Road, and paying for what they received there. And therefore
after they had got a Copy of the said Letter, they writ a large Letter to the
Mayor Page, and showed him his abominable Untruths, and told him, that they had
been moved several Times in Prison, as well as out of Prison, to go to Prayers,
and to give Thanks for the Blessings of God, which they received. And in the
Conclusion of their Letter, they signified, That they would not render Railing
for Railing; but (said they) in the Spirit of Love and Meekness we exhort you
all to repent, and fear to offend the Lord, etc.

Now as concerning the provoking Words against George Brooks, for which they
had been fined, it has been said already what they were; but this Brooks was
of a dissolute Life, and a debauch^d Fellow, having for his Drunkenness not
only been turned out of the Frigates in which he had served, but also once in
the Ship Nightingale, ignominiously exposed with a Quarter Can about his Neck,
as appears by the following Testimonies.

I having been formerly desired to relate upon what Account 'twas that Mr.
George Brooks, Chaplain of the Frigate under my Command was put on Shore.
First, Because he was a Busy-Body, and disturbed the whole Ship's Company.
Secondly, Being on Shore, it was his common Practice to abuse the Creature in
such Sort, that he was drunken, void of good Reason, that he would abuse any
one that came in his Company, by ill Language, besides the Abuse of himself and
the good Creature, daily Complaints coming unto me both a-board and on shore.
Therefore knowing him to be a deboist Fellow, and not fit for that Employment,
I put him on Shore, and I dare own it, whoever shall call me to Question.
Witness my Hand,

Robert Vessay.

Mr. Brooks, being formerly with me in the Nightingale, I found him to be very
idle, and continually drunk, which once made me to put a Quarter-Can about his
Neck; whereunto I subscribe

John Jeffery, Captain of the Nantwich.

The Person abovementioned I have seen drunk on Shore, in Testimony whereof I
have set my Hand,

Richard Potter, Captain of the Constant Warwick Frigate.

From such Evidences as these it appears, G. Whitehead, Rich. Clayton, and J.
Harwood come to Pures in Suffolk, and are imprisoned.
that it was not without Reason that he and the like Priests sometimes were
treated a little roughly. Now to return to M. Halhead; he continued Prisoner
many Months, before he was released. In the mean while it happened that George
Whitehead, Richard Clayton and John Harwood, coming on the 30th of the Month
called July to Bures in Suffolk, were imprisoned on this Occasion. R. Clayton
had set up a Paper on the Steeple-house-Door, containing these Queries.

Whether by setting up such Ministers as seek for their Gain from their
Quarters, such as the Prophet disapproves, Isa. lvi. II. Such as the Prophet
Jeremiah disapproves, Jer. v. and of whom Mention is made also, Ezekiel. xxxiv.
and Mic. iii. Such as are called of Men, Masters, loving the chiefest Places in
the Assemblies; such as Christ disapproved, Matthew. xxiii. Such as the Apostle
Peter disapproves, 2 Pet. ii. and which the Apostle Paul disapapproved also,
Phil. iii Or, when such were set up that would not suffer another to speak that
stands by, when any Thing is revealed, but send him to Prison; whether this was
not the setting up a persecuting Spirit, limiting the Spirit of God, and
despising Prophecies, not daring to try all Things? Whether it was expedient to
give to Scoffers, Scorners, Drunkards, Swearers, and Persecutors, David's
Conditions to sing? And if such were set up that took Tithes, though the Apostle
said that the Priesthood was changed, and the Law also, Heb. vii. Whether by
the setting of such, they did not set up such as did not labor in the Lord^s
V^neyard?

This Paper being set up, People came to read it: G. Whitehead being there, and
laying hold of this Opportunity, spoke a few Words to the People, and exhorted
them to turn to the Lord from the Vanities and Wickednesses they lived in. And
when G. Whitehead and his Fellow-Travellers were passing away, there came a
Constable who staid them, and carried them before Harbert Pelham Justice of
Peace. He asking several vain Questions, and behaving himself rudely, Are bad
before Justice Pelham, who sends them to Justice Walgrave at Smalbridge, and
comes thither also. Clayton is ordered to be whipped, and Whitehead and Harwood
sent to Prison.
G. Whitehead began to speak to him concerning his Rage: But Pelham said, He
did not send for him to preach. And not being able to lay the Transgression of
any Law to their Charge, he sent them, by the Constable, to Thomas Walgrave,
Justice of Peace at Smalbridge in Suffolk. Being come into his House, Richard
Clayton was first examined, of his Name, and Country, and where he had been.
The same and some other frivolous Questions were asked of G. Whitehead. Then
Walgrave asked John Harwood, If he would answer him all the Questions that he
should demand of him: But J. Harwood refused to be limited thus to his Will.
Justice Pelham now being come thither also, J. Harwood told Justice Walgrave,
that Pelham, who had before examined him, had his Examination in Writing. Then
the two Justices consulted together what to do in the Case? and not long after
Thomas Walgrave asked G. Whitehead, if he would work at Hay? But he denied to
be bound to such Taskmasters, as being in that Calling whereunto God had
called him, and wherein he was chargeable to no Man. The Conclusion of their
Consultation was, that they caused R. Clayton to be whipped, under Pretense of
having fastened a seditious Paper to the Steeple-house-Door; and the other two
were imprisoned.

It was about this Time that William Dewsbury, W. Dewsbury at Welling borough
called to by Priest Andrews, whom he visits at the Steeple-house, is kept in
Prison half a Year, then brought to his Trial at Northampton, with other before
Judge Atkins.
and several other of his Friends were put into Prison at Northampton. It
happened that he being at Wellingborough, and going along the Streets, the
Priest Thomas Andrews called to him in these Words, Give over deceiving the
People, lest the Plagues of God fall on thee. To this Dewsbury returned, Do
thou say I deceive the People? Make it manifest wherein I deceive them. Then
Andrews said, Thou say there is not any Original Sin. To this Dewsbury
replied, Did thou hear me say so? But the Priest unwilling to answer that
Question, went away. Afterward Dewsbury went into the Steeple-House in the
said Town, and after the Sermon was done, he demanded of the Priest that he
would prove there before the People, what he had openly accused him of, viz.
That he had said, there was no Original Sin. But the Priest would not answer,
but fled away. There was also Information given, that Dewsbury had said, The
Priests preach for Hire, and the People love to have it so: But what will ye do
in the End thereof? But that this was really so, I don't find. Dewsbury then
being committed to Prison, and kept there above half a Year, was at last
brought to his Trial at Northampton, with other Prisoners, his Friends; and
being set to the Bar, the Judge -- Atkins said to the Jailor, Do you use to
bring Prisoners before the Court in this Manner? You deserve to be fined ten
Pounds, for bringing them before the Court covered. The Jailor answered, If you
command me, I will take off their Hats. To which the Judge gave Command, and
the Jailor's Man took them off. Then the Judge said to Dewsbury, What art thou
here for? And Dewsbury answered, The Mittimus will express what I was committed
for; but a Copy of it I am denied by the Keeper of the Jail. The next Query of
the Judge was, What is thy Name? And the Answer was, Unknown to the World. Let
us hear, said the Judge, What that Name is that the World knows not. It is,
quoth Dewsbury, known in the Light, and none can know it, but he that has it;
but the Name, the World knows me by, is William Dewsbury. Then said the Judge,
What countryman art thou? And Dewsbury answered, Of the Land Canaan. That Is far
off, replied the Judge. Nay, said Dewsbury; for all that dwell in God, are in
the Holy City, New Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven, where the Soul is
in Rest, and enjoys the Love of God in Jesus Christ, in whom the Union is with
the Father of Light. To this the Judge returned, That is true, but are you
ashamed of your Country? Is it a Disparagement for you to be born in England?
Nay, said Dewsbury, I am free to declare that my Natural Birth was in
Yorkshire, W. Dewsbury b^rn not far from Hull in Yorkshire.
Nine Miles from York, toward Hull. Then the Judge said, You pretend to be
extraordinary Men, and to have an extraordinary Knowledge of God. To which,
Dewsbury replied, We witness the Work of Regeneration to be an extraordinary
Work, wrought in us by the Spirit of God. But, said the Judge, the Apostles
wrought with their Hands in their Callings. They had, answered Dewsbury,
Callings in the World, some were Fishermen, Paul a Tent-maker; but when they
were called to the Ministry of Christ, they left their Callings, to follow
Christ, whither he led them by his Spirit to preach the Word: And I had a
Calling in the World, as they had, and in it did abide, until the Father
revealed his Son in me, and called me from my Calling I had in the World, to
preach the eternal Word he had made known to me in the great Work of
Regeneration. Why, queried the Judge, did thou not abide in thy own Country,
and teach People in them Parts? There I did stay, returned Dewsbury, until I
was called from thence to go where I was led by the Spirit of the Lord; and as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons and Daughters of God; and
they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his. To this the Judge
said, You say well; for we must in Charity conclude, that every one in this
Place has the Spirit of God in him: But how do you know that you are guided by
the Spirit of God? They that have the Spirt of God, replied Dewsbury, are known
by their Fruits; and he that believes in Jesus Christ, and is guided by his
Spirit, has the Witness in himself. That is true, said the Judge, yet
notwithstanding, I see by your Carriage, that what my Brother Hale did at the
last Assizes, in requiring Bond for your good Behavior, he might justly do it;
for you are against Magistrates and Ministers. But Dewsbury returned, Make that
manifest wherein we are against them. Then said the Judge to the Clerk, Robert
Guy, What have you against these Men? And he gave Relation of what Dewsbury had
said to the Priest Andrews in the Steeple-house. Dewsbury then giving an
Account of the Matter of Fact, and how the Thing happened; and that it was not
any Breach of the Law of the Nation; the Judge resumed, But in that you are
found wandering in the Country, you break the Law; for there is an old Law,
That if any did go from their Dwellings to travel in the Country without a
Certificate from some Justice, they were to be taken as wandering Persons. To
this, Dewsbury said, If there be any such Law, read it to us; and if there be
such a Law, thou know in thy Conscience it is contrary to the Scripture; for
the Apostles and Ministers of Christ went to and fro in the Country preaching
the Word of eternal Life; and there were added to the Church daily such as
should be saved; and the Number of the Saints and Brethren was daily increased:
And the Law that is in Force in this Nation, does allow all that profess Faith
in Jesus Christ, to have free Liberty to walk in the Faith, which is according
to Scripture. To this the Judge said, (...) had an eloquent Tongue, and thou
art proud of it. Pride, I deny, replied Dewsbury, but the Truth I witness,
which will judge Pride, The Judge, though he behaved himself moderately,
continues them in Prison.
and (...) all that (...) in it, until it be destroyed. The Judge thou spoke to
the other Prisoners; and though he behaved himself moderately, yet he could not
resolve to set them at Liberty; but they were continued in Prison, though they
had been kept there above twenty nine Weeks. One of these Prisoners was John
Huchin, whom they had nothing else to charge with, but that being come into the
Steeple-house at Wellingborough, Particularly J. Huchin.
he stood there pea^eably in Science, but before Half the Sermon was over,
Priest And^^^s (...) have him taken away; which was done by the Churchwarden
H^^y H^ns^^^, who carried him to an Alehouse, where it was told him by the
Constable, That if he would not come into the Church in the Afternoon, he
should be set free. But he refusing to make such a Promise, though they let him
alone then, yet some Days after, a Constable came to his Master's Shop, where
he was working, and took him away without showing any Warrant. Another of the
Prisoners was Michael Pattison, M. Pattison.
who having been in the same Steeple-house, and stood peaceably in Silence
until the Priest Andrews had done, and the People were going away, said to him,
Friend, can thou witness this to be the Word of the Lord, that thou have
spoken here before the People? But this so offended the Priest, that he
commanded the Officers to take Michael away, which the Constable John Brown
did. And Thomas Goodyar.
Thomas Goodyar, who also was one of the Prisoners, being come to Northampton
to visit his Friends in Prison there, it was denied him by the Jailor; and he
meeting the Mayor and some Aldermen in the Streets, spoke to them about
Persecution; but one of the Aldermen struck off his Hat, and said, he would
teach him better Manners, than to stand and talk before the Mayor with his Hat
on. Then they required Sureties for his good Behavior; and he told them, That
he was bound to good Behavior by the righteous Law of God: And refusing to
find Sureties, he was taken up in the Street, and sent to Prison without
Mittimus, or farther Examination. But I will not detain my Reader any longer with
these Prisoners; for if I should relate all Occurrences of this Nature that are
come to my Knowledge, and under what unreasonable Pretenses, even such that
were as yet not fully entered into the Communion of those called Quakers, were
committed to Prison, I must write much more than I might be able to do, though my
Life should yet be lengthened considerably.

I find among my Papers of this Time the Names of about an hundred Persons, T.
Aldam's Sufferings by Priest Rookbey of Warnsworth.
who, for not paying Tithes to the Priests, and refusing to swear, suffered
either by Seizure of their Cattle and Goods, or Imprisonment. Thomas Aldam for
not paying of Tithes to the Priest Thomas Rookby of Warnsworth, was imprisoned
at York, in the Year 1652, Where he was kept above two Years and a Half, and
besides had thirteeen Beeves and two Horses taken from him.

But passing by a Multitude of the like Cases, I return again to G. Fox, whom I
left at London. He having had there several large Meetings, went from thence to
Colchester, G. Fox visit J. Parnel at Colchester, thence goes to Ipswich,
Norwich, and Yarmouth; then toward Lynn.
where, with Difficulty he visited James Parnel in Prison. From Colchester he
wont to Ipswich, and so on to Norwich, and Yarmouth, finding service every
where.

Traveling farther in Company with R. Hubberthorn toward Lyn, and by the way
being in Bed at an Inn, a Constable and Officers came thither, being sent with
an Hue-and-Cry from a Justice of Peace to search for two Horsemen that rid
upon gray Horses, and in gray Clothes; a House being broken up at Night, as was
reported. Now, though they said, they were honest and innocent Men, yet a Guard
with Halberts and Pikes was set upon them that Night, and in the Morning they
were carried before a Justice of Peace about five Miles off. In the Way is
seized, together with R. Hubberthorn by Hue-and-Cry on Suspicion of Robbery,
but let go.
The Justice grew angry, because they did not put off their Hats to him: But G.
Fox told him, He had been before the Protector, and he was not offended at his
Hat; why then should he be offended at it, who was but one of his Servants? The
Justice having examined them, said, He believed they were not the Men that had
broken open the House, but he was sorry that he had no more against them. But
G. Fox told him, He ought not to be sorry for not having Evil against them; but
rather to be glad. The Justice, though stirred up by the Constable to send them
to Pison, Comes, to Lynn, thence goes to Sutton, where many are convinced,
particularly the Mayor of Cambridge's Wife; goes to Cambridge, and so to London.
yet let them go. G. Fox being thus set at Liberty, traveled on to Lynn, from
whence he went to Sutton, where he had a great Meeting, many People from other
Places being come thither, and also the Mayor's Wife of Cambridge, and many
Hundreds were convinced of the Truth he preached. From thence he passed to
Cambridge, and though the Scholars were exceeding rude, yet he got (...) an inn.
In the Dark of the Evening the Mayor of the Town came, and fetched him to his
House, whither some friendly People were sent for, and he had a Meeting there.
Next Morning he departed the Town, and re-returned to London, where he staid
some Time. In this Year came out the Oath of Abjuration against King Charles,
whereupon he wrote to the Protector, Writes to the Protector.
acquainting him that many of his Friends, who could not swear for
Conscience Sake, suffered much on this Account.

From London he went to Leicestershire; and coming to Whetstone, where formerly
he had been taken by Colonel Hacker, he now had a great Meeting there, Thence
to Leicestershire. Has a great Meeting at Whetstone, where Colonel Hacker's
Wife, his Marshal, and many more are convinced. Meets J. Naylor at London, and
has Fear concerning him. E. Borough writes to the Protector.
where Hacker's Wife, and his Marshal came, and they, besides many more, were
convinced by G. Fox's Ministry; who going from thence, and after having passed
through many Places, came again to London, where meeting James Naylor, and
casting his Eyes upon him, he was struck with a Fear concerning him, being, as
it were, under a Sense of some great Disaster that was like to befall him.

In this Year Edward Borough wrote a Letter to the Protector, wherein he told
him, That the Lord's Controversy was against him, because he had not been
faithful in God's Work; but that he had taken his Rest and Ease upon a lofty
Mountain of Pride and Vain Glory, having set up himself to be worshipped, and
exalting his own Horn, without giving Glory and Honor to God. Moreover, that
he had not performed his Vows made to the Lord in the Day of Distress; and that
now he suffered grievous Oppression, Cruelty, and Tyranny to be acted in his
Name by unjust Imprisonments, and Persecution of the Lord's People. That
therefore the Lord would bring his Judgments upon him, except be did repent.
How boldly soever Borough wrote in this Letter to Cromwell, yet I do not find
that he showed himself angry because of it: But yet he hearkened too much to
the Flatteries of those Teachers, who being now entered into the Possessions of
the Episcopalians, exalted him as their Idol, by their Applause: And he
revering them as such who could strengthen his Authority with the People,
winked at the grievous Persecution, by their Instigation carried on against the
Quakers, so called.

In the mean While there were many Malcontents, who could not bear that
Cromwell should force the Members of Parliament to consent to make no Change in
the Government then established, Public Transactions.
and would not suffer any one to sit in the House, without having promised by
Writing not to propose or give his Consent there to the Change of the said
Government. This gave Occasion, that even some of those who had been his
eminent Friends, now did not stick to reprove him sharply: Among these was
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Some memorable Passages concerning J. Lilburn.
who being an extraordinary bold Man, very stiff and inflexible, had more than
once showed himself a public Assertor of the People's Liberties and Freedoms;
for which he had been prosecuted at Law, viz. once in the Year 1645, when he
was public Assertor of the People's Liberties and Freedoms; for which he had
been proscuted at Law, viz. once in the Year 1645, when he was imprisoned as
guilty of Treason, but was discharged; and afterward in the Year 1649, when
having published several Books, to expose to the Public, the arbitrary Power
he thought was exercised in the Government, he was confined in the Tower: And
after having been Prisoner above seven Months, was impeached of High Treason:
But he so vigorously defended his Cause, that though strong Persuasions had been
used to move the Jury to bring him in guilty, yet he so far prevailed, that at
length he was set at Liberty again; though I find that once he was whipped for a
Crime laid to his Charge, of which he gloried publicly. And when Cromwell had
usurped the supreme Power, Lilburn made bold to charge him, both by Word of
Mouth, and by Writing, with Falseness and Tyranny; and he went on at that Rate,
that Cromwell, foreseeing that, it this Man continued thus to expose his Doings,
he should not be able to maintain his Credit and Authority, ordered him to be
taken into Custody and impeached of High Treason. When Lilburn, thus accused,
appeared at the Bar, he behaved himself with that Undauntedness, and so
defended his Cause, that, he seemed less to plead for his Life, than for the
Freedom of his Country: And boldly answering what was objected to him, said,
That what he had done, was not only no High Treason, but the Government was
such, that no High Treason could be committed against it; and that therefore
all true Englishmen were obliged to oppose the Tyranny that was exercised. He
also said, That having been once much in Favor with Cromwell, he might have
attained to great Preferment, if he would have been quiet; but that he having
thought this unlawful, it was now resolved to have his Life taken away; which
he did not fear, because he asserted a good Cause. Thus vigorously Lilburn
pleaded, and he defended his Cause with such strong Arguments, that the Jury
brought him in not guilty, notwithstanding the Endeavors of the Judges to the
contrary. Now, though according to Law he must have been set at Liberty, yet
Cromwell would not consent to it, but kept him Prisoner; and because he indeed
feared him, as one that would weaken his Government, he ordered him to be
carried from one Prison to another, till at length he came to be confined in
the Castle of Dover, Who while Prisoner in Dover-Castle comes to be acquainted
with L. Howard, and is partly convinced.
in which Town lived Luke Howard, mentioned before; who thereby having occasion
to speak with Lilburn concerning Religion, gave him such convincing Reasons for
his Profession, as prevailed upon Lilburn to receive the Truth, as he himself
signified in a Letter he wrote to his Wife; who having visited him in Prison,
afterward wrote to him this following Exhortation:

My Dear, Hereupon his Wife writes to him.
Retain a sober patient Spirit within thee, which I am confident thou shall see
shall be of more Force to recover thee, than all thy keen Metal has been. I
hope God is doing a Work upon thee and me too, as shall make us study our
selves more than we have done.

These Words were so acceptable to Lilburn, that repeating them in his Letter
to her, he answered thus, after many other Passages:

O, my dear Love, His Answer.
I am deeply already entered into my Part of it: The mighty Power of God enable
thee to get into, and also to go through thine, and effectually to go cheerfully
and willingly along, Hand in Hand with me, which abundantly would render thee
more amiable, lovely, and pleasant in mine Eyes, although thou were then clothed
in Bags, than thou could be to me in thy drawing back, or standing still
where thou wast when I last saw thee, though therein thou were clothed all over
with rich and outwardly glistering earthly Diamonds, and in the greatest of
earthly Prosperity. I am sorry thou art so straightly put to it for Money; but
to live upon God by Faith in the Depth of Streights, is the lively Condition of
a Christian. O that thy Spirit could attain unto this! according to thy Desire
in thy Letter, and my own present Frame of Spirit. -- I now can contentedly
feed savourily upon Bread and Cheese, and Small-Beer alone, for saving of
Money. And for my Liberty, about which thou so weariest and spendest thy self,
as thy Letter acquaints me thou do, I can say to thee, that I am in my
present Temper of Spirit, ready really with Peter, at the Sight of the glorious
Transfiguration of Christ, to say, It is good being here. For here in
Dover-Castle, through the Loving Kindness of God, I have met with a more clear,
plain, and evident Knowledge of God, and my self, and his gracious Outgoings to
my Soul, than ever I had in all my Lifetime, not excepting my glorying and
rejoicing Condition under the Bishops. -- And now submissively, and heartily I
can say, The Will of my Heavenly Father be done in me, by me, and for me; in
whose Will I leave thee and thine, with all thy and my Friends, and rest

Thine in the Strength of Renewedness of true Love, JOHN LILBURN.
From Dover-Castle, the Place of the present enjoyed delightful Dispensations
of the eternal everlasting Love of God unto my Soul. The 4th of the 10th Month,
1655.

Whilst Lilburn was Prisoner here, Cromwell, as it seemed, would have released
him, if he would have signed a Declaration that he would never draw a Sword
against his Government. But Lilburn as yet not being fully convinced, that to
refrain the Use of the carnal Sword, was the Duty of a true Christian, refused,
thinking; that though G. Fox had signed such a Declaration, yet this did not
become him, because he did not perfectly approve that Point of Self-denial. But
however, continuing in Faithfulness to persevere in Respect of that Knowledge
he had already attained to, he became, in Process of Time, such an Assertor of
the true Christian Life, that in a Paper, which at his Desire was given out in
Print, he expressed himself thus:

I have now the faithful and true Witness, in my own Soul, that the Lord
himself is become within me the Teacher of my Soul, and Enabler of me to walk
in a Measure of his pure Ways and Paths; yea, and so clear a Teacher within me
is he already become unto me, as that I with Confidence believe my inward
Teacher shall never now more be removed into a Corner; but is, and shall be, as
a continual Voice speaking in my Ears, This is the Way, walk in it: By which
divine Teaching I am now daily taught to die to Sin, and led up by it into
living Power, to be raised up, and enabled to live in a pure Measure of
Righteousness, and by which inward spiritual Teachings, I am, I say again, led
up into Power in Christ, by which I particularly can, and do hereby witness,
that I am already dead, or crucified to the very Occasions, and real Grounds of
all outward Wars, and carnal Sword-fightings, and f^eshly Bustlings and
Contests; and that therefore considently I now believe, I shall never hereafter
be an User of a temporal Sword more, nor a Joiner with those that so do. And
this I do here solemnly declare, not in the least to avoid Persecution, or for
any politic Ends of my own, or in the least for the Satisfaction of the
fleshly Wills of any of my great Adversaries, or for satisfying the carnal Will
of my poor weak afflicted Wife: But by the special Movings and Compulsions of
God now upon my Soul, am I in Truth and Righteousness compelled thus to
declare; that so I may take away from thy Adversaries all their Fig-Leaf-Covers
or Pretenses for their continuing of my every Way unjust Bonds. Add that
thereby, if yet I must be an imprisoned Sufferer, it may from this Day forward
be for the Truth, as it is in Jesus; which Truth I witness to be truly profesed
and practiced by the savouriest of People called Quakers. And to this my
present Declaration, which I exceedingly long and earnestly desire to have in
Print, and for which I know that I can cheerfully and assuredly lay down my
Life, if I be called to witness the Truth of it, I subscribe my Name,

From my innocent, and every way causeless Captivity in Dover-Castle, the Place
of my Soul's delightful and content^ul A^ode, where I have really and
substantially found that which my Soul many Years has sought diligently after,
and with unsatisfied Longingness thirsted to enjoy, this present First Day of
the Week, being the 4th of the, 3d Mo. 1655. JOHN LILBURN.

It sufficiently appears by this, that Lilburn did not think that this
Declaration would procure his Liberty; and he guessed not wrong; for before he
was released, Cromwell died. Lilburn being then discharged from his Confinement,
continued steadfast to the Doctrine of the Truth he had embraced, and died at
London in the Year 1660. But being advanced in the Time, I go therefore back a
little, and intend in the Sequel, to give a more circumstantial Description of
Cromwell's Death.

And thus I conclude this Book with the Year 1655, in which Year there was a
Plot of the Royalists against Cromwell; and in Nottinghamshire, they had already
surprised some Places; and toward the West the City of Salisbury. The young
King (Charles) was now come from Cologne, into Zealand, to be the nearer if the
Attempt succeeded. But his Time of ruling was not yet come; for the Cavaliers
were soon forced to give Way to the Power of Cromwell: And the Design being thus
quashed, King Charles returned to Cologne. In the mean While Cromwell, to raise
his Esteem abroad, sent a Fleet under Admiral Penn to the West Indies, and
another under the Command of Admiral Blake toward the Mediterranean Sea.

THE HISTORY Of the CHIRSTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. 1656
The FOURTH BOOK.
NEAR the Beginning of the Year 1656. G. Fox goes to Surry, Chichester,
Portsmouth, and Pool, where W. Baily a Baptist is convinced and comes to have a
public Testimony, Thence to Southampton and Dorchester, where he discourses
with the Baptists about Water Baptism, and many substantial People are
convinced.
G. Fox went from London, to Surry, Chichester, Portsmouth, and Pool, where
William Baily, a Baptist Teacher, and some others were convinced by G. Fox's
Ministry, and entered into the Society of those called Quakers, among whom Baily
afterward became an eminent Minister. From Pool, G. Fox went to Southampton
and Dorchester, where he desired of the Baptists to have their Meeting House to
meet in: But they refusing, he sent them Word, That they might come to his Inn,
if they pleased. Many of them came with their Teacher, and they fell into a
Discourse about Water Baptism. G. Fox asked them, Whether they could say they
were sent of God to baptize People, as John was? And whether they had the same
Spirit and Power, that the Apostles had? They said, They had not. Then he asked
them, How many Powers then are? Whether there are any more, than the Power of
God, and the Power of the Devil? And they said, There was not any other Power
than those two. Then said G. Fox, If you have not the Power of God, that the
Apostles had, then you act by the Power of the Devil. And his speaking was of
such Effect, that many Substantial People were convinced that Night. Next
Morning when he was passing away, the Baptists began to shake the Dust from off
their Feet after him. What, said he, in the Power of Darkness! We who are in
the Power of God, shake off the Dust of our Feet against you. Thus leaving
Dorchester he came to Weymouth, Then to Weymouth, where at a Priest's House
many receive his Testimony; and also a Captain remarkable for Laughter.
where enquiring after the sober People, about Fourscore of them gathered
together at a Priest's House; and most of them were turned to Christ Jesus, who
had enlightened them with his divine Light, by which they were reproved of
their Sins. There was at that Time a Captain of Horse in the Town, who rode
about seven Miles out of Town with G. Fox: This Captain was of such a merry
Temper, and so exceedingly given to Laughter, that G. Fox several Times spoke
very seriously to him about it; but it was become so customary to him, that he
would laugh almost at any Thing he saw. But G. Fox still admonished him to
Gravity, and the Fear of the Lord; and of this he spoke to him again when they
parted. The next Time G. Fox saw him, the Captain told him, That when he spoke
to him at parting, the Power of the Lord so struck him, that before he got
home, he was serious enough, and had left his Laughing. He indeed became a
serious and good Man; and being convinced of the Truth, died in the real
Profession thereof.

For Brevities-Sake I don't intend to mention all the Places G. Fox past through,
Has good service at Kingsbridge.
much less all his Occurrences. At Kingsbridge he had good Service; and
returning in the Evening to his Inn, and there being many People drinking, he
was moved to go amongst them, and to direct them To the Light which Christ, the
heavenly Man, had enlightened them withal; by which Light they might see all
their evil Ways, Words. and Deeds: and by the same Light they might also see
Christ Jesus their Savior. But this Discourse did not please the Innkeeper,
seeing it hindered his Guests from drinking: And hearing G. Fox speak so much of
the Light, he snatched away the Candle, and said, Come, here is Light for you,
to go into your Chamber. The next Day G. Fox went to Plymouth, and from thence
to Cornwall; and traveling through the Country, Goes to Market-Jew in Cornwall,
where he meets with Trouble; and more in Company with E. Pyot and W. Salt, from
Major Ceely* at Ives.
he came to Market-Jew. Being there at an Inn, he met with some Trouble from
the Magistrates; and he wrote a Paper, to show, That the Lord was come to teach
his People himself, by Jesus Christ, etc. This Paper came accidentally to the
Hands of Peter Ceely, a Major in the Army, and also a Justice of Peace at Ives,
whither G. Fox came. Here Edward Pyot and William Salt, who were G. Fox's
Fellow-Travellers, were haled before the said Major, whilst G. Fox was walking
down to the Seaside: But he hearing this, followed them, and came also into
the Justice's House, where the aforesaid Paper being produced, it was asked
him, Whether he would own it? and he said Yes. Then the Major tendered them the
Oath of Abjuration. G. Fox thereupon putting his Hand in his Pocket, drew forth
the Answer to it, which had been given to the Protector. A Priest find^ Fault
with his Hair.
A Priest being present there, found Fault with his Hair, which was then pretty
long, and asked to have cut it: But G. Fox told him, He had no Pride in it. It
happened also at other Times, that because of his long Hair he was spoken to,
as I have seen my self; but of this I am fully persuaded, that he had not the
least Pride in it; but it seems to me, not improbable, that he seeing how some
would make it a Kind of Holiness to wear short Hair, did the contrary, to show
that in some Things there was a Christian-Liberty, for which we ought not to
judge one another. But to proceed, G. Fox and his Companions were taken into
Custody, and with a Guard of Horse sent to Prison with this Mittimus.

Peter Ceely, one of the Justices of the Peace of this County, To the Keeper of
His Highness's Goal at Lanceston, or his Lawful Deputy in that Behalf, Greeting.
I Send you here-withal by the Bearers hereof, the Bodies of Edward Pyot of
Bristol, and George Fox of Drayton and Clea, in Leicestershire, and William
Salt of London, which they pretend to be the Places of their Habitations, who
go under the Notion of Quakers, and acknowledge themselves to be such? who have
spread several Papers, tending to the Disturbance of the Public Peace, and
cannot render any Lawful Cause of coming into these Parts, being Persons
altogether unknown; and having no Pass for their Traveling up and down the
Country, and refusing to give Sureties of their good Behavior, according to
the Law in that Behalf provided, and refuse to take the Oath of Abjuration,
etc. These are therefore, in the Name of His Highness the Lord Protector, to
will and command you, that when the Bodies of the said Edward Pyot, George Fox,
and William Salt, shall be unto you brought; you them receive, and in His
Highness's Prison aforesaid you safely keep them, until by due Course of Law
they shall be delivered. Hereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary
at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal, at St. Ives the Eighteenth Day of January, 1655.
P. Ceely.

By this Mittimus it appears under what odd Pretenses the Quakers, so called,
were committed to Prison; for such Reasons as are mentioned therein, might be
found and picked up at any Time. Thus G. Fox and his Companions were carried
through Redruth, Falmouth, and Bodmin, to Lanceston. By the Way they suffered
great Insolences, both from the Soldiers that conducted them, and from others,
by the Connivance of Captain Keat; They are had Prisoners through Redruth,
Falmouth, and Bodmin, to Lanceston, and suffer great Abuses from Captain Keat's
soldiers, etc.
but I will not detain my Reader with all those Particulars. Being come to
Lan^^ston, Keat delivered the Prisoners to the Jailor. And though many were
greatly enraged against them, and expected that these Prisoners, who Thou Would and
Thee'd all, and did not put off their Hats to any Man, should at the Assizes be
condemned to be hanged, if they did not pay that Respect to the Bench; yet
there were many friendly People, that out of several Parts of the Country came
to visit them; for it was about nine Weeks from the Time of their Commitment to
the Assizes; by Reason of which several got Opportunity to speak with them,
which had that good Effect, that many were convinced of the Truth of the
Doctrine held forth by them.

At the Time of the Assizes Abundance of People came from far and near to hear
the Trial of the Quakers; Being ^rought into Court at the Assizes, are examined
by Judge Glyn, with whom G. Fox has a long Discourse.
who being guarded by the Soldiers and the Sheriffs Men to the Court, had much
ado to get through the Multitude that filled the Streets; besides the Doors and
Windows were filled with People looking out upon them. Being brought into the
Court, G. Fox, after all was quiet, said, Peace be amongst you. The Judge
(Glyn,) who was then Chief Justice of England, said to the Jailor, What be
these you have brought here into the Court? Prisoners, My Lord, said he, Why do
not you put off your Hats? said the Judge to them. They saying nothing; Put off
your Hats, said the Judge again: And they still continuing silent, the Judge
said, The Court commands you to put off your Hats. Then G. Fox began to speak,
and said, Where did ever any Magistrate, King, or Judge, from Moses to Daniel,
command any to put off their Hats, when they came before them in their Courts,
either amongst the Jews, (the People of God) or amongst the Heathen? And if the
Law of England does command any such Thing, show me that Law, either written or
printed. The Judge then growing angry, said, I do not carry my Law Books on my
Back. But said G. Fox, Where is it printed in any Statute-Book, that I may read
it? At this the judge said, Take him away, Prevaricator! I ll ferk him. Then
the Prisoners were taken away, and put among the Thieves. But presently after
the Judge called to the Jailor, Bring them up again. This being done, Come,
said he, Where had they Hats from Moses to Daniel? Come answer me; I have you
fast now. To this G. Fox replied, Thou may read in the Third of Daniel, that
the three Children were cast into the fiery Furnace, by Nebuchadnezzar's
Command, with their Coats, their Hose, and their Hats on. This plain Instance
stopped him; so that not having any Thing else to say, He cried again, Take them
away Jailor. Accordingly they were taken away, and being thrust among the
Thieves, they were kept there a great While, and at length carried again to
Prison: But in the Afternoon they were brought up again into the Court. G. Fox
seeing the Jurymen there, gave them a Paper which he had written against
Swearing. This Paper passing from the Jury to the Justices, they presented it
to the Judge; and he bid the Clerk give G. Fox that Paper, and then asked him,
Whether that seditious Paper was his? To which he said, If they would read it
in open Court, that he might hear it, if it was his, he would own it, and stand
by it. The Judge now would have G. Fox to have taken it, and looked upon it in
his own Hand. But he desired again, That it might be read, that all in the
Court might hear it, and judge whether there was any Sedition in it, or no; for
if there were, he was willing to suffer for it. At length the Clerk of the
Assizes read it with an audible Voice; and when he had done, G. Fox said, It
was his Paper, and he would own it; and so might they too, except they would
deny the Scripture: For was it not Scripture Language, and the Words and
Commands of Christ and the Apostles, which all true Christians ought to obey?
Then they let fall that Subject, and the Judge speaking again about the Ha^ of
the Prisoners, bid the Jailor, take them off. Then they asked, What they had
lain in Prison for these nine Weeks, seeing now nothing was objected against
them, but what concerned their Hats? And; said G. Fox, as for Putting off our
Hats, that was the Honor which God would lay in the Dust, though they made so
much ado about it: The Honor which is of Men, and which Men seek one of
another is the Mark of Unbelievers: For how can ye believe, says Christ, who
receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God
only? And Christ says also, I receive not Honor from Men, and all true
Christians should be of his Mind. Then the Judge made a Speech, How he
represented the Lord Protector's Person; and how he had made him Lord Chief
Justice of England, and sent him to come that Circuit; etc. Thereupon the
Prisoners desired him, That he would do them Justice for their false
Imprisonment, which they had suffered nine Weeks. But instead thereof, an
Indictment was read against them, but so full of Untruths, that G Fox thought
it had been against some of the Thieves; for it contained, That they came by
Force and Arms, and in an hostile Manner into the Court; whereas they were
brought there as Prisoners; which made him say, It was all false. And still
they cried for Justice for their false lmprisonment, being taken up in their
Journey without Cause, by Major Ceely. Then this Peter Ceely, who as a Justice
of Peace sat also on the Bench, The foolish malice of Major Ceely.
said to the Judge, May it please you, My Lord, This Man, (pointing to G. Fox)
went aside with me; and told me how serviceable I might be for his Design; that
he Could raise forty thousand Men at an Hour's Warning, and involve the Nation
into Blood, and so bring in King Charles: and I would have aided him out of the
Country, but he would not go. And if it please you, My Lord, I have a Witness
to swear it. And so he called upon his Witness, who, without Question, was one
that was bribed. But the Judge perceiving this palpable Lie, was not forward to
examine the Witness. Then G. Fox desired the Judge, That he would be pleased to
let his Mittimus be read, in which the pretended Crime was signified, for which
he was committed to Prison. But the Judge said, It should not be read. G. Fox
still insisting to have it read, said, It ought to be: For if I have done any
Thing worthy of Death, or of Bonds; let all the Country know it. Seeing then
they would not read it, he said to one of his Fellow. ^soners, Thou have a Copy
of it, read it up. It shall not be read said ^he Judge, Jailor, take him away;
I Will see whether he or I shall be Master. Then G. Fox was taken away, and a
While after called for again. He still cried to have the Mittimus read, and the
People being eager to hear it, he bid his Fellow-Prisoner to read it up. Which
being done, and read according to the Copy already mentioned, G. Fox said to
the Judge and Justices, Thou that say, thou art Chief Justice of England,
and you that be Justices, ye know, that if I had put in Sureties, I might have
gone whether I pleased, and have carried on the Design, if I had had one, which
Major Ceely has charged me with. And if I had spoken those Words to him; which
he has here declared, then judge ye, whether Bail or Mainprize could have been
taken in that Case. Then directing his Speech to Major Ceely, he said, When, or
where did I take thee aside? Was not thy House full of rude People, and thou as
rude as any of them at our Examination, so that I asked for a Constable, or
other Officer to keep the People civil? But if thou art my Accuser, why sit
thou on the Bench? That is not a Place for thee to sit in; for Accusers do not
use to sit with the Judges: Thou ought^ est to come down, and stand by me, and
look me in the Face. Besides, I would ask the Judge and Justices this Question,
Whether or no Major Ceely is not guilty of this Treason, which he charges
against me, in concealing it so long as he has done? Does he understand his
Place, either as a Soldier, G. Fox charged with being in a Plot to raise 40000
Men to bring in King Charles.
or a Justice of the Peace? For he tells you here, That I went aside with him,
and told him, what a Design I had in Hand, and how serviceable he might be for
it: That I could raise forty thousand Men in an Hour's Time, and bring in King
Charles, and involve the Nation in Blood. Moreover, that he would have aided me
out of the Country, but I would not go; and therefore he committed me to Prison
for want of Sureties for the good Behavior, as the Mittimus declares. Now do
not ye s^o plainly, that Major Ceely is guilty of this Plot and Treason that he
talks of, and has made himself a Party to it, by desiring me to go out of the
Country, and demanding Bail of me; and not charging me with this pretended
Treason till now, nor discovering it? But I deny and abhor his Words, and am
innocent of his devilish Design.

The Judge by this seeing clearly that Ceely, instead of ensnaring Fox, had
ensnared himself, let fall that Business. But then Ceely got up again, and said
to the Judge, If it please you, My Lord, to hear me: This Man struck me, and
gave me such a Blow, as I never had in my Life. G. Fox smiling at this, said,
Major Ceely, art thou a Justice of Peace, and a Major of a Troop of Horse, and
tells the Judge here in the Face of the Court and Country, That I, who am a
Prisoner, struck thee; and gave thee such a Blow, as thou never had the like
in thy Life? What! Art thou not ashamed? Prithee, Major Ceely, where did I
strike thee? And Who is thy Witness for that? Who was by? To this Ceely said,
It was in the Castle-green, Major Ceely calls Captain Bradden for Evidence,
which he modestly refuses.
and that Captain Bradden was standing by, when G. Fox struck him. Who then
desired the Judge to let him produce his Witness for That: And he called again
upon Ceely, to come down from off the Bench; telling him, It was not fit that
the Accuser should sit as Judge over the Accused. Ceely then said, Captain
Bradden, was his Witness: Which made G. Fox say to Captain Bradden, who was
present there, Did thou see me give him such a Blow, and strike him, as he
says? Bradden made no Answer, but bowed his Head. G. Fox then desired him to
speak up, if he knew any such Thing: But he only bowed his Head again. Nay,
said G. Fox, Speak up, and let the Court and Country hear, and let not bowing
of the Head serve the Turn. If I have done so, let the Law be inflicted on me?
The Prisoners at last fined 20 Marks apiece for not putting off their Hats, and
re-committed.
I fear not Sufferings, nor Death it self; for I am an innocent Man concerning
all his Charge. But Bradden would not testify to it. And the Judge finding
those Snares would not hold, cried, Take him away, Jailor; and fined the
Prisoners twenty Marks a-piece, for not putting off their Hats, and to be kept
in Prison till they paid the Fine: And so they were brought back to Jail again.
At Night Captain Bradden came with seven or eight Justices to see them; and
they being very civil, said, They did not believe that either the Judge, or any
in the Court, believed those Charges with Major Ceely had charged upon G. Fox.
And Bradden said, Major Ceely had an Intent to have taken away G. Fox's Life,
if he could have got another Witness. But, said, G. Fox, Captain Bradden, Why
did not thou witness for me, or against me, seeing Major Ceely produced thee
for a Witness, that thou saw me strike him? And when I desired thee to speak
either for me, or against me, according to what thou saw or knew'st, thou
would not speak. Why, said he, when Major Ceely and I came by you, as you
were walking in the Castle-green, he put off his Hat to you, and said, How do
you, Mr. Fox? Your Servant, Sir. Then you said to him, Major Ceely, take heed
of Hypocrisy, and of a rotten Heart; for when came I to be thy Master, or thou
my Servant? Do Servants use to cast their Masters into prison? This was the
great Blow he meant that you gave him. G. Fox hearing this, called to Mind,
that they walking by, Ceely had spoken the aforesaid Words, and (...) he
himself indeed made such an Answer as is mentioned; and he thought he said
nothing amiss, since Ceely so openly had manifested his Hypocrisy and
Rotten-heartedness, when he complained of this to the Judge in open Court,
Major Ceely's wicked Shift.
and would have made all believe, that G. Fox gave him a Stroke outwardly with
his hand. A Report of this Trial being spread abroad, diverse People, of whom
some were of Account in the World, came far and near to see him and his Friends
in Prison, which tended to the Convincement of some. Being settled in Prison
upon such a Commitment, that they were not likely to be soon released, they
forbore giving the Jailor seven Shillings a Week a-piece for themselves, and as
much for their Horses, which he had in a Manner extorted from them: But upon
this he grew so very ^icked, that he turned them down into a nasty stinking
Place, where they used to put Persons condemned for Witchcraft and Murder.
Their Jailor's inhuman Behavior to them.
This Place was so noisome, that it was observed, few who went into it, did
ever come out again in Health: For there was no House of Office in it, and the
Excrements of the Prisoners, that from Time to Time had been put there, had not
been carried out for many Years; so that it was all like Mire, and in some
Places to the Top of the Shoes in Water and Piss; and the Jailor would not
suffer them to cleanse it, nor let them have Beds or Straw to lie on. At Night
some friendly People of the Town brought them a Candle, and a little Straw; of
which they were about to burn a little to take away the Stink. The Thieves lay
over their Heads, and the Head-Jailor in a Room by them over their Heads also.
But it seems the Smoke went up into the Room where he lay, which put him into
such a Rage, that he took the Pots of the Thieves Excrements, and poured them
down through a Hole upon their Heads; whereby they were so bespattered, that it
was loathsome to touch themselves, or one another: besides, the Stink so
increased, that by it, and the Smoke, they were almost in Danger of being
suffocated. And all this could not satisfy the Rage of this cruel Jailor, but
he railed against them so hideously, and called them by such horrible nick
Names, that they never had heard the like before. In this Manner they were
forced to stand all Night, for they could not sit down, the Place being so
filthy. Thus he kept them a great While, before he would let them c^ean^e it,
or suffer them to have any Victuals brought in, but what they got through the
Grate. And even this could not be done without Difficulty; for a Lass one Time
having brought them a little Meat, he sued her in the Town-Court for breaking
the Prison; perhaps, because she had a little bent an half-broken Bar of the
Grate, to get a small Dish through it. That this Jailor was so desperately
wicked, is not so much to be wondered at, since (as they were informed) he had
been a Thief, and was on that Account burnt both in the Hand and on the
Shoulder; and the Under-Jailor in like Manner: Their Wives had also been burnt
in the Hand. It was not at all strange then, that the Prisoners suffererd most
grievously from such a wicked Crew: But it was more to be wondered at, that
Colonel Bennet, a Baptist T^^cher, having purchased the Jail and Lands
belonging to the Castle, had there placed this Head Jailor. It Was much talked
of, that Spirits haunted this Dungeon, and walked there, and that many had died
in it; Some thinking to terrify the Prisoners therewith. But G. Fox told them,
G. Fox s^^^hts a Rep^rt of Spirits ha^nting the Dangeon wherein they were s^ut
up.
That if all the Spirits and Devils in Hell were there, he was over them in the
Power of God, and scared no such Thing; for Christ, their Priest, would
sanctify the Walls and the House to them; he who bruised the Head of the Devil,
as the Priest was to cleanse the Plague out of the Walls of the House, under
the Law.

Now the same of the Sessions at Bodmin being come, the Prisoners drew up their
suffering-Case, and sent the Paper thither; upon reading of which, They present
their Sufferings to the Sessions at Bodmin, and are a^^^w'd some Fase. Write to
London for Ann Downer. Send their Case to the Protector. H. Peter's Observation.
the Justices gave Order, that the Door of Doomsdale (thus the Dungeon was
called) should be opened, and that they should have Liberty to cleanse it, and
to buy their Meat in the Town. Having obtain d this Liberty, they writ to
London, and desired Ann Downer, a young Woman already mentioned in this Work,
to come down, and to buy and dress their Meat: Which she being very willing to
do, was therein greatly serviceable to them; for she was a good Writer, and
could take Things in Shorthand. They also sent up a Relation of their
Sufferings to the Protector; who thereupon sent down an Order to the Governor
of Pendennis-Castle, to examine the Matter. On which Occasion Hugh Peter's, one
of the Protector's Chaplains, told him, They could not do George Fox a greater
Service for the spreading of his Principles in Cornwall, than to imprison him
there. This was not altogether untrue; for he was much visited, and many were
turned from Darkness to the Light; notwithstanding the Mayor of Lanceston was a
fierce Persecutor, casting in Prison all he could get; Mayor of Lanceston a
fierce Persecutor.
and he did not stick to search substantial grave Women, as supposed, for
Letters. In Devonshire it was not much better; for many of those called
Quakers, that traveled through the Country, were taken up and whipped, Friends in
Devonshire whipped as Vagabonds.
under Pretense of being Vagabonds; nay, some Clothiers, that were going to
Mill with their Cloth, and other substantial Men, were seized and whipped: And
Henry Pollexsen, who had been a Justice of Peace for the most Part of forty
Years before, H. Pollexsen cast into Prison as a Jesuit.
was cast into Prison, under Pretense of being a Jesuit. In the mean While
Edward Pyot, who had been a Captain, and was a Man of good Understanding in the
Laws and Rights of the Nation, E. Pyot's Letter to Judge Glyn. See G. Fox's
Journal, at P. 189.
writ a large Letter to the Lord Chief Justice John Glyn, wherein he plainly
set before him his unlawful Dealings, and queried with him, Whether his saying,
If ye will be uncovered, (or put off your Hats) I will hear you, and do you
Justice, was not an Overthrow of the Laws, that were made to maintain Right and
Justice?" Many other Particulars (and among the rest that of G. Fox's striking
Major Ceely) were also mentioned in this Letter. G. Fox himself wrote also
several Papers, wherein the Odiousness of Persecution was plainly set forth.
Among those that came to visit him was also Thomas Lower, Dr. T. Lower visits
G. Fox, is convinced and enters into Communion with Friends.
a Doctor of Physic at London, who, whilst I am writing this, is yet alive,
and he asking many Questions concerning religious Matters, received such
satisfactory Answers from G. Fox, that he afterward said, His Words were as a
Flash of Lightning, they ran so through him; and that he never met with such wise
Men in his Life, etc. Thus he came to be convinced of the Truth, and so entered
into the Communion of the despised Quakers. While G. Fox was still in Prison,
one of his Friends went to Oliver Cromwell, and offered himself Body for Body,
to lie in Doomsdale Prison in his Stead, if he would take him, and let G. Fox
go at Liberty. But Cromwell said, He could not do it, for it was contrary to
Law: And turning to those of his Council, Which of you (quoth he) would do so
much for me, if I were in the same Condition? Thus G. Fox continued in Prison,
and it was yet a good While before he and his Fellow Prisoners were released.
The Next Year the wicked Jailor received a Recompense of his Deeds; For he was
turned out of his Place, and for some wicked Act was Cast into Jail himself;
and there his Carriage was so unruly, that he was by the succeeding Jailor put
into Doomsdale, locked in Irons, and beaten, The Jailor Cruelty s^gnally
recompensed.
and bid to remember, How he had abused those good Men, whom he had wickedly,
without any Cause, cast into that nasty Dungeon: But that now he deservedly
should suffer for his Wickedness; and the same Measure he had meted to others,
he should have meted out to himself: And this mischievous Fellow, who might
have grown rich, if he had carried himself civilly, grew now very poor, and so
died in Prison.

About the same Time that G. Fox was released, A Parliament called. S. Fisher
attempts to speak before them.
Cromwell called a Parliament, which met, for the first Sitting, in the Painted
Chamber at Westminster, on the 17th of the Month called September. Samuel
Fisher got an Opportunity to come into this Assembly, where he heard the
Protector's Speech, and in it these Words, That he knew not of any one Man that
suffer^d Imprisonment unjustly in all England. And after he had got the
Convenience of a Standing, he said, That he had a Word to speak from the Lord
to the Protector, the Parliament and the People: And then he began thus:

The Burden of the Word of the Lord God of Heaven and of Earth, as it came unto
me on the 22d Day of the last Month, and as it now lies upon me to declare it
in his Name, ^ven unto thee Oliver Cromwell, Protector (so called) of these
three Nations, England, Scotland, and Ireland; and also to all you who are
chosen out of the several Parts thereof to sit in Parliament this Day, to
consider of such Things as concern the Commonwealth thereof; and likewise to
the three Nations themselves, and all the People thereof whose Rulers and
Representatives ye are: Which Word of the Lord, as ye do not deem your selves
too high, or too great, or too good to be spoken to from the Lord, and as you
will not fall under the Guilt of that Sin of saying to the Seers, See not, and
to the Prophets, Prophesy not, prophesy not unto us right Things, prophesy
smooth Things, prophesy Deceits: I charge you all, in the Name of the living
God; that without Interruption or Opposition, whether you like it, or like it
not, you stand still and hear it; and when I have done, you may do with me as
the Lord shall give you Leave, or leave me under the Power of your Hands to do;
no Law of Equity condemning any Man before he be heard, especially when he
speaks on so high an Account as from the God of Heaven himself, though to such as
are no less than Gods under him here on Earth.

Scarce had he spoken thus much, but some cried, A Quaker! a Quaker! keep him
down, he shall not speak: Yet the Protector and the Parliament Men were still
and quiet. But some others, among whom two Justices of Peace, had not so much
Patience; but Fisher, as he related afterward, believed that the Protector and
the Parliament Men would have given him Audience, But is interrupted.
had not others set him at naught, some saying, The Protector had spoken long,
and was very hot and weary; and that he [Fisher] might be ashamed to occasion
his Stay any longer. Thus Fisher was interrupted, and the Protector and
Parliament Men rising, went away; though Fisher did not question but the
Protector would have heard him: For his Moderation in hearing what was said,
having been experienced before, Fisher was willing to acknowledge his Nobility
as freely, as Paul took Notice of the like in Festus, whom he held most noble
in that he would hear him, though he thought him mad. He publishes his designed
Speech, and some others be afterward intended.
Fisher being thus prohibited, published his Speech in Print, so as he intended
to have delivered it, though not one Syllable of it was written before. It was
pretty long, and contained a sharp Reproof to the Hypocrisy of those, who under
a Show of Godliness made long Prayers, kept Fasts, and nevertheless lived in
Pride, Pomp, and Luxury, persecuting those who really were a pious People. And
to the Protector he said, That unless he took away the Wicked from before him,
and all flattering false Accusers, his Throne would never be established in
Righteousness. In the Introduction placed before thi^ Speech, he says, That
before this Burden came upon him, he had prayed God that he might have been
excused of this Message, thinking that a more unworthy one than himself could
not have been singled out: But whatever he did, he could not be rid of it; and
though he spent a whole Week with Fasting, Tears, and Supplication, yet during
the Time of that Abstinence, he felt a daily Supply and Refreshmen to his
Spirits, so that he fully resigned to do what he believed was required of him
from the Lord; and he felt all Fears of the Frowns of Men removed from him.
Some other Speeches which he intended to have made to the Parliament, but was
obstructed therein, he also published afterward in Print.

In the latter Part of this Year, H. Smith at Evesham.
it happened that Humphrey Smith coming to Evesham in Worcestershire, was
disturbed in a Meeting by the Mayor Edward Young, who said, He would break the
Quakers Meetings, or else his Bones should lie in the Dirt. Thus resolved, he
came in the Month called October, on a First Day of the Week in the Morning,
into their Meeting in a House where H. Smith was; and several Persons, after
being rudely abused, He is imprisoned with others, and cruelly treated by the
Mayor E. Young.
were haled out to Prison. In the Afternoon a Meeting being kept in the Street,
some of the Company were by Order of the said Mayor put into the Stocks, and
others, of which the aforesaid Smith was one, into a dark Dungeon: And though the
Mayor then said, It was an unlawful Assembly; but if they would meet in Houses,
he would not molest them; yet on the next First Day of the Week, he seeing one
going to a Meeting that was appointed in a House, His Cruelty.
put him in Prison. H. Smith, and his Friends had some Bedding and Bed-cloaths
sent them, but the Mayor caused it to be taken away from them; and when
afterward some Straw was brought them to lie upon, the Jailor would not suffer
it; nay, when one came, and asked Liberty to fetch out their Dung from them, the
Mayor denied it, and ordered him to be put in the Stocks. The Place where they
were kept, was not 12 Foot Square, and the Hole to take in Air, was but four
Inches wide, so that even by Daylight they were ^ain to burn Candle, when they
had it. Here they were kept above fourteen Weeks, with their own Dung in the
same Room; so that one of them grew sick of the Stink; and yet the Jailor said,
If they had been there for Theft or Murder, he could have let them have more
Liberty than now he durst, because of the Mayor. James Wall, He hindered a
Freeman's Wife of her Stand in the Market.
one of the Prisoners, was a Freeman of the Town, and a Shopkeeper, and yet
the Mayor forbad his Wife to stand in the Marketplace, which for many Years
she had done. She going to him about it, he began to fawn upon her, and said, I
hear that your Husband does abuse you. To which she answered, My Husband did
never abuse me; but as for that Judgment which he now holds, once I could not
own it: but now seeing it is so much persecuted, makes me own it, because the
Way of God was always persecuted. He hearing her speak so, said, She should not
have a Standing-place for five Pounds.

About a Month after, He treats barbarously M. Newby and E. Courton for
visiting the Prisoners.
Margaret Newby, and Elizabeth Courton came to this Town, and had a Meeting at
the House of one Edward Pi^wayes, But coming in the Afternoon to visit the
Prisoners, the Mayor himself said violent Hands on them, and caused them to be
put in the Stocks, with their Legs near a Yard one from another; and he would
not suffer them to have a Block to si^ on, though they desired it; yet as one
that would seem to have some Modesty, he bid the Constable fetch a Block, and
put between their Legs; uttering indecent Expressions: In this Posture they
were kept for the Space of fifteen Hours, and then in a freezing Night sent out
of the Town, without suffering them to go to any Place to refresh themselves.
And as to Humphrey Smith, and those with him, they were kept yet a good While
in Prison.

In this Year Alexander Parker was at Radnor in Wales, A. Parker and Radnor.
and bearing there a Testimony against the Priest Vavasor Powel, he also
preached the Doctrine of Truth, as occasion offered. It was I think, about this
Time that Ambrose Rigg and Thomas Robinson came to Exeter, A. Rigg, T. Robinson
go to Exeter and Bristol.
from thence to Bristol, and afterward to Basing-stoke in Hampshire. Here,
after much Trouble they got a Meeting appointed; but before all the People was
assembled, the Chief Priest with the Rulers of the Place came there; and
causing them to be taken away, tendered them the Oath of Abjuration. But they
denying to swear, for Conscience Sake, Imprisoned and cruelly used at Basing
stoke in Hampshire.
were committed to Prison: And the Jailor nailed Planks before the Window, to
deprive them of the Light; neither would he suffer them to have a Candle at
Night. Here they were kept about a Quarter of a Year, having nothing to lie on
but some Straw. But this their Suffering had such Effect, that some of the
Inhabitants seeing these unreasonable Dealings, began to enquire into the
Doctrine held forth by the Sufferers, and so came to be convinced of the Truth
thereof. They are released. Preach at Portsmouth, some there convinced.
They at last being released, Robinson went to Portsmouth; where he preached
Repentance. Some Time after A. Rigg came also thither, and reaped what Robinson
in some Respect had sowed; though it was not long before he was sent out of Town.
But returning within a short Time, he found Opportunity to have a Meeting
there; and by his Preaching some were convinced, and embraced his Doctrine.

From thence he went to the Isle of Wight, A. Rigg goes to several Places.
where some also received the Doctrine maintain^d by him. After some Stay he
returned to Sussex, where he had great Service. And traveling up and down the
Country, he came to Weymouth and Milcomb-regis, Is persecuted and imprisoned at
Milcomb-regis.
where speaking in the Steeple-house against the Priest, he was seized and
locked up in a nasty Dungeon, where there was nothing to lie on but some filthy
Straw; and a Stone to sit on: There was also no House of Office; but on the
Ground lay an ^eap of Dung, where he also was forced to case himself. But there
being an Opening at the Top of the Room, she could see People go along the
Streets, and thus took Occasion from this Subterranean Cave, to preach to the
Passengers with such Power and Efficacy, There preaches from under Ground.
that his Doctrine entered into the Hearts of the Hearers, and stuck there. This
Manner of Preaching often has been in England; and I my self, in my young
Years, have been an Eyewitness of it; and have heard the Prisoners lift up,
their Voice so, that it could be heard very easily in the Street^; which made
People that pas^'d by, stand still, and hearken to what was spoken by such
zealous Preachers. And tho these were often hindered of having Meetings, yet it
was impossible to stop up the Fountain from whence their Words flowed. Thus it
was also with A. Rigg, Is released again. Travels and is persecuted.
who after an Imprisonment of eleven Weeks, being set at Liberty, traveled up
and down again; but in many Places where he came, a Prison was his Lot;
sometimes even when nothing could be laid to his Charge, but that he was gone
from his Dewlling Place: For the, Parliament had made a Law, that all who were
gone from home, and could not give a satisfactory Account of their Business,
should be taken up as Vagabonds. Under this Pretense, many who traveled to the
Markets with their Goods, were seized by the Way; for if it did but appear that
such an one was a Quaker, which was presently seen by his not putting off his
Hat, then there wanted no pretended Reason to clap him up in Prison.

A. Rigg traveling on, came also to visit some of his Friends in Prison at
Southampton. This was taken so ill, that the Mayor Peter Seal, He is severely
wh^pt at Southampton, and examined, by Order of P. Seal, Mayor,
without examining, caused him to be fastened to the Whipping-post in the
Marketplace, where he was severely lashed by the Executioner, and then put
into a Cart, and sent out of the Town in freezing snowy Weather, the Mayor
threatening him, that if ever he returned, he should be whipped again, and burnt
in the Shoulder with an R. signifying Rogue. Notwithstanding this, he was moved
to return; and the Mayor was very eager to have this executed on him; but the
other Magistrates would not consent; who died of a Bloody Flux.
and not long after the Mayor died of a Bloody Flux. This Relation has carried
me a little beyond the Course of Time. But now I leave A. Rigg for a While,
intending to make further Mention of him hereafter.

In this Year William Caton went again to Scotland, from whence returning, W.
Caton goes to Scotland; back to Bristol, Plymouth, London, and then to Holland,
where W. Ames and J. Stubs had been.
he traveled to Bristol, thence to Plymouth, and so to London; from whence he
made a Voyage again to Holland, where William Ames and John Stubs had been, and
also found some among the English People at Amsterdam who had received the
Doctrine they preached, though afterward they turned off from it again. W. Ames
found also some Reception among the Baptists there, who at first were pleased
with him, but J. Stubs did not please them so well, as Dr. Galenus Abrahamson
once told me, who compared Ames to a Musician that pray^d a very melodious
Tune, and Stubs to a Disturber of the harmonious Music, though Ames afterward
for his great Zeal was found Fault with also. W. Caton now arrived at Dort, and
from thence repaired to Rotterdam, where for Want of an Interpreter that
understood English, he was fain to make Use of the Latin. But it grieved him
exceedingly to meet with some unruly Spirits there, that having been in some
Measure convinced by W Ames, ran out under the Denomination of Quakers, into
Extremes, both in Words and Writings. Some of these Persons I know, and have
seen also some of the Books they gave out in Print, in which, under a Pretense
of Plainness, not one Capital Letter was to be found, even not to proper Names,
nay, not to Names of Authors themselves. And since they ran out into several
other Extravagancies, it was not much to be wondered, that the Magistrates clapped
them up in Bedlam. The Ringleader of these People was one Isaac Furnier, Some
extravagant People disowned ^^ the Quakers.
who formerly (as I have heard my Uncle tell, who had seen it himself) lived as
another Diogenes, using at the Fire, instead of a Pair of Tongs, a split Stick;
and now conversing among the Quakers, so called, made it a Piece of Holiness to
use the most blunt Language he could think of, how absurd and irregular soever.
In fine, he so behaved himself, that the Orthodox Quakers could not resolve to
keep Society with him any longer. He it was, as I have understood, who was the
Author of that ridiculous Saying, My Spirit testifies: Which, though not
approved, nor used, by the true Quakers, yet has been so spread among the
People in the Low Countries, that it has been constantly credited, and is not
yet quite disbelieved, that the Quakers use to say so of any Thing they intend
to do; and that if any one, who ever it be, says so, they will give Credit to
his Saying. The abovesaid Dr. Galenus has told me, that this Man, coming to
his Door, and finding the Doctor's Name writ on the Post of the Door (as is
usual in Holland) did, with his Knife, scratch out the Letters Dr. signifying
Doctor. On which the Doctor asked him, Why he did so? And his Answer was,
Because the Spirit did testify so unto him. And being asked farther, If so be,
that Spirit did move him to stab the Doctor with the Knife, whether he would
follow that Motion. He answered, (if the Relation be true) as the Doctor
affirmed to me, Yes. But however it be, this is true, that this Furnier was a
passionate and giddy-headed Man, whom the true Quakers could not own, though he
had translated many of their Books out of English into Dutch; and would also
preach amongst them. But at length he left them, and turning Papist, ^ell to a
dissolute and debauch d Life.

But to return to W. Caton; he coming to Amsterdam, From Rotterdam, W. Caton
comes to Amsterdam.
did not find much more Satisfaction there than at Rotterdam; for several high
conceited Professors, who seemed to approve the Doctrine preached by the
Quakers, were more ap^ to take upon them to teach others, than to receive
Instruction from others. Wherefore W. Caton did not stay long at Amsterdam, but
returned to Rotterdam, and from thence went to Zealand, arriving at Middleburgh
accompanied with a certain young Man, Afterward to Middleburgh in Zealand,
where visiting a young Man (that went with him) in Prison he is also secured.
who went to some of the Meeting-places in that City, and was apprehended;
which Caton understanding, went to visit him, and they perceiving that he was
his Companion, secured him also; and after having been kept in Prison some
Days, being weak in Body, it was ordered that they should be sent to England;
and so they were carried in a Coach-wagon to the Waterside, being conducted by
a Guard of Soldiers, to protect them against the rude Multitude, and brought on
board a Ship of War, And after some Days put on board a Man of War, where he
was hardly used; and arrives at last in England, where he is kindly recieved;
then goes into Hampshire, Surry, Sussex and Kent.
where Caton suffered great Hardship; for the Seamen were so ill natured, that
they would not allow him so much as a piece of Sail-Cloth, but he was fain to
lie upon the bare Boards, in very cold and stormy Weather. But though thus hardly
used, yet he felt his Strength increase, and so experienced ^he Mercies of God.
It was in the Month called November, when he arrived at London, where he was
kindly received by the Brethren: After some Stay there he went to Hampshire,
Surrey, Suffex, and Kent.

Not long before this, G. Fox came to Exeter, where James Naylor was in Prison,
and spoke to him by Way of Reproof; which Naylor slighted, though he offered to
kiss G. Fox; but he unwilling to suffer this, said, Since he had turned against
the Power of God, he could not receive his Show of Kindness. It appeared from
Letters the Magistrates found in his Pocket at Bristol, that the Quakers found
fault with him, and had reproved him of his High-mindedness, before it launched
out into that extravagant Act, which made so great a Noise in the World, and
has been mixed with many Untruths, and false Turns. I have therefore thought
it worth While to enquire narrowly into it, in Order to give a true Relation of
Matters of Fact.

This James Naylor was born of honest Parents, His Father was a Husbandman, and
of good Repute, having a competent Estate to live on, with Industry, according
to the Manner of the country where he dwelt. He was educated in good English,
and wr^te well. About (...) of twenty two he married, and then removed into
Wakefield Parish, where he continued (...) the Wars broke out in 1641, and then
went into the Army, and was a Soldier eight or nine Years, first under the Lord
Fairfax, and afterward Quarter master under Major General Lambert, till
disabled by Sickness in Scotland, he retained (...) about 1649. (...).
in the Parish of Ardesloe near Wakefield in Yorkshire, History of J. Naylor.
about the Year 1616. He had served in the Parliament Army, being
Quartermaster in Major General Lambert's Troop in Scotland, was a Member of
the Independents, and afterward in the Year 1651, he entered into the Communion
of the Quakers so called He and Thomas Goodair were convinced by G. Fox about
Wakefield, (...) 1651, as were also Richard Farnsworth, Thomas Aldham, William
Dewsbury, G. Fox 's Journal.
and Wife, about the same Time. And in the Beginning of the Year following, as
he was in the Field at Pl^u^h, meditating on the things of God, he hea^^, a
Voice, ^idding him go out from his K^^^^^^, and from his Father's H^^se; and
had a Promise given with it, that the Lord would be with him; whereupon he did
exceedingly rejoice that he had heard the Voice of God whom he had professed
from a Child, and endeavored to serve: And when he went home he made
Preparation to; but not being obedient, the Wrath of God was upon him, that he
was made a wonder, and 'twas though he would have died. Afterward being made
willing, and going out with a Friend, not thinking then of a Journey, he was
commanded to go into the West, not knowing what he was to do there; but when he
came he had given him what to declare; and so he continued not knowing one Day
what he was to do the next; and the Promise of God, that he would be with him,
he found made good to him every Day. J. N's Works.
. He was a Man of excellent natural Parts, and at first did acquit himself
well, both in Word and Writing among his Friends, so that many came to receive
the Truth by his Ministry. He came to London toward the latter End of the Year
1654, or Beginning of 1655, and found there a Meeting of Friends, which had
already been gather^d in that City by the Service of Edward Borough and
Francis Howgill, and there he preached in such an eminent Manner, that many
admiring his great Gift, began to esteem him much above his Brethren, which as
it brought him no Benefit, so it gave Occasion of some Difference in the
Society; See G. W's Preface to J. N's Works.
and this ran so high, that some forward and inconsiderate Women, of whom
Martha Simmons was the Chief, assumed the Boldness to dispute with F. Howgill
and E. Borough openly in their Preaching, and thus to disturb the Meetings
These Women's Practice we may suppose to be somewhat like that which gave
Occasion to the Apostle Paul to say, Let your Women keep silent in the
Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, 1 Cor. xiv. 34. This
Prohibition of speaking must be voluntary Discourse by Way of Reasoning or
Disputing, and not when they had an immediate Impulse or Concern to prophesy;
for the Apostle in the same Epistle has defined Prophecy to be speaking unto
Men to Edification, Exhortation, and Comfort, Chap xiv. 3. And has also Chap.
xi. made express mention of Women's praying and Prophesying together with the
Men.
. Whereupon they who were truly excellent Preachers, did not fail, according to
their Duty, to reprove this Indiscretion. But hereupon these Women were so
disgusted, that Martha, and another Woman, went and complained to J. Nailor, to
incense him against F. Howgill and E. Borough, but this did not succeed, for
he showed himself afraid to pass Judgment upon his Brethren, as they desired:
Whereupon Martha fell into a Passion, in a Kind of Moaning or Weeping, and
bitterly crying out with a mourning shrill Voice, said, I looked for Judgment,
but behold a Cry; and with that cried aloud in a passionate lamenting Manner,
which so entered and pierced J. Naylor, that it smote him down into so much
Sorrow and Sadness, that he was much dejected in Spirit, or disconsolate: Fear
and Doubting then entered him, so that he came to be clouded in his
Understanding, bewildred and at a Loss in his Judgment, and became estranged
from his best Friends, because they did not approve his Conduct; insomuch that
he began to give Ear to the flattering Praises of some whimsical People, which
he ought to have abhorred and reproved them for. But his sorrowful Fall ought
to stand as a Warning, even to those that are endu'd with great Gifts, that
they don't presume to be exalted, left they also fall, but endeavor to
continue in true Humility, in which alone a Christian can be kept safe. Hannah
Stranger, whom I knew very well, and have Reason to believe a Woman of high
Imaginations, wrote in this Time several very extravagant Letters to him,
calling him The everlasting Son of Righteousness; Prince of Peace; The only
begotten Son of God; The fairest of ten Thousands, etc. In the Letters of Jane
Woodcock, John Stranger, and others, were Expressions of the like Extravagancy:
The said Hannah Stranger, Martha Simmons, and Dorcas Erbury arriv^d to that
Height of Folly, that in the Prison at Exeter they kneeled before Naylor, and
kissed his Feet: But as to what has been divulged concerning his committing of
Fornication, I never could find, though very inquisi^ive in the Case, that he was
in the least guilty thereof. As to that Accusation, as if I had committed
Adultery with some of those Women who came with us from Exeter-Prison, and also
those who were with me at Bristol the ^^ight before I suffered there, of both
which Accusations I am clear before God, who kept me at that Day both in
Thought and Deed, as to all Women, as a little Child* God is my Record. Introd.
to J. Naylor's Works, p. 54. See more particularly in his Answer to Blome's
Fanatic History, in the said Works at p. 652.
But for all that, he was already too much transported, and grew yet more
exorbitant; for being released from that Prison, and riding to Bristol in the
Beginning of November, he was accompanied by the aforesaid and other Persons;
and passing through the Suburbs of Bristol, one Thomas Woodcock went bare-headed
before him; one of the Women led his Horse, Dorcas, Martha, and Hannah spread
their Scarfs and Handkerchiefs before him, and the Company sung, Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord God of Hosts, Hosannah in the highest, Holy, Holy, Holy, is
the Lord God of Israel. Thus these mad People sung, whilst they were walking
through the Mire and Dirt, till they came into Bristol, where they were examine
d by the Magisrates, and committed to Prison; and not long after he was carried
to London to be examined by the Parliament. How it went there, may be seen in
the printed Trial, which the Parliament were pleased to publish. But the
Extravagancy of the Sentence which that Parliament passed upon him with other
Circumstances, give great Reason to suspect the Account was partially talen,
and published ^ justify their Cruelty, which is also set forth in Part by way
of Ann^tation on the said Trial And (as J. W. says) some of his Answers were
innocent enough, some not clear and some aggravated by his Adversaries; some of
them he denied some he owned they reported the worst, and more than was true in
some Things, adding and diminishing as they were minded, much wanting of what
he had spoken to the Committee, wresting and perv^^ting his W^rds what they
could, and endeavoring to draw Words out of him, to ensnare him, and take away
his Life; and to show their C^nfusion when he was before them, they would have
had him to kneel, and put off his Hat to them, though a Part of the Charge
against him was, that some kneeled to him.
I believe that J. Naylor was clouded in his Understanding in all this
Transation: But how grievous soever his Fall was, yet it pleased God in his
infinite Mercy, to raise him up again, and to bring him to such sincere
Repentance, that (as we may see in the Sequel) he abhorred not only this whole
Business, but also manifested his hearcy Sorrow, in pathe^ical Expressions,
which were publish d, as will be shown in its proper Place. What has been said
of the odd Doings in Exeter-Prison, and of his riding into Bristol, was not
denied by him, nor by the rest of the Company when they were examin^d by a
Committee of Parliament, who made their Report on the 5th of December, to which
the House agreed next Day. On the 16th this Business, which had (not without
much Contradiction; for many Members of the Parliament did not approve the
Severity used against him) been treated both Forenoons and Afternoons, was
proposed the twelfth Time, which made an ingenious Author say afterward, That
it was wondered at by many what the Cause might be that this foolish Business
should hold so many wise Men so long at Work. On the 17th, after a long Debate,
they came to this Resolution,

That James Naylor be set on the Pillory, with his Head in the Pillory, in the
Palace-^ard, Westminster, during the Space of two Hours, on Thursday next, and
be whipped by the Hangman through the Streets from Westminster to the Old-Exchange,
London, and there likewise be set on the Pillory, with his Head in the Pillory
for the Space of two Hours, between the Hours of eleven and one, on Saturday
next, in each Place wearing a Paper containing an Inscription of his Crime^ and
that at the Old Exchange his Tongue be bored through with a hot Iron, and that he
be there also stigmatiz^d in the Forehead with the Letter B, and that he be
afterward sent to Bristol, and be conveyed into and through the said City on
Horseback, with his Face backward, and there also publicly whipped the next
Market Day after he comes thither, and that from thence he be committed to
Prison in Bridewell, London, and there restrained from the Society of all
People, and there to labor hard till he shall be released by Parliament, and
during that Time be debarred the Use of Pen, Ink, and Paper, and shall have no
Relief but what he earns by his daily Labor.

They were long ere they could agree on the Sentence; for suppose there was
Blasphemy committed, yet his Tongue seemed not properly guilty of it, since it
was not proved that blasphemous Words had been spoken by him. At Lancaster
Sessions the Priests got some to swear Blasphemy against G. F. (which was the
common Accusation in those Days) but he was cleared and the Priests. etc. were
enraged, wh^ thereup^n sent a Petition to the Council of State against G. F.
and J. N. who answered the same in a Book called Readiness Errand to Damascus.
After this, J. N. was persecuted in diverse P^aces, beaten, st^ned, and cruelly
used by the Priests and their rude Followers, and in Danger of his Life.
Afterward, by the Instigation of the Priests, he and F. Howgill were committed
to Appleby-Jail, and tried ^n an Indictment for Blasphem^, for saving, Christ
was in him, according to C^o^. i. 27. Christ in you the Hope of Glory. He was
also another time charged with Blasphemy, for asserting in a Book.
Justification by the Gift of God's Righteouness, which he proved from Romans v.
and so stopped their Mouths, and cleared himself: By which we may see what that
Generation, who were righteous in their own Eyes, would have made Blasphemy. J.
W. Account.
Many thought it to be indeed a very severe Judgment to be executed upon one
whose Crime seemed to proceed more from a clouded Understanding, than any
wilful Intention or Evil.

Now although several Persons of differene Persuasions being moved with
Compassion toward Naylor, as a Man carried away by foolish Imaginations, had
offered Petitions to the Parliament on his Behalf, yet it was resolved not to
read them till the Sentence was pronounced against him.

There lived then at London one Robert Rich a Merchant (a very bold Man) who
wrote a Letter to the Parliament, wherein he showed what was Blasphemy; and on
the 15th or December several Copies thereof were delivered to particular
Members; and in that which was given to the Speaker, these Words were written
at the Bottom, If I may ^ave Liberty of those that sit in Parliament, I do here
attend at their Door, and am ready, out of the Scriptures of Truth, to show,
that not any Thing J. Naylor has said or done, is Blasphemy, etc.

The Parliament, after Judgment was concluded, resolved that the Speaker should
be authoriz^d to issue his Warrants to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex,
the Sheriff of Bristol, and Governor of Bridewell, to see the said Judgment
put in Execution: But by some it was question^d, whether this was a sufficient
Warrant, unless the Protector concurred in the Matter; but he seemed unwilling
to meddle with it. The Thing being thus far agreed upon, J. Naylor was brought
up to the Bar; when the Speaker Sir Thomas Widdrington was about to pronounce
the aforementioned Sentence, Naylor said, He did not know his Offense. To which
the Speaker returned, He should know his Offense by his Punishment. After
Sentence was pronounced, though J. Naylor bore the same with great Patience, yet
it seemed he would have spoken something, but was denied Liberty; nevertheless
was heard to say, with a composed Mind, I pray God he may not lay it to your
Charge.

The 18th of December, J. Naylor suffered Part of the Sentence; and after
having stood full two Hours with his Head in the Pillory, was stripped and whipped
at a Cart's Tail, from Palace-Yard to the Old Exchange, and received three
Hundred and Ten Stripes; and the Executioner should have given him one more (as
he confess^d to the Sheriff) there being three Hundred and eleven Kennels, but
his Foot s^ipping, the Stroke fell upon his own Hand, which hurt him much. All
this Naylor bore with so much Patience and Quietness, that it astonished many
of the Beholders* though his Body was in a most pitiful Condition: He was also
much hurt with Horses treading on his Feet, whereon the Print of the Nails were
seen. R. Travers, a grave Person, who washed his wounds, in a Certificate which
was presented to the Parliament, and afterward printed, says, There was not the
Space of a Man's Nail free from Stripes and Blood from his Shoulders near to
his Waste, his Right-Arm sorely striped, his Hands much hurt with Cords, that
they bled, and were swelled. The Blood and Wounds of his Back did very little
appear at first Sight, by Reason of Abundance of Dirt that covered them, till
it was washed off. Nay, his Punishment was so severe, that some Judged his
Sentence would have been more mild if it had been present Death: And it seem^d
indeed that there was a Party, who not being able to prevail so far in
Parliament as to have him sentenced to Death, yet strove to the utmost of their
Power to make him sink under the Weight of his Punishment; for the 20th of
December was the Time appointed for Executing the other Part of his Sentence,
viz. Boring through his Tongue, and stigmatizing in his Forehead; but by Reason
of the most cruel Whipping, he was brought to such a low Ebb, that many Persons
of Note, moved with Compassion, presented Petitions to the Parliament on his
Behalf, who resp^^ed him farther Punishment for one Week. During this Interval
several Persons presented another Petition, in whicn are these Words: Your
Moderation and Clemency in respiting the Punishment of J. Naylor, in
Consideration of his Illness of Body, has re^reshed the Hearts of many
Thousands in these Cities, altogether unconcern^d in his Practice: Wherefore,
we most humbly beg your Pardon that are constrained to appear before you in
such a Suit, (not daring to do otherwise) that you would remit the Remaining
Part of your Sentence against the said J. Naylor, leaving him to the Lord and
to such Gospel Remedies as he has sanctified; and we are persuaded you will
find such a Course of Love and Forbearance more effectual to reclaim; and will
leave a Zeal of your Love and Tenderness upon our Spirits,

And we shall pray, etc.

This Petition being presented at the Bar of the House, by about one Hundred
Persons, on the Beha^^ of the whole, was accordingly rea^ and debated by them;
but not being, likely to produce the desired Effect, the Petitioners thought
themselves in Duty and Conscience bound to address the Protector for remitting
the remaining Part of the Sentence; who thereupon sent a Letter to the
Parliament, which occasioned some Debate in the House. But the Day for
executing the remaining Part of the Sentence drawing near, the Petitioners made
a second Address to the Protector. It was indeed very remarkable, that so many
Inhabitants that were not of the Society of those called Quakers, shew^d
themselves so much concerned in this Business; but to me it seems to have
proceeded merely from Compassion toward the Person of J. Naylor, whom they
regarded as one that was rather fallen into Error through Inconsiderateness than
to have been guilty of wilful Blasphemy, for then he would not have deserved so
much Pity. But notwithstanding all these humble Petitions, the public
Preachers it seems prevailed so much with Cromwell, that he could not resolve to
put a Stop to the intended Execution; for five of these Ministers, whom I find
named thus, Caryl, Manton, Nigh, Griffith, and Reynolds came on the 24th of
December, by Order from the Parliament (as it was said) to Naylor, to speak
with him concerning the Things for which he was detained, and would not permit
either Friend or other to be present in the Room, though a certain impartial or
neutral Person desired it earnestly, but it was denied him; yet after the
Conference, W. H.
coming into the Prison, he asked Naylor what had been the Issue of it? Who
told him that he told those Ministers, That he saw they had an Intent to make
him suffer (though innocent) as an Evil-doer, and therefore had denied any to be
present that might be indifferent Judges betwixt them and him; and that
therefore he should not say any Thing, unless what passed was wrote down, and a
Copy thereof given him to keep, or left with the Jailor signed by them. This
was by them consented to, and so they propounded several Questions unto him,
and took his Answers in Writing: He farther told, That they asked him if he was
sorry for (...) Blasphemies that he was guilty of, and whether he did recant
and renounce the same? To which his Answer was, What Blasphemies? Name them:
But they not being able to instance in any Particular, he continued, Would you
have me recant and renounce you know not what? Then they asked him, Whether he
did believe there was a Jesus Christ? To which he answered, He did believe
there was, and that Jesus had taken up his Dwelling in his Heart and Spirit,
and for the Testimony of Him he now suffered. Then one of the Preachers said,
But I believe in a Jesus that never was in any Man's Heart: To which Naylor
returned, He knew no such Christ, for the Christ he witnessed filled Heaven and
Earth, and dwelt in the Hearts of the Believers. Next they demanded of him, Why
he suffered those Women -- to worship and adore him? To which he replied,
Bowing to the Creature I deny; but if they beheld the Power of Christ,
wherever it is, and bow to it, he bad nothing by which be might resist that,
or gainsay it: The most that I find in his Examination, either at Bristol or
London, before the Committee of Parliament as published from their Report, was,
that he owned Christ in him, but never that he was Christ; and that he ^ook the
Honor given, not as to himself, but to Christ in him; which yet is more than
any Man ought to receive; for when the beloved Disciple John fell at the
Angel's Feet to worship him, he (though an Angel) said unto him, See thou do it
not, I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren that have the Testimony of
Jesus, worship God, Rev. xix. 10. And if an Angel ought not, surely no Mortal
Man ought to receive or accept it, on any Pretense whatsoever; though falling
down or kneeling to one another, is too frequently used by some other People,
and if it is not to their Person, it must be to their Function, Quality, or
Character in the Church: But that he received it to himself, as a Creature, he
utterly denied, Trial Page 15. And that there could not be a more abominable
Thing than to take from the Creator, and give to the Creature, etc. J. W.
And withal said to the Ministers, Have you thus long professed the Scriptures,
and do you now stumble at what they hold forth^ Whereupon they desiring one
Instance of Scripture wherein such a Practice was held forth. 2 Kings iv 27, 37.
He answered, What think you of the Shunamite's falling down at the Feet of
Elisha, and bowing before him? As also diverse others in Scripture spoken of, I
Sam. xxv 23.
as that of Abigail to David, and that of Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel: Dan. ii. 46.
Upon which they pausing a while, said at length, That was but a civil Act or
Acknowledgment: To which he returned, So you might interpret the Act of those
Women also, if your Eye were not evil, seeing the outward Action is one and the
same: And he perceiving that they were seeking to wrest Words from him to their
own Purpose, said, How soon have you forgot the Work of the Bishops, who are
now found in the same, seeking to ensnare the Innocent. Whereupon they rose up,
and with Bitterness of Spirit burnt what they had written before, and so left
him with some bemoaning Expressions; and when they were departing, he desired
of them, That the Parliament would send him such Questions in Writing as they
desired Satisfaction to, and give him Leave to return his Answers in Writing
also.

By this it seems that Naylor, though still under some Cloud, yet was a little
more clear in his Understading than before; but he was encountered by fierce
Enemies, and therefore the Execution of his Sentence was not stopped, but
performed on the 27th of December. Robert Rich, that forward Man, of whom
something has been mentioned already, was this Day at the Parliament-Door,
from eight in the Morning till about eleven, crying variously to the
Parliament Men as they passed by ^ To one whom he judged to be innocent, he
said, He that dwells in love dwells in God; for God is Love: And to another
whom he thought to be swayed by Envy, he said, He that hates his Brother is a
Manslayer, and he that hates his Brother is a Murderer. Some then thought that
Naylor would not have suffered any farther Punishment, because many honorable
Persons had attended the Parliament and the Protector on his Behalf: But Rich
knowing how the Case stood, told the People, That the Innocent was going to
suffer: And to some of the Parliament Men he cried, That he was clear from the
Blood of all Men; and that he desired them to be so too. Then he went toward
the Exchange, and got on the Pillory, held Naylor by the Hand while he was
burned on the Forehead, and bored through the Tongue; and was not a little
affected with Naylor's Sufferings, for he licked his Wounds, thereby as it
seems to allay the Pain; and he led him by the Hand from off the Pillory. It
was very remarkable, that notwithstanding there might be many Thousands of
People, yet they were very quiet, and few heard to revile him, or seen to throw
any Thing at him: And when he was burning, the People both before and behind
him, and on both Sides, with one Consent stood bare-headed, as seeming
generally moved with Compasssion and Good Will toward him.

Many now rejoiced, seeing how some few among the Quakers, as Rich, and the
like Sort of People did side with Naylor, whilst the Quakers generally spoke
against him and his Doings; for those who hoped to see the Downfall ot them,
signified not obscurely, That now Things went as they would have, since the
Quakers (as they said) were divided among themselves. But Time showed that this
pretended Division soon came to an End, and those Diviners and Guessers
over-shot themselves. How it went with the Execution of Naylor's Sentence at
Bristol, I am not informed He was sent to Bristol, and there whipped from the
Middle of Thomas-street, over the bridge, up High street, to the Middle of
Broad-street, all which he bore with wonderful Patience, as related by an
Eve-Witness, and then sent by Tower-Lane the Back Way to Newgate, and from
thence retun'd to Bridewel, London according to the Sentence. J. W.
; but by a Letter of one Richard Snead, an ancient Man of about eighty Years, I
have understood that Naylor had written a Letter to the Magistrates of Bristol,
wherein he had disapproved, and penitently condemned his Carriage there And
after he was set at Liberty, he went to Bristol, where in a public Meeting he
made Confession of his Offense, as to his former Fall, and declared in so
powerful a Manner, as tendered and broke the Meeting into Tears; so that there
were few dry Eyes, (as related by some then present) and many were bowed in
their Minds, and reconciled to him, J. W's Account.
. After this he was brought to Bridewel, London, (as sentenced) where he
continued Prisoner about two Years, during which Confinement he came to a true
Repentance of his Transgression; and having got the Use of Pen and Ink, wrote
several Books and Papers, condemning his Error, which were published in Print;
and after his Release he published several others, one of which, by Way of
Recantation, runs thus:

GLory to God Almighty, who rules in the Heavens, and in whose Hands are all
the Kingdoms of the Earth; who raises up, and cas^eth down at his Will; wh^
has Ways to confound the Exaltation of Man, and to chastize his Children, and
to make Man to know himself to be as Grass before him, whose Judgments are
above the highest of Men, and his Pity reaches the deepest Misery; and the Arm
of his Mercy is underneath, to lift up the Prisoner out of the Pit and to save
such as trust in him from the great Destructon, which vain Man, through his
Folly, brings upon himself; who has delivered my Soul from Darkness, and made
Way for my Freedom out of the Prisonhouse, and ransomed me from the great
Captivity; who divides the Sea before him, and removes the Mountains out of his
Way, in the Day when he takes upon him to deliver the Oppressed out of the Hand
of him that is too mighty for him in the Earth: Let his Name be exalted for
ever, and let all Flesh ^ear before him, whose Breath is Life to his own, but a
con^^^ng Fire to the Adversary.

And to the Lord Jesus Christ be everlasting Dominion upon Earth, and his
Kingdom above all the Powers of Darkness; even that Christ of whom the
Scriptures declare, which was, and is, and is to come, the Light of the World
to all Generations; of whose coming I testify with the rest o^ the Children of
Light, begotten of the immortal Seed, whose Truth and Virtue non shine in the
World, unto the Righteousness of eternal Life, and the Savior of all that
believe therein; who has been* the Book of my Salvation, and his Spirit has
given Quietness and Patience to my Soul in deep Affection; even for his
Name's-Sake, Praises for ever.

But condemned for ever be all those false Worships, with which any have
idol^^ed my Person in the Night of Temptation, when the Power of Darkness was
above; all their Cas^^ng of their Clothes in the Way, their Bowings and
Singings, and all the rest of those wild Actions which did any ways tend to
dishonor the Lord, or draw the Minds of any from the measure of Christ Jesus
in themselves, to look at Flesh, which is as Grass, or to ascribe that to the
Visible, which belongs to Christ Jesus; all that I condemn, by which the pure
Name of the Lord has been any ways blasphem^d through me, in the Time of
Temptation; or the Spirits of any People grieved, that truly loved the Lord
Jesus, throughout the whole World of what sort soever. This Offense I confes^,
which has been Sorrow of Heart, that the Enemy of Man's Peace in Christ,
should get this advantage in the Night of my Trial to stir up Wrath and
Offenses in the Creation of God; a Thing, the Simplicity of my Heart did not
intend, the Lord knows; who in his endless Love has given me Power over it, to
Condemn it; and also that Letter which was sent me to Exeter by John Stringer,
when I was in Prison, with these Words; Thy Name shall be no more James Naylor,
but Jesus. This I judge to be written from the Imaginations, and a Fear struck
me when I first saw it, and so I put it in my Pocket close, not intending any
should see it; which they finding on one, spread it abroad, which the
Simplicity of my Heart never owned. So this I deny also, that the Name of
Christ Jesus was received instead of James Naylor; for that Name is to the Seed
to all Generations; and he that has the Son, has the Name, which is Life and
Power; the Salvation and the Unction into which Name all the Children of Light
are baptized. So the Name of Christ I confess before Men, which Name to me has
been a strong Tower in the Night and in the Day: And this is the Name of Christ
Jesus, which I confess, the Son and the Lamb in the Seed where he speaks in
Male and Female: But who has not this in himself, has not Life, neitheir can
have by Idolizing my Person, or the Person of any Flesh, but in whom the Heir
is born, and has spoken, or does speak; there must not be denied the mouth to
speak by, who is Head over all, and in all his own, God blessed for ever.

And all those ranting wild Spirits, which then gathered about me in that Time
of Darkness; and all their wild Actions and wicked words against the Honor of
God, and his pure Spirit and People; I deny that bad Spirit, the Power and the
Works thereof; and as far as I gave Advantage, through Want of Judgment, for that
evil Spirit in any to arise, I take shame to my self justly; having formerly
had Power over that Spirit, in Judgment and Discerning, wherever (...) was;
which Darkness came over me through Want of Watchfulness and Obedience to the
pure Eye of God, and diligently minding the Reproof of Life, which condemns the
adulterous Spirit. So the Adversary got Advantage, who ceases not to seek to
devour; and being taken captive from the true Light, I was walking in the Night
where none can work, as a wandering Bird fit for a Prey. And if the Lord of all
my Mercies had not rescued me, I had perished, for I was as one appointed to
Death and Destruction, and there was none could deliver me. And this I confess,
that God my be justified in his Judgment, and magnified in his Mercies without
End, who did not forsake his Captive in the Night, even when his Spirit was
daily provoked and grieved; but has brought me forth to give Glory to his Name
for ever. And it is in my Heart to confess to God, and before Men, my Folly and
Offense in that Day: Yet were there many Things formed against me in that Day
to take away my Life, and bring Scandal upon the Truth, of which I am not
guilty at all; as that Accusation, as if I had committed Adultery with some of
those Women who came with us from Exeter-Prison, and also those who were with
me at Bristol the Night before I suffered there; of both which Accusations I am
clear before God, who kept me in that Day both in Thought and Deed, as to all
Women, as a Child, God is my Record. And this I mention in particular (hearing
of some who still cease not to reproach therewith God's Truth and People) that
the Mouth of Enmity might be shut from Evil-speaking, though this touches not my
Conscience.

And that Report, as though I had raised Dorcas Erbury from the Dead carnally,
this I deny also, and condemn that Testimony to be out of the Truth; though that
Power that quickens the Dead, I deny not, which is the Word of eternal Life.
And this I give forth, that it may go as far as the Offense against the Spirit
of Truth has gone abroad, that all Burdens may be taken off with the Truth,
and the Truth cleared thereby, and the true Light, and all that walk therein,
and the Deeds of Darkness be condemned; and that all that are in Darkness, may
not act in the Night, but stay upon God, who dwells in the Light, who with the
Workers of Iniquity has no Fellowship; which had I done, when first Darkness
came upon me, and not been led by others, I had not run against the Rock to be
broken, which so long had born me, and of whom I had so largely drunk, and of
which I now drink in Measure; to whom be the Glory of all, and to him must
every Tongue confess, as Judge and Savior, God over all, blessed for ever.

The Author adding to this an Exhortation to the Reader, how to behave himself,
if at any Time he came to be tempted to Sin; and also a Warning not to rely too
much on Gifts, Wisdom, and Knowledge, concludes thus:

This I have learned in the Deep, and in secret, when I was alone; and now
declare openly in the Day of thy Mercy, O Lord; Glory to the Highest for
evermore, who has thus far set me free to praise his Righteousness and his
Mercy; and to the eternal, invisible, pure God, over all, be Fear, Obedience,
and Glory evermore. Amen.

James Naylor.

He wrote another Paper, wherein he related at large, how by Unwatchfulness he
came to fall, after having once obtained much Victory over the Power of Satan,
by the Grace of God, when he daily walked humbly in his Fear, having for some
Years labored faithfully in the Ministry of the Gospel. But what is
remarkable, though wherever he did use to come, he went with great Boldness
through all Opposition, yet coming to the City of London, he entered into it with
the greatest Fear that ever he came into any Place with, in Spirit foreseeing
(as he relates) somewhat to befall him there, but not knowing what it might be:
Introduction to J. N's Works, p. 40.


Yet had I, (thus he says) the same Presence and Power as before, into
whatever Place or Service I was led of the Spirit; in that Life I never
returned without Victory in Christ Jesus, the Lord thereof. But not minding in
all Things to stand single and low to the Motions of that endless Life, by it
to be led in all Things within and without; but giving Way to the reasoning
Part, as to same Things which in themselves had no seeming Evil, by little and
little it drew out my Mind after Trifles, Vanities, and Persons, which took the
affectionate Part, by which my Mind was drawn out from the constant Watch, and
pure Fear, into which I once was begotten. -- Thus having in a great Measure
lost my own Guide, and Darkness being come upon me, I sought a Place where I
might have been alone, to weep and cry before the Lord, that his Face I might
find, and my Condition recover: But then my Adversary, who had long waited his
Opportunity, had got in; and bestirred himself every way, so that I could not
be hid: And diverse Messages came to me, some true, some false, as I have seen
since. So I knowing some to be true, to wit, how I had lost my Condition, with
this I let in the false Message also; and so letting go that little of the true
Light which I had yet remaining in my self, I gave up my self wholly to be led
by others, whose Work was then to divide me from the Children of Light, which
was done, though much was done by diverse of them to prevent it, and in Bowels of
tender Love many labored to have stayed me with them. And after I was led out
from them, the Lord God of my Life sent diverse of his Servants with his Word
after me, for my Return; all which was rejected; yea, the Provocation of that
Time of Temptation was exceeding great against the pure Love of God; yet he
left me not; for after I had given my self under that Power, and Darkness was
above, my Adversary so prevailed, that all Things were turned and perverted
against my right Seeing or Understanding; only a secret Hope and Faith I had in
my God which I had served, that he would bring me through it, and to the End of
it, and that I should again see the Day of my Redemption from under it all; and
this quieted my Soul in my greatest Tribulation.

The Author moreover seriously exhorting others who also might come to fall
into great Temptation, concludes with these Words: He who has saved my Soul
from Death thus far, and lift my Feet up out of the Pit, even to him be
immortal Glory for ever, and let every troubled Soul trust in him; for his
Mercy endures for ever.

James Naylor.

That he came to a perfect Recovery from his having been in a Maze, seems to
appear plainly by the following Thanksgiving to God for his Mercies, which he
published after his Fall.

IT is in my Heart to praise thee, Introduction to J. N's Works, p. 49.
O my God; let me never forget thee, what thou have been to me in the Night, by
thy Presence in the Day of Trial, when I was beset in Darkness, when I was cast
out as a wandering Bird, when I was assaulted with strong Temptations, then thy
Presence in secret did preserve me, and in a low State I felt thee near me:
When the Floods sought to sweep me away, thou did set a Compass for them how
far they should pass over: When my Way was through the Sea, and when I passed
under the Mountains, there wast thou present with me: When the Weight of the
Hills was upon me, thou uphold me, else had I sunk under the Earth. When I was
as altogether helpless, when Tribulation and Anguish was upon me Day and Night,
and the Earth without Foundation; when I went on the Way of Wrath, and passed
by the Gates of Hell; when all Comforts stood afar off, and he that is mine
Enemy had Dominion; when I was cast into the Pit, and was as one appointed to
Death; when I was between the Milstones, and as one crushed with the Weight of
his Adversary; as a Father thou wast with me, and the Rock of thy Presence.
When the Mouth of Lions roared against me, and Fear took Hold of my Soul in the
Pit, then I called upon thee in the Night, and my Eyes were strong before thee
daily, who answered me from thy Habitation, and delivered me from thy
Dewlling Place, saying, I will set thee above all thy Fears, and lift up thy
Feet above the Head of Oppression. I believed and was strengthened, and thy Word
was Salvation. Thou did fight on my Part when I wrestled with Death; and when
Darkness would have shut me up, then thy Light shone about me, and thy Banner
was over my Head: When my Work was in the Furnace, and as I passed through the
Fire by thee, I was not consumed, though the Flames ascended above my Head. When
I beheld the dreadful Visions, and was amongst the fiery Spirits, thy Faith
stayed me, else through Fear I had fallen. I saw thee, and believed, so the Enemy
could not prevail.

When I look back into thy Works, I am astonished, and see no End of thy
Praises: Glory, Glory to thee, says my Soul, and let my Heart be ever filled
with Thanksgiving. Whilst thy Works remain, they shall show forth thy Power.
Then did thou lay the Foundation of the Earth, and lead me under the Waters,
and in the Deep did thou show me Wonders, and thy Forming of the World. By
thy Hand thou led'st me in Safety, till thou shewedst me the Pillars of the
Earth: Then did the Heavens shower down, they were covered with Darkness, and
the Powers thereof were shaken, and thy Glory descended: Thou fillest the lower
Parts of the Earth with Gladness, and the Springs of the Valleys were opened,
and thy Showers descended abundantly. So the Earth was filled with Virtue. Thou
make thy Plant to spring, and the thirsty Soul become as a watered Garden:
Then did thou list me out of the Pit, and set me forth in the Sight of my
Enemies. Thou proclaimedst Liberty to the Captive, and called mine Acquaintance
near me: They to whom I had been a Wonder, looked upon me, and in thy Love I
obtained Favor in those who had forsook me. Then did Gladness swallow up
Sorrow, and I forsook all my Troubles; and I said, How good is it that Man be
proved in the Night, that he may know his Folly, that every Mouth may become
silent in thy Hand, until thou make Man known to himself, and have slain the
Boaster, and showed him the Vanity that vexes thy Spirit,

JAMES NAYLOR.

This plainly appears to be a Poetical Piece; for the Author all along makes
Use of Allegorical Sayings, to signify the great Anguish and Tribulation he had
been under.

The Hatred of his Enemies was the fiercer, because he had undisguisedly and
clearly demonstrated their Duty to the Rulers and Preachers, and Lawyers: For
in a certain Book published by him in the Year 1653, to exhort Men to
Repentance, he writes thus to the Rulers:

O You Rulers of the People, who are set up to judge between a Man and his
Neighbor, ought not you to judge for God, and not for Man? Ought not you to be
Men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, not judging for Gifts and Rewards?
Ought not you to countenance and encourage them that do well, and be a Terror
to them which do Evil? Justice is so. And he that is of God, and bears his
Sword, turns the Edge of it against all Sin and Wickedness, Injustice and
Oppression, and so sets up Jusitce and Judgment in the Gates, that the Poor may
be delivered from him that is too mighty for him, and that the Cause of the
Fatherless, Widow and Stranger may not fall; but has an Ear open to the Cries
of the Poor and Helpless, who has but little Money, and few Friends; that a
poor Man may not be afraid to appear in a good Cause, against the greatest
Oppressor in the Nation.

And ought not you to judge without Respect to Persons, or without seeking
Respect to your own Persons, Worship or Honor from Men, but only to advance
Justice, Equity, and Righteousness, which is of God, that so you may be
honored by the Lord? for true Humility is Honor, and he that honors the
Lord, him will he honor; and such has been honored in all Ages, though they
never sought it from Men.

This and much more he wrote to the Rulers. And to the Preachers thus: And you
who say, you are the Teachers of the Nation, How long will it be ere you look
at your own Ways? Is not all Manner of Filthiness amongst you, which you should
lead the People out of? Is there not among you Drunkenness, Gluttony, Whoredom,
and Sporting, Sitting down to eat and to drink, and rising up to play;
Swearing, Lying, Backbiting, false Accusing, Railing, Slandering, Contention,
Strife and Envy? Yea, are not the best of you given to Pride and Covetousness,
which is Idolatry, Fullness of Bread, and Abundance of Idleness? Are not you
Hirelings, and teach for the Fleece? Do not you contend for Money with your own
Hearers, and sue them at Law for it; yea, although they cannot satisfy your
Demand, without sinning against the Light in their own Conscience, and so sin
against God? Are you not bitter, and Persecutors of any that come to discover
your Lewdness, crying out to the Magistrate to uphold you in your beastly Ways,
and to stop the Mouths of all those whom God has sent to witness against you?
And many more Works of this Nature are among you, which the pure All-seeing God
has showed unto his People to be amongst you; and therefore it is that they
come out from you, lest they partake with you of your Sins and Plagues. But are
not you blind Leaders of the blind, when you neither see these to be the Works
of Darkness, nor those that follow you. Woe unto you that devour Souls for
Money and Gain, the Day of your Account is at Hand. O repent, the Blood of
Souls is upon you, etc.

The Lawyers in the same Writing had a Stroke also, thus: And you Lawyers,
ought not you to plead the Cause of Equity between Man and Man for Equity Sake,
without Respect to your selves or others, but only to Truth it self, that a
just Cause may be owned in whomsoever it concerns? But is not the justest Cause
sure to fall, if the Party have not Money to satisfy your Demands, which are
many Times very unreasonable? And you who should instruct People in the Ways of
Truth and Peace, do not you by your Wisdom teach them Lies and Strife? Do not
you advise your Plantiffs, as you call them, to declare in Bills, Things that
are not true, and make small Offenses seem very great by false Glosses? For say
you, We may declare what we will, and prove what we can; so that you, and they
whom you act for, know before hand, that scarce one Thing of Ten can be proved,
neither is true? Is this the Way to make up the Breach, and preserve Peace and
Truth among People? O miserable Fall from God, when that Law which should
before preserve in Peace, is used to aggravate Offenses beyond Truth, and so
make Differences greater. And do not you delight to fish in troubled Waters;
and the greater Dissension amongst the People, the more is your Gain? Are not
your Purses filled, and your Estates raised in the Ruins of the People? And are
not those Laws which ought to be used to preserve People from Oppression, by
abusing, made the Undoing of whole Families, impoverishing Towns and Countries?
The Law, as it is now used, is scarce serviceable for any other End but for the
envious Man, who has much Money to revenge himself of his poor Neighbors,
which, may be, never did him Wrong? Is there any appearing for the Poor against
the Rich, although his Cause be just, but by Deceit, Delays and Expenses; the
Remedy is worse than the Disease?

Much more he wrote to the Lawyers, to stir 'em up to do Justice, and then
addressed himself to the People in general, in these Words,

And you People of the Nation, that have seen the Hand of God, against the
Prince and People for these and the like Abominations, and you your selves are
escaped, as Brands placked out of the Fire; have you at all turned to him who
has smitten you? Or are you bettered by Correction? Or have you made your
Peace with the Almighty? Although you have seen War, and the Sword reaching to
the very Soul, are you not every one to your own Power, gathering Fuel to that
Fire which has been burning in the Land, and has consumed Thousands; which
should have been as a Warning unto you who are escaped, to return to the Lord
from the Evil of your Doings? But are not you still making the Breach wider
between God and the Nation, as though you were le^t for no other End, but to fill
up the Measure of Iniquity that is yet behind, that the Just God may sweep the
Land with the Besom of Destruction? O when will you cease to provoke the Lord
by your Sins? Where is your Redeemer you have professed so long in Words and
Forms? Can you witness him in your Works? And what has he redeemed you from?
For says he, Why call you me Lord, and do not the Things which I say? Is he
your Lord, and you Servants to all Manner of Filthiness? And notwithstanding
that you have seen his Wonders in the Nation, yet do not you exceed all that
ever went before you, in Pride, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Swearing, Envying,
Quarrelling, Backbiting, Slandering, false Accusing, Self-Love, and Deceit in
all Manner of Merchandise and Trading; false Weights and Measures, Sayings,
Protestings one toward another, in your Bargaining, speaking Things that are
not true, and hereby to overreach your Brethren, and get dishonest Gain. How
many false Oaths, and idle Words are spent about every Bargain in your Markets,
and open Streets, without blushing, or being ashamed? Yea, it is able to break
the Hearts of any who know the Pure God, to know it, and hear it, for it is
come to such a Height of Deceit, that none can trust his Brother; for Lying,
Swearing, and Forswearing, it abounds in the Nation; and yet you will profess
your selves to be the Members of Jesus Christ: And had Jesus Christ ever such a
Body as this? Nay, all that are Members of him, are of one Heart, and one Soul.
And you talk of a Communion of Saints; Had ever the Saints such a Communion as
this, to defraud one another for Money; and profess a Redeemer, and are
Servants to the Devil, and your own Lusts, in all the Motions and Temptations
thereof, and are led captive at his Will? But what Redemption is this you
witness, so long as Sin, the Partition Wall, is between God and you, stands
still whole in your Wills; you will be drunk, swear, lie, and commit Adultery,
di^semble, and satisfy your Lusts in all Things, and say, we are redeemed, yet
commit all these Abominations, and live in them, under a Pretense of a
Profession, and going to the Idols Temple once a Week: Did ever Jesus Christ
redeem such a People, or dwell in such a People? Those whom he has redeemed,
he has freed from the Servitude of Sin, by separating them from Sin, and
reconciling them to God, from whence they are fallen by Sin; for God and Sin
cannot dwell in one. And to such he says, Be ye holy, for I am holy: And as he
is the Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World: Now see, how is your
Sins taken away, when the Kingdom, of Darkness does wholly rule in you, and
leads you into Works and Ways of Darkness? Are you reconciled to God, and have
you Fellowship with him? Are not you yet Strangers to him, and worship an
unknown God? For he that commits Sin, has not seen him, neither known him, and
so worship they know not what, in formal and superstitious Worships.

Thus J. Naylor wrote: But I now break off, that I may not be tedious.

So zealous was he before his Fall, which was wholly of another Nature than the
common Sins and Transgressions: For by the Wiles of Satan he accepted the
idolatrous Honor that some Persons gave him, instead of which he ought to have
reproved them: And thus was he so stupefied in his Understanding, that he
imagined the Bowing and kneeling before him, was not done on Account of his
Person, but for Christ: And with this false Opinion he blinded himself for a
Time, till it pleased God to pity him, and to give him Light again, after he
had suffered such an unheard of Punishment for his Transgression, as is already
related in this History. And because his Freedom of Speech against
Unrighteousness of all Sorts, and his Preaching ran very sharp upon all,
several were angry with him, became his Enemies, and took Occasion from his
Crime to revenge themselves fiercely upon him, by making him suffer a cruel
Punishment, which was no Ways proportionable to his Transgression. But herein
barbarous Cruelty played its Part so much, that the soberest Inhabitants did
detest it, and therefore a Petition was presented to the Parliament, desiring a
Discharge of Part of the Punishment, of which, the first Subscriber was Colonel
Scroop, who was Governor of Bristol.

While he lay in the House of Correction, he wrote several Papers to manifest
his Regret and Repentance for his Crime; some of which are already inserted in
this History. Since is come to my Hand a Letter to his Friends, being written
with his own Hand, to this Purport:

Dear Brethren,
MY Heart is broken this Day for the Offense I have occasioned to God's Truth
and People, and especially to you, who in dear Love followed me, seeking me in
Faithfulness to God; which I rejected, being bound wherein I could not come
forth, till God's Hand brought me, to whose Love I now confess: And I beseech
you, forgive wherein I evilly requited your Love in that Day. God knows my
Sorrow for it, since I see it, That ever I should offend That of God in any, or
reject his Counsel; and now that Paper you have seen lies much upon me, and I
greatly fear farther to offend, or do amiss, whereby the innocent Truth, or
People of God should suffer, or that I should disobey therein.

Unless the Lord himself keep you from me, I beseech you let nothing else
hinder your coming to me, that I might have your Help in the Lord: In the
Mercies of Christ Jesus this I beg of you, as if it was your own Case, let me
not be forgotten of you.

And I entreat you, speak to Henry Clarke, or whoever else I have most
offended; and by the Power of God, and in the Spirit of Christ Jesus I am
willing to confess the Offense, that God's Love may arise in all Hearts, as
before, if it be his Will, who only can remove what stands in the Way; and
nothing thereof do I intend to cover: God is Witness herein.


He wrote also several other Confessions of his Faults about this Time; in one
of which, amongst others, I find these Words:

And concerning you, the tender Plants of my Father who have suffered through me,
or with me, in what the Lord has suffered to be done with me, in this Time of
great Trial and Temptation; the Almighty God of Love, who has numbered every
Sigh, and put every Tear in his Bottle, reward it a thousand Fold into your
Bosoms, in the Day of your Need, when you shall come to be tried and tempted;
and in the mean Time fulfill your Joy with his Love, which you seek after. The
Lord knows, it was never in my Heart to cause you to mourn, whose Sufferings is
my greatest Sorrow that ever yet came upon me; for you are innocent herein.

When he had finished that Letter, and set his Name, he wrote as follows:

I beseech you (all that can) to receive it, even as you would be received of
the Lord; and for the rest, the Lord give me Patience to suffer, till he make
up the Breach.

While he was in Bridewel, he writ to the Parliament, who had punish^d him as a
Blasphemer, to let them know what his true Opinion concerning Jesus Christ was.

CHRIST Jesus, the Immanuel, (of whose Sufferings the Scriptures declare) him
alone I confess before Men; for whose Sake I have denied whatever was dear to
me in this World, that I might win him, and be found in him, and not in my
self, whose Life and Virtue I find daily manifest in my mortal Body (which is
my eternal Joy and Hope of Glory) whom alone I seek to serve in Spirit, Soul,
and Body, Night and Day, (according to the Measure of Grace working in me) that
in me he may be glorified, whether by Life or Death; and for his Sake I suffer
all Things, that he alone may have the Glory of my Change, whose Work alone it
is in me: Even to that eternal Spirit be Glory, and to the Lamb for ever.

But to ascribe this Name, Power, and Virtue to James Naylor, (or to that which
had a Beginning, and must return to Dust) or for that to be exalted or
worshipped, to me is great Idolatry, and with the Spirit of Christ Jesus in me
it is condemned; which Spirit leads to Lowliness, Meekness, and Long-suffering.

So having an Opportunity given (with Readiness) I am willing in tho Fear of
God the Father, (in Honor to Christ Jesus, and to take off all Offenses from
every simple Heart) this to declare to all the World, as the Truth of Christ is
in me, without Guile or Deceit, daily finding it to be my Work to seek Peace in
Truth with all Men in that Spirit.

JAMES NAYLOR.


After this, hearing that some had wronged him about that which he had spoken
to the Committee of the Parliament, and understanding how Men had perverted his
Words, he wrote a Paper, declaring himself farther, concerning his Belief of
Christ, and his Sufferings and Death, etc. Also he complained of Things that
some had published under the Title of James Naylor's Recantation, wherein they
had much perverted him; and he declared,

And as touching the printing of that Paper (called J. N's Recantation) it was
not done by me, nor with my Knowledge in the least, nor do I yet at all know
the Man that has done it; but out of the Truth, and against the Truth he has
done it, and for Evil toward me, whoever it was; the Lord God of my Life, who
has kept me alive in Distress, turn it for Good, and forgive the Evil: And
though he that has done it, has not done it in Truth, nor Love to it, yet what
of Truth there is in the Paper, I shall own, as stands on Truth's Behalf: For
thus it was; That after I was put into the Hole at Bridewell, I heard of many
wild Actions done by a Sort of People who pretended that they owned me; and
these were earnestly stirred up at that Day, with much Violence, and many
unseemly Actions, to go into the Meetings of the People of the Lord called
Quakers, on Purpose to hinder their peaceable Meetings, and yet would take that
holy and pure Name of God and Christ frequently in their Mouths, whereby the
Name of the Lord was much dishonored, and his pure Spirit grieved, and much
Disorder they caused in many Places of the Nation, to the Dishonor of Christ
Jesus, for which I felt Wrath from God; which when I understood that they had
any Strength through me, I used all Means I could to declare against that evil
Spirit, which under the Name of God and Christ, was against God and Christ, his
Truth and People; and something I did give forth about a Year and Half since,
in Denial of these Spirits, which it seems to me, he that has done this, has
got a Sight of, and has added to it the Thoughts of his own Heart, and so has
brought out this Darkness, that People know not what to make of it.

Therefore, so far as it testifies against those unclean ranting Spirits, and
all the Actions wherein the Holy Name of God has been dishonored, and his
Spirit grieved, so far I own it; but in that it is turned as though I denied the
Lord Jesus Christ and his Truth, which has called me out of the World, or his
People whom he has called into Light, in that I own it not; for in the
Patience and Tribulation of Christ Jesus, and with those who have the Power
this Day to testify therein, against all the Evils of this present World, I am
one in Heart and Soul to the utmost of my Strength, till the Coming of the Lord
Jesus over all, and the Throne of Meekness and Truth to be set on the Top of
Enmity and Deceit; in which Faith and Power I am given up to live or die,
suffer or rejoice, as God will, even so be it, without murmuring.

JAMES NAYLOR.

This is certain, that James Naylor came to very great Sorrow, and deep
Humiliation of Mind; and therefore because God forgives the Transgressions of
the Penitent, and blotteth them out, and remembers them no more, so could
James Naylor's Friends do no other than forgive his Crime, and thus take back
the lost Sheep into their Society. He having afterward obtained his Liberty,
behaved himself as became a Christian, honest and blameless in Conversation,
and patiently bore the Reproach of his former Crimes.

When King Charles the IId. had ascended the Throne, one Richard Blome,
published a Book entitled, The Fanatic History, which was said to be published
with the Approbation of Orthodox Divines (so called) and dedicated by him to
the King. This Book struck chiefly against the Quakers, and was stuffed with a
Multitude of lying Stories, and the Fall of J. Naylor was not concealed in it.
He being then alive, took up the Pen, and answered the Falsities contained in
it, relating to himself; and because R. Blome in his Dedication said, That if
his Majesty put not forth his Royal Hand of Power suddenly to restrain us, we
are so numerous and seducing, that we will (in a little Time) diffuse our
Poison over the better Part of his Kingdom, which none but a Regal Authority
can stifle.

I say then, what is become of your spiritual Weapons? Have not your Teachers
told People of the Strength of Truth, and the Power of Godliness? Have you lost
both (may Wisdom say) and run you now to the Arm of Flesh, to get Errors
stifled (as you call them) or else your Hope is lost, and your Faith fails you?
Did ever any of Christ's Ministers leave their spiritual Weapons, to run to the
Arm of Flesh, or a carnal Weapon to stop Seducers? I say, No; this they never
did, but with spiritual Weapons they wrestled and overcame spiritual
Wickedness, and with them cut down Heresies, Blasphemies, and false Worships,
and cleared the Churches of Christ of them, and drove them down before them in
the World: For none could resist the Spirit by which they spoke, of all the
false Priests, and false Worshippers: But being put to the worst, they cried
(as you do) to Rulers and People, Help us, or all will be overrun: For they
that turn the World upside down are come hither; [Mind your Cry.] And then the
rude Multitude ran on Heaps upon them, and made Tumults often, and fell upon
them with Staves and Fists, and assaulted the Houses that entertained them, as
you do, and so haled them before Rulers, who took their Part herein, and put
them in Prison, and often whipped them, unless it were some that were so noble,
as not to heed the Cry of the Multitude; but would hear their Cause, and give
them Leave to speak, before they would sentence them that were accused. And
this was the Nobility of Heathen Kings and Rulers; and do not you seek to make
England's Rulers worse than them; Beware lest Heathens rise up in the Day of
Judgment against them who are called Christians, and condemn them.

And in this your Cry for Help, against so contemptible a People (as you count
them) you (like silly Women) do but discover your Weakness and Worthlesness;
and if God open the Eyes of King Charles, he will see it. What! Have you
preached and wrestled your selves out of all Hope and Faith, that either you
must have sudden Help from him, or all is lost and overrun? Surely it may be
said, you have been bad Watchmen, and idle Shepherds, who have lost all, if
sudden Help come not from another Hand. Now if any had come against you with
carnal Weapons, then had you had some Excuse in crying to the Earthly Powers;
but in that, nothing but Spirit comes against Spirit, and yet you have lost the
Day. This does clearly manifest, that the Power of God you have not in you, but
have lost the Kingdom of the Most High, and so are become unreasonable Men, who
would have two Weapons against one, and another to do your Work for you, and
yet are unwilling to forgo your Wages; yea, this Advantage you have had diverse
Years, but have not prevailed therewith.

And whereas thou say, Thy Book is of great Consequence; and so thou
presumest to make King Charles the Patron of it: And then ask Pardon for thy
Presumption when thou have done.

I say thou have Need, the Substance of thy Book being made up of false
Accusations, gathered up out of Books formerly written against us, which have
been disproved by Answers several Times over: And to these thou have added some
new Accusations, as false as the Old, and spied out the Failings of some few,
who have mourned before God, that ever they should sin, and give Occasion to
the Enemy of God so to blaspheme. And many Things which were done and spoken by
others, who are not of us, nor ever were: And of this is thy Book made up, as
any may see who read it, and our several Answers to the Charges therein, many
of them of several Years standing, against these false Accusations, which have
most of them been printed over and over, and presented to the former Powers
that have risen, and as often answered: So there needed no more to be said,
than has been, were it not for the Sake of some, who may yet be Strangers to
your Way of Dealing toward us, under every Power that has been. Now
Discretion will say, that to make another Man the Father of such a Work, to
which he is a Stranger (but especially a King) is Presumption indeed, Rashness
and Folly, and needs a Pardon.

And whereas you now say, That none but a Regal Authority can stifle; It Is
true, you have tried Parliaments and Protectors (as you called them) and
Parliaments again; and to make them then work for you, your Priests used these
Arguments to them, (to wit,) That in the late Wars they had exposed Lives,
Liberties, Estates, and Relations, with all other personal Advantages, in
maintaining the just Proceedings of Parliaments, and from them you then claimed
our Stifling, as the Price of your Prayers, Purses, Hazards, Losses, Banishment
and Blood, as may be read in the Westmorland Petition against us, which thou
have printed in Page 197, and 198. And was not this Power that which you then
called the common Enemy, in the same Petition, p. 200, which you now cry to,
and would put him upon that Work against us now, as Defender of your Faith,
etc. Ah! faithless Generation have you been to God and Man, may you not be
ashamed of this Work, to print it and send it to King Charles, and call him to
defend it, and patronize it: How has Envy bereaved you of your Reasonableness?
Shall he who defends this, defend either Faith or Truth? But this is that you
may cover your selves with your Shame and Envy, that both King and People, and
Parliaments, may see what a Generation you are, that will run under any Power
to get your bloody Ends; but indeed true to none; for if it was true, that you
were so faithful to that Parliament, with your Prayers, Purses, and Blood, as
there you plead, then is your Faith but new, which now you would have defended;
but if not true, then how great Deceivers, and how little to be trusted, or
defended in your cruel Designs.

The King that faithfully judges the Poor, his Throne shall be established for
ever. But if a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are wicked, Prove. xxix.
12, 14.

And to thee, who have set forth this Book of Mischief, I say with the
Scriptures, Lay not wait, (O wicked Man) against the Dwelling of the Righteous;
spoil not his Resting Place. For a just Man falls seven Times, and rises up
again; but the Wicked shall fall into Mischief, Prove. xxiv. 15, 16. See also
Mich. vii. 8.

J. N.

In Answer to the BOOK.
THE Day is come that the Scripture is fulfilled, which the Lord spoke by his
Prophet, Isa. xliv. 25. That he will make the Diviners mad; and that the
Prophets shall be ashamed, every one of his Vision, Zach. xiii. 4. The which
does now evidently appear, and their Folly is made manifest unto all that will
see and behold it, according to 2 Timothy iii. 9. And is not this manifest Madness
and Folly in them, called Orthodox and Divines, to present unto the King their
Packet of Lies, which have been seven Years told over, and so long since
disproved and confuted, as may be seen in a Book called, Readiness Errand to
Damascus, etc. printed in the Year 1653, and in several other Books since. It
already has been, and is now manifest unto all Men of sober Understandings,
that these Men, falsely called Orthodox and Divines, have had no Defense,
either to vindicate themselves, or disprove the People called Quakers, but this
Refuge of Lies, which they first presented to the Parment sitting in 1652, and
likewise to other Parliaments which have been since that Time, and to the two
Protectors, and now to this present King is directed; and you presumptuously
charge him to be the Patron to it, requiring him to defend those Lies which you
falsely call the Faith. But this we know, according as it is written, Prove.
xxix. 12, 19. That if a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are wicked; but
a wise King scatters the Wicked, and brings the Wheel over them.

These pretended Divines, are such as have bowed and crouched under every
Appearance of a Power, and by Flatteries seem to cleave unto them, that they
might uphold, maintain, and satisfy their God, which is their Bellies: These
were of them which said, that Oliver Cromwell was the Light of their Eyes, and
the Breath of their Nostrils: So that now with Shame they might rather confess
that they are blind, and dead (from the Light and Life of God) than to multiply
Lies in their accustomed Manner as formerly. These also were of them that said,
Oliver Cromwell was Moses, who had led them into a Sight of the good Land; and
that Richard his Son was Joshua, which should lead them into the Possession.
But we with many more, do see that their Hope is false, and their Faith also
proved vain, and they are not yet in the Land of Promise; for there no Liars
come. And those former Rulers hearkening to their Lies, were deceived by them,
which was the Cause of God's Judgments, and utter Destruction coming upon them;
which while they put into the Priests Mouths, they cried, Peace unto them,
calling them Moses, Aaron, and Joshua; but when they ceased, and could not put
into their Mouths, then they cried out, that Moses and Joshua were Tyrants and
Oppressors: And so will they do unto the King now, who are seeking to cleave
unto him by Flattery and Deceit; which if he deny to be the Patron and Defender
of their Lies, will be apt to cry as much against him. So that he, or they, are
blessed, whose Ears are not open to their Clamours, but whose Hearts are joined
to the Truth, and who are led by the Spirit of God as their Instructor; for
such shall discern Hypocrites, and false Hearted Men, under every Pretense of
Flattery or Dissimulation; for the Folly of these begins to be manifest unto
all Men, 2 Timothy iii. 9.

Now as in Answer to the History, concerning John Toldervey, asserted by a
Company of Priests, as Brooks, Cocking, Goodwin, Jenkins, Jacomb, Alderry,
Tombs, and Pool, whom themselves say, that they have but perused a Part, as
Page 99, and yet pretend to witness the whole; whose Witness is disproved and
denied by the said John Toldervey, both by his own Book given forth from him,
and by his Life and Conversation, being now (since his Return from his
Out-going) a living Witness, not against, but for the Way, Doctrine, Principle,
and Practice, which the People called Quakers do live in, against those Lies
published abroad concerning him.

And as for thy Charge thou have against J. Naylor, through the everlasting Mercy
of my God, I have yet a Being among the Living, and Breath to answer for my
self, though against the Intents of many cruel bloody Spirits, who pursued my
Soul unto Death (as much as in them lay) in that Day of my Calamity, when my
Adversary was above, and wherein I was made a Sign to a backsliding Generation,
who then would not see nor hear what now is coming upon them, but rejoiced
against this Piece of Dust, and had little Pity toward him that was fallen
into their Hands; wherein God was just in giving me up for my Disobedience, for
a little Moment, as a Father to correct; yet should not they have sought to
aggravate Things against me, as thou do; for it was a Day of deep Distress,
and lay sore upon my Soul, and the merciful God saw it, who, though he was
displeased for a Time, yet his Thoughts were not to cast off for ever (but
extend Mercy) as it is at this Day, Glory be to his Name, from my delivered
Soul, eternally.

And in that Day there were many Spirits flocked about me, and some whom, while
the Candle of the Lord shone upon my Head, I ever judged and kept out from me,
who then got up and acted, and spoke several Things not in the Light and Truth
of God, by which they, who sought Occasion against me, were then strengthened
to afflict this Body; and he that watches for Evil, in thee and some others,
makes Use on still against God's Truth and innocent People; whose Mouths the
God of my Mercy stop, and so finish the Trouble of my Heart as to that Thing,
for my Soul has long dwelt among Lions, even among them that are set on Fire,
whose Teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongues a sharp Sword, speaking
mischievous Things to shed Blood.

But O Man, or Men, whoever you be, whose Work it is to gather the Failings of
God's People in the Time of Temptation, or Night of their Trial, and aggravate
them, and add thereto the Wickedness and mischievous Lies of your own Hearts,
as thou have done in thy Book, and then come out with those against God's
everlasting holy Truth, it to reproach; I say, you are set on work by an evil
Spirit, and you do but show your selves to be Enemies to God and his Children;
and it is our Sorrow, that any of us should give such Spirits Occasion to
blaspheme; and it has been Trouble of Soul to all the People of God, that have
ever loved Righteousness, when they have thus occasioned the Joy of the Wicked,
or to feed the Man that watches for Iniquity, and feeds on Mischief: Yet know
this, you that are of that Brood, God will not cast off his People; though he be
sometimes provoked to correct them, even before their Adversaries,(which is a
Sign to them) yet is his Anger but for a Moment, and his Favor shall return as
Streams of Life; then shall the Food be taken out of the Mouth of the Viper,
and the Prey from between the Teeth of the Devourers; and God will feed them
with their own Vomit, and the Poison that has long lain under their Tongues,
shall be bitter in their own Bowels. Thus will God certainly plead with Zion 's
Enemies, as he bends her Sons for himself, and God will make up her Breaches:
And this has my Soul seen, Jacob's Captivity restored, and the Diggers of the
Pit are fallen therein; neither has he smitten him as he smote them that smote
him, nor is he slain according to the Slaughter of them that are slain by him;
but this is all His Fruit to purge away his Sin.

So he that had long watched for my faltering, then got Advantage against me;
yet had I then Power to bear his utmost Envy, through Christ Jesus, whom I then
confessed before Men, who then was my Support in all, and under all, and who is
over all, blessed for ever of all who have proved him in the Depth.

But that which was, and is the Sorrow of my Heart, is the Advantage the Enemy
then took against the Name of Christ, his Truth, and his despised People, in
that Time of Temptation, which is that which thou art now pursuing with Hatred
and Lies, as That I was suspected to have a Woman in Bed with me, the Night
before I suffered at Bristol, when there were six or seven Persons in the Room
that Night, and a Man (to wit) Robert Rich in Bed with me. But this, and
several other false things thou have written in thy Book, of which I am clear
before the Lord, so they touch me not at all; nor shall I here mention them
against thee in particular; but to God alone I look, in his Time to be cleared
from all Offenses in his Sight, who only knows my Heart in this Thing, in whose
Presence I can say, that nothing is more odious and burdensome to my Soul, than
that any of the Glory or Worship which belongs to God, or to Christ, should be
given to Flesh and Blood, in my self, or others: And how it was with me at that
Day, many talk of, but few know; so the Judgment of such I bear; desiring that
none in judging me, might have condemned themselves in God's Sight, whose
Counsels are a great Deep, and the End of his Work past finding out, till he
himself reveal them; but in the End he will be justified of all, and in all he
does, that all Flesh may be silent before him.

And however my self, or any others my be left to themselves, to be tried in
the Night, yea, should any utterly fall, or whatever may be acted by any Man or
Woman, that is not justifiable in God's Sight, yet in vain do thou, or you,
gather up Sin, or watch for Iniquity, to cast upon the Light which condemns it
in every enlightened Conscience, and there will clear himself to be no Author
nor Actor therein; and I know by the Spirit of Jesus, which I have received,
and which works in me, that this is not his Work, nor his Seed, nor in him
that loves his Enemies, thou art not; but the old Accuser of the Brethren it is
that works strongly in thee; and in the Light which thou reproachest, art
thou seen to be the Man that makes Lies, and carries Tales to shed Blood, Ezekiel.
xxii. 9, 12.

Thus much and more J. Naylor wrote to answer the Falsehoods whereof he was
accused, and to apologize for the Doctrine of which he made Profession, and to
show that the Fault of his Crime must no Ways be attributed to the same, as
many envious Persons in those Times asserted, to wit, that his Fall was a
Consequence of the Doctrine that Men must take Heed to the saving Grace, the
inward Anointing, or the Light wherewith every Man coming into the World is
enlightened from God. J. Naylor was a Man who had been highly favored of God
with a good Degree of Grace which was sufficient for him, had he kept to its
Teachings; for while he did so, he was exemplary in Godliness and great
Humility, was powerful in Word and Doctrine, and thereby instrumental in the
Hand of God for turning many from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to the Power of God. But he, poor Man, became exalted above Measure,
through the abundance of Revelation; and in that Exaltation did depart from the
Grace and Holy Spirit of God, which had been his sufficient Teacher. Then
Blindness came over him, and he did suffer himself to be accounted above what
he ought* Here he slipped, and fell, but not irrecoverably; for it did please God
of his infinite Mercy, in the Day of his Affliction, to give him a Sight and
Sense of his Outgoings and Fall, and also a place of Repentance. And he, with
the Prodigal, humbled himself for his Transgression, and besought God with true
Contrition of Soul, to pardon his Offenses through Jesus Christ. God, I firmly
believe, forgave him, for he pardons the truly Penitent. His People received
him with great Joy, for that he who had gone astray from God, was now returned
to the Father's House, and for that he who had separated himself from them
through his Iniquity, was now through Repentance and forsaking of it, returned into
the Unity of the Faith, and their Holy Fellowship in the Gospel of Christ. And
I do hereby testify, that I do esteem it a particular Mark of God's owning his
People, in bringing back into Unity with them, a Man who had so dangerously
fallen, as did James Naylor. And here let none insult, but take Heed lest they
also, in the Hour of their Temptation, do fall away: Nor let any boastingly
say, where is your God? Or blasphemously suppose his Grace is not sufficient
for Men in Temptation, because the Tempted may go from, and neglect the
Teaching of it. David and Peter, as their Transgression came by their departing
from this infallible Guide, the Holy Spirit, so their Recovery was only by it.
J. Wyeth's Anguis Flagel.
Yet to proceed farther with J. Naylor, he wrote after his Recovery many Papers
and edifying Letters: He also answered two Letters, which when the Persecution
in New England burnt so fierce, were sent over from thence in Defense of that
Fact; one under the Name of John Endicot, Governor of Boston, and the other in
that of Richard Bellingham. All the Arguments for the Persecution of the
Quakers to be lawful and necessary, he answered at large, See J. N's Works, p.
737.
and showed how little Agreement their Crime of pursuing Persecution had with
the Name wherewith they had called themselves, for a Distinction from other
Persuasions, namely, Independents, by which they would have it known, that they
were independent from all, except the Spirit of Jesus Christ, on whom they
pretended alone to be dependent: And yet nevertheless it now appeared
manifestly that it was the fleshly Arm whereby they supported themselves. He
wrote also some Papers to the Parliament and the Rulers, Ibid. 748. Ibid. 760.
to check the Vanities that were publicly committed, and to mend their Faults;
to ease the Oppressed, and to take Care for the Maintenance of Liberty.

At length He was a Man of great Self-denial, and very jealous of himself ever
after his Fall and Recovery. -- At last departing from the City of London,
about the latter End of the 8th Month, 1660, toward the North, intending to go
home to his Wife and Children at Wakefield in Yorkshire, he was seen by a
Friend of Hertford, sitting by the Way-side in a very awful weighty Frame of
Mind, who invited him to his House, but he refused, signifying his Mind to pass
forward, and so went on Foot so far as Huntingtonshire, and was observed by a
Friend as he past through the Town, in such an awful Frame, as if he had been
redeemed from the Earth, and a Stranger on it, seeking a better Country and
Inheritance. But going some Miles beyond Huntington, he was taken ill, being
(as it is said) robbed by the Way, and left bound: Whether he received any
personal Injury, is not certainly known, but being found in a Field by a
Countryman toward Evening, was had, or went to a Friend's House at Holm, not
far from King's Rippon, where Thomas Parnel a Doctor of Physic dwelt, who came
to visit him; and being asked, if any Friends at London should be sent for to
come and see him: He said, Nay, expressing his Care and Love to them. Being
shifted, he said, You have refreshed my Body, the Lord refresh your Souls; and
not long after departed this Life in Peace with the Lord, about the 9th Month,
1660, and the 44th Year of his Age, and was buried in Thomas Parnel's Burying
Ground at King's Rippon aforesaid. J. W's Account.
he died in Huntingtonshire, in the latter End of the Year 1660, about the 44th
Year of his Age. About two Hours before his Death, he spoke in the Presence of
several Witnesses, these Words:

There is a Spirit which I feel, that delights to do no Evil, nor to revenge
any Wrong, but delights to endure all Things, in Hope to enjoy its own in the
End: Its Hope is to outlive all Wrath and Contention, and to weary out all
Exaltation and Cruelty, or whatever is of a Nature contrary to it self. It sees
to the End of all Temptations: As it bears no Evil in it self, so it conceives
none in Thoughts to any other: If it be betrayed, it bears it; for its Ground
and Spring is the Mercies and Forgiveness of God: Its Crown is Meekness, its
Life is everlasting Love unfeigned, and takes its Kingdom with Entreaty, and
not with Contention, and keeps it by Lowliness of Mind: In God alone it can
rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its Life: It Is conceived in
Sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it; nor does it murmur at Grief
and Oppression: It never rejoiceth but through Sufferings; for with the World's
Joy it is murdered: I found it alone, being forsaken; I have Fellowship therein
with them who lived in Dens, and desolate Places in the Earth, who through Death
obtained this Resurrection and eternal holy Life. N. B. There is a Passage in
the Book called, The Complete History of England, Vol. III. Page 201. which
says, That J. Naylor died with no Fruits, nor so much as Signs of Repentance:
How the Author came by such Information, we cannot tell, but that it is a
manifest Mistake we doubt not but the impartial Reader is by this Time
abundantly convinced.


J. N.

This was J. Naylor's last Testimony or dying Words; and thus he gave Proof,
that though he had erred, yet with great Confidence he hoped for a happy
Resurrection.

So I conclude the Story of J. Naylor, and leaving him now, Time calls me to
New England.

It was in the Month called July, M. Fisher and A. Austin come to Boston in New
England, before any Law made against Quakers.
of this present Year, when Mary Fisher and Ann Austin arrived in the Road
before Boston, before ever a Law was made there against the Quakers, and yet
they were very ill treated; for before they came ashore, the Deputy Governor
Richard Billingham (the Governor himself being out of Town) sent Officers
aboard, who searched their Trunks and Chests, and took away the Books they
found there, which were about One Hundred, and carried them ashore, after
having commanded the said Women to be kept Prisoners aboard; and the said Books
were, by an Order of the Council, burnt in the Marketplace by the Hangman. Yet
are ill treated.
Afterward the Deputy Governor had them brought on Shore, and committed them
by a Mittimus to Prison, as Quakers, upon this Proof only, that one of them
speaking to him, had said Thee instead of You: Whereupon he said, He needed no
more, for now he saw they were Quakers. And then they were shut up ^lose
Prisoners, and Command was given that none should come to them without Leave; a
Fine of five Pounds being laid on any that should otherwise come at, or speak
with them, though but at the Window. Stripped to know whether they were Witches,
and barbarously misused.
Their Pens, Ink, and Paper were taken from them, and they not suffered to have
any Candlelight in the Night-Season; nay, what is more, they were stripped
naked, under Pretense to know whether they were Witches, though in searching, no
Token was found upon them but of Innocence: And in this Search they were so
barbarously misused, that Modesty forbids to mention it: And that none might
have Communication with them, a Board was nailed up before the Window of the
Jail. And seeing they were not provided with Victuals, Liberty being denied to
send them Provision, N. Upshal a Member of their own Church purchases it at 5
s. per Week. W. Chichester bound to carry them back, and not suffer any to
speak with them.
Nicholas Vpshal, one who had lived long in Boston, and was a Member of the
Church there, was so concerned about it, (Liberty being denied to send them
Provision) that he purchas^d it of the Jailor at the Rate of five Shillings a
Week, lest they should have starved. And after having been about five Weeks
Prisoners, William Chichester, Master of a Vessel, was bound in one hundred
Pound Bond to carry them back, and not to suffer any to speak with them, after
they were put on board; and the Jailor kept their Beds, which were brought out
of the Ship, and their Bible for his Fees.

Such was the Entertainment the Quakers first met with at Boston, and that from
a People who pretended, that for Conscience Sake they had chosen the
Wildernesses of America, before the well-cultivated Old England; though
afterward, when they took away the Lives of those called Quakers, they, to
excuse their cruel Actions, did not stick to say, that at first they had used
no Punishment against the Quakers.

Scarce a Month after the Arrival of the aforesaid Women at Boston, Soon after
came C. Holder, T. Thirstone, etc. who are imprisoned; and after about 11 Weeks
Stay, sent back in a Ship at the Charge of R. Lock, Master.
there came also Christopher Holder, Thomas Thirstone, William Brend, John
Copeland, Mary Prince, Sarah Gibbens, Mary Wheathead, and Dorothy Waugh; they
were locked up in the same Manner as the former, and after about eleven Weeks
Stay, sent back; Robert Lock, a Master of a Ship, being compelled to carry
these eight Persons back on his own Charge, and to land them no where but in
England; having been imprisoned till he undertook so to do.

The Governor John Endicot, whose Blood-thirstiness will appear in the Sequel,
being now come home, bid them, Take heed ye break not our Ecclesiastical Laws,
for then ye are sure to stretch by a Halter. And when they desired a Copy of
those Laws, it was denied them; which made some of the People say, How shall
they know then when they transgress? But Endicot remained stiff, having said
before, when at Salem, he heard how Ann Austin and Mary Fisher had been dealt
with at Boston, If I had been there, A Law to prohibit Masters of Ships
bringing Quakers into that Jurisdiction.
I would have had them well whipped. Then a Law was made, Prohibiting all Masters
of Ships to bring any Quakers into that Jurisdiction, and themselves from
coming in, on Penalty of the House of Correction. When this Law was published,
Nicholas Vpshal, already mentioned, could not forbear to show the Persecutors
the Unreasonableness of their Proceedings, N. Upshal for warning them, is
fined, imprisoned, and banished.
warning them to take Heed that they were not found fighting against God, and
so draw down a Judgment upon the Land. But this was taken so ill, that though he
was a Member of their Church, and of good Repute, as a Man of an unblameble
Conversation, yet he was fined in twenty three Pounds, and imprisoned also, for
not coming to Church, and next they banished him out of their Jurisdiction.
This Fine was exacted so severely, that Endicot said, I ll not bate him one
Groat: And though a weakly old Man, yet they allowed him but one Month's Space
for his Removal, so that he was forced to depart in the Winter.

Coming at length to Rhode Island, This Usage is amazing to an Indian Prince he
met after at Rhode Island who offers him Favor.
he met an Indian Prince, who having understood how he had been dealt with,
behaved himself very kindly, and told him, If he would live with him, he would
make him a warm House: And farther said, What a God have the English, who deal
so with one another about their God! For it seems Vpshal was already looked upon
as one that was departing from his Church Membership. But this was but a
Beginning of the New England Persecution, which in Time grew so hot, that some
of the Quakers were put to Death on the Gallows, as will be related in its due
Time.

Now I return to Old England, G. Fox goes from Exeter to Bristol, where he has
a great Meeting in an Orchard, and there Paul Gwin a Baptist, finds Fault with
him, but is soon s^^^^'d.
where we left G. Fox at Exeter, from whence he went to Bristol. Here he had a
great Meeting in an Orchard: And since some Thousands of People were come
thither, and many very eager to see him, he stepped upon a great Stone that stood
there, and having put off his Hat, stood a pretty while silent, to let People
look at him. There was there a Baptist, named Paul Gwin, who began to find
Fault with G. Fox's Hair, and at last said to the People, Ye wise Men of
Bristol, I strange at you, that ye will stand here, and hear a Man speak, and
affirm that which he cannot make good. Then G. Fox asked the People, Whether
they ever heard him speak before, or ever saw him before? And he bid them take
Notice what Kind of Man this Gwin was, who so impudently said, that he spoke
and affirmed that which he could not make good; and yet neither Gwin nor they
ever heard him, or saw him before; and that therefore it was a lying, envious,
and malicious Spirit that spoke in him. Then G. Fox charging Gwin to be silent,
began to preach, which lasted some Hours, without being disturbed. After this
Meeting G. Fox departed from Bristol, and passing through Wiltshire, Marlborough,
Passes to London, and on the R^ad speaks to the Protector in his Coach.
and other Places, he returned to London; and when he came near Hide-Park, he
saw the Protector coming in his Coach; whereupon he rode up to his Coach-side,
and some of his Lifeguard would have put him away; but the Protector forbad
them. Then riding by his Coach-side, he spoke to him about the Sufferings of
his Friends in the Nation, and showed him how contrary this Persecution was to
Christ and his Apostles, and to Christianity. And when they were come to the
Gate of James's- Park, G. Fox left Cromwell, who at parting desired him to come
to his House. The next Day Mary Sanders, one of Cromwell's Wife's Maids, M.
Sanders, one of Cromwell's Wife's Maids.
came to G. Fox's Lodging, and told him, That her Master coming home, said, he
would tell her some good News: And when she asked him, What it was? He told
her, George Fox was come to Town. To which she replied, That was good News
indeed. Not long after, G. Fox and Edward Pyot went to Whitehall, and the^e
spoke to Cromwell, G. Fox and E. Pyot at Whitehall speak to Cromwell about
Friends Sufferings, and reason with him about the light, etc.
concerning the Sufferings of their Friends, and directed him to the Light of
Christ, who had enlightened every Man that comes into the World. To which
Cromwell said, This was a natural Light: But they showed him the contrary,
saying, That it was Divine and Spiritual, proceeding from Christ, the Spiritual
and heavenly Man: Moreover, G. Fox bid the Protector lay down his Crown at the
Feet of Jesus. And as he was standing by the Table, Cromwell came and sat upon
the Table's Side by him, and said, He would be as high as G. Fox was. But though
he continued to speak in a light Manner, yet afterward was so serious, that
when he came to his Wife and other Company, he said, That he never parted so
from the Quakers before.

G. Fox having visited the Meetings of his Friends in and about London,
Afterward G. Fox travels almost through England and returns to London. 1657
Public Affairs.
departed thence, and traveled almost through all England, not without many
Occurrences, which for Brevity's Sake I pass by. At length he returned to
London again, this Year being now come to an End.

In the Parliament which Cromwell had called, a Law was made, whereby Charles
Stuart's Title of King was rejected, and the Year 1657 being come, Subsidies
were granted to Cromwell, and there was a Contrivance under Hand to make him
King, of which, though he expressed his Dislike, yet he seemed not altogether
averse to it; for speaking once with General Fleetwood, and Colonel Desborough,
he began to droll with them about the Word Monarch, and said, It was but a
Feather in a Man's Cap; and therefore he wondered that Men would not please the
Children, and permit them to enjoy their Rattle. But they not obscurely
signified to him, that this Business did displease them; and told him, That
those who put him upon it, were no Enemies to Charles Stuart; and that if he
accepted of it, he would infallibly draw Ruin upon himself. Now, though he would
not openly oppose them, yet he did not stick to tell them, They were a Couple
of scrupulous Fellows, and so left them. It is related also, that Major General
Lambert told Cromwell, That if he accepted the Crown, he could not assure the
Army to him. The Design thus miscarrying, and Cromwell having now seen that the
Matter would not go so cleverly, he refused the Title of King; and the
Parliament confirming him in his Title of Protector, it was agreed, that the
Parliament henceforth should consist of a Lower House, and another House, and
that the Protector should name a Successor in the Government. Now he was
solemnly vested in his Authority, a Throne for that Purpose being erected in
Westminster Hall, and he being clothed in a Purple-Robe lined with Ermins, and
the Scepter and Sword being presented him, took the Oath to rule faithfully.
Cromwell having called a new Parliament, it consisted of two Houses, viz. a
House of Commons, and another House, as they called it. And many excluded
Members having taken Place again in the House of Commons, it was believed that
more than an Hundred of the Members were Enemies to Cromwell; and the Authority
of the Upper House began to be called in Question by some, because it was
filled up with many of his Creatures, some of them of low Rank. And this Matter
was so carried on in the House of Commons, that Cromwell dissolved the
Parliament, and he also made Major General Lambert surrender his Commission.

Edward Borough who often writ to Cromwell, Edward Burrough's Letter to Cromwell.
having heard of the Design of making him King, wrote a Letter to him, wherein
I find that after having told the Protector, That he had many Warnings from the
Lord, he thus speaks to him;

I as one that has obtained Mercy from the Lord, 1657
and unto whom his Word is committed, being moved of him, do hereby in his
Presence, yet once more warn thee, that thou fear before him, and diligently
hearken to him, and seek him with all thy Heart, that thou may know his Will
and Counsel concerning thee, and may do it, and find Favor in his Sight,
and live. Now is the Day that his Hand is stretched forth unto thee, to make
thee a Blessing, or to leave thee a Curse for ever; and the Days of thy
Visitation are near an End, when God will no more call unto thee, nor hear
thee, when in the Day of thy Trouble thou call'st to him. -- And if thou
rejectest the Counsel of the Lord, and followest the Desires of thine own
Heart, and the Wills of Men, and wilt not have the Light of the World, Christ
Jesus, only to rule thee, and to teach thee, which condemns all Evil, then
shall Evil surely fall upon thee, if thou love not the Light in thee, which
condemns it; and the Judgments of God, nor the Day of his last Visitation with
Vengeance thou may not escape. Therefore consider, and mark my Words, and
let this Counsel be acceptable unto thee; let it move thee to Meekness, to
Humbleness, and to fear before the Lord, assuredly knowing that it is he that
changes Times and Things, and that brings down, and sets up whomsoever he
will; and how that thou wast raised from a low Estate, and set over all thine
Enemies. -- And in that Day when thou wast raised up, when the Fear of the Lord
was before thy Face, and thy Heart was toward him, and thou wast but little in
thine own Eyes, then was it well with thee, and the Lord blessed thee. -- And
it was not once thought concerning thee, that the Hands of the Ungodly would
have been strengthened against the Righteous under thee, or that such grievous
and cruel Burdens and Oppressions would ever have been laid upon the Just, and
acted against them in thy Name, and under thy Dominion, as unrighteously have
come to pass in these three Years: And this thy suffering of such Things is thy
Transgression, and thou have not requited the Lord well for his Goodness unto
thee, nor fulfilled his Will in suffering that to be done under thee, and in
thy Name, which the Lord raised thee against, and to break down, had thou
been faithful to the End.

Again, consider, and let it move on thy Heart, not to exalt thy self, nor to
be high-minded, but to fear continually, knowing that thou stand not by thy
self, but by another, and that he is able to abase thee, and give thee into the
Will of thy Enemies whenever he will; and how the Lord has preserved thee
sometimes wonderfully, and does unto this Day, from the murderous Plots, and
crafty Policy of evil Men, who seek thy Evil, and would rejoice in thy Fall,
and in the Desolation of thy Family and Countries: How have they, and do they
lay Snares for thy Feet, that thou may be cut off from amongst Men, and die
unhappily, and be accounted accursed? And yet to this Day he has preserved
thee, and been near to keep thee, though thou have hardly known it; and the
Lord's End is Love to thee in all these Things, and yet a little longer to try
thee, that thou may give him the Glory.

O that thy Heart were opened to see his Hand, that thou might live unto
him, and die in him in Peace. And beware lest Hardness of Heart possess thee,
if thou slight his Love, and so be shut up in Darkness, and given to the
Desires of thine Enemies, and lest to the Counsels of treacherous Men, who may
seek to exalt thee by Flattery, that they may the better cast thee down, and
destroy thee, and blot out thy Name in Reproach, and make thy Posterity a
People miserable. But now, O consider, and let it enter thy Heart, for thou
have not answered the Lord, but been wanting to him for all this, and have
chosen thy own Way and Glory, rather than his, and not fulfilled his Counsel in
raising thee; for the Bonds of Cruelty are not loosed by thee, and the
Oppressed are not altogether set free; neither is Oppression taken off from the
Back of the Poor, nor the Laws regulated, nor the Liberty of pure Consciences
altogether allowed: But these Dominions are filled with cruel Oppressions, and
the Poor groan every where under the heavy Hand of Injustice; the Needy are
trodden down under Foot, and the Oppressed cry for Deliverance, and are ready
to faint for true Justice and Judgment. The Proud exalt themselves against the
Poor, and the High-minded and rebellious contemn the Meek of the Earth: The
Horn of the Ungodly is exalted above the Lord's Heritage, and they that are
departed from Iniquity are become a Prey to Oppressors; and the cruel-hearted
deal cruelly with the Innocent in these Nations. -- Many are unjustly and
woefully Sufferers, because they cannot swear on this or that Occasion, though in
all Cases they speak the Truth, and do obey Christ's Commands; even such are
trodden upon, by unjust Fines charged upon them; and this is by the Corruptness
of some that bear Rule under thee; who rule not for God as they ought, but turn
the Sword of Justice. -- Some suffer long and tedious Imprisonments, and others
cruel Stripes and Abuses, and Danger of Life many Times, from wicked Men, for
reproving Sin, and crying against the Abominations of the Times, (which the
Scriptures also testify against) in Streets or other Places; some having been
sent to Prison, taken on the Highway, and no Evil charged against them; and
others committed, being taken out of peaceable Meetings, and whipped, and sent
to Prison, without Transgression of any Law, just or unjust, wholly through the
Rage and Envy of the Devil, and such who have perverted Judgment and Justice;
and some in Prisons have suffered superabundantly from the Hands of the cruel
Jailors, and their Servants, by Beatings and Threatenings, and putting Irons on
them, and not suffering any of their Friends to visit them with Necessaries!
and some have died in the Prisons, whose Lives were not dear to them, whose
Blood will be reckoned on Account against thee one Day. -- Some have suffered
hard Cruelties, because they could not respect Persons, and bow with Hat or
Knee; and from these Cruelties can thou not altogether be excused in the
Sight of God, being brought forth in thy Name, and under thy Power. Consider,
Friend, and be awakened to true Judgment, let the Lord search thy Heart, and
lay these Things to Mind, that thou may be an Instrument to remove every
Burden, and may at last fulfill the Will of God. -- O be awakened, be
awakened, and seek the Lord's Glory, and not thine own, lest thou perish before
the Lord and Men: Nay, if Men would give thee Honor, and high Titles, and
Princely Thrones, take it not; for that which would exalt and honor thee in
the World, would betray thee to the World, and cast thee down in the Sight of
the World: And this is God's Word to thee! What! shall the whole Nation be
perjured Men, and thou the Cause of it? and will thou transgress by Building
again that which thou have destroyed? Give Heed unto my Words, and understand
my Speech; Be not exalted by Man, left Man betray thee. -- Deal favorably and
relieve the Oppressed; boast not thy self, though the Lord has used thee in his
Hand: But know, that when he will, he can cast thee, as a Rod, out of his Hand
into the Fire; for in his Hand thou art; if thou will honor him, he will
honor thee; otherwise he can, yea, and will confound thee and break thee, and
make thee weak as Water before him. His Love through my Heart breathes unto thee;
he would thy Happiness, if thou wilfully contemn it not by exalting thy self,
and seeking thy own Glory, and hardening thy Heart against the Cry of the Poor.
This I was moved in Bowels of Pity to lay before thee, who am thy Friend, not
in Flattery, but in an upright Heart, who wishes well unto thee in the Lord.

E. BVRROVGH.


That which E. Borough mentions in the Forepart of this Letter of the
grievous Burdens and Oppressions laid upon the Just, seems chiefly to regard
the Tithes which the Priests extorted from the Quakers, so that many thereby
were reduced to Poverty: And the Hainousness of this was was not unknown to
Cromwell; for when he was about to give Battle to his Enemies near Dunbar in
Scotland, he said in his Prayer to God, Cromwell breaks his Promise made in
Distress at Dunbar in Scotland.
That if the Lord would be pleased to deliver him at that Time, he would take
off that great Oppression of Tithes. But this Promise he never performed, but
suffered himself to be swayed by the Flatteries of his Teachers: And therefore
it was not without great Cause that E. Borough laid this grievous Oppression
before him. A Copy of the said Letter, of which but a Part is inserted here to
shun Prolixity, was given into the Hands of Oliver Cromwell, then Protector, in
the third Month of this Year. In the next Month E. Borough spoke with him
about it and Cromwell told him in Effect, That all Persecution and Cruelty was
against his Mind; and said, That he was not guilty of those Persecutions acted
unjustly upon Burrough's Friends. This made E. Borough write again to him, E.
Borough writes to him again.
and bid

consider what the Cause is, that what thou desire not to be done is yet
done: Is it not that thou may please Men? Making it appear thou art more
willing to do the false Teachers of this Nation, and wicked Men, a Pleasure,
than to own the People of God in relieving them, and easing them of their cruel
Burdens and Oppressions laid upon them by unjust Men. For a Word of thy Mouth,
or a Show of thy Countenance in Dislike of these cruel and unjust Persecutions,
would bind the Hands of many blood-thirsty Men. Therefore consider: Thou can
not be cleared in the Sight of the Lord God from them, being acted under thee,
and in thy Name: For there seems rather to be a Favoring of them in thee, by
Forbearance of the Actors of Cruelty, by which their Hands are strengthened,
than any Dislike showed by thee, in bearing thy Witness, as thou ought to
do, against them. For thou know of some in this City and elsewhere, whom we
know to be just Men, who suffer Imprisonment and the Loss of their Liberties,
because for Conscience Sake they cannot swear; and many others in thy Nation,
suffering cruel Things upon the like or same Ground, even for well-doing, and
not for Evil; which Oppression might be removed, and their unjust Sufferings
taken off by thee, by a Word from thy Mouth or Pen; and this makes that thou
can not be clear in the Sight of God in these Things; because not helped by
thee, who have the Power to help it.

And as concerning the Light of Christ, at which thou stumblest, by which every
Man that comes into the World is enlightened, in short, this I say, This Light
to thee is given of God, and thou must own it to be thy only Teacher to receive
by it from the Father, and to be guided by it in all Things, if ever thou
inheritest God's Kingdom.

The Kingdom of Christ is setting up by his own Power, and all must bow and
become subject thereunto; he needs none of thy Policy, nor the Strength of
thy Arm to advance it: yet would he have thee not to prove thy self an open
Enemy thereof, by doing or suffering to be done, Cruelty and Injustice against
them whom the Lord is redeeming out of this World, into Subjection unto that
Kingdom; lest thou be such a one, as will not enter thy self, nor suffer others
to enter, and so Destruction come upon thee. Wherefore arise as out of Sleep,
and slumber not in this World's Glory and Honor; be not overcome by the
Pleasures of this World, nor the flattering Titles of Men: Wink not at the
Cruelty and Oppression acted by some, who shelter under thee, and make thy Name
a Cloak for Mischief against the Upright.

Consider, I say, consider, and be thou changed in thy Mind and Heart; lest
thou having forgotten God, and his many Deliverances, be shut up, and numbered
for Destruction. I desire, the Lord may give thee a more perfect Understanding
of his Ways and Judgments, and that the Crown immortal thou may strive for
by Meekness and Righteousness, through relieving the Oppressed, and showing Mercy
to the Poor, and removing every Burden which lies upon the Innocent; and this
is the Desire of him who is thy Friend, and would not have thee crowned with
Dishonor, through suffering the People of God to be oppressed in thy Name, which
will be thy Overthrow absolutely, if thou removest it not by turning and easing
the Oppressed.

E. Borough.


This Letter was delivered to O. Cromwell in the Fourth Month, Writes again.
and in the Month following E. Borough wrote again to him: That the good Name
PROTECTOR, by the great Oppression acted in his Name, was abused, and
subverted; and that instead of Protection by it, great Injustice was acted
under it, and covered with it. Besides, that several Justices of Peace, and
other Officers in Trust under him, when they had owned the People called
Quakers, had been cast out of their Places, though they had not denied to serve
him and the Commonwealth, neither had Unfaithfulness to their Trust been
proved against them.

In September, E. Borough wrote another Letter to Cromwell, And again.
wherein he signified to him; That he had many Enemies, some of which
endeavored to destroy him, by any Means, without regarding any Danger that
might be in the Attempt. And that he going on in oppressing through Tyranny, or
suffering it, perhaps the Lord might raise up the wicked to be a Plague to
Wickedness, and suffer the Oppressors to overthrow Oppressions. That there were
others, viz. the Fifth Monarchy Men, who, though not so bad as the former, yet
secretly murmured against him, and envyed him, not being Friends to his
Government, some of them being cast out and rejected, without just Cause, as
they supposed. And as to us, how can we, said he mention thee in our Prayers to
God, except it be to be delivered from thee, who are daily unjustly Sufferers
by thee, or because of thee? Or how can we be Friends to that Government, under
which we daily suffer such hard and cruel Things, as the Loss of our Liberty
and Estates, and are in Danger of Life also?

It was about the Beginning of this Year that Christopher Birkhead came to
Zealand, C. Birkhead in Danger of his Life, from Papists at Rochel.
having before been at Rochel in France; where having spoken and written
against the Popish Religion, he was imprisoned, and examined by the Bishop: And
some would have had him burnt, but the Criminal Judge absolved him. It was in
the latter End of the Month called February, when he came to Middleburrough in
Zealand, ^^mes to Zealand.
and going to the English Congregation there, after the Preacher William Spanke
had preached about three Quarters of an Hour, he said, Friends, the Apostle
says, that We may all prophecy one by one, that two or three Prophets may
speak, and the others judge; and if any Thing be revealed to another that
sits by, Has a Conference in the English Congregation at Middle-burgh.
let the first hold his Peace. This speaking caused a great Stir in the
Congregation, and the rather because he stood in the Place where the Women used
to sit: So he was apprehended by order of the Magistrates, and examined in the
Presence of some of the public Preachers. When he was asked, What his Name
was? he answered, that his Name according to the Flesh was Christopher Birkhead
Then it was asked him, whether he had yet another Name? And his Answer was,
Yes, written in the Lamb's Book of Life. Being enquired, what that Name was? he
made Answer, None knows it but him that has it. To which was said, Why, if you
have it, tell it us. No, replied he, read it, if ye have seen the Book of the
Lamb opened: It is forbidden me to tell it. Then the English Teacher Spanke
asked, Whether he had seen the Book of the Lamb opened? And he answered, yea.
The next Question was, Whether he had opened it? No, said Birkhead, it was the
Lamb that did it. Then Spanke asked, Whether his Name in the Book of the Lamb,
was not Jesus? No, quoth Birkhead, that is the Name of the Lamb. More other
Questions to ensnare him, Spanke put to him. And being examined by the
Magistrates concerning the Place of his Abode, his Calling, or Trade, etc.
Spanke was asked what he had to say against him: Who then related what had
happened in the Congregation. Concerning this, several Questions were asked of
Birkhead; but since he understood not Dutch, and the French Tongue but
imperfectly, he complained that he could not fully answer for himself so as he
wished. He was asked also, Whether any Body else came along with him, and he
was charged to speak the Truth. To which he said, that God did not permit him
to lie. One of the Preachers then said, That all Men were Liars. To this,
Birkhead replied, that though all Man were Liars, yet he knew a Deliverance from
Lying. Then Spanke bid him, not to add to the Scriptures. For Birkhead had
accused him a little before, that he had added his Meaning to the Scriptures.
And it being strongly asserted that all Men were Liars, Birkhead took Occasion
from thence, to ask Spanke, Whether he was a Liar? who without any Hesitation
answering, Yes, Birkhead bluntly told him, Then thou art of thy Father the
Devil. Now the Matter of J. Naylor having caused strange Reports of the Quakers
every where, and Birkhead, for Want of the Language not being able to answer so
plainly every Objection, his Offense without Question was aggravated the more;
and the Conclusion was, that he was sentenced to be confined in the House of
Correction. But after some Time, Is sent to the House of Correction, but after
released. G. Baily in Prison in France, therein dies.
he was released at the Intercession of the Here Newport, Ambassador of the
States General in England.

In this Year it was, I think, that one George Baily coming into France, was
taken into Custody, and dyed in Prison there; he having zealously testified
against Popery, and spoken boldly against the Worshipping of Images.

William Ames returning this Year to Amsterdam, W. Ames and H. Thatcher at
Amsterdam.
and one Humble Thatcher coming with him (whom I could never learn to have been
truly in Communion with the Quakers) it caused some Jealousy; for Ames, who
formerly had been in Military Employment, was an extraordinary bold Man; and
about this Time it seems, a Paper was put on the Door of the English
Meeting House, though Ames declared he knew Nothing of it, or who was the Author.
And about this Time also the strange Business of J. Naylor being noised abroad
by a Book that was given out in Print at Amsterdam, and some other Pamphlets
stuffed with several Untruths, and abominable Lies, it was not to be wondered at,
that the Magistrates fearing some Mischief, sent for Ames and Thatcher to
appear before them, and commanded them to depart the Town within twenty four
Hours. But they being persuaded of their own Innocence, did not obey this
Command. The next Day appearing before the Magistrates, and not putting off
their Hats, it seems they were looked upon as such as did not own Magistrates;
(for this the Quakers stood charged with in public Print, and were compared to
the tumultuous Crew of Anabaptists or Fifth Monarchy Men at Munster in the
foregoing Age:) And so they were kept in Custody for some Days, Taken into
Custody and banished the Town. Ames returns next Day.
and then at Night were led through the Regulars Gate, and so banish^d out of the
Town. But W. Ames judging that he had committed no Evil, came again the next
Day into the City, and passed the great Marketplace called the Dam. It is
reported that some of the Magistrates seeing him out of the Windows of the
Townhouse walking along the Street, said, Lo there is the Quaker; If we had a
Mind now to make Martyrs, here would be an Opportunity for it. But it seems not
without Reason, that it was looked upon to be most safe to wink at this; for
though strange Reports were spread up and down of the Quakers, yet there was no
Proof of their evil Carriage here. Mean while Ames staid some Time in Town, and
the Doctrine he preach^d found a little Entrance even with some of the
Collegians. By whom the Author's Parents were convinced, being some of the
first Quakers in Amsterdam.
It was about this Time, that my Parents, viz. Jacob Williamson Sewel, of
Vtreght, free Citizen and Surgeon at Amsterdam, and his Wife Judith
Zinspenning, born in this Town, both Members of the Flemish-Baptists Church
there, were convinced of the Truth preached by W. Ames; she having before had
immediate Openings, that if ever she would become a Child of God, she must give
Heed to this Light which reproved for Sin. They with two or three more were the
first Orthodox Quakers in Amsterdam; Orthodox, I say, because I very well
remember what a strange and odd Sort of People about that Time did flock to the
Quakers in this Country: But these whimsical People not being sincere in Heart,
but more inclined to Novelties than to true Godliness, perceived in Time that
they were not regarded by them; and they were also contradicted by Ames and
others; so that at length, after many Exorbitances, they left the Quakers.

In the Forepart of this Year, W. Caton, at a Meeting in Sussex, quiets a
desperate rude Rabble.
William Caton came also to Amsterdam. Before he left England, he had had a
Meeting at the East Side of Sussex on the Day called Shrove-Tuesday, where
there had never been any of his Friends before. But the People being on that
Day more rude than ordinary, came up to the House with a Drum, and that in such
a desperate Manner, as if they would have pulled the House down. Caton stepping
out, a^ked them, What they wanted? And they answered Quakers; at which he told
them, He was one: And he spoke so plainly to them, and with so much Power, that
Fear falling upon them, they withdrew with Shame and Confusion.

Not long after he went to London, Goes to London; thence to Rotterdam and
Amsterdam.
and from thence to Holland. And being safely arrived at Rotterdam, he repaired
to Amsterdam; where he came in due Time to stop the Unruliness of some forward
Spirits, among which one Anne Garghil an English Woman was not one of the
least; whose Rudeness grew in Time to that Degree, that she would not suffer W.
Ames to preach peaceably in the Meeting, but laid violent Hands on him; so that
at length to be rid of her, he bad an English Seaman that was present, to take
her away, which was done accordingly: And how haughty she was, and continued, I
well remember still, W. Caton procured also some Books to be printed at
Amsterdam, Has some Books printed there. Goes to Zutphen.
to prevent evil and malicious Reports concerning the Quakers; and he went with
W. Ames to Zutphen in Guelderland, where meeting with nothing but Opposition,
he returned to Amsterdam, and from thence by Leyden and the Hague to Rotterdam;
from which Place he went to Zealand, where he wrote the Book called The
moderate Enquirer resolved, both in Latin and English, which was afterward
translated indifferently into Dutch. After some Stay, Caton returned again to
England, Returns to England.
and came to London, where the Society of his Friends was in a thriving
Condition, and many were added to the Church.

In this City we left G. Fox: He wrote there several Papers for the Opening of
the Understandings of People, G. Fox travels into Kent Sussex, Surrey.
and for the Edification of his Friends. From thence he traveled into Kent,
Sussex, and Surrey, and coming to Basingstoke, though the People were rude there,
yet he had a quiet Meeting in the Place. In the Inn he had some Trouble with
the Innkeeper, who was a Drunkard. Afterward he came to Portsmouth, Exeter,
Bristol, and into Wales, And to Portsmouth, Exeter, Bristol and into Wales.
where many came to him. At Brecknock, (where he was accompanied by Thomas
Holmes, who first of the Quakers in Wales, had preached the Doctrine of the
inward Light, and by John-ap-John, who three Years before had been sent by a
Priest out of Wales into the North, to enquire what kind of People the Quakers
were) he had a great Meeting in the Steeple-house-yard, Has a succesful Meeting
at Brecknock.
where was a Priest, and one Walter Jenkin, who had been a Justice, and another
Justice. Here he preached so effectually, that many were convinced. And after
the Meeting, he went with Jenkin to the other Justice's House, who said to him,
You have this Day given great Satisfaction to the People, and answered all the
Objections that were in their Minds. And at Lemster, where he is opposed.
At Lemster he had a great Meeting, where Priest Tombs made some Opposition, by
saying that the Light G. Fox spoke of was but a natural Light: But G. Fox
asserted the contrary, and said that he had spoken of no other Light than John
bore Witness unto, viz. The Word which was in the Beginning with God, and which
Word was God; and that was the true Light, which enlighteneth every Man that
comes into the World. G. Fox coming from this Place to Tenby, Comes to Tenby,
has a Meeting there.
as he rode in the Street, a Justice of Peace came out and desired him to
alight, and to stay at his House, which he did; and on the first Day of the
Week had a Meeting there, whither the Mayor and his Wife, and several others of
the Chief of the Town came. John-ap-John, who was then with G. Fox, left the
Meeting, and went to the Steeple-house, and was by the Governor cast into
Prison. The next Morning the Governor sent one of his Officers to the Justice's
House to fetch G. Fox, which grieved the Mayor and the Justice, and so they
went up to the Governor; and a while after, G. Fox went with the Officer,
Discourses with, and convinces the Governor, who sets his friend at liberty.
and coming in, said, Peace be unto this House: And before the Governor could
examine him, he asked, Why he had cast his Friend into Prison? and the Governor
answered, For standing with his Hat on in the Church. Why, resumed G. Fox, Had
not the Priest two Caps on his Head, a black one, and a white one? And if the
Brim of the Hat, which was but to defend from the Weather, had been cut off,
then my Friend would have had but one Cap. These are frivolous Things, said the
Governor. Why then, said G. Fox, do thou cast my Friend into Prison for such
frivolous Things? Then the Governor asked him, Whether he owned Election and
Reprobation. Yes, said he, And thou art in the Reprobation. This so incensed
the Governor, that he told G. Fox, He would send him to Prison, till he proved
it. G. Fox, not at all at a Loss, said, I Will prove that quickly, if thou will
but confess Truth: And then he asked him, Whether Wrath, Fury, and Rage, and
Persecution were not Marks of Reprobation? For he that was born of the Flesh
persecuted him that was born of the Spirit; and Christ and his Apostles never
persecuted nor imprisoned any. This Speech of his so struck the Governor that
he fairly confessed That he had too much Wrath, Haste, and Passion in him.
Which made G. Fox say, that Esau the first Birth was up in him, not Jacob the
second Birth. By this the Man was so reached, that he confessed to Truth, and
inviting G. Fox to Dinner with him, he set his Friend at Liberty. It was with
great Satisfaction that G. Fox departed the Town; and in several other Places
of Wales he had some singular Occurrences; and though the People generally were
rude, yet some were convinced. Visits several Places in the North.
At length he came to Lancaster, where at the Inn he met with Colonel West, who
was very glad to see him. Next he came to Swarthmore, where he writ some
Epistles and other Papers. After having staid there some Days, he went to some
other Places in the North, and to Scotland; here traveling from Town to Town,
he met with great Opposition from some Priests: Goes into Scotland, has much
Opposition.
For in an Assembly they had drawn up several Articles or Curses, to be read in
their Steeple Houses, the first of which was, Cursed is he that says, every
Man has a Light within him sufficient to lead him to Salvation: And let all
the People say Amen. An Independent Pastor preaching one Day against the
Quakers and the Light, A Remarkable Occurrence.
and calling the Light natural, cursed it, and so fell down as dead in his
Pulpit: The People carrying him out, and pouring Strong Water into him, it
brought him to Life again; but he was mopish, and a^ one of his Hearers said,
he never recovered his Senses. In the Month October, G. Fox came to Edinburgh,
where he was summoned to appear before the Council, who, though indifferent
civil, yet told him, He must depart the Nation of Scotland, by that Day
Seven-night: Against which, he not only spoke, but wrote also. Whilst G. Fox
was in Scotland, his Friends there were brought to a great Strait; His Friends
there excommunicated.
for being excommunicated by the Presbyterian Teachers, Charge was given, That
none should buy or sell with them, nor eat or drink with them. Hence it came to
pass, that some having bought Bread or other Victuals of their Neighbors,
these frighted with the Curses of their Priests, did run, and fetch it from
them again. But Colonel Ashton, a Justice of Peace, Col. Ashton is convinced.
put a Stop to these Proceedings; and being afterward convinced of the Truth,
had a Meeting settled at his House, and declared the Truth, and lived and died
in it.

G. Fox now traveled almost over all Scotland, G. Fox travels over Scotland.
and had in some Places good Opportunities to declare the Gospel, being often
heard with Satisfaction by the English Soldiers, but the Scotch generally gave
little Heed. He went also among the Highlanders, who were a mischievous People.
Returning at length to Leith, the Innkeeper told him that the Council had
granted forth Warrants to apprehend him, because he was not gone out of the
Nation after the seven Days were expired, that they had ordered him to depart
in. Some others told him the same, to whom he said, Makes slight of Warrants to
take him up.
What do you tell me of their Warrants against me? If there were a Cart-load of
them, I do not heed them; for the Lord's Power is over them all. From Leith, he
went to Edinburgh again, and went to the Inn where he had lodged before, and no
Man offered to meddle with him. Alexander Parker and Robert Widders being also
there, he resolved to go with Parker to Johnston, out of which Town some Time
before he had been led by Soldiers: And he came into Johnston just as they were
drawing up the Bridges, the Officers and Soldiers never questioning him. And
coming to Capt. Davenport's House, from which he had been haled before, he
found there many Officers, who lifting up their Hands, wondered that he came
again: But he told them, The Lord God had sent him amongst them again. Then the
Baptists sent him a Letter, by Way of Challenge, Is challenged by the Baptists
at Johnston.
That they would discourse with him the next Day. And he sent them Word, that
he would meet them at a certain House, about half a Mile out of the Town, at
such an Hour. For he thought, if he should stay in Town to speak with them,
they might under Pretense of discoursing with him, have raised People to carry
him out of the Town again, as they had done before. At the Time appointed, he
went to the Place, They neglect to meet him.
Captain Davenport and his Son accompanying him; and there he staid some Hours,
but none of them came; whereby the Intent of the Baptists was sufficiently
discovered. Being thus disappointed, he went back again to Edinburgh, He
returns to Edinburgh, and has a Meeting undisturbed.
and past through the Town, as it were, against the Canon's Mouth. The next Day,
being the first of the Week, he went to the Meeting in the City, and many
Officers and Soldiers came to it, and all was quiet. The following Day he went
to Dunbar, where walking with a Friend or two of his, in the
Steeple-house-yard, he met with one of the chief Men of the Town there, and
spoke to one of his Friends, to tell him, That about the Ninth-Hour next
Morning, there was to be a Meeting there, of the People of God called Quakers,
of which they desired him to give Notice to the People of the Town. To which he
said, that they were to have a Lecture there by the Ninth Hour: But that a
Meeting might be kept there by the Eighth Hour, if they would. G. Fox thinking
this not inconvenient, desired him to give Notice of it. Accordingly in the
Morning many came, both Poor and Rich; and a Captain of Horse being quartered
in the Town, came there with his Troopers also. Has a Meeting at Dunbar.
To this Company G. Fox preached, and after some Time the Priest came, and went
into the Steeple-house; but G. Fox and his Friend being in the
Steeple-house-yard, most of the People staid with them; so that the Priest
having but few Hearers, made short Work, and coming out, stood a while, and
heard G. Fox, and then went away. This was the last Meeting he had in Scotland,
and he understood afterward that his Labor had not been in vain, but that the
Number of Believers increased. Goes thence to Berwick and Newcastle.
Now he departed from Dunbar, and came to Berwick in Northumberland, and from
thence to Newcastle; where we will leave him a while, and return again to
New England.

We have seen before, Severities against the Quakers in New England.
that a Law was made there, to prevent the Quakers coming into that Country.
The first I find that came after that, were Anne Burden, a Widow, whose
Business was to gather up some Debts in the Country, that were due to her, and
Mary Dyer from Rhode Island, who before her coming, knew nothing of what had
been done there concerning the Quakers. A. Burden, and M. Dyer imprisoned.
These two were both imprisoned, which William Dyer, Mary's Husband hearing,
came from Rhode Island, and did not get her released without a great Deal of
Pains, becoming bound in a great Penalty, not to lodge her in any Town of that
Colony, nor to permit any to speak with her: An evident Token that he was not
of the Society of the Quakers, so called, for otherwise he would not have
entered into such a Bond; but then without Question he would also have been
clapped up in Prison. As for Anne Burden, Their farther Cruelties to Ann Burden.
she was kept in Prison, though sick, about a Quarter of a Year. Whilst she was
in this Restraint, some tender Hearted People had procured of her Debts to the
Value of about thirty Pounds in Goods: And when she at length was to be sent
away, she desired that she might have Liberty to pass to England by Barbados,
because her Goods were not fit for England. Now how reasonable soever this
Request was, yet a Master of a Ship was compelled to carry her to England,
without her Goods, for which she came there, except to the Value of about six
Shillings, which an honest Man sent her upon an old Account. And when the
Master of the Ship asked what should pay for her Passage, the Rulers bid him
take so much of her Goods as would answer it. But he was too honest to do so,
being persuaded that she would not let him be a Loser, though he could not compel
her to pay, since she went not of her own Will: Yet for all that, she paid him
at London. After she was gone, when he that had the first Trust from her
Husband, was to convey her Goods to Barbados, these rapacious People stopped
to the Value of six Pounds ten Shillings, for her Passage, for which they paid
nothing, and seven Shillings for Boat-Hire to carry her on Shipboard, though the
Master proffered the Governor to carry her in his own Boat; but that was not
allowed; she being sent with the Hangman in a Boat that was pressed: Besides,
they took to the Value of Fourteen Shillings for the Jailor, to whom she owed
nothing. Now though this Widow had made such a great Voyage, to get something of
what was due to her, to relieve her and her Fatherless Children, yet after
three Years she had nothing of it come to her Hands: And whether she got any
Thing since, I never understood.

The next of the Quakers that came to Boston was Mary Clark, M. Clark at Boston
whipped unmercifully, and kept in Prison about 12 Weeks in Winter.
who having left her Husband John Clark, a Merchant-Taylor, with her Children,
at London, came thither to warn these Persecutors to desist from their
Iniquity: But after she had delivered her Message, she was unmercifully
rewarded with twenty Stripes of a Whip with three Cords, on her naked Back, and
detained Prisoner about twelve Weeks in the Winter-Season. The Cords of these
Whips were commonly as thick as a Man's little Finger, having each some Knots
at the End; and the Stick was sometimes so long, that the Hangman made use of
both his Hands, to strike the harder. The next that came were Christopher
Holder and John Copeland, who had been banished before, C. Holder and J.
Copeland brought from Salem to Boston, cruelly whipped, imprisoned, and inhumanly
used there.
and coming to Salem a Town in the same Colony, Holder spoke a few Words in
their Meeting after the Priest had done; but was haled back by the Hair of his
Head, and a Glove and Handkerchief thrust into his Mouth, and so turned out
with his Companion, and next Day had to Boston, where each of them received
thirty Stripes with a knotted Whip of three Cords, the Hangman measuring his
Ground, and fetching his strokes with the greatest Strength he could: Which so
cruelly cut their Flesh, that a Woman seeing it, fell down as dead. Then they
were locked up in Prison, and the Jailor kept them three Days without any Food,
not giving them so much as a Draught of Water; and so close, that none might
come to speak with them; lying on the Boards, without Bed or Straw. Thus they
were kept nine Weeks Prisoners, without Fire in the cold Winter-Season. And
Samuel Shattock of Salem, S. Shattock imprisoned.
who endeavored to stop the Thrusting of the Glove and Handkerchief into
Holder's Mouth, lest it should have choked him, was also carried to Boston,
and there imprisoned, till he had given Bond for twenty Pound to answer it at
the next Court, and not to come at any Meeting of the Quakers. The Career of
this Cruelty did not stop here; L. and C. Southick.
for Lawrence Southick and his Wife Cassandra, Members of the public Church at
Salem, and an ancient and grave Couple, having entertained the aforesaid C.
Holder and J. Copeland, were committed to Prison, and sent to Boston, where
Lawrence being released, his Wife was kept seven Weeks Prisoner, and then fined
Forty Shillings for owning a Paper of Exhortation, written by the aforesaid
Holder and Copeland. The next that came from England, as being under a
Necessity from the Lord to come to this Land of Persecution, was Richard
Dowdney, R. Dowdney barbarously whipped, etc.
who was apprehended at Dedham, and brought to Boston, having never before been
in that Country; yet he was not spared for all that; but thirty Stripes were
also given him in like Manner as the Former. And after twenty Days
Imprisonment, he was sent away with Holder and Copeland; after having been
threatened with cutting off their Ears, if they returned. These cruel Dealings
so affected many Inhabitants, This Usage makes some withdraw from the public
Worship, and meet by themselves, for which they are fined, and undergo the Lash.
that some withdrew from the Public Assemblies; and meeting by themselves
quietly on the First Days of the Week, they were fined Five Shillings a Week,
and committed to Prison. The First whose Lot this was, were the aforesaid
Laurence, and Cassandra Southick, and their Son Josiah, who being carried to
Boston, were all of them, notwithstanding the old Age of the Two, sent to the
House of Correction, and whipped with Cords, as those before, in the coldest
Season of the Year, and had taken from them to the Value of four Pounds
thirteen Shillings for not coming to Church.

Leaving New England for a While, I Will turn another Way. It was in this Year,
G. Robinson, a young Man, is moved to travel to Jerusalem; his remarkable
Occurrences, wonderful Preservation, and safe Return.
about the latter End of the Summer, that a certain young Man named George
Robinson, felt a Motion to travel to Jerusalem: In Order thereunto, he embarked
in a Ship bound for Leghorn in Italy; where having staid about two Weeks, being
daily visited by Engish and others, he went with a French Ship toward St. John
d' Acra, formerly called Ptolemais, a City in Asia, bordering upon the
Mediterranian Sea, near Palestine, where having lodged about eight Days in a
French Merchant's House, he embarked in a Vessel bound for Japha, or Joppe.
What occurred by the Way with some Turks, who demanded unreasonable Tribute of
him, I pass by: But a certain Armenian on that Occasion having seen his meek
Behavior, said, He was a good Christian, and was very kind to him. Being
arrived at Japha, he went to Ramath; but the Friars at Jerusalem having heard
of his coming, gave Orders to some to stop him; which was done accordingly; and
after having been locked up about a Day, there came an ancient Turk, a Man of
great Repute, who took him into his House, and courteously entertained him.
After four or five Days, there came an Irish Friar from Jerusalem, with whom
falling into Discourse of religious Matters, the Friar at first behaved himself
kindly, but told him afterward, that was not the Business he came about, but
that he was sent from his Brethren, the Friars at Jerusalem, to propound to him
some Questions.

1. Whether he would promise, when he came to Jerusalem, that he would visit
the holy Places, as other Pilgrims did? 2. Whether he would pay so much Money
as Pilgrims used to do? 3. Whether he would wear such a Sort of Habit as was
usual with Pilgrims? 4. That he must speak nothing against the Turks Laws. 5.
And when he came to Jerusalem, not speak any Thing about Religion.
Not being willing to enter into a Promise, he was by the Irish Friar (with a
Guard of Horse and Footmen he brought with him from Jerusalem) carried back to
Japha, and embarked in a Vessel bound for St. John d' Acra; whither being come,
a French Merchant called Surrubi, took him into his House, and lodged him about
three Weeks. This Man entertained him very kindly, and would say sometimes,
That it was the Lord's doing? for, said he, when my own Countrymen come to me,
they are little to me, but thee I can willingly receive. After much Trouble,
Robinson got Opportunity, by the Help of the said French Merchant, who was an
ancient Man, to return by Sea ^o Japha; where being come, he went on his
Journey a-foot, and by the Way met three Men, two of them riding upon Asses,
and the other going a-foot, and they asking him for Money, one held his Gun to
his Breast, and another put his Hand into his Pockets, and took some Things
out. He suffering all this without any Opposition, the Man that took his Things
from him, put them up again; and one of the Three taking him by the Hand, led
him a little on his Way, in a friendly Manner, and so left him. At length
Robinson came to Ramath, where he was presently known, and two that belonged to
the Friars laid hold on him, and hurried him away; but two Turks took him from
them, and one leading him by one Arm, and the other by the other, they brought
him into a Mosque, or Turkish Temple. He being thus innocently entered there,
many People came flocking in, and also some of the Mohammedan Priests, who
having caused him to sit down, asked him, whether he would turn to the
Mohammedan Religion? But he refusing to do so, they pressed him much, and made
great Promises, and said, That he had no Need to fear what the Christians might
do unto him. Nevertheless he answered, He could not turn unto them for all the
World. But they continued to strive much with him, and would have him hold up
one of his Fingers, as a Sign of owning them; and one bid him say, Christ is
bad. But he answered, He knew him to be good, and he was his Servant. Then some
growing angry, said, If he would not turn to their Religion, he should die. To
which he replying, That he would rather die than turn unto them; it was
answered, He should then die. And so by their Order, the Executioner haled him
away to the Place where it was expected that he should have been burnt to Death
with Camel's Dung. Here he was made to sit down upon the Ground, and was as a
Sheep among the Wolves. Whilst he was thus sitting with a retired Mind, the
Turks began to fall out among themselves, and whilst they were at odds, a grave
ancient Turk, a Man of Note, came to him, and said, whether he would turn from
his Religion, or not, he should not die. Then he was brought before the Priests
again, who asked him, will you turn? And he answering, No, they recorded in a
Book, That he was no Roman Catholic, but of another Religion; for having
denied to be such a Catholic, yet he had owned that he was a Christian.

The Turks being come now to be more sedate, the aforesaid ancient Man ordered
his Servants to conduct Robinson to his House, where he was friendly
entertained, and soon perceived that the Friars had thus plotted against him;
for he went not into the Mosque of his own Accord, being led into it; but
Heaven preserved him. After having been four or five Days in the House of the
ancient Turk, there came a Guard of Horsemen, hired by the Friars, to carry him
to Gaza; for they had pre-inform'd the Basha of that Place against him: But
Robinson being come thither, Things took another Turn than they expected; for
the Basha being by some Turks made acquainted with the mischievous Design of
the Friars, made them not only pay a considerable Fine, but commanded them also
to convey Robinson safely to Jerusalem. Now whilst he was at Gaza, he was
visited by many Turks, Greeks, and Armenians; the latter of which having heard
he was a Christian, and that he chose rather to die than to turn from his
Religion, became very loving to him, as were the Turks, and the Jews also
showed themselves moderate toward him. Then according to the forementioned
Order of the Basha, he was carried to Jerusalem, and there, by the Appointment
of the Friars, brought into their Convent, where at first they seemingly showed
Love unto him, and one confessed* There was now an evident Sign, that he was a
good Christian, for he was come through Persecution and Sufferings; and those
Things which had been spoken in his Prejudice, were manifest to be untrue.
Robinson told the Friar, It was he and his Brethren that had been the Cause of
his Sufferings, and withstood his coming to Jerusalem. To which the other
returned, That the English Friar had misinformed them by his Writing, which had
caused them to do what they had done; and that therefore they desired he would
now pass by those Things, seeing he was come through in such a miraculous Manner;
for (continued the Friar) it was the Lord's Work, thus to carry him through, and
he might praise God he was preserved.

The next Morning there came a Friar to him, and asked, If he would become an
obedient Child, and go to visit the holy Places, according to their Custom? He
answered, No. Then the Friar said, Whereas others give great Sums of Money to
see them, you shall see them for Nothing. But Robinson replied, I shall not
visit them in your Manner, for in so Doing I should sin against God. This did
not please the Friar, yet he said, They would honor him as much as ever they
did any Englishman that came thither, if he would conform unto them. But
Robinson continued immovable, and said, He should not conform; and as to their
Honor, he did not matter it. Then the Friar became angry, and said, They would
make him an Example to all Englishmen that came thither. To which Robinson,
returned, I choose rather your Dishonor than your Honor. The Friar seeing he
could not prevail, went away in Anger, and within a short Time came again, and
other Friars being present, one asked him, If he would visit their Church, and
the holy Sepulcher, and Bethlehem, with the rest of the holy Places, as other
Pilgrims did? But he told them, At present he had no Business to visit them;
and in their Manner he should not visit them at all, viz. to worship them. Then
one said to him, How can you be a Servant of God, and will not go to visit the
Places where the holy Men of God dwelt? To which he returned, That they, under
Pretense of doing Service to God, in visiting the Places where the holy Men
dwelt, did oppose that Way, and resist that Life, which the holy Men of God
lived and walked in. Then one of the Friars said, What do you preach unto us
for? To which he replied, That he would have them turn from those evil
Practices they lived in, else the Wrath of the Almighty would be kindled
against them. But they did not at all like such Discourse, and therefore said,
If he would not go and visit the aforesaid Places, yet he must give twenty five
Dollars, as was the Manner of those that visited them; for, said they, the
Turks must be paid, whether he would visit them, or not; but if he would visit
them, then they would pay it for him. To this he signified, that he could not
submit to such unreasonable Terms. Then they brought him before a Turk in
Authority in that Place, who asked him diverse Questions, to which he soberly
gave Answers; and they discoursing about the Worship of the Christians, the
Turk asked also, What was the Ground of his coming to Jerusalem? To which he
answered, That it was by the Command of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth he
came thither; and that the great and tender Love of God was made manifest in
visiting them; his compassionate Mercies being such, that he would gather them
in this the Day of his gathering. This was the Message which Robinson believed
he had from the Lord to declare unto them, whether they would hear, or forbear.
And afterward he wrote, that having thus cleared his Conscience, he found
great Peace with the Lord, and therefore he magnified his glorious Name, who
had gone along with him, and preserved him in many Trials. For the Friars, who
intended him Mischief, were commanded by the Turks to carry him again safe and
free of Charges, to Ramla. Here I leave him, because I don't find how he came
home; but that he returned thither in Safety, appears to me from the Relation
he afterward published of his Travels.

The Year being come to an End, G. Fox, with A. Pearson, visit some of the
Aldermen of Newcastle.
I return again to G. Fox, whom we left at Newcastle. Whilst he was there, he,
with Anthony Pearson, visited some of the Aldermen; and among these one Ledger,
who, as well as the Priests, had said, The Quakers would not come into any
great Towns, but lived in the Fields like Butterflies. G. Fox desired to have a
Meeting amongst them; but they would not yield to it. He therefore asked
Ledger, Whether they had not called his Friends, Butterflies, and said, They
would not come into any great Towns? But, said he, now we are come into your
Town, you will not come to us? Who are the Butterflies now? Then Ledger began
to plead for the Sabbath Day; which made G. Fox say, They kept Markets on that
which was the Sabbath Day, for that was the SEVENTH-DAY of the Week; Comes to
Derham, where discoursing with one come to erect a College for Education of
Ministers, he gives over the Design.
whereas that Day which the professed Christians now meet on, and call their
Sabbath, was the First Day of the Week. No Leave for a public Meeting being
obtained, G. Fox got a little Meeting among his Friends, and some Friendly
People, at Gateside.

Traveling from thence, and passing through Northumberland, and Bishopric, he
came to Durham, where was a Man come down from London to set up a College
there, to make Ministers of Christ, as they said. G. Fox entering into Discourse
with this Man, said, That to teach Men Hebrew, 1658
Greek, and Latin, and the Seven Arts, was not the Way to make them Ministers
of Christ; for the Languages began at Babel; and to the Greeks that spoke Greek
as their Mother Tongue, the Preaching of the Cross of Christ was Foolishness;
and to the Jews that spoke Hebrew as their Mother Tongue, Christ was a
Stumbling Block. And as for the Romans who spoke Latin, they persecuted the
Christians; and Pilate, one of the Roman Governors, set Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin a-top of Christ when he crucified him. Thus the Languages, which began at
Babel, had been set above Christ, the Word: And John the Divine, who preached
the Word, that was in the Beginning, said, that the Beast and the Whore had
Power over Tongues and Languages, and they were as Waters, and in the Mystery
Babylon, for they began at Babel; and the Persecutors of Christ set them over
him, when he was crucified by them. Do thou think, said G. Fox, to the Man,
to make Ministers of Christ by these natural confused Languages, which sprang
from Babel, are admired in Babylon, and set a-top of Christ, the Life, by a
Persecutor? The Man puzzled a little by this, confessed to many Things spoken
by G. Fox. Then it was showed him farther, That Christ made his Ministers
himself, and gave Gifts unto them, and bid them pray to the Lord of the
Harvest, to send forth Laborers: That Peter and John, though unlearned and
ignorant as to School-Learning, preached Christ the Word, which was in the
Beginning before Babel was: And that Paul also was made an Apostle, not of Man,
nor by Man, but by Jesus Christ, who is the same now, and so is his Gospel, as
it was at that Day. This Discourse had such Effect upon the Man, that he became
very loving; and having considered the Matter farther, he never set up his
intended College.

From Durham G. Fox passed to Nottingham, Goes to Nottingham.
where he gathered again a scattered People, that having about eight Years
before been convinced of the Truth, had been led aside by one Rice Jones.

From hence he went into Warwickshire, Thence to J. Crook's House in Bedfordsh.
where a yearly general Meeting is kept.
and passing through Northamptonshire, and Leicestershire, he came into
Bedfordshire, and so to John Crook's House, where a General Yearly Meeting was
appointed, which lasted three Days; and many of G. Fox's Friends from most
Parts of the Nation came to it, so that the Inns in the Towns thereabouts were
filled. Here was also William Caton, who after the Meeting was ended, went with
Thomas Salthouse, formerly his Fellow Servants in the House of Judge Fell, to
Westmorland, Cumberland, and Swarthmore in Lancashire. In the said General
Meeting, G. Fox made a long Speech concerning the several States of Men, but
more especially for Instruction of the Ministers of the Word, exhorting them at
large to be circumspect in their Station.

After the Meeting was over, Some come to seize him, but do not.
there came a Party of Horse with a Constable, to seize upon G. Fox, who then
was walking in J. Crook's Garden: And though somebody, when they came to the
House, had told them G. Fox was there, yet they were so confounded, that they
came not into the Garden to look for him, but went away without him. Parting
from thence, He came to London, A Jesuit challenges the Quakers to dispute at
the E. of Newport's House.
where he heard that a Jesuit who was come over with an Ambassador from Spain,
had challenged all the Quakers, to dispute with him at the Earl of Newport's
House. G. Fox then let him know by some of his Friends, that they would meet
him. Whereupon the Jesuit sent Word, He would meet with twelve of the wisest
learned Men they had. A while after he sent Word, He would meet with but Six;
and after that, he sent Word again, He would have but three to come. Then G.
Fox went, with Edward Borough and one Nicholas Bond to the aforesaid House,
and bad them to go up, and enter the Discourse with the Jesuit, whilst he would
be walking in the Yard, and then come up after them. He had advised them to
state this Question, Whether the Church of Rome, as it now stood, was not
degenerated from the true Church which was in the primitive Times, from the
Life and Doctrine, G. F. with two others meet him there.
and from the Power and Spirit that those Believers were in? They having stated
the Question accordingly, the Jesuit affirmed, That the Church of Rome now was
in the Virginity and Purity of the Primitive Church. By this Time, G. Fox being
come in, the Jesuit was asked, Whether they had the Holy Ghost poured out upon
them, as the Apostles had? And he said, No. Then said G. Fox, If ye have not
the same Holy Ghost poured forth upon you, and the same Power and Spirit, that
the Apostles had, then ye are degenerated from the Power and Spirit, which the
Primitive Church was in. And he asked the Jesuit, What Scripture they had for
setting up Cloisters for Nuns, Abbeys and Monasteries for Men, and for their
praying by Beads, and to Images, and for making Crosses, for forbidding of
Meats and Marriages, and for putting People to Death for Religion? If, said he,
ye are in the Practice of the Primitive Church, in its Purity and Virginity,
then let us see by Scripture wherever they practiced such Things? For it was
agreed mutually, that both the Jesuit and the Quakers should make good by
Scripture what they said. Then the Jesuit said, there was a written, and an
unwritten Word. Which made G. Fox ask, What he called his unwritten Word? And
he answered, The written Word is the Scriptures, and the unwritten Word is that
which the Apostles spoke by Word of Mouth, which are all those Traditions that
we practice. Then G. Fox bid him prove that by Scripture; and the Jesuit
alleged the Words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 5. When I was with you, I told
you these Things: That is, said he, I told you of Nunneries and Monasteries, of
putting to Death for Religion, and of Praying by Beads and to Images, etc. This
he affirmed to be the unwritten Word of the Apostles, which they told then, and
had since been continued by Tradition unto these Times. Then G. Fox desired him
to read that Scripture again, that he might see how he had perverted the
Apostle's Words, since that which the Apostle said there he had told them
before, was not an unwritten Word, but was written down there; namely, that the
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, should be revealed before that great and
terrible Day of Christ, which he was writing of, should come. And therefore
this was not telling them any of those things the Church of Rome practiced.
Besides, the Apostle, in the third Chapter of the said Epistle, told the Church
of some disorderly Persons he heard were amongst them, Busy-bodies, who did not
work at all; concerning whom he had commandded them by his unwritten Word, when
he was among them, that if any would not work, neither should be eat; which now
he commanded them again in his written Words in this Epistle, 2 These. iii.

The Jesuit now finding no other Scriptural Proof for the Tradition of the
Church of Rome, let that Point fall, and came to the Sacrament of the Altar; to
prove the Reality of which, he began with the Paschal Lamb, and the Show Bread,
and so came to the Words of Christ, This is my Body, and to what the Apostle
writ to the Corinthians, concluding from thence, that after the Priest had
consecrated the Bread and Wine, it was immortal and divine, and that he who
received it, received the whole Christ. To this G. Fox said, that the same
Apostle told the Corinthians, after they had taken Bread and Wine in
Remembrance of Christ's Death, that they were Reprobates if Christ was not in
them. But that if the Bread they eat was Christ, he must of Necessity have been
in them, after they had eaten it. Besides, if the Bread and Wine which the
Corinthians ate and drunk, was Christ's Body, how then (continued he) has
Christ a Body in Heaven? And he also signified to him, that both the Disciples
at the Supper, and the Corinthians afterward, were to eat the Bread and drink
the Wine in Remembrance of Christ, and to show forth his Death till he came;
which plainly proved, that the Bread and Wine which they took, was not his
Body. For if it had been his real Body that they ate, then he had been come,
and was then there present; and it would have been improper to have done such a
thing in Remembrance of him, if he had been then present with them; as he must
have been, if that Bread and Wine, which they eat and drank, had been his real
Body. And as to the Words of Christ; This is my Body, G. Fox told him, Christ
calls himself a Vine, and a Door, and is called in Scripture, a Rock: Is Christ
therefore an outward Rock, Door, or Vine? O, said the Jesuit, These Words are
to be interpreted. So, said G. Fox, are those Words of Christ, This is my Body.
And having thus stopped the Jesuit's Mouth, he made this Proposal; That seeing he
said the Bread and Wine was immortal and divine, and the very Christ, and that
whosoever received it, received the whole Christ; a Meeting might be appointed
between some such Papists as the Pope and his Cardinals should appoint, and
some of those called Quakers: And then, said he, let a Bottle of Wine, and a
Loaf of Bread he brought, and divided each into two Parts, and let them
consecrate which of those Parts they will; and then let the consecrated and
unconsecrated Bread and Wine be set in a safe Place, with a sure Watch upon it;
and let Trial then be made, whether the consecrated Bread and Wine will not
lose its Goodness, viz. the Bread grow dry and moldy, and the Wine turn dead
and sour, as well and as soon as that which was unconsecrated; for by this
Means the Truth of this Matter may be made manifest. And if the consecrated
Bread and Wine change not, but retain their Savor and Goodness, this may be a
Means to draw many to your Church. But if they change, decay, and lose their
Goodness, then ought you to confess and forsake your Error, and shed no more
Blood about it, as has been done, especially in Queen Mary's Days. To this,
the Jesuit made this Reply; Take a Piece of new Cloth, and cut it into two
Pieces, and make two Garments of it, and put one of them upon King David's
Back, and the other upon a Beggar's, and the one Garment shall wear away as
well as the other. Is this, said G. Fox, thy Answer? Yes, said the Jesuit.
Then, said G. Fox, By this the Company may all be satisfied, that your
consecrated Bread and Wine is not Christ. Do thou now say that the
consecrated Bread and Wine, which you have told People was immortal and divine,
and the real Body and Blood of Christ, will wear away, or decay as well as the
other? Then I must tell thee, Christ remains the same to Day as Yesterday, and
never decays; but is the Saints Heavenly Food in all Generations, through which
they have Life. To this the Jesuit replied no more, but let the Thing fall; for
he perceived that those which were present, saw his Error, and that he could
not defend it. Then G. Fox asked him, why the Church of Rome did persecute, and
put People to Death for Religion? And he answered, It was not the Church did ^
but the Magistrates. G. Fox asked, whether those Magistrates were not counted
and called Believers and Christians? Yes, said he. Are they not Members of your
Church? asked G. Fox. Yes, said the Jesuit. Then G. Fox left it to the People
to judge, whether the Church of Rome did not persecute, and put People to Death
for Religion. And thus they parted; the Jesuit's Subtilty being comprehended by
the Simplicity of G. Fox and his Friends.

Whilst G. Fox was at London, Friends under Sufferings. G. Fox writes to the
Protector.
his Friends, both in England and Ireland, were under great Sufferings, which
made him write to the Protector about it: And there being then much Talk of
making Cromwell King, he went to him, and warned him against it, because of the
Dangers that would attend it, and which if he did not avoid, would bring Shame
and Ruin upon him and his Posterity. Writes again.
Which Counsel Cromwell seemed to take well, and thanked him for it: Yet G. Fox
wrote also concerning the same Thing to him in this Manner.

O Protector,
WHO have tasted of the Power of God, which many Generations before thee has
not so much since the Days of Apostasy from the Apostles, take Heed that thou
lose not thy Power, but keep Kingship off thy Head, which the World would give
to thee, and earthly Crowns under thy Feet; lest with that thou cover thy self,
and so lose the Power of God. When the Children of Israel went from that of God
in them, they would have Kings as other Nations had, as Transgressors had; and
so God gave them one. And what did they do then? And when they would have taken
Christ, and made him a King, he hid himself from them; he was hid from that
which would have made him a King, he who was the King of the Jews inward. -- O
Oliver, take Heed of undoing thy self, by running into Things that will fade,
the Things of this World that will change. Be subject and obedient to the Lord
God.

G. Fox.


About this Time G. Fox wrote also another Letter to O. Cromwell, And again.
wherein he signified to him, That if he had been faithful, and thundered down
Deceit, he would yet have done many mighty Things. And he also advised him, not
to slight sober Men, and true Hearts, but to mind the Law of God, and his Fear
and Dread; to take Heed of Flatteries, and to prize his Time now he had it.

The Lady Claypole, He writes to Cromwell's Daughter Claypole.
Cromwell's most beloved Daughter, being sick, and much troubled in Mind, so
that none that came could administer any Comfort to her, G. Fox visited her
with the following Letter.

Friend,
BE, still and cool in thy own Mind and Spirit from thy own Thoughts, and then
thou will feel the Principle of God, to turn thy Mind to the Lord God, from
whom Life comes; whereby thou may receive his Strength and Power to allay
all blustering Storms and Tempests. That is it which works up into Patience,
into Innocence, into Soberness, into Stilness, into Stayedness, into Quietness,
up to God with his Power. Therefore mind, that is the Word of the Lord unto
thee, that the Authority of God thou may feel and thy Faith in that, to work
down that which troubles thee: For that is it which keeps Peace, and brings up
the Witness in thee, which has been transgressed, to feel after God with his
Power and Life, who is a God of Order and Peace. When thou art in the
Transgression of the Life of God in thy own particular, the Mind flies up in
the Air, and the Creature is led into the Night, and Nature goes out of its
Course, and an old Garment goes on, and an uppermost Clothing, and thy Nature
being led out of its Course, it comes to be all on a Fire, in the
Transgression; and that defaceth the Glory of the first Body. Therefore be
still a while from thy own Thoughts, searching, seeking, Desires, and
Imaginations, and be stayed in the Principle of God in thee, that it may raise
thy Mind up to God, and stay it upon God, and thou will find Strength from him,
and find him to be a God at hand, a present Help in the Time of Trouble, and of
Need. And thou being come to the Principle of God, which has been
transgressed, it will keep thee humble; and the Humble God will teach his Way,
which is Peace, and such he does exalt. Now as the Principle of God in thee
has been transgressed, come to it, that it may keep thy Mind down low to the
Lord God; and deny thy self, and from thy own Will, that is the earthly, thou
must be kept: Then thou will feel the Power of God, which will bring Nature
into its Course, and give thee to see the Glory of the first Body. And there
the Wisdom of God will be received (which is Christ, by which all Things were
made and created) to be thereby preserved and ordered to God's Glory. There
thou will come to receive and feel the Physician of Value, who clothes People
in their right Mind; whereby they may serve God, and do his Will. For all
Distractions, Unruliness, and Confusion is in the Transgression; which
Transgression must be brought down, before the Principle of God, which has
been transgressed against, be lifted up; whereby the Mind may be seasoned and
stilled, and a right Understanding of the Lord may be received; whereby his
Blessings enter, and are felt, over all that is contrary, in the Power of the
Lord God, which raises up the Principle of God within, and gives a Feeling
after God, and in Time gives Dominion. Therefore keep in the Fear of the Lord
God; that is the Word of the Lord God unto thee; for all these Things happen to
thee for thy Good, and for the Good of those concerned for thee, to make you
know your selves, and your own Weakness, and that ye may know the Lord's
Strength and Power, and may trust in him. Therefore let the Time that is past
be sufficient to every one, who in any Thing has been lifted up in
Transgression, out of the Power of the Lord: For he can bring down, and abase
the mighty, and lay them in the Dust of the Earth. Therefore all keep low in
his Fear, that thereby ye may receive the Secrets of God and his Wisdom, and
may know the Shadow of the Almighty, and sit under it in all Tempests, Storms,
and Heats. For God is a God at Hand, and the Most-High rules in the Children of
Men. So then this is the Word of the Lord God unto you all, what the Light does
make manifest and discover, as Temptations, Distractions, Confusions; do not
look at the Temptation, Confusions, Corruptions, but at the Light which
discovers them, and makes them manifest. And with the same Light you may feel
over them, to receive Power to stand against them. The same Light which lets
you see Sin and Transgression, will let you see the Covenant of God, which
blots out your Sin and Transgression, which gives Victory and Dominion over it,
and brings into Covenant with God. For looking down at Sin, and Corruption and
Distraction, ye are swallowed up in it: But looking at the Light which
discovers them, ye will see over them: That will give Victory, and ye will find
Grace and Strength; and there is the first Step to Peace. That will bring
Salvation, and by it ye may see to the Beginning, and the Glory that was with
the Father before the World began; and so come to know the Seed of God, which
is the Heir of the Promise of God, and of the World which has no End, and
which bruises the Head of the Serpent, who stops People from coming to God.
That ye may feel the Power of an endless Life, the Power of God which is
immortal, which brings the immortal Soul up to the immortal God, in whom it
does rejoice. So in ^he Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, God Almighty
strengthen thee.

G. F.


This Paper being read to the aforesaid Lady, it staid her Mind somewhat, but
she lived not long after; so that O. Cromwell met with almost continual Trouble,
for Discontent against him increased more and more. Now since the Protestants
in the Valley of Lucern and elsewhere were much persecuted, G F. writes about
Fasts to the Protector and chief Magistrates.
there came forth a Declaration from the Protector to keep a Fast, and one also
for a Collection for the Relief of distressed Protestant Churches. On this
Occasion, G. Fox, to show what Kind of Fast it was, that God requires and
accepts, wrote the following Paper.

To the Heads and Governors of this Nation, who have put forth a Declaration
for the keeping of a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for the Persecution
(as you say) of diverse People beyond the Seas, professing the reformed
Religion, which, ye say, has been transmitted unto them from their Ancestors.
A Profession of the reformed Religion may be transmitted to Generations, and
so holden by Tradition; and in that, wherein the Profession and Tradition is
holden, is the Day of Humiliation kept; which stands in the Will of Man, which
is not the Fast that the Lord requires, to bow down the Head like a Bulrush for
a Day, and the Day following be in the same Condition as they were the Day
before. To the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences do I speak, which
testifies for God every Day, and witnesses against all Sin and Persecution;
which Measure of God, if ye be guided by it, does not limit God to a Day, but
leads to the Fast which the Lord requires, which is, To loose the Bonds of
Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, to break every Yoke, and to let the
Oppressed go free, Isa. lviii. 6, 7. This is the Fast the Lord requires; and
this stands not in the Transmission of Times, nor in the Traditions of Men: But
this stands in that which was before Times were, and which leads out of Time,
and shall be, when Time shall be no more. And these that teach for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men, are they that ever persecuted the Life and Power when it
came. And whereas ye mention a Decree or Edict, that was made against the said
persecuted Protestants; all such Decrees or Edicts proceed from the Ground of
the Pope's Religion and Supremacy, and therein stands his Tyranny and Cruelty,
acted in that Will, which is in that Nature, which exercises Lordship over one
another, (as you may read, Mark x. 42. Luke xxii. 25.) as all the Heathen do,
and ever did; and in the Heathenish Nature is all the Tyranny and Persecution
exercised, by them that are out of the Obedience to the Light of Christ Jesus
in the Conscience, which is the Guider and Leader of all who are tender of that
of God in the Conscience. But who are not led by this, know not what it is to
suffer for Conscience sake. Now, whereas ye take into your Consideration the
sad Persecution, Tyranny, and Cruelty exercised upon them, whom ye call your
Protestant Brethren, and do contribute and administer to their Wants outwardly;
this is good in its Place, and we own it, and see it good to administer to the
Necessities of others, and to do good to all: And we who are Sufferers by a Law
derived from the Pope, are willing to join, and to contribute with you to their
outward Necessities. For the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; who
is good to all and gracious to all, and willing that all should be saved, and
come to the Knowledge of the Truth. But in the mean Time, while ye are doing
this, and taking Notice of others Cruelty, Tyranny, and Persecution, turn your
Eye upon your selves, and see what ye are doing at home. To the Light of Christ
Jesus in all your Consciences I speak, which cannot lie, nor cannot err, nor
cannot bear false witness; but does bear Witness for God, and cries for Equity,
and Justice, and Righteousness to be executed. See what ye are doing who
profess the Scriptures which were given forth by the Saints in Light, who dwelt
in the Light and in the Life of them. For them who do now witness the same
Light, the same Life, and the same Power which gave forth the Scriptures, which
ye in Words profess, them ye persecute, them ye hale out of your Synagogues and
Markets; them ye beat, stock, and imprison. Now let that of God in your
Consciences, which is just and righteous, and equal, examine and try, whether
ye have any Example or Precedent to exercise this Persecution, which now many
in this Nation suffer under, who are a People harmless and innocent, walking in
Obedience toward God and Man: And though ye account the Way of Truth they walk
in, Heresy; yet therein do they exercise themselves to have always a Conscience
void of Offense toward God and Man, as ye may read the Saints of old did, Acts
xxiv. 14, 15, 16. not wronging any Man, neither giving any just Cause of
Offense; only being obedient to the Commands of the Lord, to declare, as they
are moved by the Holy Ghost; and standing for the Testimony of a good
Conscience, speaking the Truth in Christ, their Consciences bearing them
witness that they lie not: For this do they suffer under you, who in Words
profess the same Thing for which they suffer. Now see if any Age or Generation
did ever persecute as ye do: For ye profess Christ Jesus who reveals the
Father, and persecute them that witness the Revelation of the Father by Christ
Jesus unto them. Ye profess Christ Jesus, who is the Light of the World, that
enlightens every one that comes into the World, and yet persecute them that
bear witness and give Testimony to this Light. Ye profess that the Word is
become Flesh, and yet persecute them that witness it so. Ye profess that
whosoever confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is an
Antichrist, and yet persecute them that do confess him come in the Flesh, and
call them Antichrists and Deceivers. Ye profess that the Kingdom of Christ is
come, and yet persecute them that witness it come. Ye profess Christ Jesus the
Resurrection and the Life, and yet persecute them that witness him to be so. If
ye say, How shall we know that these People who say they witness these Things,
do so, or no? I answer, Turn your Minds to the Light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened you withal, which is one in all; and if ye walk in the Light, ye
shall have the Light of Life, and then ye will know and see what ye have done,
who have persecuted the Lord of Glory (in his People) in whom is Life, and the
Life is the Light of Men. To no other Touchstone shall we turn you, but into
your own Consciences, and there shall ye find the Truth of what we have
declared unto you, and of what we bear Testimony to, according to the Holy
Scriptures. And when the Books of Consciences are opened, and all judged out of
them, then shall ye witness us to be of God, and our Testimony to be true; though
now ye may stop your Ears, and harden your Hearts, while it is called to Day:
But then ye shall know what ye have done, and whom ye have transgressed
against; and then ye will see that no Persecutors in any Age or Generation that
ever went before you, did ever transgress against that Light and Measure of God
made manifest, in such Manner as ye have done. For though Christ and the Apostles
were persecuted in their Times, the Jews, for the most Part of them, did not
know that he was the Christ, when he came, notwithstanding that they had the
Scriptures, which prophesied of him; neither did they believe that he was risen
again, when the Apostles preached his Resurrection. But ye say, Ye believe he
is come; and ye say, Ye believe his Resurrection, and yet ye persecute those
that witness him come in the Flesh, those that are buried with him in Baptism,
those that are conformable to his Death, and know the Power of his
Resurrection, those ye persecute, those ye hale before Magistrates, and suffer
to be beaten in your Synagogues; those ye cause to be whipped and stocked, and
shamefully entreated, and into Prison cast, and kept, as many Jails in this
Nation at this Day testify to your Faces. Therefore honestly consider what ye
are doing, while ye are taking Notice of others Cruelties, lest ye overlook
your own. There is some Difference in many Things between the Popish Religion,
and that which ye call the Protestant; but in this Persecution of yours there
is no Difference: For ye will confess, that the Foundation of your Religion is
grounded upon the Scriptures; and yet now ye are persecuting them that be in
the same Life which they were in who spoke forth the Scriptures; your selves
being the mean while under a Profession of the Words they spoke; and this ye
shall one Day witness. So ye have a Profession and Form, and persecute them
that are in the Possession, Life, and Power. Therefore know assuredly, that ye
must come to Judgment; for he is made manifest to whom all Judgment is
committed. Therefore to the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences, which
searches and tries you, turn your Minds, and stand still, and wait there to
receive the righteous Law, which is according to that of God in the Conscience
which is now rising, and is bearing witness against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men; and they whom ye persecute, are manifest to God, and
that of God in all Consciences shall bear Witness for us, that we are of God:
And this ye shall one Day witness, whether ye will hear, or forbear. Our
Rejoicing is in the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity, and godly
Sincerity, (not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God) we have had our
Conversation in the World, not handling the Word of God deceitfully, but in the
Manifestation of the Truth; commending our selves to every Man's Conscience in
the Sight of God: And if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:
And for the witnessing the holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience,
do we suffer, and are subject for Conscience Sake. This is thank-worthy, if a
Man for Conscience Sake endure Griefs and suffering wrongfully. And in this is
our Joy and Rejoicing, having a good Conscience, that whereas we are evil
spoken of, as Evildoers, they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse our good
Conversation in Christ; which is not only the putting away of the Filth of the
Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. And this we witness made manifest, (eternal Praises to the living
God) and bear Testimony to that which spoke it in the Apostle in Life and
Power. And therefore do we bear witness, and testify against those, who being
got into a Form and Profession of it, do persecute the Life and Power.
Therefore to the eternal Light of Christ Jesus, the Searcher and Trier of all
Hearts, turn your Minds, and see what ye are doing, lest ye overturn your
Foundation and Bottom whereon ye pretend to stand, while ye are professing the
Scriptures, and persecuting the Life, Light, and Power which they were in who
gave them forth. For the Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands, is now
striking at the Feet of the Image, the Profession which is set up, and stands
in the Will of Man. Now is that made manifest unto which all must answer, and
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; that every one may receive the Thing
done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good, or bad.
Knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we persuade Men; but we are made
manifest unto God, and shall be made manifest in all your Consciences, which ye
shall witness.

G. F.

Diverse Times when a Fast was proclaimed, G. Fox wrote on that Subject; and
since commonly some Mischief was then contrived against the Quakers, no Wonder
that he would say, that these Fasts were like to Jezabel's.

Now many of his Friends being at this Time in Prisons and Dungeons, Many
Friends offer to lie in Prison for their Brethren, but are repulsed and
threatened.
several others of them went to the Parliament, and offered to lie in the same
Prisons where their Brethren lay, that so those that were in Prison might not
perish in stinking Dungeons, and their Persecutors bring innocent Blood thereby
upon their own Heads. But this could not be obtained; for those of the
Parliament sometimes threatened these compassionate Men that thus attended them,
with Whipping, if they did not desist. And because the Parliament then sitting
consisted mostly of such who pretending to be more religious than others, were
indeed Persecutors of those who were truly religious, G. Fox could not let this
Hypocrisy go unreproved, G. F. writes to the Parliament reproving their
Hypocrisy.
but writ the following Lines to them.

O Friends, do not cloak and cover your selves; there is a God that knows
your Hearts, and that will uncover you. He sees your Way; Woe be to him that
covers, but not with my Spirit says the Lord. Do ye do contrary to the Law,
and then put it from you? Mercy and true Judgment ye neglect. Look, what was
spoken against such: My Savior spoke against such: I was sick and ye visited
me not; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not
in; I was in Prison, and ye visited me not. But they said, When saw we thee in
Prison, and did not come to thee? Inasmuch as ye did not unto one of these
little Ones, ye did it not unto me. Friends, ye prison them that be in the Life
and Power of Truth, and yet profess to be the Ministers of Christ: But if
Christ had sent you, ye would bring out of Prison, and out of Bondage, and
receive Strangers. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; ye
have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter: Ye have condemned, and
killed the just, and he does not resist you.

G. F.


It was not G. Fox alone who was grieved with the said Hypocrisy, but others of
his Friends also declared zealously against it. A certain Woman came once into
the Parliament with a Pitcher in her Hand, A Prophecy.
which she breaking before them, told them, So should they be broken to Pieces;
which came to pass not long after. And because, when the great Sufferings of G.
Fox's Friends were laid before O. Cromwell, he would not believe it, Friends
Sufferings represented to Cromwell, and neglected.
this gave Occasion to Thomas Aldam and Anthony Pearson to go through all, or
most of the Jails in England, and get Copies of their Friends Commitment under
the Jailor's Hands, to lay the Weight of the said Sufferings upon O. Cromwell,
as was done; but he unwilling to give Order for their Release, Thomas Aldam
took his Cap from off his Head, His ^all foretold.
and tearing it to Pieces, said to him, So shall thy Government be rent from
thee and thy House.

About the Beginning of this Year, Edw. Borough wrote a Letter to O. Cromwell,
and his Council, complaining of, E. Borough writes to Cromwell.
and warning them against Persecution, as being what would draw down God's
Anger against them.

Several Copies of the said Letter were delivered to Oliver, and his Council;
Writes again.
and some Months after, E. Borough wrote the following Letter to him.

To the PROTECTOR.
Friend,
THE Salutation of my Life wishes well unto thee in the Lord, and most
especially that thy precious Soul may be redeemed out of Death to God, and
live, that thou may have a Rest and Habitation in him, when this World is no
more.

Now whereas it is a general Outcry among the Teachers and People of this
Nation, and also is doubted, and has been sometimes objected by thy self, That
the People called Quakers are deluded, and deceived, and in Error, and such
like: And now, if it be possible that thy self and others may be resolved
concerning us; put therefore all thy Objections and Doubting into plain
Positions, or let the wisest of thy Teachers do it for thee; and whatsoever thy
self, or any for thee can object against us, or what thou doubtest of, or
stumblest at, either in respect of our Doctrines or Practice, let the Matter be
stated in plain Words, in Positions or Queries, and if God permit, a sufficient
Answer thou may receive, to remove all conscientious Scruples, and to
confound all subtle Alledgments and Evasions, whereby hereafter forever thou
may be altogether inexcusable of all Doubting or speaking against us, or
suffering Evil to be done or spoken against us upon that Account. And this am I
moved to give forth, and send to thee, that thou may be satisfied, and all
Things tried and made manifest in the Sight of all Men, and that all rash
Judgment, and false Supposition, which lodges in the Hearts of many, may be
confounded and brought to naught; and let it be left off to cry out Deceivers,
and Heresy, etc. and causing any to suffer on Suspicion thereupon, but bring
all Things to Light, and true Judgment, that what is proved to be the Truth,
may be owned, and not persecuted any more; for we are willing to be made
manifest to all Men; and if any Thing be objected against us, which may not be
sufficiently answered and resolved to sober Men, then our Enemies are more
free, and have whereof to glory in against us: But and if all Occasion of
Stumbling be removed by Answers according to the Scriptures, and our
Principles, Practices, and Doctrines thereby vindicated, then let all the
Teachers, and all our Adversaries shut their Mouths from biting at us, and
railing against us, and accusing of us to thee; and let thy Ear be shut from
believing Lies against the innocent; and let none suffer in thy Dominion under
the Cruelty of Men, upon such a Ground. Hereof I shall be glad to receive an
Answer, and to join Issue in this Cause; and in this mean Time, and always, am
a Lover of thy Soul, but a Witness against all Oppression.

E. B.
This was delivered to his Hands at Hampton Court, in the 4th Month, 1658.

I never understood that any Thing of Moment followed upon this: But about two
Months after he wrote another Letter to Cromwell, which was delivered to him at
Hampton Court, And again.
in the 6th Month.

To the PROTECTOR.
Friend,
KNOW that there is a God that does whatsoever he will, all Power is in his
Hand, and he brings to pass the Counsel of his own Heart, and he rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and brings down and sets up; he kills and makes alive;
and he changes Times, and Seasons, and Governments, and brings to naught the
Counsels of Men; for all Power in Earth and in Heaven is in him, and all his
Doings are right, and his Ways are equal; and thou and all Mankind are as Clay
in the Hand of the Potter, he can honor and exalt as he pleases, and he can
mar, and break to Pieces, and dishonor whenever he will; wherefore be humble
and low in Heart before him, for he is the highest Power that subdueth all
Things under his Feet: If he wound, who can heal? And if he kill, there is none
can make alive; and know thou, it is the Lord God Almighty that does this, in
whose Hands are the Issues of Life and Death, and he it is who can break thee
down, and build thee up, who can wound thee and restore thee, and bring thee to
Destruction, and say unto thee return; and to know him that does this, belongs
to thy eternal Peace.

Be thou faithful in what the Lord calls thee to, and thou shall have thy
Reward; and seek his Honor, and he will honor thee; and let thy Mind be to
the Lord in all Things, and feel his Word, and Power, and Presence in thee, to
quench all that which is contrary, and then thou will be blessed in this Life,
and in the Life to come; but if thou continuest in thy Oppression, the Lord
will suddenly smite thee.

By a Friend unto thee in the Lord, E. B.


That the Lord, according to this Prediction, did suddenly smite Cromwell, Time
verified; for he lived but about a Month after the Receipt of the said Letter.
That E. Borough tenderly loved him, appears to me from several Circumstances,
and the ardent Desire he had for his eternal Welfare occasioned this plain
Language to him. G. F. also writes to Cromwell.
G. Fox also once wrote to him, That it was not improbable, that because of his
Wickedness the Lord might once raise the Royalists against him, to be
Instruments of executing his Wrath, as once Cromwell himself had been an
Instrument to their Overthrow. And a very short Time before his Death, Speaks
with him at Hampton Court.
G. Fox went to Hampton Court to speak with him about the Sufferings of his
Friends. With this Intention he met him riding into Hampton-Court-Park; and
before he came at him, (according to his Relation) he perceived a Waft of Death
go forth against him; and coming to him, he looked like a dead Man. So after G.
Fox had laid the Sufferings of his Friends before him, and had warned him,
Oliver bid him come to his House. Whereupon G. F. went to Kingstone, and the
next Day came to Hampton Court again; Is invited to his House, but sees him no
more.
but there he understood that the Protector was sick; and Dr. Harvey told him,
that the Doctors were not willing that he should speak with the Protector. So
he passed away, and never saw Oliver Cromwell any more, who since the Death of
his Daughter, the Lady Claypole, The Protector taken ill.
had been distempered, and troubled with a malignant Humor in his Foot, which
when his Physicians endeavored to disperse, they drove upward (as was to his
Heart; and being seized with a violent Fever, he grew weaker and weaker; yet
his Preachers endeavored to conceal the Danger he was in; and it is reported
that Dr. Goodwin, one of his Chaplains, in a Prayer during the Time of his
Sickness, made use of this Expression, Lord, we beg not for his Recovery, for
that thou have already granted, Vain Presumption of one of his Chaplains.
and assured us of; but for his speedy Recovery. Whilst the Protector was sick,
E. Borough writ the following Letter to his Wife and Children.

Friends,
REmember, E. Burrough's Letter to Cromwell's Wife and Children.
that by the Lord you were raised from a low State, and when he will, he can
abase you, and bring you down; he gave you the Palace of Princes, and threw out
them before you.

O! remember this, every one of you, and come to the Witness of God in you, and
be humble, and meek, and lowly, and let the Lord's Fear be in your Hearts, and
be of a tender Spirit, having your Minds exercised in Purity, in Holiness, and
in Righteousness; and exalt not your selves, nor be lifted up in your Hearts,
in the Pride and Vainglories, and Honors of this World, lest the Lord cast you
down, and make your Name and Posterity a Reproach, as he has done many before
you; and if you walk in the same Steps, and do the same Things, and become
guilty of the same Abominations, and suffer the Children and Servants of the
Lord to be persecuted (as many are at this Day, some until Death) shall the
Lord spare you? Nay, he will cause you to feel his Hand of Judgment, and bring
you down with Sorrow, and he will vex you in his Wrath, and smite you with his
Rod more and more, till you learn his Fear, and depart from all your
Iniquities; and the Lord will deface your Glory, and pull down your Crown; and
he will make you know, that he is Lord, that does whatsoever he will.

Wherefore humble your selves under the Hand of God, and search your own
Hearts, and cast out the Abominations that vex the Spirit of the Lord; and
suffer not the People of the Lord's precious Flock to be devoured, and made a
Prey to the Wicked; for because of this, the Rod of Affliction comes upon you,
and may suddenly break you to Pieces: But mind the Seed of God, in you, which
is oppressed, and wait to know the Power of the Lord, which will redeem you out
of Sin and Death, and reconcile you to God, and bring you into Fellowship with
himself, to enjoy Peace and Rest for your Souls, that you may be made Heirs of
the Inheritance of an endless Life; and this would make you truly honorable,
and will be more Satisfaction to you, and Joy, and Content, and true Rejoicing,
than all worldly Crowns and Worldly Glories, which will waste and consume away,
and leave you miserable: And remember that you are now warned from the Lord
God, by whom I am moved to write this unto you, in dear and tender Love to you
all; and one Day you shall witness it.

And as concerning the Quakers, so called, who are accounted as vile in the
Sight of Men, and are cast out of all Power and Place in the Nation, being
despised of all, and also are reproached, persecuted, and imprisoned, and all
Manner of Evil and Injustice unrighteously done, and spoken against them, by
wicked and corrupt Men in Authority; yet are they the Children and Servants of
the living God, and greatly beloved of him, and are as dear to him as the Apple
of his Eye, and his Power and Presence is with them; and the Time is at Hand,
that the Lord will make their Persecutors fall, and their Enemies bow and
tremble, though now they suffer unjustly, and are trodden down, as not deserving
a Place on the Earth; yet it is for Righteousness-sake, and because they show
forth the Image of the Father, and not for Evil-doing: And will not their
Sufferings lie upon you? For many Hundreds have suffered cruel, and great
Things, and some the Loss of Life (though not by, yet in the Name of the
Protector;) and about an Hundred at this present Day lie in Holes, and
Dungeons, and Prisons, up and down the Nation; and some at this Time are sick
nigh unto to Death, whose Sufferings cry for Vengeance, and the Lord hears
the Cry: Wherefore save your selves, and let the Innocent be delivered, and the
cruel Bonds of Oppression broken, and the Exercise of a pure Conscience go
free, without Persecution; and then the Lord will turn away his Anger, and
cease to smite you with his Rod, which has been upon you; and he will give you
Peace, and make you blessed, if you come to be led by his Spirit into all
Truth. And though these innocent Lambs of Christ suffer thus under this present
Power, yet are they not Enemies to you, but are Friends to your Persons and
Families, and pity you, and love you, and desire well for you in the Lord, that
you may repent, and be healed, and even that your Hearts may be opened, to
receive Refreshments to your Souls, and that you may be established in
Righteousness and Truth over all your Enemies, and may not be confounded, nor
your Posterity brought into Reproach, which is hastening upon you: And though our
Love be despised, and we accounted hateful in your Sight, and looked upon with
Derision, yet we bear all Things in Patience, truly desiring your Returning and
Repentance, and not your Destruction: But if these doleful Sufferings of the
Lord's poor Lambs be continued by this present Power, it will destroy you, and
undo you, and break you, and confound you; and the Lord will not cease to smite
you with his Rod of sharp Rebukes; and he will make you know, his People's
Cause shall not be unpunished. Oh, did you but know how Hundreds have, and do
suffer! How the Bodies of some have been tortured by Stocks, and cruel
Whippings! and how some lie sick in stinking Holes and Dungeons on the Ground,
or a little Straw at best; Ten, or often more, in a Prison together, and
sometimes their own Friends not suffered to come to visit them with
Necessaries! Oh, did but your Eyes behold, or your Hearts perceive the
Greatness of the Cruelty, which some of the Lord's dear Servants, and your
faithful Friends undergo, it would make your Hearts ache, and your Spirits to
tremble! And all this is done in the Name, and under the Authority of
(Protector;) therefore how should the Lord but lay it to your Charge, and
afflict him and his Family? He will make you know there is a God that can do
whatsoever he will, and that Life and Death are in his Hands, and all Creatures
are as Clay in the Hands of the Potter; and he rules in the Kingdoms of Men,
and puts down one, and sets up another, according to his Pleasure: But if
the Love of God be withholden from you, it is because of Disobedience to him,
and your Transgression. Wherefore be obedient to him, and love his Ways and
Judgments, that he may make you more happy with a Crown immortal, that never
fades away. And remember once more the Lord has warned you, by a Friend unto
you in the Lord.

Written the 1st Day of September, 1658. E. Buroughs.


Cromwell was snatched away by Death at unawares; however the Day before his
Decease, this Letter was delivered to his Relations. It was not but in the last
Period of his Life that he named his Son Richard to be his Successor. And when
Death looked in his Face, Cromwell names his Son Richard his Successor.
Remorse did not stay behind; for, according to what Ludlow relates, he seemed
above all, concerned for the Reproaches (he said) Men would cast upon his Name,
in trampling on his Ashes when dead. In this Temper of Mind he departed this
Life about two in the Afternoon, And dies.
on the 3d of September, at the Age of about Fifty five Years. The News of his
Death being brought to those who were met together to pray for him, one Sterry
stood up, and said, This is good News; because cause if he was of great Use to
the People of God when he was amongst us, now he will be much more so, being
ascended to Heaven, there to intercede for us. O horrid Flattery! Horrid
Flattery of one Sterry.
Thus I call it, though he had been the greatest Saint on Earth, which he came
much short of, though he was once endued with some eminent Virtues. His dying Day
was remarkable by a most grievous Tempest, not only in England, but also in the
low Countries, where Trees were torn out of the Ground by the Violence of the
Wind, and many Ships foundered. He was, says Edward Earl of Clarendon, one of
those Persons whom even his Enemies could not vilify, Earl of Clarendon's
Saying of Cromwell.
without praising him. And I have heard impartial Men say, that in the
Beginning of his Achievements, he was an excellent Man; but being come to a
high Station, he soon lost that Zeal for the public Welfare, by which at first
he seemed to be animated.

The Body of the Deceased was laid in Somerset House, in an Apartment
enlightened only with Wax Tapers, the Corpse being richly adorned.

After his Death, His eldest Son Richard proclaimed.
Richard, eldest Son to Oliver, was proclaimed Protector of the Commonwealth;
to whom E. Buroughs wrote a Letter, superscribed to Richard Cromwell, chosen to
be Protector and chief Magistrate, etc. wherein he gave some Account of the
most cruel Sufferings of his Friends; and speaking of the Rulers, he says thus:

As for Magistracy, it was ordained of God to be a Dread, and Terror, and Limit
to Evildoers, and to be a Defense and Praise to all that do well; to condemn
the guilty, and to justify the guiltless; but the Exercise thereof at this Day
in these Nations is degenerated, and some that are in Authority are greatly
corrupted, and regard not the just and pure Law of God, to judge only thereby;
but oppress the Poor by Injustice, and subvert the good Laws of God and Men to
a wrong End and Use, abusing Authority, and turning the Sword against the Just,
whereby true Judgment is turned backward, and the Innocent made unjustly to
suffer for Righteousness-sake, through the Corruption of Men in Authority; and
did thou but know what we know in this Particular, it would pierce thy Heart:
Why? It is frequent among some of the Judges and Magistrates, to commit a Man
to Prison, and impose some great Fine upon him, and to cast him into a Dungeon,
or Hole, among Thieves and Murderers, for a long Season, for no other Offense,
or Breach of any Law, but because he cannot put off his Hat to them, and
respect their Persons, by the Hat, or bowing the Knee: And many others that
fear God, and for Conscience Sake cannot swear upon a Book by kissing it, and
laying Hand upon it, because Christ says, Swear not at all; though they deny not
to speak and do the Truth in all Things, as in the Presence of God and all Men:
And many others, that because they are moved to cry against Sin, and declare
against the Iniquities of the Times in Teachers, Rulers and People, that highly
abound, perhaps in a Market, or Steeple-house, or Highway, or other Places, as
they are moved of God: And many others, because for Conscience Sake they cannot
pay Tithes, nor give Money and Wages to maintain a Priest, or false Teacher,
that they receive no Profit by: or to maintain a Steeple-house, where the World
worships in vain Traditions, and not in the Spirit and Power of God. And many
have been taken out of peaceable Meetings, where they were waiting upon the
Lord; and some out of their Inns and Friend's Houses; and many have been taken
on the Way, traveling about their lawful Occasions; and some from their
Callings and Labors; and for these Causes, through the Envy of wicked Men, and
without any just Conviction of the Breach of any Law, or any lawful Trial or
Examination, have Hundreds of just Men, being wholly innocent, been sent to
Prison, and lain many Months, and some for Years, or whipped, or put in the
Stocks, and grievously abused by cruel Executioners of wicked Men's Envy and
Injustice; and upon such Grounds only, and for such Causes mentioned, and
without the Transgression of any just Law, have and do at this Day many
Hundreds of faithful Subjects suffer hard and cruel Things, long and sore
Imprisonment, and cruel and sharp Whipping, and Stocking, and unjust Banishment
out of Towns and Cities; yea, Friend, it is hard to be expressed, and large to
be declared, how many of the Lord's Servants do, and have suffered great
Injustice in these Nations, through the Abuse of good Government, and
Degeneration of Magistracy, from its perfect State and Place, whereunto it was
ordained of God in the Beginning.

This Remonstration, how powerful and large soever, had not it due Effect; but
Persecution continued, without being stopped by him* For the Churchmen fawned
upon him, calling him not only their Joshua, but the Preachers of Suffolk said
in their Address to him, Suffolk Preachers Address to Richard.
Though our Sun is gone down, yet no Night ensued.

About this Time was given forth a Paper, called, The Church-Faith; and G. Fox
having got a Copy of it before it was published, G. F. Answers a Paper called
Church-Faith.
writ an Answer to it; and when the Book of the Church-Faith appeared, his
Answer was also in Print. This so incensed some of the Parliament Men, that one
of them told G. Fox, They must have him to Smithfield. To which he answered,
That he was over their Fires, and feared them not: And farther asked, Whether
all People had been without a Faith these sixteen Hundred Years, that now the
Priest must make them one? And since Christ Jesus was the Author of the
Apostle's Faith, and of the Church's Faith in the primitive Times, and of the
Martyrs Faith, should not all People look unto him to be the Author and
Finisher of their Faith, and not unto the Priests? Nothing material was
answered to this; for the Priests called G. Fox's Friends, House-Creepers,
because they met together in Houses, and would not maintain the Priests
Temples. One Major Wiggan, that was present when G. Fox discoursed with the
Parliament Man, said, Christ had taken away the Guilt of Sin, but had left the
Power of Sin remaining in us. But G. Fox told him, that this was strange
Doctrine; for Christ came to destroy the Devil and all his Works, and the Power
of Sin, Confutes Major Wiggan.
and so to cleanse Men from Sin.

Now there was great Persecution, both by Imprisonment, and breaking up of
Meetings; and many died in Prisons: For the Priests speaking Evil of the
Quakers, it did kindle the Insolency of the Rabble not a little, so that they
did not stick to throw Squibs into the Meetings, to cast rotten Eggs on those
that were met, to beat on Drums and Kettles, and so to make a hideous Noise,
and to abuse People most grievously with Blows and violent Pushes.

One Day there being a Meeting appointed near London, they beat and abused
about eighty Persons that came out of the City to meet there, tearing their
Coats and Cloaks from off their Backs, and throwing them into Ditches and
Ponds. The next First Day of the Week after this, G. Fox, though at that Time
very weak, went thither, G. F. preaches and shows rude People the Fruits of
their Preachers Doctrine.
and preaching with the Bible in his Hand, he showed the rude People their, and
their Teachers Fruits, and how disagreeable these mad Actions were to the
Doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures. Many of his imprisoned Friends were
now brought up to London to be tried by the Committee; where Henry Vane, being
Chairman, H. Vane, all first refuses Friends Admittance, without putting off
their Hats, till prevailed on by others.
would not suffer them to come in, except they would put off their Hats. But
since many of them had been imprisoned upon Contempts, as the not putting off
Hats before Magistrates was called, others signified, that it must not be
expected that now they should comply; and so through the Mediation of some that
persuaded Vane, they were at length admitted; where they so well defended their
Cause, that several were set at Liberty.

Now Sufferings growing (...), G. Fox, to encourage his Friends, writ the
following Lines to them.

My dear Friends every where scattered abroad, An encouraging Letter of G. F.
in Prison, or out of Prison; fear not, because of the Reports of Sufferings;
let not the evil Spies of the good Land make you afraid; it they tell you the
Walls are high, and that there be Anakims in the Land: For at the blowing of
the Rams-horns did the Walls of Jerico fall down; and they that brought the
evil Report, perished in the Wilderness. But dwell ye in the Faith, Patience,
and Hope, having the Word of Life to keep you, which is beyond the Law; and
having the Oath of God, his Covenant, Christ Jesus, which divides the Waters
asunder, and makes them to run all on Heaps; in that stand, and ye will see all
Things work together for Good, to them that love God; and in that triumph when
Sufferings come, whatever they be: Your Faith, your Shield, your Helmet, your
Armor you have on; ye are ready to skip over a Mountain, or a Wall, or an
Hill, and to walk through the deep Waters, though they be Heaps upon Heaps: For the
evil Spies of the good Land may preach up Hardness, but Caleb, which signifies
an Heart, and Joshua, a Savior, triumph over all.

G. F.


There was at that Time great Discord among those that were at the Helm of
Government; and G. Fox relates, that he did then foresee the King's coming in
again; He foresees the Restoration.
and that therefore when some forward Spirits, who frequented the Meetings of
his Friends, would have bought Somerset House to keep Meetings in, he dissuaded
them from it. Some inclined to buy Somerset House to meet in.
There came also a Woman to him, who having (as she said,) had a Revelation
concerning the restoring of King Charles, three Years before he came in, said,
she must go to him to declare it: But G. Fox advised her to keep this
Revelation to her self, since if she went on such a Message, it would have been
counted Treason.

How the Corpse of Oliver Cromwell was laid in Somerset House to be seen, has
been said already; but afterward an Image of him lying there in State, was
accompanied with Trumpeters, who sounded over the said Image. This Vanity so
grieved G. Fox, that he writ the following Lines to the Authors thereof.

Oh Friends, what are ye doing! and what mean you to sound before an Image!
Will not all sober People think ye are like mad People? Oh, how am I grieved
with your Abominations! Oh, how am I wearied! My Soul is wearied with you,
says the Lord, Will I not be avenged of you, think ye, for your Abominations?
Oh, how have ye plucked down, and set up! Oh, how are your Hearts made whole,
and not rent! And how are ye turned to Fooleries! Which Things in Times past ye
stood over: Therefore how have ye left my Dread, says the Lord! Oh, therefore
fear, and repent, lest the Snare and the Pit take you all. The great Day of the
Lord is come upon all your Abominations, and the swift Hand of the Lord is
turned against them all. The sober People in the Nation stand amazed at your
Doings, and are ashamed, as if you would bring in Popery.

G. F.


Sometime after this, the Funeral of O. Cromwell was solemnized with very great
Pomp, not at all agreeable to that Condition he once was in; for the Time was,
when he would have abhorred such an Idolatrous Honor as was now paid to his
Image. On the Day of this pompous Funeral, which was the 23d of November, it
happened that Edward Borough came riding from Kingston into London, E.
Borough meets Oliver's Funeral Pomp. Which sorely grieves him, and occasi^ns
his giving forth a Testimony in Print.
not knowing any Thing of what was done there. As he entered at Charing Cross,
he beheld a great Multitude of People thronging exceedingly, the Streets being
filled as far as he could see, and Abundance gazing at the Windows, and upon
the Balconies, and House-tops. There were also Guards of Horse and Foot, that
stopped his Horse, and it was told him, that he might not pass that Way. Yet he
did not know what was the Matter; but at length, he perceived that Cromwell's
Image, richly adorned, was to be carried that Way toward Westminster. The
Consideration of this, was like an Arrow which pierced his Breast: And because
of this Idolatry, he felt such a Fire kindled in him, that he was, as it were,
filled with the Indignation (...) the Lord, whose Fury ran through him, to cry,
Plagues, Plagues, and Vengeance against the Authors of this Abomination. Nay,
so ardent was his Zeal, that if he had been moved to it, and it had been
possible to have done it, he could, (not at all minding his own Life) have
ridden through the Guards, and Multitude, to have founded the Judgments of God
against the Idolaters. And considering that all this sinful Idolatry was about
the Funeral of Oliver Cromwell: Alas for him, (said Borough with himself) who
was once a great Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, to break down many
idolatrous Images! Did not the Lord once stir up his Heart against all such
Things? And did not once his Children, Officers, Soldiers, and Army, pull down
all the Images and Crosses, and all suchlike Popish Stuff, wherever they met
with it? What grievous and abominable Work is this? Have they now made a costly
Image of him? And are such as were once his Soldiers now guarding it, and
watching over it, and his Children and Officers following it, and Multitudes of
the Inhabitants of London wandering and gazing after an Image of him? This is
sad, and great Pity: What a Change is this in so short (...) Time?

This zealous Testimony E. Buroughs gave out in Print, whereby he has erected
to himself a more lasting Monument, than by the Erecting of a Statue was made
to his quondam Friend, O. Cromwell. Now since the Persecution of E. Burrough's
Friends (notwithstanding what he had written to Richard Cromwell,) did not
cease, and that all Exhortations and Warnings were rejected, E. Borough, in
the Month December, E Borough writes to Richard the Protector and his Council.
wrote the following Lines to Richard and his Council.

To the Protector, and his Council.
THE Lord God will shortly make you know that we are his People; A Prophetic
Letter.
though we be accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter, yet our King of Righteousness
will break you to Pieces, if you harden your Hearts, and repent not. And tho
that Love will not draw thee, neither the gentle Leadings of our God have any
Place in you, yet Judgments shall awaken you, and his heavy Hand of Indignation
shall lie upon your Consciences, and you will be scattered and distracted to
Pieces.

E. Borough.


How soon this Prediction was fulfilled, Richard resigns.
we shall see in the next Year; for it was but a few Months after the
Delivering of this Letter, when Richard laid down the Government. In the mean
while we will take again a View of the Persecution in New England.
New-England's Persecution.
There was, as has been said already, Fining.
a Fine settled of Five Shillings a Week to be paid for not coming to Church,
as it was called. And thus from Time to Time, Cruelty.
Occasion was found to use Cruelty against the Inhabitants, tho none of those
called Quakers ca^^ (...) abroad. William Shattock a Shoemaker at Boston, being
on a First Day of the Week, found in his House, instead of coming to the
public Worship, was haled to the House of Correction, where, at his first
Entrance, he was cruelly whipped, and then kept to Work, whilst his Wife and
innocent Children were in Want, because of his Absence. In the mean Time, the
Deputy Governor Richard Bellingham did not stick to say to William's Wife, that
since he was poor, and could not pay five Shillings a Week for not coming to
Church, they would continue him in Prison. Thus was verified that Saying of
Solomon, Cruel are the Mercies of the Wicked. Bellingham also endeavored to
persuade this Woman, that what her Husband had done, was to be rid of her, and
therefore advised her to disown him. Now these Persecutors began to have
abundance of Business; and taking a^ay of Goods, and cruel Whippings became
almost daily Work, which was performed without Regard of Age or Sex; all which
to relate would exceed my Limits.

Two women, Barbarous Usage of two Women.
named Sarah Gibbons, and Dorothy Waugh, being come to Boston, and having in
the public Meeting Place, after the Lecture was ended, spoken a few Words,
were brought to the House of Correction, and three Days before their being
whipped, and three Days after, were kept from Victuals, though they had offered to
pay for them. And when Sarah afterward asked the Governor John Endicot,
Whether this was Justice or Equity? adding, That by this all might see that God
was with them, that they were preserved without Food; and if they perished,
their Blood would fall heavy on those that were the Occasion thereof. He
answered, That he mattered it not.

Not long after, A Girl whipped and a Woman who prays for her Presecutors.
Hored Gardner, an Inhabitant of Newport in Rhode Island, came with her sucking
Babe, and a Girl to carry it to Weymouth; from whence, for being a Quaker, she
was hurried to Boston, where both she, and the Girl were whipped with a
threefold knotted Whip. After whipping, the Woman kneeled down, and prayed the
Lord to forgive those Persecutors: Which so reached a Woman that stood by, that
she said, Surely she could not have done this, if it had not been by the Spirit
of the Lord.

But when should I have done, if I would describe all the Whippings inflicted
on the Quakers so called, in those Parts! For now a Law was made, which
furnished continual Work to the Persecutors there. The Contents thereof were,
Cruel Laws.
That whosoever of the Inhabitants should directly or indirectly cause any of
the Quakers to come into that Jurisdiction, he should forfeit an Hundred Pounds
to the Country, and be committed to Prison, there to remain till the Penalty
should be satisfied. And whosoever should entertain them, knowing them to be
so, should forfeit forty Shillings to the Country for every Hour's entertaining
or Concealment, and be committed to Prison till the Forfeiture should be fully
paid and satisfied. And farther, that all and every of those People that should
arise among them there, should be dealt withal, and suffer the like Punishment
as the Laws provided for those that came in, Viz. That for the first Offense,
if a Male, one of his Ears should be cut off, and be kept at Work in the House
of Correction, till he should be sent away on his own Charge. For the second,
the other Ear, and be kept in the House of Correction as aforesaid. If a Woman,
then to be severely whipped, and kept as aforesaid, as the Male for the first;
and for the second Offense to be dealt withal as the first. And for the third,
He or she should have their Tongues bored through with an hot Iron, and be kept
in the House of Correction, close at Work, till they be sent away on their own
Charge.

In the latter Part of the Fifth Month, it came to pass, that William Brend and
William Leddra, Two Men have a Conference with a Priest.
having been at Salem, came to Newbury, where at the House of one Robert Adams
they had a Conference with the Priest, in the Presence of Captain Gerish, who
had promised that they should not suffer: But after the Conference was ended,
the Captain would not let them go, but on Promise presently to depart the Town.
Which being loath to comply with, as they were on their Way, they were sent for
back, and Captain Gerish riding after them, commanded them to return; which
they refusing, he compelled them thereunto, and sent them with a Constable to
Salem; where being brought before the Magistrates, they were asked, Whether
they were Quakers? To which they answered, That they were such that were in
Scorn called so. Next it was objected to them, That they maintained dangerous
Errors. They asking what these were, it was told them, That they not only
denied that Christ at Jerusalem had suffered on the Cross, but also that they
denied the Holy Scriptures. They boldly contradicted this, and said, They owned
no other Jesus but he that had suffered Death at Jerusalem, and that they also
owned the Scriptures.

Now although nothing could be objected against this, And are sent to the House
of Correction, notwithstanding Captain Gerish's Promise to the contrary.
Cruelly used there.
yet they were carried to the House of Correction, as such who, according to
the Law made at Boston, might not come into those Parts. Some Days after, they
were carried to Boston, where, in the next Month they were brought into the
House of Correction, to work there. But they unwilling to submit thereto, the
Jailor, who sought his Profit from the Work of his Prisoners, would not give
them Victuals, though they offered to pay for them. But he told them, It was not
their Money, but their Labor he desired. Thus he kept them five Days without
Food, and then with a three-corded Whip gave them twenty Blows. An Hour after,
he told them, they might go out, if they would pay the Marshal that was to lead
them out if the Country. They judging it very unreasonable to pay Money for
being banished, refused this; but yet said, That if the Prison-door was set
open, they would go away. The next Day the Jailor came to W. Brend, a Man in
Years, Barbarous Cruelties.
and put him in Irons, Neck and Heels so close together, that there was no more
Room left between each, than for the Lock that fastened them. Thus he kept them
from Five in the Morning, till after Nine at Night, being the Space of sixteen
Hours. The next Morning he brought them to the Mill to work, but Brend
refusing, the Jailor took a pitched Rope about an ^nch thick, and gave him
twenty Blows over the Back and Arms, with as much Force as he could, so that
the Rope untwisted; and then going away, he came again with another Rope that
was thicker and stronger, and told Brend, that he would cause him to bow to the
Law of the Country, and make him work. Brend judged this not only unreasonable
in the highest Degree, since he had committed no Evil; but he was also
altogether unable to work; for he wanted Strength for want of Food, having been
kept five Days without eating, and whipped also, and now thus unmercifully beaten
with a Rope. But this inhuman Jailor relented not, but began to beat anew with
his pitched Rope, on this bruised Body, and foaming at his Mouth like a
Madman, with Violence laid fourscore and seventeen Blows more on him, as other
Prisoners who beheld it with Compassion, have told; and if his Strength, and
his Rope had not failed him, he would have laid on more; he threatened also to
give him the next Morning as many Blows more. But a higher Power, who sets
Limits even to the raging Sea, and has said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no
farther, also limited this butcherly Fellow, who was yet impudently stout
enough to say his Morning-prayer. To what a most terrible Condition these Blows
brought the Body of Brend, (who because of the great Heat of the Weather, had
nothing but a Serge Cassock upon his Shirt) may easily be conceived: His Back
and Arms were bruised and black, and the Blood hanging as in Bags under his
Arms; and so into one was his Flesh beaten, that the Sign of a particular blow
could not be seen; for all was become as a Jelly. His Body being thus cruelly
tortured, he lay down upon the Boards, so extremely weakened, that the natural
Parts decaying, and Strength quite failing, his Body turned cold: There seemed
as it were a Struggle between Life and Death, his Senses were stopped; and he
had for some Time neither Seeing, Feeling, nor Hearing: Till at length a divine
Power prevailing, Life broke through Death, and the Breath of the Lord was
breathed into his Nostrils. Now the Noise of this Cruelty spread among the
People in the Town, and caused such a Cry, that the Governor sent his Surgeon
to the Prison to see what might be done: But the Surgeon found the Body of
Brend in such a deplorable Condition, that, as one without Hopes, he said, His
Flesh would rot off his Bones, ere the bruised Parts could be brought to
digest. This so exasperated the People, The Magistrates seem to relent in their
Cruelty.
that the Rulers to prevent a Tumult, set up a Paper on their Meeting House
Door, and up and down the Streets, as it were, to show their Dislike of this
abominable, and most barbarous Cruelty; and said, the Jailer should be dealt
withal the next Court. But this Paper was soon taken down again upon the
Instigation of the High Priest John Norton, But are confirmed therein by their
Priests.
(who having from the Beginning been a fierce Promoter of the Persecution,) now
did not stick to say, W. Brend endeavored to beat our Gospel-Ordinance black
and blue; if he then be beaten black and blue, it is but just upon him; and I
will appear in his Behalf that did so. It is therefore not much to be wondered
at, that these precise and bigoted Rulers, who would be looked upon to be
eminent for Piety, were so cruel in persecuting, since their chief Teacher thus
wickedly encouraged them to it. In the mean while, it pleased God, even
miraculously to heal W. Brend, and to keep him alive: But as if the Hearts of
these Persecutors were more hardened thereby, to show themselves obedient
Followers of their Teacher, they made an Order, that the Jailor, if the Quakers
that were in his Custody refused to work, should whip them twice a Week, the
first Time with Ten Lashes, the next Time with fifteen, and so at each Time
with three more, till they would work. This was performed on Four Persons, two
of which were William Leddra and John Rous, who may be mentioned hereafter. And
to keep the passionate Jailor within due Bonds, forsooth, it was ordered that
each Time he should warn two Constables to see the Execution. But how little
Moderation was truly meant, and that this was more like a Jest, may appear in
that the Jailor the first Time laid fifteen Lashes a piece on the said Persons,
and so added five Stripes to the first Number of ten.

It happened about this Time that some of the People called Quakers that lived
there, being had before the Magistrates, it was demanded by one of them, How
they might know a Quaker? to which Simon Broadstreet, one of the Magistrates,
answered, Thou art one, for coming in with thy Hat on. Which made the other
reply, It was a horrible Thing to make such cruel Laws, to whip and cut off
Ears, and bore through the Tongue for not putting off the Hat: Then one of the
Bench said, That the Quakers held forth Blasphemies at their Meetings. To which
one of the others desired, To make such a Thing appear, if it were so; that
they might be convinced: And farther, that they should do well to send some to
their Meetings, that they might hear, and give Account of what was done and
spoken there; and not conclude of a Thing they knew not. But, said Major
General Denison, If ye meet together and say any Thing, we may conclude that ye
speak Blasphemy. A very strange Syllogism indeed. No better to prove
Persecution lawful was the Argument of Charles Chansey, chief Teacher at the
University, who in a Sermon at Boston, argued thus; Suppose you should catch
six Wolves in a Trap, and ye cannot prove that they killed either Sheep or
Lambs; and now ye have them, they will neither bark nor bite; yet they have the
plain Marks of Wolves, and therefore ye knock them down. A base Expression thus
to compare a Man to a Beast; for God said in plain Terms to Noah, Whosoever
sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. But these Persecutors
thought there was Stress enough in it, to call the Quakers Wolves; and to make
one pass for a Quaker, they counted it a sufficient Proof, when they saw he did
not put off his Hat to Men: Knock him down, it is a Wolf: And if the Hat was not
found fault with, something else was thought on; for at Salem twelve Persons
were fined forty Pounds nineteen Shillings for not coming to Church: Several
fined.
And of others much Money was extorted, because their Wives absented themselves
from the public Worship. William Marston of Hampton was fined Ten Pounds for
two Books found in his House, viz. John Lilburn's Resurrection, and W.
Duesbury's Mighty Day of the Lord. Thus these People did whatever they would,
without any Regard to the Laws in Old England: And when once some Prisoners
appealed to it, the Governor John Endicot, and his Deputy Bellingham cried, No
Appeal to England! No Appeal to England! And they seemed to fear nothing for
what they did to the Quakers; according to what Major General Denison said in
open Court; This Year you will go and complain to the Parliament; the next Year
they will send some to see how Things go; and in the third Year the Government
will be changed. Now they not at all caring for Old England, denied also the
Prisoners their Request of being tried according to the Laws of that Realm, by
a Jury. And the Rulers dealing thus arbitrarily, Trial by a Jury refused.
the Jailor of the House of Correction did the like; for when some of his
Prisoners showed themselves not unwilling to work, provided that their Families
should have something of the Gain, he would not allow that, unless they paid
him Eight Pence from every Twelve Pence Gain: And when they refused this, the
Whipping-post was his Refuge.

But to go on; In the foregoing Year, Mention was made of John Copeland and
Christopher Holder: J. Copeland and C. Holder taken up.
These coming in the Sixth Month to Dedham, lodged there one Night; but the
next Day were taken up by a Constable, and carried to Boston, where being
brought before the Governor, he said in a Rage, Ye shall be sure to have your
Ears cut off. Not long after, John Rouse came again to Boston; Also J. Rouse.
but was shortly after taken, and committed to Prison. On the Seventeenth of
September, he with Holder and Copeland were brought before the Magistrates in
the Court, All three brought before the Magistrates in Boston, and what passed
there.
where the Deputy Governor told them, That they in Contempt of the Magistrates
and Ministers being come there again to seduce the People, might know that
whatever befell them, whether the Loss of their Ears, or of their Lives, their
Blood would be upon their own Heads. They denying this, and saying, That the
Lord had sent them thither, the Governor Endicot said, You are greater Enemies
to us, than those that come openly; since under Pretense of Peace, you come to
poison the People. Being asked for Proof that the Lord had sent them, they
replied, That it was some Kind of Proof the Lord had sent them; because they
met with such an Entertainment as Christ had told his Disciples, would be meet
to them, for his Namesake, viz. Whipping, etc. To this, Major General Denison
said, Then when Malefactors are whipped, they suffer for Christ's Sake. Then John
Rouse, whose Father was a Lieutenant Colonel in Barbados, said, If we were
Evildoers, the Judgments of God would be heavier upon us than that which we
suffer by you. To which Major Denison replied, Mr. Rouse, (for so I may call
you, having heard your Father is a Gentleman) what Judgment of God do you look
for greater than is upon you, to be driven from your Father's House, and to run
about here as a Vagabond, with a Company of Deceivers, except you look for a
Halter? To this Rouse said, I was not driven from my Father's House, but in
Obedience to the Lord I left it; and when the Lord shall have cleared me of
this Land, I shall return to it again. Then Endicot called to the Secretary to
read the Law; who thereupon read this Clause in it, That if any that had
suffered the Law, should presume to return again, they should have one of their
Ears cut off. Some more Words were spoken, and among the rest Endicot said, The
Quakers have nothing to prove their Commission by, but the Spirit within them,
and that is the Devil. And when one of the Prisoners said, We have seen some of
your Laws, that have many Scriptures in the Margent; but what Example have you
in Scripture for cutting off Ears? Endicot asked, What Scripture is there for
hanging? To which Denison said scoffing, Yes, they would be crucified. Then
Endicot called the three Prisoners by Name, Sentenced to have their right Ears
cut off.
and said in great Passion: It is the Sentence of the Court, that you three
have each of you his right Ear cut off by the Hangman. Then they were carried
to the Prison; and on the 16th of September, the Marshal's Deputy came thither,
letting as many come in as he thought meet; and when the Doors were made fast,
the said Marshal read the following Order.

TO the Marshal General or to his Deputy: You are to take with you the
Executioner, and to repair to the House of Correction, and there see him cut
off the right Ears of John Copeland, Christopher Holder, and John Rouse,
Quakers, in Execution of the Sentence of the Court of Assistants, for the
Breach of the Law, entitled Quakers.

Edward Rawson, Secretary.

Then the Prisoners were brought into another Room; where John Rouse, said to
the Marshal, We have appealed to the chief Magistrate of England: To which he
answered, He had nothing to do with that. Holder said, Such Execution as this
should be done publicly, and not in private; for this was contrary to the Law
of England. But Captain Oliver returned, We do it in private, to keep you from
tattling. Then the Executioner took Holder, The Sentence executed in private.
and when he had turned aside his Hair, and was going to cut off his Ear, the
Marshal turned his Back on him; which made Rouse say, Turn about and see it;
for so was his Order. The Marshal then, though filled with Fear, turned, and
said, Yes, yes, let us look on it. Rouse, who was more undaunted than his
Persecutor, suffered the like, as well as the Third, and they said, Those that
do it ignorantly, we desire from our Hearts the Lord to forgive them; but for
them that do it maliciously, let our Blood be upon their Heads; and such shall
know in the Day of Account, that every Drop of our Blood shall be as heavy upon
them as a Millstone. And they are afterward whipped again.
Afterward these Persons were whipped again; but this Practice becoming so
common in New England, as if it was but Play, I will not detain my Reader with it.

Persecution being now come to the Cutting off of Ears, Persecution advances.
did not stop there, but went higher, and rested not before it came to the
taking away of Lives. But to compass that, proved very difficult; for there
were many honest People who abhorred such a Cruelty. J. Norton, and other
Priests petition for a Law to banish Quakers on Pain of Death.
Yet John Norton, and the other Priests, petitioned the Magistrates to cause
the Court to make some Law to banish the Quakers upon Pain of Death. This gave
Encouragement to the Magistrates, for since the Churchmen pushed on so wicked a
Business, no Scruple was made to go on with this bloody Work: And the Court of
Magistrates voted it to be put in Execution by a Country-Court, which three
Magistrates made up, the Majority of which might hang at Pleasure, without
Trial by a Jury; a Thing not heard of in Old England: But it served the Purpose
of Norton and his Fellow-Preachers. The Court where this Law was made,
consisted of twenty five Persons; and when it was put to the Vote, it was
carried in the Affirmative, That Law put to the Vote, and carried by one Voice
only.
the Speaker and Eleven being on the Negative, but Thirteen on the Affirmative,
so that one Vote carried it. This so troubled one Wo^el, when he heard it,
having through Illness been absent, that he got to the Court, and weeping for
Grief, that his Absence should occasion such a Law to pass, said, If he had not
been able to go, he would have crept upon his Knees, rather than that it should
have passed. But what he said proved in vain; they had now passed the Rubicon,
and what was eagerly desired, was obtained. Yet there was a great Difference in
the Court, and the Twelve that had voted in the Negative, resolved to enter
their Dissents to that Law; which the others seeing, and that so many
Difficulties would weaken their Law, they admitted this Addition, to be tried
by a special Jury, though a standing Law of the Country contained, That none be
sentenced to Death and Banishment, but by a special Jury, and a Court of
Assistants; and such a Court consisted of seven Magistrates at the least. But
it was now resolved to prosecute the Quakers to Death; and all this Trial, when
it came to it, was but whether they were Quakers; which they judged by their
coming in covered; and that they had been banished out of the Country.

Now to enter upon this bloody Business, the following Act was made at a
general Court, held at Boston, the 20th of October, in this Year 1658.

An ACT made at a General Court held at Boston, the 20th of October, 1658.
WHereas there is a pernicious Sect (commonly called Quakers) lately risen, The
Act.
who by Word and Writing have published and maintained many dangerous and
horrid Tenets, and do take upon them to change and alter the received laudable
Customs of our Nation, in giving civil Respect to Equals, or Reverence to
Superiors, whose Actions tend to undermine the Civil Government, and also to
destroy the Order of the Churches, by denying all established Forms of Worship,
and by withdrawing from orderly Church Fellowship, allowed and approved by all
Orthodox Professors of the Truth, and instead thereof, and in Opposition
thereunto, frequently meeting themselves, insinuating themselves into the Minds
of the Simple, or such as are least affected to the Order and Government of
Church and Commonwealth, whereby diverse of our Inhabitants have been infected,
notwithstanding all former Laws, made upon the Experience of their arrogant and
bold Obtrusions, to disseminate their Principles among us, prohibiting their
coming in this Jurisdiction, they have not been deterred from their impetuous
Attempts to undermine our Peace, and hazard our Ruin.

For Prevention thereof, this Court does order and enact, that every Person or
Persons of the cursed Sect of the Quakers, who is not an Inhabitant of, but is
found within this Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where no
Magistrate is at Hand, by any Constable, Commissioner, or Select Man, and
conveyed from Constable to Constable, to the next Magistrate, who shall commit
the said Person to close Prison, there to remain (without Bail) unto the next
Court of Assistants, where they shall have a Legal Trial: And being convicted
to be of the Sect of the Quakers, shall be sentenced to be banished upon Pain
of Death: And that every Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction, being convicted to be
of the aforesaid Sect, either by taking up, publishing, or defending the horrid
Opinions of the Quakers, or the stirring up Mutiny, Sedition, or Rebellion
against the Government, or by taking up their absurd and destructive Practices,
viz. Denying civil Respect to Equals and Superiors, and withdrawing from our
Church Assemblies, and instead thereof frequent Meetings of their own, in
Opposition to our Church Order, or by adhering to, or approving of any known
Quaker, and the Tenets and Practices of the Quakers, that are opposite to the
Orthodox received Opinions of the Godly, and endeavoring to disaffect others
to civil Government, and Church-Orders, or condemning the Practice and
Proceedings of this Court against the Quakers, manifesting thereby their
complying with those, whose Design is to overthrow the Order established in
Church and State, every such Person, upon Conviction before the said Court of
Assistants, in Manner as aforesaid, shall be committed to close Prison for one
Month, and then unless they choose voluntarily to depart this Jurisdiction,
shall give Bond for their good Behavior, and appear at the next Court, where
continuing obstinate, and refusing to retract and reform the foresaid Opinions,
they shall be sentenced to Banishment upon Pain of Death; and any one
Magistrate, upon Information given him of any such Person, shall cause him to
be apprehended, and shall commit any such Person to Prison, according to his
Discretion, until he come to Trial, as aforesaid.

Here ends this Sanguinary Act, being more like to the Decrees of the Spanish
Inquisition, than to the Laws of a reformed Christian Magistracy, consisting of
such, who themselves to shun Persecution (which was but a small Fine for not
frequenting the public Worship) had left Old England. This Act was answered by
Francis Howgill, and the said Answer published in Print; wherein was plainly
shown, that it spoke the Language of the ancient persecuting Jews and Heathen.
In the Sequel we shall see the bloody Execution of it upon some Persons.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The FIFTH BOOK.
IN the Forepart of the Year, 1659, there was great Discord, 1659 Public
Affairs.
and several Factions among the People in England; for some adhered to the
Protector Richard, and others to the chief Members of the Long Parliament; and
the Royalists made also a Party. G. Fox being under a Concern lest some young
or raw People, who sometimes came amongst his Friends, might be drawn into some
of those several Interests, wrote an Epistle, warning such to be careful, and
not at all to meddle with any Plotting, but to consider that their Warfare was
a spiritual one, not at all wanting the Use of carnal Weapons.

About this Time William Caton came again into Holland, W. Caton at Amsterdam,
and what passed there.
and (finding at Amsterdam some malicious People, who endeavored to bring his
Fellow-Believers there into Trouble, and to stir up the Mob against them, that
so the Magistrates might take Occasion to look upon the Quakers as Rioters,)
advised those of that Persuasion to be circumspect, and to avoid as much as
possibly they could, the impending Storm. In Order thereto, it was thought meet
that their religious Meetings, which on the Weekdays were kept pretty late at
Night, on the First-Days of the Week should not always be kept in one Place,
but sometimes in this, and at other Times in another House: Sometimes a Meeting
was kept in an Alley, at the Town-Wall near the Regulars-Gate, where several
English People dwelt, from whence it was called the English Alley, and has that
Name still: Hither came very rude Company, committing great Insolence. The Time
before that W. Caton was in Holland, he met with an extraordinary rude
Encounter at the said Place, insomuch that he seemed in Danger of his Life; for
some wicked People, not daring to do their utmost in the House where he was,
pushed him out of Doors; but then a Woman pulled him into her House, where he
was safe, though at first he knew not whether he was among Friends or Foes. I yet
well remember this Fact, being at that Time with my Parents in the said
disturbed Meeting. Now Caton being a discreet and judicious Person, and
perceiving that some of his Friends there had more of a rash Zeal than true
Wisdom, advised the most moderate of them often to change Meeting-places. In
the Beginning, a Meeting was kept now and then in St. John-street, so called,
and afterward on Eland's Graff, in an Alley at the House of one Richard
Langham, and also on the Angelier's Graff, in the House of my Father; and some
Time after in the English Alley abovesaid, and also without the Town, near the
River Amstel, in Kuypers Padt, or Cooper's-Lane; from whence the Meeting was
removed in the Forepart of this Year (if my Memory does not deceive me) into
the Verwers Padt, or Dyers-Lane, which was then without the City-Freedom, and
the Meeting Place was in a large Garret of a Tanner's House, where oftentimes
came abundance of People, and among these, not a few of the rude Rabble. Here
the Meeting was continued till the Year 1663, when that Place came into the
Possession of another Owner.

W. Caton, W. Ames at the Court of the Elector Palatine. Is kindly treated by
the Elector.
after some Stay in Holland, returned again to England. I think it was in this
Year that William Ames went into Germany, where being come into the Palatinate,
he went to Heidelburgh, and came to the Court of the Prince Elector, Charles
Lod^wick, who treated him kindly, even at his own Table, and seemed not to take
Offense at Ames's Hat, which he kept on, though the Lords and others that were in
the Company, stood bare-headed. The Baron of Helmont, who also was at that
Court, was wont to tell afterward, That Ames walking once with his Hat on,
next to the Prince in his Garden, the Courtiers asked the Prince, Whether they
should question Ames for this Incivility: But the Prince said, No, for I did
expect that. At another Time the Prince made his Chaplain and Ames both dine
with him, on Purpose, as it seems, that Ames, whom he knew to be a bold Man,
might find Occasion to reprove his Chaplain; for at Meat he suffered his Jester
to come, who playing his Tricks, the Chaplain was silent: But Ames, who loved
Gravity, and was averse to Jesting, took Occasion from thence to reprove such
vain Actions; but chiefly he aimed at the Chaplain, whom because of his Silence
at the lewd Behavior of the Jester, he called, A dumb Dog; which seemed to
please the Prince.

Now whilst William Ames was in the Palatinate, he got Acquaintance with the
Baptists at Kriesheim, At Kriesheim, Baptists receive his Doctrine, ^^d after
settle in Pennsylvania before the Wars.
a Town not far from Worms; and among those People he found such Entrance, that
some Families receiving the Doctrine he preached, bore a public Testimony for
it there, and so continued till the Settlement of Pennsylvania in America, when
they unanimously went thither, not as it seemed, without a singular Direction
of Providence; for not long after, a War ensued in Germany, where the
Palatinate was altogether laid waste by the French, and thousands of People
were bereft of their Possessions, and reduced to Poverty.

But to return to Ames, when some in the Palatinate began to give an Ear to his
Preaching, a Fine was settled against those that gave him Entertainment: He is
favored by the Elector and his Sister.
But the Prince Elector being informed hereof, took off that Fine; and though
those of the Consistory did send for Ames, the Prince generously ordered them
not to meddle with him. The Prince's Sister also behaved her self very kindly
toward him, and received his Exhortations favorably.

A Year after, Ames with J. Higgins again kindly received by the Elector.
Ames came again into the Palatinate, with John Higgins, and visiting the
Prince Elector, he understood from the Captain of the Prince's Guard, that the
Prince was glad of Ames's Return thither. A while after, Higgins delivered to
the Prince Elector a Book of G. Fox, with a Letter of Ames to the said Prince,
who was so well pleased with it, that he bad Higgins to thank Ames on his
Behalf, saying also that he took the Coming of Ames and Higgins to him and his
Family very kindly, and really believed that what they spoke, was in Love to
their Souls.

Several Years after this, And their Friends from England.
some others of Ames's Friends from England visited the aforesaid Prince
Elector, and he always (to his Praise be it said) received them kindly. W.
Ames, who was at sundry Times in Germany, came not only to Hamburgh, but
traveled also through Bohemia to Dantzick, Ames travels to Dantzick, and Poland.
and from thence to Poland. At Hamburgh and Dantzick he met with some that
received the Truth he preached; but in Poland People were too rude (...)
haughty, to get Entrance among them.

In the Forepart of this Year, Ames at Roterdam confined to Bedlam.
W. Ames being at Rotterdam in Holland, was confined there in Bedlam; which
having made a great Noise, I Will give a brief Relation of it here. At
Moordrecht, a Village near Gouda, lived at that Time one Martin Martinson, a
Cooper by Trade; this Man approving the Doctrine preached by Ames at Rotterdam,
and elsewhere, began to assert it as Truth; and seeing now and then he with
some of his sober Neighbors, kept a Meeting at his House, The Occasion thereof.
this caused a great Stir in the Town, insomuch that sometimes he suffered rude
Treatment from the People. Ames coming once there, and keeping a Meeting in
Martin's House, great Insolence was committed by the wicked Rabble. And going
from thence to pass over the Water to Gouwerek, he was followed by a Multitude
of riotous People, both young and old, with a hideous Cry of Quake, Quake,
Quake! and was pelted with Stones and Clods, till he came to the Boat that
carried him over. The Preacher of Gouwerek hearing the Noise, came to the Boat,
and asked, What the Matter was, why People made such a sad Noise? To which Ames
answered, It seems the People are not taught better. To which the Preacher
returned, They are not used to make such ado against honest People; but I
believe you to be a deceiving Wolf, that comes among the Sheep to seduce them,
and that therefore they cry so. Prove this, replied Ames. I don't know you, said
the Preacher. Learn then, returned Ames, better Manners, than to call one thou
know not, a Wolf and a Deceiver. And so going his Way, shortly after he
wrote from Rotterdam to Martin, and bad him go to the Preacher, and desire him
to appoint a Time to prove that Ames was a deceiving Wolf. But to this, the
Preacher showed himself backward; yet to be rid of Martin, he said at length,
Come, I Will prove it presently. But Martin replied, I am not come for that; but
this must be done to Ames; and insisting thereon, Well, said the Preacher, Let
him come next Sunday before Noon, after Sermon; then I Will prove it publicly
before all People.

Of this Martin sent Word to Ames; but Things were managed so, that this
Project of Proof was quashed: For the Preacher of Gouwerek went to his
Colleague at Moordrecht, and consulted with him what to do in the Case; and
Ames being come to Moordrecht on the first Day of the Month called March, and
the last of the Week, though it was late at Night, was seen and known by some,
who committed much Violence upon the House of Martin, where Ames was entered.
The next Day it was reported that some of the Sheriff's Men of Gouda were come
to Gouwerek, to apprehend Ames when he came there; and at Moordrecht, the
Dikegrave's Men came to the same Purpose; and so they took Ames Prisoner, and
carried him to Rotterdam, where he was locked up in Bedlam, as a Madman. And a
Week after, Martin, As is also M. Martinson.
for having kept Meetings at his House, where not above eight Persons were come
together, was also by the Dikegrave's Men taken Prisoner in his House, and
carried to Rotterdam, where he was locked up with Ames. Who were the
Instigators of this Business is plain enough, though I don't mention them.

After Ames had been not much above three Weeks in Bedlam, the Under-Governor
of the House, on the 27th of the Month about Night, came to him and Martin, and
said, If I was in your Place, I would go out. Which made Ames ask, Whether he
would suffer them to do so? To which he answered, That he should not hinder
them. Then Ames returned, I will not be reputed as one that broke Prison. To which
the Deputy replied, Nay, why should you be reputed so? You may go out freely;
all is unlocked, and the Door will stand open for you: For the Governors are
not minded that you should stay here. Then Ames said, Well, I intend to go out
to Morrow. The next Day Martin's Wife came to see her Husband; but the Deputy
told her, that he had an Order in Writing from the Dikegrave, that rather than
to let Martin's Wife come to him, he might let him and Ames go out together.
The Issue was, that they were both let out that Morning, it being the 28th of
the Month. But they staid at Rotterdam, intending not to depart the Town before
they had given Notice to the Dikegrave of their being let out; lest any
Qccasion might be given for saying that they had broken Prison. And it was not
without Reason they were so cautious: For the next Day in the Morning, the
Deputy came to them, and said, I desire that you will not bring me into Trouble;
for I am am an ancient Man, and the Dikegrave has been with me, and asked for
you: To which I answered, That you were gone out; but he took this very ill. I
desire therefore that you would say, that you were gone out without my
Knowledge. But this was not to be expected from Ames, whom I knew so well, that
I truly believe he would rather have died, than to have spoken a Lie: For in
such a Case he was without Question, of the same Mind as formerly Christian
Languedol, Uncle of my Grandmother by the Mother's Side, who when at Antwerp,
he, with other Martyrs, was led to the Stake to be burnt, cried out
immediately, and with a valiant Mind, If we would once but have told a Lie, we
might have escaped this. But to return to Ames, he told the Deputy, That he
himself intended to go and speak with the Dikegrave, and if he was displeased
at their going out, he might put them in again where they had been; for they
would not have the Name of Prison-breakers. Then they both went to the
Dikegrave, Their Discourse with the Dikegrave.
and told him after what Manner they were come out; saying also, that they
would not have it said, that they broke out. That Name, said the Dikegrave, you
would have had, if you had departed the Town; for the Deputy has told me that
you got out by breaking a Window. After some other Words were exchanged, he
further said, I have nothing to object against your Life and Conversation,
having heard nothing concerning you but a good Report; neither do I seek to
persecute you. But would you be willing to return to Bedlam? Ames answered,
Here we stand before thee, thou may do with us according to thy Pleasure.
And if thou desire us to return thither, we'll do so; The Dikegrave
signifying, that this was his Desire, said, that they might go and walk in the
Gallery then, till another Order came. And so he caused his Messenger to go
along with them. Being come thither, they not long retained the Liberty to walk
in the Gallery, but on the 31st of the Month they were locked up again, each in
a Hole by himself. Now Ames acquainted the Deputy that he heard from the
Dikegrave, that he had been informed by him, that they were got out by breaking
a Window. But the Deputy denied to have said so. They were detained there yet
some Time, and were pretty much visited, and this often by such as sought
nothing but to scoff at them; and among these, a certain Clergyman did not
stick to say to Ames, That he was a Deceiver, because he wore Pewter Buttons,
to make People believe they were Silver ones. Whilst Ames was confined here, he
wrote some Papers, which afterward he gave out in Print, and among these, a
Reply to an Answer of one Jacob Koelman, to 83 Queries given forth by the said
Ames; Are set at Liberty.
who now being set at Liberty, traveled to ^ermany, as has been said before,
and from thence going back to hi^ native Country, after some Time he returned
again into Holland. (...) did also William Caton.

But now I turn again to England, wh^ an Account was published in Print of the
Sufferings of the Peo^^^ ^^^led Quakers, which being offered to the Parliament,
was deliv^^^^ ^o the Speaker, Thomas Bampfield. This contained a Relation of
above one hundred and forty Persons, Account of Friends Sufferings offered to
the Parliament.
all distinguished by their Names, who for the keeping of Meetings, the
refusing to swear, the not putting off their Hats, the not paying of Tithes,
and their traveling up and down the Country, had been taken up and imprisoned,
and many also been deprived of their Goods, and one and twenty of these died
either by Sickness in Prison, or by violent Abuses; among whom was Richard
Sale, near West-chester, who being Constable, had a Minister of the People
called Quakers brought to him, with a Pass as a Vagabond, whose Conversation so
convinced the Constable, that he gave him his Pass and Liberty. And because the
said Sale judged both Priests and People to be exceedingly darkened, R. Sale a
Constable used barbarously at West-chester.
he entered upon an extraordinary Act, to show them by a Sign that they wanted
to be enlightened, viz. he came in the Daytime with a Lanthorn and burning
Candle into the Steeple-house during the Sermon. But this was resented to such
a high Degree, that by Order of the Mayor he was put into Prison, and thrust
into a Hole called Little-Ease, which was so strait, that it could not well
receive his Body; but he was thrust in with such Violence, that his Body was
bruised, and he spit Blood, and shortly after grew sick, and his Body swelling,
occasioned by the squeezing of it into the Hole, he died in great Pain. In the
beforementioned Account it was also said, that in the last six Years about two
thousand Persons, for being Quakers, had suffered in their Body and Goods. To
this was added a Paper, The mutual christion Love amongst Friends.
signed by more than one hundred and sixty Persons, (several of whom I knew)
whereby they offered to the Parliament to put themselves in the Stead of their
Brethren, who were confined either in Prisons, or Houses of Correction, or in
Dungeons, some being fettered, and others lying sick only on a little Straw;
wherefore they declared themselves ready to change Places with them, out of
true Love, that so they might go out, and not die by Hardship, as many had done
already, to prevent which they were willing to take upon themselves the
Sufferings of their Brethren, and lay down their Lives for them. Under their
Names they added, If we had been of Esau 's Race, we should have fainted before
this Time; and if we had been of Cain 's Progeny, we should have fought with
his Weapons; but this never was, neither is it the Way of the Righteous and
Chosen, of which we are from the Foundation of the World. It was in the Month
called April, that this Paper was delivered to the Parliament; but I don't find
that this Offer was accepted, or any Thing done for releasing the imprisoned.

About this Time also Edward Buroughs published a Paper, A remarkable Prophecy
of Edw. Buroughs.
containing a very remarkable Prediction of what followed the next Year, when
King Charles the Second was placed on the Throne. In it he says, that as he
was traveling in Warwickshire, in the first Month, his Meditations being upon
the Lord; and considering what unjust and woeful Sufferings had been inflicted
upon the Lord's People within these few Years, a Cry went through him, The Lord
will be avenged, the Lord will be avenged, upon his Enemies, and he will avenge
the Cause of his People. This Cry stuck close upon him, and his Heart was even
broken therewith, and his Spirit melted before the Lord, it being, as it were,
said to him, Write unto the Rulers and yet once more warn them of that
Recompense, and of that Indignation, which is at Hand upon them, even a just
Recompense for all their Deeds; and as they have done, even so shall it be done
to them; as they have sought to destroy the Generation of the Righteous, even
so shall they be destroyed from off the Face of the Earth; and as they have
unjustly judged and condemned the Innocent, so shall they be condemned, and
justly judged of the Lord; and as they have cast the Bodies of the poor Lambs
of Christ into Prison, and been a Snare upon them, even so shall they be
ensnared, and into Captivity shall they go. And as they have caused the Goods
and Possessions of the Innocent to be spoiled, and made a Prey, even so in like
Manner shall the Curse of the Lord spoil their Substance. And as they have
done, so shall it be done unto them; and as they have met to others, so shall
it be met to them again. And I saw a great Misery and Desolation nigh at Hand,
even the Sword of the Lord; and that it should slay them; and I beheld it was
made ready for the Slaughter; and in the Sense of these Things, a Sadness fell
upon my Spirit, considering the Desolation and the Judgment that is at hand, to
be executed upon the cruel Oppressors.

Wherefore all ye Rulers, and all ye that have trodden down the Heritage of
God, and ye that have disregarded those many Warnings that ye have had; I say
unto you all, in the Power of the Lord God, in his Dominion, and by his Spirit;
this is once more a Warning to you from the Lord, and that these Things must
surely come to pass, and be fulfilled in their Season, and no Man shall be able
to deliver his Brother; but every Man shall bear his own Burden, and drink his
own Cup, prepared for him; and though it has been counted a light Thing among
you, and you have despised the Reproof, and gone on without Fear; yet in as
much as the Lord has spared you, and not speedily executed Judgment upon you,
but rather waited for your Return; yet the Dealing of the Lord toward you, in
sparing of you, you have not accepted; and therefore shall his Judgments be the
greater upon you, For if you do now come to the Witness in your own
Consciences, What Evil have this People done? Whose Ox have they taken, or what
have they desired of you? Or what have they sought from you? Or wherein have
they been a Burden to you? Saving that they have reproved you for your
Iniquities, and desired your Redemption? Would you but now at last come to
consider this, and confess the Truth in your Consciences; will not that tell
you, that they have patiently suffered all Things that you have cruelly imposed
upon them? And have not they walked peaceably toward you, and humbly, meekly
and justly among their Neighbors? And have they not been meek and innocent,
even as Lambs, and as Sheep before the Shearers? and have they wrought Offenses
toward any? Have they sought the Overthrow of the Government, or have they
sought Vengeance against their Enemies? Or what Injury have they done to any
Man's Person or Estate, saving to Satan and his Kingdom? Have they not sought
to reform and reclaim the Ungodly from their Ways? And have they not pitied and
prayed for their Enemies? And have they not in all Things walked in good
Conscience toward the Lord, and toward all Men? Yea, my Friends, in the Day
of the Lord, when the Witness in your Consciences shall not be limited, but
shall speak plainly, and when the impartial Judge shall appear upon his Throne,
then shall you acknowledge these Things. Wherefore I say unto you, receive the
Judgment of the Lord, to purify you, otherwise the Judgment shall destroy you;
and now come to be more wise, that some of you may be as a Brand plucked out of
the Fire, and be reserved from being consumed; for the Visitation of the Lord
is near an End, when his loving Kindness will be shut from you, and his
Long-suffering turned into Fury; and he will make you know that we are his
People, with whom you have thus dealt; yea, you shall suddenly know it; the
Time is not long till he will crown his People in the Sight of his Enemies; he
will crown them with Praise and with Righteousness, with Honor and Majesty,
and he will keep them in Safety, even when Sorrow compasses you about; his
Mercy and loving Kindness shall extend toward them, even when his Wrath and
Judgments does smite you, and confound you. O! what shall I say unto you; for
the deep Sense thereof remains upon my Heart; for when I consider, how that in
all Ages the Lord did avenge his People's Cause, and when the Time of their
Suffering was expired, he broke the Bonds of Iniquity, and set them free. Thus
did he with his People Israel of old, and many Times it was his Way with his
People, to bring them low by Suffering, and then to raise them up again in
Glory; and he suffered their Enemies for a Season to glory over them, that he
might bring them down. And thus he did in England, in the Case between the
Bishops and their Crew of Persecutors, and the poor People at that Day called
Puritans: Did not he confound that persecuting Crew, and deliver his People?
And is not he the same to effect the same Work at this very Day? Yea,
doubtless, and much more will he do, inasmuch as the Manifestation of Truth is
more clear than it was in their Days; and in as much as the Rulers and People
of this Nation have rejected a more clear Testimony, than either the Papists in
Quoen Mary's Days, or the Bishops and Prelates in their Days; even so much the
more will the Lord execute his Vengeance with more Violence, in a more manifest
Way; and all shall know, that it is he that does it, and he will set his People
free; for he has regarded their Sufferings, and he has said, it is enough;
for he has tried them, and found them faithful; and all this has been
suffered to prove them, and not to destroy them: And like as he has preserved
them in Patience and Peace through it all, even so will he give them Hearts to
walk answerably to their Deliverance; and us they have abounded in Patience in
their Suffering, so shall they abound in Pra^^e everlasting in the Day of their
Freedom, and the Earth shall be glad, and shall yield the Increase and
Blessing; the Heaven and Earth shall rejoice, and the Hearts of the Righteous
shall leap for Joy, when the Lord has broken the Yoke of the oppressed, and
set his People free, inwardly and outwardly; and then shall they sing to the
Lord over all their Enemies, who shall be tormented and vexed in the Lord's
sore Displeasure; for their Reward comes, and their Recompense shall be even
as their Work, and he will give unto them Sorrow and Anguish, instead of
Rejoicing. But again when I considered the long Suffering, and Patience, and
Forbearance of the Lord's innocent People under all their Sufferings; and when
I looked at their Innocence, and at their Righteousness, and Spirit of Holiness
with which the Lord had blessed them, my Heart was made glad in the
Consideration of this; and the more was my Joy, the more I beheld their
Innocence, and the Guiltlesness of their Cause, whereby the Unjustness of their
Suffering did the more appear; and withal, when I looked and beheld their
Increase under all their Sufferings, and how that the Lord had turned all these
Things to their Good, and to the Overthrow of all their Enemies; how that by
that Way, wherein their Enemies intended to destroy them from being a People,
even thereby did the Lord most wonderfully increase them to be a great People;
for through all have they grown in Life and Power, and in Strength, and in
Number, and through it all have they been encouraged to follow the Lord with more
Zeal and Boldness. Add in the Consideration of this I did rejoice, with
magnifying the Lord for ever, that he had brought forth his Praise, even through
the Wickedness of the Wicked, and he had increased his People, and exalted them
through the Cruelty of all their Enemies; and that through all Opposition they were
attained unto a happy Rest, and through all the Tempest of great Trials, they
were arrived into the Harbor of Renown and great Glory: And where I consider
this, how that the Lord had given them Dominion, and brought their Life to
reign over all their Enemies, these Things were a Joy unto me; and looking back
into Ages, seeing there was nothing, nor any People for Generations, that had
grown, and risen through all Opposition like unto these, wherefore it is a Sign
and a Testimony that we are the Lord's, and that these Things are of him, and
from him, and by him alone, that he might be praised for ever. Again, when I do
consider, how that the Lord has raised his People, even out of the Dust; and
them that were not a People, are become a People; and the Lord has provoked
Nations by them that were not a People within these few Years; and the Lord
has carried on this Work among his People, not by any Thing of Man, nor by the
Arm of Flesh, but in pure Innoceney and Simplicity has it been accomplished;
not by the Wisdom of this World, nor by Men in Places of Honor, and of Power
in the Nations; for all that has been wanting to them, and what they are, it is
through the Opposition of all this; for they have had none of the great Men of
the Earth on their Side to defend them, and establish them, but all have been
against them, and even Oppression and Tyranny executed upon them, rather than
any Approbation, or Justification from Men in outward Authority: So that truly
it may be said, there has been nothing of Man in this Work, but all of the
Lord, by his own Power, and in a contrary Way to all the false Sects, and false
Churches, has the Beginning and carrying on of these Things been; for we know
that all the false Sects in this Nation have risen, and been established through
the Countenance of Men in Place and Power, and upon Man, and the Wisdom of this
World, and Authority of the Powers of the Earth, has the Rise and Fall of all
false Churches depended: And as the Powers of the Earth have sided with them,
so have they been set up; and at the Displeasure of Authority, have been cast
down. But as for this People, they are raised of the Lord, and established by
him, even contrary to all Men; and they have given their Power only to God, and
they cannot give their Power to any mortal Men, to stand or fall by any outward
Authority, and to that they cannot seek; but to the Lord alone, who hears
their Cry, and will avenge their Cause. Wherefore let all the Persecutors bow
before the Lord, and let all the Saints walk humbly in his Sight, and let them
continue in that innocent Life in which they have begun; and let them never
forget the Mercies of the Lord, and what he has brought to pass, who has
manifested great Things, and will do more and more to the confounding of all
his Enemies, and to the Praise of his elect People. And all ye Saints upon the
Earth, have ye the Lord in Respect continually, and turn you not unto Idols,
but let the Lord be your Joy for evermore.

E. B.


Not long after the publishing of this Paper, to wit, in the Month called May,
E. Buroughs and S. Fisher at Dunkirk.
Edward Buroughs and Samuel Fisher went from Dover to Dunkirk, where then was
an English Garrison. Being come there, it quickly spread over the Town: The
Governor Lockhart now not being there, his Deputy, Colonel Alsop, with the
Council of Officers sent for them; and they being come, were asked, What their
Business was there? To which they gave Answer; and the next Morning signified
in Writing, The End of their going thither.
that their coming was to visit the Jesuits, Friars, and Priests, and other
Papists, to show them the Errors of their Ways, and the Falseness of their
Worship, etc. they being called to preach the everlasting Gospel to the
Nations. Discourse with the Deputy Governor and Officers.
They were some Hours in Discourse with the said Deputy and the Officers, and
not unkindly treated; but the Deputy however said, That it would be dangerous
for them to stay in the Town; and therefore, he desired them to depart. To
which their Answer was, That if he desired them, they could not receive any
such Desire; and if he commanded them, they could not obey his Command in that
Case; because they could not depart the Town but in the Will of God, according
to which Will they came thither. After much Reasoning they left them, and the
next Day went to the Capuchin Friars, And chief of the Capuchins.
and had some Discourse with the chiefest of them in their Garden, concerning
the Light of Christ, that every Man is enlightened withal; and they told them,
That the mighty Day of the Lord was at Hand upon them, and that the Lord was
come to search and try them; and that he would hew down their idolatrous Ways,
Worships, Writes Queries to the Friars and Nuns.
and Works. The next Day Buroughs wrote some Queries to the Friars and Nuns in
and about that Town, which were sent to them in Latin. The Introduction was
thus:

The mighty Day of the Lord is come and coming upon you, and all the World:
Awake, awake, ye that sleep in the Earth, for the dreadful God is arising to
plead with you, and to give unto all the World the Cup of his fierce
Indignation, because of your Idolatries, and Hypocrisies, and Abominations,
which have corrupted the Earth, and are come up before him, and have provoked
him; and the Cry of the Just, who has been smitten and laid slain, is entered
into the Ears of the Most High, and his Sword, which is the Word of his Mouth,
is awakened to wound and slay all his Enemies. And the Day of your Visitation
is now come, wherein the Lord is searching you, and trying you, that he may
recompense you: And this is the Word of the Lord to you.

Wherefore I am moved of the Lord to propound some few Queries to you, for the
Trial of your Spirits and Ways; to which I demand your Answer, that all Things
may be brought to Light and true Judgment, and that you may be judged justly,
and by the Spirit of the Lord cleared, or condemned, according to your Deeds.

These Queries were partly concerning the Orders of Friars and Nuns, whether
any such were in the Church in the Apostles Days; and concerning the Popish
Worship and Ceremonies, demanding Proof of their Lawfulness from the holy
Scriptures. After the delivering of these Queries to the Capuchins, Buroughs
and Fisher went also to the Friars of other Orders, and entered into Discourse
with them: But their plain Speeches against their Idolatrous Rites and
Ceremonies, Discourse with those of other Orders.
found no Entrance. After some Stay in the Town, they going to the College of
the Jesuits, got into Discourse with their chief Rector; and after a Conference
of about three Hours, he grew weary, and pretending other Business, And with
the chief Rector of the Jesuits.
would stay no longer with them; and so they parted, asking him, Whether he
would admit more Discourse at some other Time? But he refused it. Buroughs
afterward wrote a Letter to him, which began thus:

Friend, Thy Wisdom and thy Knowledge is earthly and sensual, Writes to him.
and thereby can thou not know the Things of the Kingdom of God; And he
concluded with this Query: What is that Whore that has sat upon Multitudes of
People! And what is that golden Cup in her Hand? Proposes a Query.
And what are the Abominations and Fornication of which her Cup is full, which
she has caused the Kings and People to drink? etc.

But neither this Query, nor the others were answered. Buroughs and Fisher did
also visit the Nuns; and speaking to them through a Grate, Nor this, nor others
answered.
they asked, If they were of the Order of those called Quakers; and soon
perceiving they were such, they said, They might not hear them, and so
presently passed away; whereby Buroughs and Fisher were deprived of an
Opportunity to speak to them; only they witnessed against them. E. Buroughs
wrote also some Propositions to the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, Propositions
in Latin sent to the Jesuits.
wherein he particularly represented the Tyranny of the Church of Rome, in true
Colors; and these Propositions were sent to them in Latin. They stand yet some
few Days in Town, and had diverse Meetings among the English Soldiers: And
Buroughs also wrote to them, Have Meetings among the English Soldiers.
and bid them to be faithful to the Lord, and not to seek themselves in their
Service, but the Honor of God: He also showed them what their Duty was in
their military Station; and not to give them too rough a Brush, E. Buroughs
writes to them
but to meet them somewhat in their own Way; following therein the Example of
John the Baptist, when he spoke to the Soldiers, Luke iii. 14. told them, What
do you know but the Lord may have some good Work for you to do, His Advice to
Soldiers and Officers.
if you be faithful to him? And he also signified unto them, That since the
Lord one Day would avenge the innocent Blood shed in the Pope's Dominions, and
appear against Babylon and Rome, the Seat of the Whore, and the Kingdom of
Antichrist, it seemed not improbable to him, that the Lord would make Way
thereto by the English Nation. It is, said he the Lord's Work, I know, to make
Men truly religious; but yet he may work by you to break down the Briars and
Thorns, and the Rocks and Hills that have set themselves against the Lord, etc.
He also advised them, if ever such a Work fell to be their Lot, not to be
ambitious nor vainglorious; but to make it their Work to demand the
Disannulling of the Popish Inquisition and cruel Laws. And the Officers he
charged, not to be as Tyrants and Oppressors over the poor Soldiers, but to be
loving and meek, and Examples of all Goodness unto them: To this he added, And
having no Sin lying upon your Consciences, then ye shall face your Enemies with
Courage, and not fear Death, but shall be ready to lay down your Lives in a
good Cause. But left any might think he was for the Bearing of Arms, and not
for Harmlesness or Non-resistance, he told them also, That the Lord had a more
honorable Work to work after them, viz. to destroy the Kingdom of the Devil,
and the Ground of Wars. And that there was a more honorable Victory to be
waited for, to wit, the Victory over Sin, etc.

Buroughs and Fisher being once sent for by the Governor Lockhart, Beth sent
for by Governor Lockhart
found many Officers with him; and after some friendly Discourse, they advised
them to Moderation, and the Fear of God, and so parted from them. Return to
England
And after having performed their Service in the Town, they returned to England.

Not long after, Buroughs gave the foresaid Queries out in Print, and wrote
also a Paper to the Parliament, exhorting those that were Members of that
Assembly, to fear God, and not to oppress honest People, but to free them from
Oppression and Tyranny; lest the Lord come suddenly upon them, and break them
to Pieces.

The Power of the Protector Richard Cromwell already declining, Affairs of State
he was prevailed upon by the Officers of the Army to dissolve this Parliament,
which began to make Enquiry how the Subsidies were employed: And by the
Direction of some of the chief Republicans, the Long Parliament was called
again. This Parliament set up a Committee of Safety, for apprehending those
that disturbed the Peace, and for making an Alteration among the military
Officers, either by casheering them, or otherwise; and increasing in Power,
erected also a Council of State; and Word was sent to Richard Cromwell, who was
now deprived of all Power, R. Cromwell removes from Whitehall.
to remove from Whitehall; which at length he did, the Parliament allowing him
two thousand Pounds for the Charges of Removing, and promising to pay his Debts
contracted for the Public: And his Brother Henry, who was Lord Deputy of
Ireland, was called back by the Parliament. Thus these two Brothers were again
reduced to the state of private Men.

E. Buroughs now wrote a Letter to the Parliament, and seriously exhorted them
therein, To desist from all Persecution for Religion, and to take away that
which gave Occasion thereunto. About this Time, Booth's Insurrection.
there was an Insurrection in Cheshire for King Charles, under Sir George
Booth; who having received a Commission from that Prince, got such Numbers of
Followers, that he seized the City of Chester. In the mean while the Parliament
sent Edmond Ludlow to Ireland, to be Commander in chief of the Army there,
instead of Henry Cromwell; and General Lambert was sent with an Army against
Booth. Now since some rash People that went under the Name of Quakers, were for
taking up Arms under Lambert; and that the Committee of Safety offered great
Places and Commands to some of that Persuasion, thereby to draw them off from
the Truth they professed, G. Fox wrote a Paper, wherein he showed The
Unlawfulness of Wars and Fightings, representing it as a Work not at all
becoming the Followers of Christ: G Fox writes a Paper of the Unlawfulness of
Wars.
And he exhorted his Friends not to join with those that took up Arms, but to
fight only with Spiritual Weapons, which took away the Occasion of the Carnal.
This he also recommended in his Preaching, for an harmless and innossensive
Life was that which he always asserted and practiced.

As for Booth, Booth is de feated, taken, and sent to the Tower.
he was defeated, and endeavoring to make his Escape in Woman's Clothes, was
discovered in an Inn, and taken into Custody; and being carried to London, by
an Order of the Parliament, he was committed to the Tower. The Officers of the
Army, of which George Fleetwood was now Commander in chief, were very busy to
get the upperhand of the Parliament; which caused great Division and
Distraction in the Nation; for it was well known, that if the supreme Power was
offered up to the Army, they then could do what they would; and thus the Nation
would be governed by the Sword. It was also fresh in Memory, that it was the
Army by which Cromwell had been advanced so as to become Protector, and supreme
Ruler of the Nation: And therefore many opposed the Design on foot.

About this Time, also the Military Officers moved the Taking off of the
Burden of Tithes, and to settle another Maintenance for the National
Preachers. But being unwilling that the Parliament should be Masters of the
Army, they complained of having been deceived by the Parliament; and Colonel
Desborough said, That they had not performed any part of the Promises they had
made to the Army; that they had taken no Care to secure a Liberty to tender
Consciences; and that their Intention was to remove the principal Officers, and
place others in their Commands, who were of different Principles.

Now the Council of Officers was for calling a new Parliament; but this met
with no small Opposition. In this Bustle the Council of Officers began to
insinuate with the Clergy, and they agreed with them, That their Maintenance by
Tithes should not be taken away till another Revenue as ample and certain
should be settled upon them: That some Provision should be made for those who
differed in Faith and Worship from the established Church; but that the
Quakers, and some others, whose Principles they said tended to the Destruction
of civil Society, should not be tolerated at all. In this distracted State of
Affairs, when some were for, and others against the Parliament, so that it was
hardly well known in whom the supreme Authority resided, Edward Buroughs writ
and published in Print a large Speech, E. Buroughs his Message to the Rulers of
England.
which he styled, A Message to the present Rulers of England, whether Committee
of Safety (so called) Council of Officers, or others whatsoever. He signified
by Way of Introduction, That the Contents had been upon him to deliver by
Speech and Word of Mouth, to the Men then in Power; but no Way being made for
him so to do, he had written what was upon him: And then he begins thus with a
majestic Strain:

Friends,
MY Master is a high, and mighty, and powerful Prince, and very honorable; and
Fear, Reverence, Respect, and Subjection belongs to him alone, from you and all
Mankind; he is wise, and understanding, and of great Strength, and his Dominion
is from everlasting to everlasting, and he can do whatsoever he will in Heaven
and Earth, for he rules with his Iron Rod over the World, and whatsoever he
says, it is done: for his Word is an everlasting Command: If he says to a
Man, Live, it is so; if he says to a Man, Die, it comes to pass; and if he
give Peace to a Man or a Nation, none can make War; and if he make War with a
Person, or in a Nation, no Man is able to make Peace: For why? He has all
Power in his Hand, and to him all Judgment and Authority is given; he is the
Son of the living God, the everlasting Creator; he was, and is, and is to come;
his Eye beholds all Things, and his Arm compasses Heaven and Earth; and what
his Purpose is, he has always, and will ever bring it to pass: If he set up
Rulers, they must rule; and if he pull them down, none can hinder: Whom he
will, he honors; and if it be his Pleasure, he brings Men to Shame: If he
break a Nation down, none can build it up; and if he confound Powers and
Authorities in the Kingdoms of Men, they all fall as withered Grass before him.
Behold ye Men! He is so great and mighty, and of so great Authority, that
whatsoever he says, it is done; and whatsoever he wills, it comes to pass,
and none is able to resist him, and overcome his Power, when his Pleasure is to
accomplish a Work: By him all Things are that be, and all Things live that have
Life, and through him all Things move, and of his Fullness every Creature in
Heaven and Earth receive. And this, my Master, is altogether honorable in
Birth, and otherwise, and altogether mighty in all his Works; he is just and
merciful, full of Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth; all Virtue dwells in him,
and his Judgment and Mercy, his Authority and Meekness, and his Wrath and his
Love, they are Companions; and what are ye before him? Or how shall ye be able
to resist him, or to turn backward what his Purpose is concerning you, and this
Nation? For ye have no Being nor Breath without him. Behold ye Men! ye are
verily as the Dust before the Wind, so are ye to him, soon blown away, and your
Place not found; as the Grass before the Mower, so are ye before him, soon cut
down, and wi^hered, and your Beauty utterly extinguished; as a Potter's Vessel
under an ^on Rod, even so are you to him, he can immediately bre^^ you, never
to be bound up; as a Drop to the Fountain, so are you to him, soon dried up;
and made nothing: Wherefore ye Men, ye mortal Creatures, ye ignorant Persons,
Sons of a Transgressor, ye Dust and Ashes, for thus you are in Comparison of
him, this mighty Prince, hearken to his Message, which comes to you from him;
hear and fear, and be not stout Hearted against the Lord God, that is about to
speak unto you. As for this little Island of England, wherein your present
Place and Being is, it is an Island which the Lord has showed great Favor
unto in Ages past, and in this present Time; and I must tell you, he has a
Purpose of Love toward it, and to honor it in the View of the World, though
through great Tribulations; and he has an Intent of great Good unto it; for he
has a Seed, a precious Seed in it, scattered abroad, and he has a People that
fear his Name, and have walked in his Ways, and he has made them, and elected
them, and what they are, it is by him; that he may dwell among them, and have
the whole Government over them all; yea, he has a speedy Purpose verily
concerning this Nation, and he will purify it in Judgment, and refine its
Inhabitants through the Fire of Tribulations, that it may be pleasant to him, and
fit to do his Will: He has a Purpose to work some great Thing in it, I must
tell you, as he has said unto me so to do^ he will have his Name exalted and
reverenced in this Island, and his Terror shall be sent out of it through the
World, and his Branch from it shall spread over the Earth; he does purpose in
his Season, to take it into his own Hand, and to sway the Government thereof
with his own Scepter, and to set up Righteousness alone, and to overthrow all
Oppressors and Oppressions; and the Kingdoms of this World must become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. True it is, such has been the coming
to pass of Time, and of Things, for many Ages bypast, that my Master has
been, as it were, banished from the Nation, and has not been suffered to enjoy
his Right, but has been expelled, even, as it were, by the Force of Satan and
Antichrist, who has long usurped Authority over the Inhabitants of this
Nation; and in my Master's Absence lamentable Injustice, Cruelty,
Unmercifulness, Tyranny and Oppression has been exercised upon the
Inhabitants, and the poor Creatures have been held in great Slavery by their
Rulers, that have ruled by the Dragon's Power, and been kept in great Blindness
and Ignorance, and under great Oppression both in Body and Spirit, by
antichristian Teachers, for this many Years, even while the great King has
been absent, and as it were gone into a far Country; even all this Time has
Antichrist and the Devil ruled and reigned, and have made and executed
Oppression and tyrannical Laws and Decrees, both in Church and State; and all
the Nation has been out of right Order, and laid waste and barren of good
Fruit, and it has been as a Wilderness by reason hereof; and Men that have
ruled for many Years, have not ruled singly by my Master's Authority, but by
another Power, though not without the Knowledge of my Lord, neither as though he
had not Power to have done otherwise; but for his own Pleasure he has suffered
it thus to be, and let Men go on to rule and govern in their own Wills, and
after their own Lusts; and People have walked wickedly toward him, and toward
one another; and all this he has suffered, not as if he gave Toleration for
it; for his Messengers now and then, and his Witness in Peoples Consciences,
have been reproving their ungodly Ways, and he has often showed his Dislike by
diverse Ways and Tokens, and many Judgments, and strange Overturning, to the Way
and Proceeding of both Rulers, Prophets, and Teachers of this Nation; but yet
they have gone on against his Mind, and contrary to his Will, notwithstanding
his Reproofs and Judgments: Not that he had not Power to have executed his
Pleasure in Wrath upon them, and to have destroyed them altogether, and have
made the Nation a Heap, and as nothing long before this Day; for Power was in
his Hand to have done it; but he has been long-susfering, and of great
Patience, and born all Things, and taken the Injustice, and Cruelty, and
Wickedness, and Idolatry, and all Unrighteousness that has abounded in the
Nation, upon himself, and suffered under it, and born it for its Season, while
woeful and lamentable Oppressions have been practiced in civil State, even
hellish Laws, and devilish Executors of them; merciless Tyrants have born the
Scepter, and reigned for many Years over the Inhabitants, and in Church and
State has been heinous Idolatry and superstitious Vanities committed in a high
Nature and Measure, and even all Men, and States of Men, and Orders of Men of
every Degree have been abominably corrupted in the Sight of my Lord, even from
the Prince to the Beggar, even Rulers and Subjects, Teachers and People, Judges
and Prophets, they have been corrupted both in Heart and Hand, and they have
dealt falsely and wickedly toward him, and toward one another, even to the
great Displeasure and Vexation of him, and his blessed Spirit, and to the high
Provocation of him to their own Destruction, if his Long-suffering had not
prevailed; and all this while he has lain as it were asleep, and at rest in
himself; and he has left Men to try them, what they will do, and he has given
them a Day; many Kings and Rulers he has let them have a little Time, to see
how they would use it; but they have abused it, and not ruled for him, nor
accomplished his Work, nor fulfilled his Will, but acted even in Defiance of
him, and of his Power, and to his great Dishonor. Alack! I must be plain with
you: My Lord has been utterly exiled, and greatly dishonored, and highly
provoked and vexed, by reason of such Proceedings, as have been in this Nation
for these many Years, through the Corruption of all Sorts of Men in Place and
Power, who have not ruled for him, but for the Devil, to their own corrupted
Ends; only he has suffered Men to go on in their Course for a Season; some as
it were appearing on the Stage for a Time, and suddenly cast down again for
their Iniquities Sake; and his Hand has been in all these Things, though very
privately and secretly, not known and discerned by the Sons of Men, yet has he
ruled over the Kingdoms of Men, and pulled down one, and set up another. And to
forbear the several Actings and Proceedings of many by-passed Ages, and to come
to this Generation, and to speak of Things that have happened within these few
Years, and of the Changing and overturning that has happened in this Nation;
such was the Cruelty, Tyranny, Oppression and Idolatry, both in Church and
Civil State, that the People of this Nation were held under, in the Days of
Papal Power; such, I say, was the exceeding Height of the Cruelty and Tyranny
of that Time, that not any that feared or reverenced my Lord, in any Measure,
could scarce live, or have a Being in the Nation; even against every Man that
did but incline toward him, and desire the Knowledge of his Ways, Hell's Mouth
was opened against them, and they were swallowed up, and many of their Lives
taken from the Earth, by the Hellish Power that had in that Day usurped
Authority in this Island; and when thus it was, then he looked down from
Heaven, and his Bowels of Compassion were opened, for the Sake of the oppressed
People that desired after him, in so much that he broke and threw down the
Power of their Oppressors in some Measure, as it stood in Papal Authority; and
when the Iniquity of that Power was filled up, he took Vengeance upon it; and I
must tell you, it was he that brought it about, even the Destroying of that
Power in this Nation, and freeing the Nation from it, though the Men that were
Instruments in the Cause were not his Servants, otherwise than as
Nebuchadnezzar served him; for he has a secret Way to have a Service from the
Wicked, and such is his Power, that he can turn the Wickedness of the Wicked to
his Glory, and he can make a Rod to whip his Adversaries, and burn it when he
has done, and he has often destroyed one Wickedness by another. Well, but to
leave that, though he did in some Measure free the Nation from much Tyranny and
Cruelty, in the casting out Popish Authority; yet alack! the Nation in a few
Years was near as much violated by Injustice and Cruelty, under the succeeding
Power, as ever it was once under the Papal Power; though before there had been
some small Reformation and Change in outward Appearance, though little in Ground
and Nature; yet Oppression, and Idolatry, and Superstition in Church and State,
and all Profaneness and Wickedness among People was grown so high, like as it
had been under the Papal Power before; and all that desired after the Lord, and
were weary of Iniquity, and of the then present Oppressions and Idolatries,
were persecuted, and slain, and destroyed, and Injustice and Cruelty exercised
upon them, even almost to the rooting out of Righteousness, and to the grieving
of the Lord's Spirit: Well then, because of the Cry of the People, and the
Oppression of the Nation under that Authority, my Lord looked down again, and
even for his Name's Sake, and for his Seed's Sake, he had Compassion on this
Nation, to set it free, and to break off its Oppressions; and in a great
Measure he did deliver the People of this Nation in many Things, and there was
a Part of Reformation wrought, and much pretended and looked for; and all this
came to pass through him, and my Lord did accomplish it, however the Instruments
by which he wrought proved deceitful, and became Oppressors, as others before
them: and though there was in this Nation a Day of great Troubles, and Wars, and
Contention, and great Strife, and the wasting of much Blood, and earthly
Treasure; and none of these Things I must tell you, fell without the ordering
of my Master's Hand; yet so it was, and came to pass, that after this Nation
was restored to Peace, though much Unrighteousness and Injustice was removed, yet
there was much also left behind; and Men that he had used as Instruments in his
Hand, in a good Work, and to whom he had given Wisdom and Understanding, and
appeared in much Mercy and in great Deliverance; yet they even turned to seek
themselves, and became corrupted in the Spoils of their Enemies, and when Peace
and Plenty abounded, the Lord was forgotten again; and then the Land fell under
Oppressors, and began again to cry out for Freedom, even when other Horns of
the first Beast sprang up, and went on each of them after his Follow; and though
one Horn has striven to break another, yet after one has been cast down,
another has rison, and made an Image to the first, and ruled and reigned by
the same Spirit and Authority, derived from the Dragon's Power in Cruelty and
Oppression, and made Laws, and executed them to the Dishonor of the Lord, and
to the great Oppression of his People, and to the filling of this Island with
Injustice and Cruelty, even from one Generation to another, until this Day: And
thus up and down have Times and Seasons been altered, Powers and Authority
changed and altered, Statutes, Laws and Decrees, changeable and alterable; for
as the Iniquity of one Power was; filled up, that was cast down, and another
had its Day, till the Measure thereof was also filled up, that it might partake
of the same Judgments. And in all these Overturnings, Breakings-down and
Overthrowings, the very Hand of my Lord has been, though secretly, and not
discerned, yet his Power has brought about, and suffered all these Things to
come to pass and who shall charge him with Injustice? Or, who shall say, What
have thou done! Or, Why have thou done it? For, as I have said, he is a high
and mighty Prince, and can do whatsoever he will; and he is the supreme Power
mad Authority, which rules and reigns in, and over all the Kingdoms of Men. And
what though he has used wicked Men as an Instrument to accomplish his Work, and
made the Wicked his Rod, and even brought it to pass, that one Wickedness
should destroy another, and one Oppressor break down another, and the Kingdom
of Antichrist confound it self; yet what of all these Things? All Flesh must be
silent before him, and all People, and the whole Earth must be subject unto
him; for the Government and Dominion over Heaven and Earth is his, and all
Power and Dominion belongs to him alone, and all Judgment is in his Hand, to
bring to pass whatsoever he will, and by whomsoever as he pleases. But now, my
Friends, though I would not be tedious to you, yet I must I tell you the Truth,
and faithfully deliver the Lord's Message unto you; and as concerning this last
Overturning, there was something of the Hand of my Lord in it; and he can, and
will bring forth his own Work and Praise by it, and it shall be for the Good of
all his People, that wait upon him, though there was much Ambition and corrupted
Ends in the Instruments, and neither Part were perfectly single to the Lord in
their Proceedings; but their Work was tainted with the false idolatrous Spirit
of Self-Seeking: Yet notwithstanding, the Lord may bring forth his Government,
and his pleasant Plant, through and beyond all this, even out of another Root,
which yet appears not among either ot them; and Righteousness may arise in the
Nation, contrary to both of them, out of another Stem, and he will set up his
Kingdom; and in the mean Time, leave one Potsherd of the Earth to break
another. And as for you, that now sit on the Throne, and bear Rule, whether
Committee of Safety, (so called) chiefly, though it is not without my Master; for
he has the Knowledge of it at least; yet you are not the only Men of his
Choice, truly called of him to the Place of Government, neither is your
Government the Government of the Lamb; neither must it be for ever established
by him; its Foundation is not blessed, nor can its Building be prosperous: For
why? Alas, it is but another Horn of that Fourth Beast, that has been made to
rule over the World, and upon the Earth for many Generations, and it is but
hitherto a very little refined from the last, and is of the last, even as the
Eighth was of the Seventh, spoken of by that Servant, Rev. xvii. 11. and it may
also make War with the Lamb and his Followers for a little Season, and it may
have a small Measure of Injustice and Persecution to bring forth in the Land,
even till the Words of God be fulfilled, and his Kingdom be fully come; the Way
of which is but yet preparing by all these Overturnings: Is meant here,
chiefly, the new Committee of Safety (so called.)
And this your present Government originally is leavened with the Spirit of the
Old Dragon, that has killed the Saints, and drunk their Blood, and how should
the Lord establish it? Nay, your Kingdom may prove but small and little, and
full of Vproars and Troubles, and little Peace, and Satisfaction and
Establishment in it to your selves, nor the People under you; but Confusion
will attend it, and Fears will compass it about: Though this I must tell you, as
you are Men, You have your Day of Trial what you will do, as many others have
had before you; and something you may and ought to do, if but to make the Whore
(the false Church) more naked, and to scourge her more than some others have
done; and indeed my Lord requires something more of you (as such) to do, than
others before you could do; and you have a Price put into your Hands, which you
may improve to the Lord's Honor, and to the Nations Good, and to your own
Happiness; which, if you be faithful to the Lord, to do what he requires of
you, and if you become meek and humble Men, and fear his Name, and deny your
selves, and not seek your own Honors, nor any Earthly Advantage to your
selves; if you do thus, then my Lord will show Mercy to you, and you shall not
suddenly fall before your Enemies, though many may rise up against you; but your
Days shall be lengthened, and the Purpose of the Lord may be turned to your
longer Continuance, and not to your sudden Destruction; and if you walk in this
Way, and rule only for the Lord, then shall you be honored as Men, if not as
an Authority, and you and the Nation preserved in Peace, and the Force of the
Wicked shall be turned backward, and you shall not suddenly fall. And the late
sundry Overturnings in this Nation may be Examples to you, that you follow not
the Steps of those that God has cast out, lest you come to the same End of
Confusion and Misery: For, as concerning that Assembly of Men, that last sat
on the Throne, something was done by them in their Day and Time, and in both
their Assemblings, in some Things they served my Lord, and they were a Rod in
his Hand to smite his Enemies; yet they were not faithful to the End, till all
his Enemies were destroyed, but rather joined themselves to fight against the
Lord and his People, and were hastening on toward the Way of Oppression and
Persecution; and it was Time for the Lord to remove them, and to lay them aside
as an empty Vessel, sometime useful; and to break them as a Rod, sometime of
Service to be a Scourge upon his Enemies: And when the Day of their Trial was
over, which God gave unto them, being any longer (for present) unfit
Instruments for his Hand, then he cast them into the Fire; and this his Purpose
came to pass upon them: So that they and the whole Nation may be contented, and
yield themselves subject to what he has done concerning them; for they being
entering into the very same Spirit of Wickedness, of Oppression and Persecution,
which the Lord had once reproved through them, and cast out by them; then was a
Rod raised up against them, even as they had been against others, and they were
dealt withal as they had done to others; and this was in the Justice of my
Lord's Hand: And what has mortal Man to question his Proceedings? And though
some of you (present Rulers) be looked upon as great Traitors and Tyrants in
your Dealing toward them, and doubtless the Men of that Part will seek
Vengeance against you, even by Preaching and Praying, and they will curse you
in the Name of their God, and seek continually your Destruction, as such as
have taken away Part of their Strength, and cast down their Idol; but alas! all
this is nothing; for the Lord does not account as Men: For these Things must
needs thus come to pass, for the Furtherance of the Kingdom and Government of
Jesus Christ, that it may arise through all; and if you were but faithful to what
the Lord requires of you in your Proceedings, what you have done unto them
should not be reckoned on Account against you, neither by God nor good Men. But
and if you of the Army be always treacherous and disobedient toward him, and
abuse your Power, and disregard your Price, that God has given you, and trifle
away your Hour about Places of Honor, and such self-seeking Matters, and the
Cause of God be neglected by you, and his People continued oppressed Sufferers
under you, as they have long been; A remarkable Prophecy.
Even then shall you be cast aside with shameful Disgrace, and the heavy Hand
of the Lord shall be upon you in Judgment, and you shall be smitten more than
any before you; your Estates shall not be spared from the Spoiler, nor your
Souls from the Pit, nor your Persons from the Violence of Men, no, nor your
Necks from the Axe: For if you be unfaithful, and continually treacherous to
the Cause of God, then shall you be left to the Will of your Enemies, and they
shall charge Treachery and Treason upon you, and your Persons and Estates shall
be given for a Prey to your Enemies; and you shall not deliver your selves,
neither will the Lord deliver you from the Execution of merciless Men; for my
Lord shall leave the Cruel-hearted to plead with you. Wherefore that you may be
warned, I advise you to be faithful, let not the Cause of God fall, nor the
Cause of his Enemies prosper before you; for there is no other Way whereby you
can be preserved, nor no other Defense shall you ever find from the Wrath of
the Lord, and from the Fury of your devouring Enemies, than your Faithfulness
in God's Cause; and therefore relieve the Oppressed, and take off all
Oppressions, break down all unjust Laws, and set all People free from unjust
Burdens, and let all Oppression cease, both in Church and Civil State; and even
all oppressive Laws, and unjust Judges, and evil Men in Power, let all these be
removed, and the Nation clean quitted and discharged even from all Men and Laws
whatsoever, that have held under Oppression the Persons, Estates, and
Consciences of the good People of this Land; and let the Nation be corrected,
and all Orders and Places of Men, and Laws, and Decrees be purified; for this
my Lord, the Great King requires, and he will suddenly have it brought to pass
in the Nation, if not by you, then contrary to you, and to your utter
Destruction: And this is the very Substance of my Message to you, that my
Master has given me to say unto you; and on his Behalf I am come to claim of
you my Master's long lost Right; let him have his Right, from which he has
long been banished; I demand it of you, all ye whatsoever, that seem to bear
Rule in the Nation; I charge you in his Name, let him have his Title and
Prerogative, let him be Lord and King wholly in his own Kingdom, let him have
the Exercise of his People's Consciences by his own Spirit in all Things
related to his Worship and Service, and let him have the full Authority by his
Spirit in all Things pertaining to Church, and Ministry, and Faith, and
Religion; and let his Spirit have the alone Authority to persuade and dissuade
People from, or to such or such Ministry, Worship, and Practices of Religion;
and let all forced Maintenance to Ministers, and Tithes be speedily taken away;
and let all Laws and Decrees whatsoever, made and practiced in the Days ot
Antichrist, upon the Bodies, Estates, and Consciences of the People, in
Oppression and Unjustness about Church, and Worship, and Religion, be utterly
repealed, and made void, and never more be in Force in this Nation: But let my
Lord be sole Ruler and Governor, and have the full Authority in his own
Kingdom, in all Things whatsoever pertaining thereunto; and let no Man
henceforth hereafter be entrusted with the Liberties of the Members of Christ's
Kingdom, as they are such, nor to judge over them in any Matters of Faith and
Worship, but give that Right and Privilege wholly unto the Spirit of Jesus
Christ; for unto him only it pertains, to be whole Judge, and to have full
Power in his own Kingdom; and until you give him the Right, and deliver up unto
him his own Kingdom, and the Exercise of People's Consciences in all Things
about RELIGION, you shall never prosper, nor none that comes after you, that
shall in any measure abridge my Master of his proper RIGHT, from which he has
long been banished, as I have said; and till his Right be given him, in the
Case aforesaid, He will dash one Man against another, and none shall ever be
established, but Horn after Horn shall be broken, and one Power after another
brought into Confusion. And therefore, ye Men, do not strive with him in this
Matter, but yield unto him the Exercise of your own Consciences by his Spirit
in you, and let him do so unto all others, even as ye hope to prosper, and upon
the Penalty of his sore Displeasure upon you in this World, and in the World to
come; and let just Men, and righteous Men, and meek Men, and Men that have the
Fear and Wisdom of God in them, without Acceptance of Birth, or otherwise; let
such Men have the Power and Judgment committed to them, to determine in Things
between Man and Man. Down with all the false hearted Flatterers, that have
ruled for Man, and not for God, and for themselves, and not for the Good of the
People; cast all such out from among you; for the Good among you is choked by
them: Down with all that judge for Rewards; and away with all hireling Rulers,
that execute the Law for Money, and will not plead the Cause of the Poor
without great Fees: And down with all that will not serve Places of Trust
without so large Stipends; away with all these Things out of the Land, for they
are heinous Oppressions unto Men, and great Abominations in the Sight of God,
and the Land has long groaned under the Weight and Burden of these Things, and
the Earth is weary of them, and my Lord requires their utter Desolation, as
being Iniquities fully ripe, and having the Guilt of so much Cruelty,
Injustice, and Oppression lying upon the Nation because hereof, therefore this
is the Lord's Season to destroy them, and remove them out of the Land; which if
you be the Instruments in such a Work, it will be your greatest Crown, and your
perpetual Honor; for the Lord's Purpose is one Way or other to cleanse the
Land of all these and other Oppressions whatsoever, that the People of this
Land may be a free People from all the heavy Yokes of Antichrist, which have
long sorely pressed them down; and the Purpose of the Lord is to break the
Yokes of Oppression and Tyranny from off the Necks of this People; and
therefore it is that he overturneth, yea, and will overturn all Men and
Authorities that shall oppose his Work, and none shall be able to stand before
him; for the Presence of my Lord is more dreadful to a Nation, when he shows
himself in Wrath, than any Multitude of armed Men; and Woe is unto you, if you
be found opposing of him; and if you seek to stop his Work, you shall not
cumber the Earth very long, nor oppress the Nations many Days. Wherefore
consider, Cursed will you be, if you be unfaithful in what you have to do on
the Lord's Behalf; for your Hour passes over that is allotted you, and will be
suddenly expired, never to be recalled, and then you cannot work.

And whereas there is a great Cry about Ministry, For sending forth, and
maintaining, and encouraging a godly Ministry, as you say.

Now to this I do answer on my Lord's Behalf, and I must tell you plainly; as
for a true godly Ministry, truly called and sent of God, such a Ministry, and
such Ministers, you can never be able to hinder; but the Lord will send them
out, maintaining them and preserving them, whether you will or no; and while
you are troubling your selves about such a Ma^ter, you are but meddling with
Things above your Line, and out of your Jurisdiction, while you act in such a
Case; for it belongs to his Government to send out Ministers, whom, and as he
will, and to maintain, and to defend them according to his own Pleasure, and
all this without you; for such Ministers truly called thereunto, and sent of
the Lord, will not seek to you to be sent forth, or maintained by you, they
will not be beholden to you in such a Case; but even without you, and contrary
to you, must they be sent out, and maintained: So that the Lord will have a
Ministry in this Nation purely of his own, and not of Man, nor by Man, and such
a Ministry you shall not be able to hinder.

And I must tell you plainly, As for these Men called Ministers, in this
Nation, the Way of their setting up, and sending forth, and the Way of their
Maintenance, and the Way of their Standing and Defense, and in every Particular
of their being such, they are the greatest and most woeful Oppression in the
Nation, even the most abominable and unjust Cruelties and Tyrannies are acted
through them, as any 'other Thing in the Nation, and they are (as such aforesaid)
the woeful Cause of the Nation's groaning under merciless Dealing; and there is
upon their Account the Guilt of Blood, Injustice, and Oppression lying upon
this Nation; their Iniquities, their Iniquities cry for Vengeance upon their
own Heads; for they are full, they are full, and the Measure thereof is near
finished, and God's eternal Vengeance is their next Reward from the eternal
God. What shall I say of them, but this? The Earth is oppressed by them, the
Inhabitants groan under them, and the righteous God is vexed through them, and
they are the very Men of high Indignation and fierce Wrath, and all their
Practices (as such) are the Fuel of his Anger, to be consumed by the Fire of
his Jealousy; the Nation is weary, and its Inhabitants, and the Lord is weary
because of these Men: And is this the Ministry cried up by you as godly and
pious, etc? Are these the Men that the Nation must be forced to maintain in
their Pride and Idolatry? Is this the Ministry that must be encouraged? Well,
if these be the Men, and this the Ministry which must be established and
encouraged by you, in so doing you shall never prosper, but thereby gain the
Displeasure of the Almighty unto you, to bring a Curse upon all your Doings,
even because hereof; for I must tell you, the Hand of my Lord is against them,
and whosoever shall seek to defend them, shall not prosper in their Doings;
because their Oppressions, Cruelties, Deceit, and Abominations are nigh
finished and fulfilled: Wherefore take Heed unto your selves, for this is my
Master's Advice unto you; Let this Ministry alone, and join not your selves to
Baal, lest you perish, neither take Part with Antichrist any longer, neither be
ye Fighters against the Lamb and his Kingdom; but free the Nation, and let all
its Inhabitants be freed from the cruel Tasks and Yokes of such Men, and such a
Ministry as aforesaid; uphold it not against the Lord, for if you do, you shall
never be established; and this is from the Mouth of my Lord unto you.

And last of all, My Master has a People in this Nation, even a suffering
People, that have born the Burden of the Cruelty and Injustice, and Wickedness
both of Rulers and Teachers, who have, as it were, trodden them down, and made
them a very Prey to their devouring Mouths; the very Cry of their Sufferings
has reached unto Heaven, and the very Sound thereof your Ears have heard; and
this People are greatly beloved, and my Lord will assuredly honor them, and
his Hand shall be continued to preserve them and defend them against all their
Enemies whatsoever; and he does reserve them to himself, and for a glorious
Work that he has to do by them; and he has formed them for himself, and they
cannot join with any of the Horns of the Great B^ast, neither can a Place of
Honor pervert them from their perfect Way; but my Lord, he compasses them
about on every Side, and has kept them in the Midst of Trials, Reproaches and
Sufferings, and covered them in the Heat, and in the Storm, till his Pleasure
is to make further Use of them; they are his, and not their own; and they must
fulfill his Will, and none besides; and they lie at Rest in him, while Mountains
are overturned, and while one Potsherd of the Earth breaks another; and this
must be even till the appointed Time: And to say no more of them, though much
more might be said, they are had in Remembrance before the Lord, to do with
them even for his own Glory, and for this Nation's perpetual Good; and to the
Authority of the most High, through them, shall Kings of the Earth, and Nations
of the World bow and tremble; wherefore ye Men, touch them not, neither do ye
afflict them, even as you hope to prosper; remember their Cause, and suffer it
not always to be rejected, as it has long been, but keep your selves free from
the Injustice and Cruelty of them that have gone before you, who have been
merciless, and Oppressors of that People, even till my Lord has confounded
them, and brought them into Confusion; for there is the Weight of Blood, of
Tyranny and Oppression lying upon the Nation in that People's Cause, and my
Lord will revenge them in his Season; and though they are not weary of their
Sufferings, but are in the Patience which bears all Things, yet the Nation
can never be happy, nor its Government ever blessed, while this People are held
in Bondage; and their Sufferings are deeply considered of the Lord, and the
Season thereof is expiring toward an End; and when this comes to pass, then
Woe unto the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to the Whore and false Prophet, even
when their Strength is dried up, by which they have made War against the Lamb,
and his Followers; yea, Woe unto them, great Fearfulness shall be upon all the
World when the King of that People reigns upon the Earth, and the Time is at
hand; blessed is the Man that waits for it, and blessed is he that is not
offended in his Coming, but is prepared to receive him in his Appearing, which
suddenly comes upon all the World.

And thus I have told the Lord's present Message unto you, which I received
from him, and thus far I am clear; and whether you accept it, or reject it, my
Peace and Reward is for ever with him, who am a Subject of his Kingdom, and a
Friend to this Nation, however otherwise judged by ignorant Men.

E. Buroughs.
The 9th Month, 1659.

Now how soon after these Sayings of Buroughs were fulfilled, Your Estates
shall not be spared from the Spoiler, nor your Ne^ks from the Ax; your Enemies
shall charge Treason upon you, and if you seek to stop the Lord's Work, you
shall not cumber the Earth very long; we shall see shortly.

About this Time also, he wrote several Epistles to his Friends, wherein he so
powerfully exhorted them to Faithtfulness and Stedfastness, that thereby he
has procured to himself a Name that will never die; as living still in the
Remembrance of Thousands, though he long ago went the Way of all Flesh, having
laid down his Life in Bonds for the Testimony of Jesus, as will be said in its
due Place. There Is also extant a Piece of a Letter written about this Time to
the Cavaliers, which, whether done by E. Borough, or by George Fox the
younger, or by George Bishop, Letter to the Cauali^^s.
I cannot tell; but thus it speaks; The very same Spirit of Pride and
Oppression, and Idolatry, is entered into them, (viz. your Enemies) and now
lives in them in as high a Measure as ever it lived amongst you; and their
Iniquities are well nigh finished, and the Lord will one Way or another correct
and reprove them; and they shall be dealt with in like Manner as they have
dealt with you; for they were no more than a Rod in the Hand of the Lord for a
Season, and they must also he broken and cast into the Fire; and whether the
Lord may ever make Use of you to reprove them, as he did of them to reprove
you, this I determine not, but leave it to him who can do whatsover he will, by
what Instrument he pleases. It is true, you have made many Attempts to be
revenged upon them, but you have not hitherto prospered; but could you be
humbled, and come into the meek Spirit of the Lord, then might you prosper; but
hitherto the Lord has always defeated you, and bowed you down under a People
as unworthy as others, but their Time will come to an End. Submit therefore
unto the Will of the Lord in what is come to pass, and seek not Vengeance to
your selves; and then the Lord will avenge your Cause; for the Iniquities of
your Adversaries are ripe -- And Charles Stuart must either be converted to
God, and ruled by him, or else he can never rightly rule for God in this
Nation; though this I believe, it is not impossible but that he may be a Rod upon
them that once smote him; and their Oppressions and Ambitions may receive a
Check through him.

Among several other eminent Preachers, S. Crisp goes to preach in Scotland.
Stephen Crisp was now also become a public Minister of the Word of God; and
it was about this Time that he went to Scotland, to preach the Gospel there,
and to edify the Churches with his Gift. G. Fox jun. writes to the Army.
George Fox the Younger wrote this Year an Exhortation to the military Officers
and those of the Army; showing them how they were departed from their first
Integrity, and fallen into Pride and Wau^onness. And G. Fox the Elder was about
the Tenth Month at Norwich, where a Meeting being appointed, the Mayor having
got Notice of it, intended to have given out a Warrant to apprehend him, but he
having heard of this, sent some of his Friends to the Mayor, to speak with him
about it. And his Answer was, that he feared that such a Meeting would cause
Tumults in the Town. But being spoken to in a kind Way, he behaved himself
moderately; and a large peaceable Meeting was kept, A great Meeting at Norwich.
Priest Townsend opposes.
to which among others, several Priests also came; and among these was one
Townsend, who stood up and cried, Error, Blasphemy, etc. G. Fox desired him not
to burden himself with that which he could not make good. But he asserted it to
be Error and Blasphemy, that G. Fox had said, That People must wait upon God by
his Power and Spirit, and feel his Presence, when they did not speak Words. On
this, G. Fox asked him, Whether the Apostles and holy Men of God, did not hear
God speak to them in their Silence, before they spoke forth the Scripture, and
before it was written? He replied, Yes, and confirmed it by saying plainly, But
is confuced.
David and the Prophets did so. Then G. Fox showed the People how absurd it
was, that Townsend had called such a Practice, Error, and Blasphemy. Th^s so
puzzled Townsend, that he said, O, this is not that George Fox I would speak
withal, but this is a subtle Man. Now when some of the Auditory called to the
Priest, and bad him, Prove the Blasphemy and Error which he had charged G, Fox
with, he went away. And being afterward spoken to by George Whitehead and
Richard Hubberthorn, who were then also about Norwich, he was soon confounded,
and brought down.

The Committee of Safety being now in Power, The Long Parliament restored.
Edmond Ludlow continued to urge the Restoring of the Parliament: and General
Monk, who commanded the Army in Scotland, aiming at the Restoration of the
King, yet wrote to the Speaker Lenthal, That he would act for the Parliament,
G. Fox jun. writes to them.
and so it was restored. G. Fox, the Younger wrote to this Parliament a Letter,
wherein he told them, That their Day was turned into Darkness, and that the Sun
was gone down over them. Yea, that the Decree was gone out, and sealed against
them, and it could not be recalled: With many other remarkable Expressions. He
had written at other Times to the Army, and the Parliament, as did also Richard
Hubberthorn; which to avoid Prolixity, I pass by.

Let us now again take a View of the Persecution in New England. Account of New
England Persecution continued.
I have already made Mention of Lawrence and Cassandra Southick, and their Son
Josiah, of whom more is to be said hereafter; but first I Will speak of Daniel
and Provided, Son and Daughter of the said Lawrence and Cassandra. These
^^^^dren seeing how unreasonably their honest Parents, and Brother were ^^^^t
with, were so far from being deterred thereby, that they rather felt themselves
encouraged to follow their Steps, and not to frequent the Assemblies of such a
persecuting Generation; for which Absence they were fined ten Pounds, Lawrence
and Provided Southick sinned and ordered to be sold for Payment.
though it was well known they had no Estate, their Parents being already brought
to Poverty by their rapacious Persecutors. To get this Money, the following
Order was issued in the General Court at Boston.

Whereas Daniel Southick, and Provided Southick, Son and Daughter of Lawrence
Southick, absenting themselves from the public Ordinances, have been fined by
the Courts of Salem and Ipswich, pretending they have no Estates, and resolving
not to work: The Court upon Perusal of a Law, which was made upon the Account
of Debts, in answer to what should be done for the Satisfaction of the Fines,
resolves, that the Treasurers of the several Counties are, and shall be fully
empowered to sell the said Persons, to any of the English Nation, at Virginia
or Barbados, to answer the said Fines, etc.

Edward Rawson, Secretary.

This Order has been answered effectually at large by G. Bishop, who showed
the Unreasonableness of this Work very plainly, from sacred Writ, as from Amos
ii. 6. where the Judgments of God are denounced against those who Sold the
Righteous for Silver, and the Poor for a Pair of Shoes; and from Levit. xxv.
42. where the making the Children of Israel Bondmen is expressly forbidden;
this being not lawful, but in the Case of Theft, if the Thief had nothing to
make Satisfaction with. But to return to Daniel and Provided, there wanted
nothing but the Execution of the said Order against them. Wherefore Edmund
Butter, one of the Treasurers, to get something of the Booty, sought out for
Passage, to send them to Barbados for Sale; but none were willing to take or
carry them: And a certain Master of a Ship, to put the Thing off, pretended,
That thy would spoil all the Ship's Company. To which Butter returned, No, you
need not fear that, for they are poor harmless Creatures, and will not hurt any
Body. Will they not so, replied the Ship-master, And will you offer to make
Slaves of such harmless Creatures? Thus Butter, maugre his wicked Intention,
the Winter being at Hand, sent them home again to shift for themselves, till he
could get a convenient Opportunity to send them away. It happened also in this
Year, that a Girl, about eleven Years old, named Patience Scot, A Girl 11 Tears
sent to Prison.
whose religious Mother had been cruelly whipped by these People, bore Witness
against their wicked Persecution; which so incensed the Persecutors, that they
sent her to Prison: And the Child having been examined, spoke so well to the
Purpose, that she confounded her Enemies; Answers notably.
some of which confessed, that they had many Children, who had been well
educated; and That it were well if they could say half so much for God, as she
could for the Devil. But this Child not being of Years to be obnoxious to the
Law, how wicked soever they were, it seems they could not resolve to proceed to
Banishment, as they did with others.

All that hitherto I have said of the New England Persecution, is but
cursorily, and only a very small Part of those manifold Whippings that were
inflicted there, besides the Extortions of Fines which were exorbitant to a
high Degree; W. Maston fined unreasonably.
as may appear by what was done to William Maston at Hampton, who was fined ten
Pounds for two Books found in his House, five Pounds for not frequenting their
Church, and three Pounds, besides, as a Due to the Priest: and he not being
free in Conscience to pay this Fine, had taken from him what amounted to more
than twenty Pounds. I find also that not long after this Time above a thousand
Pounds was extorted from some only because they had separated themselves from
the Persecuting Church: Exorbitant Sums levied by Distress.
And it seems they were deemed such as were shut out from the Protection of the
Law; insomuch that Thomas Prince, Governor of Plymouth, did not stick to say,
That in his Conscience the Quakers were such a People that deserved to be
destroyed, A barbarous Expression.
they, their Wives, and Children, their Houses and Lands, without Pity or
Mercy. I find also that one Humphry Norton at Newhaven, for being a Quaker, was
whipped severely, and burnt in the Hand with the Letter H, to signify Heretic.

This Cruelty of the English, did also stir up the Dutch to Persecution: For
without enquiring what kind of People the Quakers were, they seemed ready to
conclude them to be Men of pernicious Opinions, since those of their own
Nation, who pretended to more Purity than other Protestants, did so severely
persecute them.

It happened that one Robert Hodshone, being ^n the Dutch Plantation at
Hamstead, Dreadful Instances of Cruelty. R. Hodshone and two Women delivered to
the Dutch by the English, who excite them to Persecution.
had a Meeting with some of his Friends that were English, and lived there; but
as he was walking in an Orchard, an Officer came and took hold of him, and
brought him before one Gilder sleave, an Englishman, and a Magistrate there,
who committed him to Prison, and rode to the Dutch Governor to acquaint him
therewith: And coming back with a Guard of Musketeers, the Fiscal searched the
Prisoner, and took away his Knife, Papers and Bible, and pinioned him, and kept
him so all Night and the next Day. And making Enquiry after those that
entertained him, he took into Custody two Women on that Occasion, one of which
had two small Children, the one yet sucking at her Breast. Then they got a Cart
and carried the Woman away in it, and Robert was fastened to the hinder Part of
the Cart, pinioned, and so drawn through the Woods in the Night Season, whereby
he was much torn and abused. And being come to New Amsterdam, now New York, he
was loosed, and led, by the Rope with which he had been fastened to the Cart,
to the Dungeon, being a filthy Place, full of Vermin; and the two Women were
carried to another Place. Some Time after, he was examined, there being one
Captain Willet, of Plymouth, who had much incensed the Governor against him,
who before had been moderate. The Conclusion was, that a Sentence was read in
Dutch to Robert, His cruel and unrighteous Sentence, and Treatment.
to this Effect, That he was to work two Years at the Wheel-barrow with a
Negro, or pay or cause to be paid Six hundred Guilders. To this he attempted to
make his Defense in a sober Way, but was not suffered to speak, and sent to the
Dungeon again; where no English were suffered to come to him. After some Days
he was taken out, and pinioned and being set with his Face toward the
Court-chamber, his Hat was taken off, and another Sentence read to him in
Dutch, which he did not understand: But that it displeased many of that Nation,
did appear by the Shaking of their Heads. Then he was cast again into the
Dungeon, where he was kept some Days. At length betimes in a Morning, he was
haled out, and chained to a Wheel-barrow, and commanded to work: To which he
answered, He was never brought up, nor used to such a Work. Its rigorous and
barbarous Execution.
Upon which they made a Negro to take a pitched Rope, nigh four Inches about,
and to beat him; who did so, till Robert fell down. Then they took him up
again, and caused the Negro to beat him with the said Rope, until he fell down
the second Time, and it was believed that he received about one Hundred Blows.
Thus he was kept all that Day in the Heat of the Sun, chained to the
Wheel-barrow; and his Body being much bruised and swelled with the Blows, and
he kept without Food, grew very faint, and sat upon the Ground, with his Mind
retired to the Lord, and resigned to his Will, whereby he felt himself
supported. At Night he was locked up again in the Dungeon; and the next Morning
he was chained again to the Wheel-barrow, and a Sentinel set over him, that
none might come so much as to speak with him. On the third Day he was had
forth, and chained in like Manner; and no Wonder that he still refused to work;
for besides the Unreasonableness of requiring such a servile Work of him who
had committed no Evil, he was not in a Condition to perform it, being made
altogether unable by the cruel Blows given him. In this weak State he was
brought before the Governor, who demanded him to work; otherwise, he said, He
should be whipped every Day. Robert asked him, What Law he had broken? and called
for his Accusers, that he might know his Transgression. But instead of an
Answer, he was chained to the Wheel-barrow again, and threatened, that If he
spoke to any one, he should be punished worse. Yet he did not forbear to speak
to some that came to him, so as he saw meet, and thought convenient. Then
seeing they could not keep him silent, they put him into the Dungeon again, and
kept him close there several Days, and two Nights, one Day and a half of it,
without Bread or Water. After this he was brought very early in the Morning
into a private Room, He is hung up by up Hands and whipped.
and stripped to the Waste, and hung up by his Hands, and a great Leg of Wood
tied to his Feet, so that he could not turn his Body, and then a strong Negro
was set to whip him with Rods; who laid many Stripes upon him, which cut his
Flesh very much. Then he was let down again, and put into the Dungeon as
before, and none suffered to come to him. Two Days after, he was had forth
again, and hung up as before, and many more Stripes were laid upon him by
another Negro. He almost fainting, and not knowing but his Life might be taken
away, desired that some English might be suffered to come to him: Which was
granted, and an English Woman came, and washed his Stripes, finding him brought
so low, that she thought he would not live till the next Morning. And she
telling this to her Husband, it made such an Impression upon him, that he went
to the Fiscal, and proffered him a fat Ox, to suffer Robert to be at his House
until he was well again. But the Fiscal would not permit this, unless the whole
Fine was paid. And though (...) were some, that would willingly have paid the
Fine for him, yet he could not consent to it; but within three Days after he
had thus been whipped, he was made whole and as strong as before, and was free
to labor, that he might not be burdensome to any. Some others of those called
Quakers, (who came thither from the Plantations in New England to enjoy Liberty
of Conscience, and whose Names and Sufferings I pass by for Brevity's Sake) met
also with hard Measure from the Governor, by the Instigation of the aforesaid
Captain Willet. He is dismissed without paying a Fine, through Inter^^^^ of the
Governor's Sister
Robert now, though guiltless, being kept like a Slave to hard Work, it raised
Compassion in many, and the Governor's Sister, who was much affected with his
Sufferings, became instrumental in obtaining his Liberty; for she so plied her
Brother, that he at length set him free without paying one Penny, or any Body
for him; by which the Governor showed, that though he had been too easily wrought
upon to commit Evil, yet he was not come near to that Height of Malice, as the
New England Persecutors, New-Enggland Persecutors more cruel than the Dutch.
who increased in their Hard-heartedness, and became inured to Cruelty.
Insomuch that if any one amongst them would not give his Vote for Persecution,
he was counted unworthy to be a Magistrate; as appears by a Letter of one James
Cudworth, written some Time before to one of his Friends in Old England,
wherein I meet with these Words;

As for the State and Condition of Things amongst us, it is sad: The
Antichristian persecuting Spirit is very active, and that in the Powers of this
World. He that will not whip and lash, persecute and punish Men that differ in
Matters of Religion, must not sit on the Bench, nor sustain any Office in the
Commonwealth. Last Election, Mr. Hatherly and my self left the Bench, and my
self was discharged of my Captainship, because I had entertained some of the
Quakers at my House, that thereby I might be the better acquainted with their
Principles. I thought it better to do so, than with the blind World to censure,
condemn, rail at, and revile them, when they neither saw their Persons, nor
knew any thing of their Principles. But the Quakers and my self cannot close in
diverse Things; and so I signified to the Court, I was no Quaker, but must give
my, Testimony against sundry Things that they held, as I had Occasion and
Opportunity. But withal I told them, That as I was no Quaker, so I would be no
Persecutor. See the Sequel, New England judged, Part 1. p. 168.


Now I shall enter upon the Narrative of their putting some to Death, They
proceed to capital punishments.
who died Martyrs; for this was yet wanting to complete the Tragedy, which it
seems could not be done to the Satisfaction of the Actors without playing a
murdering part.

The two first that sealed their Testimony with their Blood, were William
Robinson, Merchant of London, and Mirmaduke Stevenson, a Country Man of
Yorkshire. W Robionson and M. Stevenson banished on pain of Death. Also M. Dyar
and N. Davis.
These coming to Boston in the Beginning of September, were sent for by the
Court of Assistants, and there sentenced to Banishment on Pain ot Death. This
Sentence was passed also on Mary Dyar, mentioned heretofore, and Nicholas
Davis, who were both at Boston. But William Robinson being looked upon as a
Teacher, was also condemned to be whipped severely; and the Constable was
commanded to get an able Man to do it. W. Robinson whipped
Then Robinson was brought into the Street, and there stripped; and having his
Hands put through the Holes of the Carriage of a great Gun, where the Jailer held
him, the Executioner gave him twenty Stripes with a three-fold-cord Whip. They
are released and banished only on Account of their Profession
Then he and the other Prisoners were shortly released, and banished; which
that it was for no other Reason but their being Quakers, may appear by the
following Warrant.

You are required by these, presently to set at Liberty William Robinson,
Marmaduke Stevenson, Mary Dyar, and Nicholas Davis, who, by an Order of the
Court and Council, had been imprisoned, because it appeared by their own
Confession, Words and Actions, that they are Quakers; wherefore a Sentence was
pronounced against them, to depart this Jurisdiction On Pain of Death, and they
must answer it at their Peril, if they, or any of them, after the 14th of this
present Month, September, are found within this Jurisdiction, or any Part
thereof.

Edward Rawson
Boston, September 12. 1659.
Now though Mary Dyar and Nicholas Davis left that Jurisdiction for that Time,
yet Robinson and Stevenson, though they departed the Town of Boston, could not
yet resolve (not being free in Mind) to depart that Jurisdiction, though their
Lives were at Stake. And so they went to Salem, and some Place thereabout to
visit, and build up their Friends in the Faith. W. Robinson M. Stevenson and
M.Dyar again taken up.
But it was not long before they were taken, and put again into Prison at
Boston, and Chains locked to their right Legs. In the next Month, Mary Dyar
returned also. And as she stood before the Prison, speaking with one
Christopher Holder, who was come thither to inquire for a Ship bound for
England, whither he intended to go, she was also taken into Custody. Thus they
had now three Persons, who, according to their sanguinary Law had forfeited
their Lives. Are brought into court.
And on the 20th of October, these three were brought into the Court, where
John Indicot and others were assembled. And being called to the Bar, Indicot
commanded the Keeper to pull off their Hats, and then said, That they had made
several Laws to keep the Quakers from amongst them; and neither Whipping, nor
Imprisoning, nor Cutting off Ears, ^or Banishing upon Pain of Death, would keep
them from amongst them. And further he said, That he or they desired not the
Death of any of them. Yet notwithstanding, his following Words, without more
ado, were, Give ear, and hearken to your Sentence of Death. Robinson's
Behavior.
W. Robinson then desired that he might be permitted to read Paper, giving an
Account of the Reason, why he had not departed that Jurisdiction. But Indicot
would not suffer it to be read, and said in a Rage, You shall not read it, nor
will the Court hear it read. Then Robinson laid it on the Table. He had written
this Paper the Day before; and some of the Contents were, That he being in
Rhode Island, the Lord had commanded him to go to Boston, and to lay down his
Life there. That he also had felt an Assurance that his Soul was to enter into
everlasting Peace, and eternal Rest. That he durst not but obey without
inquiring farther concernning it; believing that it became him as a Child, to
show Obedience to the Lord, without any Unwillingness. That this was the Cause
why after Banishment, on Pain of Death, he slaid in their Jurisdiction. And
that now with Sincerity of Heart he could say, Blessed be the Lord, the God of
my Life, who has called (...) hereunto, and counted me worthy to testify
against wicked and unjust Men, etc. This Paper being handed to Indicot, he read
it to himse1f, and after he had done, said to Robinson, You need not keep such
ado to have it read; for you spoke Yesterday more than here is written. Yet
this was not so; for it contained a circumstantial Relation of the divine
Operations on his Mind; and that he was not come there, in his own Will, but in
Obedience to his Creator: And that traveling in Rhode Island, on the 8th of
the 8th Month, he had been moved thereto from the Lord, and therefore had
submitted to his divine Pleasure without murmuring. W. Robinson desiring again
that the Paper might he read, that so all that were present might hear it, it
was denied him; and Indicot said, W. Robinson, Hearken to your Sentence of
Death; You shall be had back to the Place from whence you came, and from thence
to the Place of Execution, to be hanged on the Gallows till you are dead He
receives Sentence of Death.
This Sentence was not altogether unexpected to W. Robinson; for it was four
Months now that he had believed it would be his Share. Robinson being taken
away, M. Stevenson was called, and Indicot said to, him, If you have any Thing
to say, you may speak. He knowing how they had dealt with his Companion, was
silent, though he had also written in Prson a Paper, containing the Cause of his
being come there; but he kept it with him, and found afterward Occasion to
deliver it to some Body. Then Indicot pronounced Sentence of Death against him,
saying, M. Stevenson, You shall he had to the Place from whence you came,
Stevenson also sentenced.
and from thence te the Gallows, and there be hanged till you are dead.
Whereupon M. Stevenson spoke thus, His Speech to the Court.
Give ear ye Magistrates, and all who are guilty; for this the Lord has said
concerning you, and will perform his Word upon you, That the same Day ye put
his Servants to Death, shall the Day of your Visitation pass over your Heads,
and you shall he cursed for evermore. The Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has
spoken it. Therefore in Love to you all, I exhort you to take Warning before it
be too late, that so the Curse may be removed. For assuredly if you put us to
Death, you will bring innocent Blood upon your own Heads, and swift Destruction
will come upon you. After he had spoken this, he was taken away, and Mary Dyar
was called: To whom Indicot spoken thus; Mary Dyar, you shall go to the Place
from whence you came, (to wit, the Prison) and from thence to the Place of
Execution, Mary Dyar receives Sentence.
and be hanged there until you are dead. To which she replied, The Will of the
Lord be done. Then Indicot said, Take her away, Marshal. To which she returned,
Yea, joyfully I go. Her Behavior.
And in her going to the Prison, she often uttered Speeches of Praise to the
Lord; and being full of Joy, she said to the Marshal, He might let her alone,
for she would go to the Prison without him. To which he answered, I believe
you, Mrs. Dyar; but I must do what I am commanded. Thus she was led to Prison,
where she was kept a Week, M. Stevenson's Paper
with the two other her Companions, that were also condemned to die. The Paper
of Marmaduke Stevenson mentioned before, which he gave forth after he had
received Sentence of Death, was thus;

IN the Beginning of the Year 1655, M. Stevenson's Account of his Call to
Baston, for which he said down his life to be upon Record for all to (...) the
Ground thereof wrote by him and left in the Words within written
I was at the Plough, in the East Parts of Yorkshire, in Old England, near the
Place where my outward Being was; and as I walked after the Plough, I was
filled with the Love and Presence of the living God, which did ravish my Heart
when I felt it; for it did increase and abound in me like a living Stream, so
did the Love and Life of God run through me like precious Ointment, giving a
pleasant Smell, which made me to stand still; and as I stood a little still,
with my Heart and Mind stayed on the Lord, the Word of the Lord came to me in a
still small Voice, which I did hear perfectly, saying to me, in the Secret of
my Heart and Conscience, -- I have ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations. --
And at the hearing of the Word of the Lord, I was put to a Stand, being that I
was but a Child for such a weighty Matter. So at the Time appointed, Barbados
was set before me, (...) to which I was required of the Lord to go, and leave
my dear and loving Wis^, and tender Children: For, the Lord said unto me
immediately by his Spirit, That he would be as a Husband to my Wife, and as a
Father to my Children, and they should not want in my Absence, for he would
provide for them when I was gone. And I believed that the Lord would perform
what he had spoken, because I was made willing to give up my self to his Work
and Service, to leave all and follow him, whose Presence and Life is with me,
where I rest in Peace and Quietness of Spirit (with my dear Brother) under the
Shadow of his Wings, who has made us willing to lay down our Lives for his own
Namesake, if unmerciful Men be suffered to take them from us; and if they do,
we know we shall have Peace and Rest with the Lord for ever in his holy
Habitation, when they shall have Torment Night and Day. So, in Obedience to the
living God, I made Preparation to pass to Barbados, in the 4th Month, 1658.
So, after I had been some Time on the said Island in the Service of God, I
heard that New-Enggland had made a Law to put the Servants of the living God to
Death, if they returned after they were sentenced away, which did come near me
at that Time; and as I considered the Thing, and pondered it in my Heart,
immediately came the Word of the Lord unto me, saying, -- Thou know not but
that thou may go thither. -- But I kept this Word in my Heart, and did not
declare it to any until the Time appointed. So after that, a Vessel was made
ready for Rhode Island, which I passed in. So, after a little Time that I had
been there, visiting the Seed which the Lord has blessed, the Word of the Lord
came unto me saying, -- Go to Boston, with thy Brother William Robinson. -- And
at his Command I was obedient, and gave up my self to do his Will, that so his
Work and Service may be accomplished: For he had said unto me, That he had a
great Work for me to do; which is now come to pass: And for yielding Obedience
to, and obeying the Voice and Command of the everliving God, which created
Heaven and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters, do I, with my dear Brother,
suffer outward Bonds near unto Death. And this is given forth to be upon
Record, that all People may know, who hear it, That we came not in our own
Wills, but in the Will of God. Given forth by me, who am known to Men by the
Name of

Marmaduke Stevenson.
Written in Boston Prison, in the 8th Month, 1659. But have a new Name given me
which the World knows not of, written in the Book of Life.



Mary Dyar being returned to Prison, Mary Dyar writes to the Magistrates of
Boston.
wrote the following Letter, which she sent to the Rulers of Boston.

To the General Court in BOSTON.
WHEREAS I am by many charged with the Guiltiness of my own Blood; if you mean
in my coming to Boston, I am therein clear, and justified by the Lord, in whose
Will I came, who will require my Blood of you, be sure, who have made a Law to
take away the Lives of the innocent Servants of God, if they come among you,
who are called by you, Cursed Quakers; although I say, and am a living Witness
for them and the Lord, that he has blessed them, and sent them unto you;
therefore be not found Fighters against God, but let my Counsel and Request be
accepted with you, To repeal all such Laws, that the Truth and Servants of the
Lord may have free Passage among you, and you be kept from shedding innocent
Blood, which I know there are many among you would not do, if they knew it so
to be; nor can the Enemy that stirs you up thus to destroy this holy Seed,
in any Measure countervail the great Damage that you will, by thus doing,
procure. Therefore seeing the Lord has not hid it from me, it lies upon me,
in Love to your Souls, thus to persuade you. I have no Self Ends, the Lord
knows; for if my Life were freely granted by you, it would not avail me, nor
could I expect it of you, so long as I should daily hear or see the Sufferings
of these People, my dear Brethren, and the Seed, with whom my Life is bound up,
as I have done these two Years; and now it is like to increase, even unto
Death, for no evil Doing, but coming among you. Was ever the like Laws heard of
among a People that profess Christ come in the Flesh? And have such no other
Weapons but such Laws to fight against spiritual Wickedness withal, as you call
it? Woe is me for you? Of whom take ye Counsel? Search with the Light of Christ
in you, and it will show you of whom, as it has done me and many more, who
have been disobedient and deceived, as now ye are: Which Light as you come
into, and obeying what is made manifest to you therein, you will not repent
that you were kept from shedding Blood, though it were by a Woman. It is not mine
own Life I seek, (for I choose rather to suffer with the People of God, than to
enjoy the Pleasures of Egypt) but the Life of the Seed, which I know the Lord
has blessed, and therefore seeks the Enemy thus vehemently to destroy the Life
thereof, as in all Ages he ever did. O hearken not unto him, I beseech you, for
the Seed's-Sake, which is one in all, and is dear in the Sight of God, which
they that touch, touch the Apple of his Eye, and cannot escape his Wrath;
whereof I having felt, cannot but persuade all Men that I have to do withal,
especially you who name the Name of Christ, to depart from such Iniquity, as
shedding Blood, even of the Saints of the Most High, Therefore let my Request
have as much Acceptance with you, if you be Christians, as Esther's had with
Ahasuerus, whose Relation is short of That that is between Christians; and my
Request is the same that hers was: And he said not, that he had made a Law, and
that it would be dishonorable for him to revoke it; but when he understood
that those People were so prized by her, and so nearly concerned her, as in
Truth these are to me, you may see what he did for her. Therefore I leave these
Lines with you, appealing to the faithful and true Witness of God, which is one
in all Consciences, before whom we must all appear; with whom I shall eternally
rest, in everlasting Joy and Peace, whether you will hear or forbear. With him
is my Reward, with whom to live is my Joy, and to die is my Gain, though I had
not had your Forty eight Hours Warning, for the Preparation of the Death of
Mary Dyar.

And know this also, that if through the Enmity you shall declare your selves
worse than Ahasuerus, and confirm your Law, though it were but by taking away the
Life of one of us, that the Lord will overthrow both your Law and you, by his
righteous Judgments and Plagues poured justly upon you, who now whilst ye are
warned thereof, and tenderly sought unto, may avoid the one, by removing the
other. If you neither hear, nor obey the Lord nor his Servants, yet will he
send more of his Servants among you, so that your End shall be frustrated, that
think to restrain them ye call cursed Quakers, from coming among you by any
Thing you can do to them. Yea, verily, he has a Seed here among you, for whom
we have suffered all this while, and yet suffer; whom the Lord of the Harvest
will send forth more Laborers to gather, out of the Mouths of the Devourers of
all Sorts, into his Fold, where he will lead them into fresh Pastures, even the
Paths of Righteousness, for his Name's-sake. Oh, let none of you put this good
Day far from you, which verily in the Light of the Lord I see approaching, even
to many in and about Boston which is the bitterest and darkest professing
Place, and so to continue so long as you have done, that ever I heard of. Let
the Time past therefore suffice, for such a Profession as brings forth such
Fruits as these Laws are. In Love and in the Spirit of Meekness, I again
beseech you, for I have no Enmity to the Persons of any; but you shall know,
that God will not be mocked; but what ye sow, that shall ye reap from him, that
will render to every one according to the Deeds done in the Body, whether Good
or Evil. Even so be it, says

Mary Dyar.


A Copy of this was given to the general Court after Mary Dyar had received
Sentence of Death, about the 8th or 9th Month, 1659.

The Day appointed to execute the bloody Sentence, They are led under a Guard
to Execution.
was the 27th of October, when in the Afternoon, the condemned Prisoners were
led to the Gallows by the Marshal Michaelson, and Captain James Oliver, with a
Band of about two hundred armed Men, besides many Horsemen; as if they were
afraid that some of the People would have rescued the Prisoners: And that no
Actors on the Stage might be wanting, the Priest Wilson joined to the Company,
who, when the Court deliberated how to deal with the Quakers, said, Hang them,
or else (drawing his Finger athwart his Throat) as if he would have said,
dispatch them this Way. Now the March began, and a Drummer going next before
the Condemned, the Drums were beaten, especially when any of them attempted to
speak. Glorious Signs of heavenly Joy and Gladness were beheld in the
Countenances of these three Persons, who walked Hand in Hand, Mary being the
middlemost, which made the Marshal say to her, who was pretty aged, and
stricken in Years, Are not you ashamed to walk thus Hand in Hand between two
Young Men? No, replied the, This is to me an Hour of the greatest Joy I could
enjoy in this World. No Eye can see, no Ear can hear, no Tongue can utter, and
no Heart can understood the sweet Incomes, or Influence, and the Refreshings of
the Spirit of the Lord, which now I feel. Thus going along, W. Robinson said,
This is your Hour, and the Power of Darkness. But presently the Drums were
beaten; yet shortly after, the Drummers leaving off beating, Marmaduke
Stevenson said, This is the Day of your Visitation, wherein the Lord has
visited you. More he spoke, but could not be understood, by reason of the Drums
being beaten again. Yet they went on with great Cheerfulness, as going to an
everlasting Wedding-Feast, and rejoicing that the Lord had counted them worthy
to suffer Death for his Name's Sake. When they were come near the Gallows, the
Priest said in a taunting Way to W. Robinson, Shall such Jacks as you come in
before Authority with their Hats on? Priest Wilson's repreachful Question.
To which Robinson replied, Mind you, mind you, It is for the not putting off
the Hat we are put to Death! Now being come to the Ladder, they took Leave of
each other with tender Embraces, and then Robinson went cheerfully up the
Ladder, and being got up, said to the People, This is the Day of your
Visitation, wherein the Lord has visited you: This is the Day the Lord is
risen in his mighty Power, to be avenged on all his Adversaries. He also
signified that he suffered not as an Evil-doer; and desired the Spectators, to
mind the Light that was in them, to wit, the Light of Christ, of which he
testified, and was now going to seal it with his Blood. This so incensed the
envious Priest, that he said, Hold thy Tongue, be silent; thou art going to die
with a Lie in thy Mouth. The Rope being now about his Neck, the Executioner
bound his Hands and Legs, and tied his Neckcloth about his Face: Which being
done, Robinson said, Now ye are made manifest; and the Executioner being about
turning him off, he said, I suffer for Christ in whom I live, and for whom I
die. He being turned off, Marmaduke Stevenson stepped up the Ladder, and said,
Robinson's Last Words. As also Stevenson's
Be it known unto all this Day, that we suffer not as Evildoers, but for
Conscience Sake. And when the Hangman was about to turn him off, he said, This
Day shall we be at Rest with the Lord: And so he was turned off. And Mary
Dyarseeing now her Companions hanging dead before her, also stepped up the
Ladder; but after her Coats were tied about her Feet, the Halter put about her
Neck, and her Face covered with a Handkerchief, which the Priest Wilson lent
the Hangman, just as she was to be turned off, a Cry was heard, Stop, for she
is reprieved. Mary Dyar reprieved
Her Feet then being loosed, they bad her come down. But she, whose Mind was
already as it were in Heaven, stood still, and said, She was there willing to
suffer as her Brethren did, unless they would annul their wicked Law. Little
Heed was given to what she said, but they pulled her down, and the Marshal and
others taking her by the Arms, carried her to Prison again. That she thus was
freed of the Gallows this Time, was at the Intercession of her Son, to whom it
seems they could not then resolve to deny that Favor. She writes again to the
Court of Boston
She now having heard why she was reprieved, wrote the next Day, being the 28th
of October, the following Letter to the Court.

The 28th of the 8th Month, 1659.
ONce more to the General Court assembled in Boston, Her Letter to the Court
after she was taken the first Time from the Tree, after which they hanged her
speak Mary Dyar, even as before: My Life is not accepted, neither avails me,
in Comparison of the Lives and Liberty of the Truth and Servants of the living
God, for which in the Bowels of Love and Meekness I sought you: Yet
nevertheless, with wicked Hands have you put two of them to Death, which makes
me to feel, that the Mercies of the Wicked is Cruelty; ^ rather choose to die
than to live, as from you, as guilty of their innocent Blood: Therefore, seeing
my Request is hindered, I leave you to the righteous Judge, and Searche^ of all
Hearts, who, with the pure Measure of Light he has given to every Man to
profit withal, will in his due Time let you see whose Servants you are, and of
whom you have taken Counsel, which I desire you to search into: But all his
Counsel has been slighted, and you would none of his Reproofs. Read your
Portion, Prove. i. 24, to 32. For verily the Night comes on you apace, wherein
no Man can work, in which you shall assuredly fall to your own Master: In
Obedience to the Lord whom I serve with my Spirit and Pity to your Souls, which
you neither know nor pity, I can do no less than once more to warn you, to put
away the Evil of your Doings, and kiss the Son, the Light in you, before his
Wrath be kindled in you; for where it is, nothing without you can help or
deliver you out of his Hand at all; and if these things be not so, then say,
There has been no Prophet from the Lord sent amongst you; though we be nothing,
yet it is his Pleasure, by Things that are not, to bring to naught Things that
are.

When I heard your last Order read, it was a Disturbance unto me, that was so
freely offering up my Life to him that gave it me, and sent me hither so to do,
which Obedience being his own Work, he gloriously accompanied with his
Presence, and Peace, and Love in me, in which I rested from my Labor; till by
your Order, and the People I was so for disturbed, that I could not retain any
more of the Words thereof, than that I should return to Prison and there remain
forty and eight Hours; to which I submitted, finding nothing from the Lord to
the contrary, that I may know what his Pleasure and Counsel is concerning me,
on whom I w^it therefore, for he is my Life, and the length of my Days; and as
I said before, I came at his Command, and go at his Command.

Mary Dyar.


The Magistrates now perceiving that the putting William Robinson and Marmaduke
Stevenson to Death, Is sent homewards and left at Liberty
caused great Discontent among the People, resolved to send away Mary Dyar,
thereby to calm their Minds a little. And so she was put on Horseback, and by
four Horsemen conveyed fifteen Miles toward Rhode Island, where she was left
with a Horse and a Man, to be conveyed the rest of the Way; which the soon sent
back, and so repaired home. Her Character
By the Style of her Letters, and her undaunted Carriage, it appears that she
had indeed some extraordinary Qualities, I find also, that she was of a comely
and grave Countenance, of a good Family and Estate, and a Mother of several
Children: But her Husband it seems was of another Persuasion.

Whilst I now leave her at Home, J. Chamberlain and E. Wharton whipped, and the
last also fined.
I am to say, that one John Chamberlain, an Inhabitant of Boston, having seen
the Execution of William Robinson, and M. Stevenson, was so reached by their
pious Speeches, that he received the Doctrine of the Truth, for which they
died: But his visiting those in Prison, was so ill resented, that afterward he
was whipped several Times severely; as was also Edward Wharton, an Inhabitant
of Salem, who having said, that the Guilt of Robinson's and Stevenson's Blood
was so great and heavy that he was not able to bear it, was for this his
pretended Sauciness, whipped with twenty Lashes and fined twenty Pounds.

But before I quite leave the Persons that were hanged, I must say, that being
dead, their Countenance still looked fresh (for the Terror of Death had not
seized them.) But being cut down, they were very barbarously used, The Bodies
of the ex^^uted inhumanly used.
none taking hold of their Bodies; which so fell down on the Ground, that
thereby the Skull of W. Robinson was broken: And even their Shirts were ripp'd
off with a Knife, and their naked Bodies cast into a Hole which was dug,
without any Covering. And when some of their Friends would have said their
Bodies into Coffins, it was denied them. Neither would they suffer the Place
where the Bodies were cast, to be senced with Pales, lest ravenous Beasts might
prey upon them.

When the People returned from the Execution, many seemed sad, and heavy; and
coming to the Drawbridge, one End of it fell upon some, and several were hurt,
The Miserable End of a Woman who reviled them at their Death
especially a wicked Woman, who had reviled the said two Persons at their
Death; but now she was so bruised, that her Flesh rotted from her Bones, which
made such a noisome Stink that People could not endure to be with her: In which
miserable Condition the remained till she died. But the Magistrates, instead of
taking Notice of this, Priest Wilson make Ballad on them
grew more hardened; and Priest Wilson did not stick to make a Ballad on the
Executed.

Now I return again to Mary Dyar who being come to Rhode Island, went from
thence to Long Island, where she staid the most Part of the Winter, M.Dyar
returns to Boston.
and then coming home again, she was moved to return to the bloody Town of
Boston, whither she came, on the 21st of the Third Month, Is sent for by the
Court and examined.
in the Year 1660, and on the 31st she was sent for by the General Court. Being
come there, the Governor John Indicot said, Are you the same Mary Dyar that was
here before? And it seems he was preparing an Evasion for her, there having
been another of that Name returned from Old England. But she was so far from
disguising, that she answered undauntedly, I am the same Mary Dyar that was
here the last General Court. Then Indicot said, You will own your self a
Quaker, will you not? To which Mary Dyar, I own myself to be reproachfully
called so. Then the Jailor (who would also say something) said, she is a
Vagabond. And Indicot said, And is again sentenced to D^^^b by indicot
The Sentence was passed upon her the last General Court, and now likewise: You
must return to the Prison, and there remain until to Morrow at (...) from
thence you must go to the Gallows, and there be hanged till you are dead. 1660
To which Mary Dyar said, This is no more than what thou said st before. And
Indicot returned, But now it is to be executed; therefore prepare your self to
Morrow at nine a Clock. She then spoke thus; Why she returned to Boston.
I came in Obedience to the Will of God, the last General Court, desiring you
to repeal your unrighteous Laws of Banishment on Pain of Death; and that same
is my Work now, and earnest Request; although I told you, that if ye refused to
repeal them, the Lord would send others of his Servants to witness against
them. Hereupon Indicot asked her, Whether she was a Prophetess. And she
answered, She spoke the Words that the Lord spoke in her; and now the Thing was
come to pass. And beginning to speak of her Call, Indicot cried, Away with her,
away with her. So she was brought to the Prisonhouse where she was before, and
kept close shut up until the next Day. About the appointed Time, the Marshal
Michaelson came, and called for her to come hastily; and coming into the Room
where she was, she desired him to stay a little; and speaking mildly, said, She
should be ready presently. But he being o^ a rough Temper, said, He could not
wait upon her, but she should now wait upon him. One Margaret Smith her
Companion, being grieved to see such Hard-heartedness, spoke something against
their unjust Laws and Proceedings: To which he said. You shall have your Share
of the same. Is led forth to Execution.
Then Mary Dyar was brought forth, and with a Band of Soldiers led through the
Town, the Drums being beaten before and behind her, and so continued, that none
might hear her speak all the Way to the Place of Execution, which was about a
Mile. Her Behavior at the Place of Suffering
With this Guard she came to the Gallows, and being gone up the Ladder, some
said to her, That if she would return, she might come down, and save her Life.
To which she replied, Nay, I cannot, for in Obedience to the Will of the Lord I
came, and in his Will I abide faithful to the Death. Then Captain John Webb
said, That she had been there before, and had the Sentence of Banishment upon
Pain of Death, and had broken the Law, in coming again now; and therefore she
was guilty of her own Blood. To which she returned, Nay, I came to keep
Blood-guiltiness from you, desiring you to repeal the unrighteous and unjust
Law of Banishment upon Pain of Death, made against the innocent Servants of the
Lord; therefore my Blood will be required at your Hands, who wilfully do it:
But for those that do it in the Simplicity of their Hearts, I desire the Lord
to forgive them. I came to do the Will of my Father, and in Obedience to his
Will, I stand even to Death. Then Priest Wilson said, Mary Dyar, O repent, O
repent, and be not so delu^ed and carried away by the Deceit of the Devil. To
this Mary Dyar answered, Nay Man, I am not now to repent. And being asked by
some, Whether she would have the Elders pray for her, she said, I know never an
Elder here. Being farther asked, Whether she would have any of the People to
pray for her, she answered, she desired the Prayers of all the People of God.
Thereupon some scoffingly said, It may be, she thinks there is none here. She
looking about, said, I know but few here. Then they spoke to her again, That
one of the Elders might pray for her. To which she replied, Nay, first a Child,
then a young Man, then a srong Man, before an Elder in Christ Jesus. After this
she was charged with something which was not understood what it was, but she
seemed to hear it; for she said, It Is false, it is false, I never spoke those
Words. Then one mentioned that she should have said, She had been in Paradise.
To which she answered, Yea, I have been in Paradise several Days. And more she
spoke of the eternal Happiness into which she was now to enter. In this well
disposed Condition she was turned off, Where she died a Martyr for Christ.
and died a Martyr of Christ, being twice led to Death, which the first Time
she expected with undaunted Courage, and now suffered with Christian Fortitude.
Thus this honest, valiant Woman finished her Days: But so hardened were these
Persecutors, that one of the Court said scoffingly, She did hang as a Flag for
others to take Example by: And putting to Death for Religion did not yet cease,
as will be related hereafter: But first I Will take a Turn again to Old England,
where there was now great Division, and a Revolution in the State.

About the Beginning of this Year, E. Buroughs his Warning to the Parliament
. E. Buroughs writ the following Letter to the Parliament, which then had the
Power again in their Hands:

Friends,
ALL these Overturnings, and almost wonderful Changings were effected through the
Justice of the Lord's Hand -- You are now again at the Stern of Government, and
on the Throne; and I dare not but say, it is of and by the Lord, and that he
has done it contrary to the Expectations of many; and what his End is in it,
remains with him. But I am sure one Cause is, that you may execute Part of his
Wrath upon that treacherous Generation of hypocritical and deceitful Men, some
of the Army I mean. -- I need not say to you, how that many of them were raised
up from a low Estate; and instead of serving the Nation, became their Lords and
Oppressors: They have abused the Lord's Mercy to them, and exalted themselves,
and become as great Oppressors, and as grievous to the Nation, as ever they
were that went before them; and some of them took the very Titles and Estates
or their Enemie^, and followed their evil Spirit also, though the Lord was
long-suffering to them, and gave them a Day, and put Opportunity into their
Hands, wherein they might have done Good; but they also neglected to serve God
and the Nation, to serve themselves; and because of the Ambition and Pride of
some of them, the Lord suffered them to make this last Interruption upon you,
which was great Treachery in Man's Account, that thereby their Measure might be
filled up, and that he might give you Occasion against them, and suffer you to
be filled with Indignation toward them, to break them to Pieces: And what you
do to some of them, in casting them out, and afflicting them, you are but God's
Executioners therein; you are the Executioners of his Anger, in what you do to
them; and who shall prevent you, or forbid you to go on? For they have long
enough dissembled with this Nation, in professing more than others, and doing
less; and their Downfall is now. And God has looked upon you to be hard-hearted
and cruel enough, and very fit Executioners of Vengeance upon such Men, as I
have mentioned.

But now concerning you, and your present State, as you are in present Place
and Power, I have something to say to you; tho they are fallen, and you yet
stand, and you have a little Time after them; but this I say, do not glory over
their Fall, neither glory as though you should stand for ever; for they were not
greater Sinners than you are, neither are you one whit more righteous than some
of them; but you are as sure to fall, as they are fallen, with no less Measure
of Dishonor and Affliction than is come upon them; and you are in your last
Hour; and I dare not say, that God expects much more from you, than for the End
aforesaid (viz) To be the Executioners of Justice upon Men as sinful as your
selves: So do not glory over them that are fallen; but know that your Time also
is but short, and your Fall may prove to your Destruction, and theirs may prove
to make them hotter, and refine them: And if God has chosen you to execute
some Part of his Wrath upon them, for their Wickedness, he will doubtless find
Instruments to execute his Wrath upon you, else he will do it with his own
Hand; for he purposes not to spare you; for your Sins (...) as loud as any
other People's and the Oppressions are as great under you, as under them whom
you condemn. And I desire, if there be any good Men amongst you, that such who
are wise may consider, and mind the Hand of the Lord in and through all these
Things that are come to pass; for God is working as well as you, he is seeking
to set up a Kingdom as well as you, and his Government and yours cannot stand
together; and he will make you know that he is stronger, and his Government of
more Force, and your Kingdom cannot stand in Place with his. Therefore, Oh that
you would take hee^! Oh that you would be wise, if so be some of you may be
spared! and be not too zealous in your Way, nor too furious in your
Proceedings? do but to others at you intend to receive from others, and from
the Lord; and go not beyond your Commission; for a Permission at least you have
had from God, even to scourge Hypocrites, and to be a Judgment upon that
hypocritical seeming religious Generation of Men aforesaid, which have many a
Time, as it were, mocked God, and pretended Love to him with their Lips, when
their Hearts have yearned after Self-Honour, and Treasures of this World: I
say, your present Hour and Permission is for this End, but not to persecute the
People of the Lord, nor to destroy God's Heritage; but if you shall extend your
Power unto such a Work, and if you do persecute the innocent without Cause, and
make War against the Lamb and his Followers, and make Laws, and execute them to
the Oppression of the Saints of the most high, then you go beyond your
Commission; for God has not called you unto this, but to be Instruments in
another Cause. And the Children of Zion they trust in the living God, and fear
not the Terror of mighty Men, neither can they be afraid at the Roaring of the
Sea, nor at the present Threatening of the Heathen; for God is with them. And I
say unto you, the Servant of the Lord has pondered and considered all these
proceedings, and viewed the present State of Things at this Day, and there is
no Vision from God unto you of Peace and Comfort, nor of a happy and lasting
Government, as you now stand. If any Prophet shall divine this unto you, he
speaks what he has not from the Lord, but the Vision of his own Heart, and he
deceives you and himself; for you are not established upon a right Foundation,
neither are you acted by a right Spirit, which can truly govern for God; but
the Spirit of Wrath and Fury is put into you, for the Work which you are
called. And I know not how to warn you that you do not persecute the People of
God: For why? It may be you must fill up your Measure of Wickedness thereby,
that God may break you perpetually; yet the less will be your Judgment, if you
do it not: But and if you do it, the Lord will take Occasion against you, to
wound you, and you shall never be healed; and as you do afflict others, so and
much more shall it be done unto you from the Lord. Wherefore consider what I
have said; for this is the Vision of the Almighty unto you, that shall not go
unfulsilled: And what you do, you must do it quickly; for your Time is short,
and your Power will God subdue; and his Kingdom and Power will he speedily
exalt over your Heads, and make you and the Nations know, that he is God, and
that all Power is with him, and that he can do whatsoever he will; and it is
his Right alone to reign, and his Childrens Po^tion to possess the Kingdom with
him. Let the whole Earth, and all the Powers thereof, bow and tremble before
him: Let not your Hearts be stout and rebellious against him; for he can grind
you to Powder, and sink you into Confusion and Misery, as a Stone into the Sea.


This was directed for the Hands of the Speaker in Parliament, and accordingly
was given to William Lenthal, being enclosed to him with these Lines following.

Friend,
THE enclosed I do commend unto thee for to present unto the House, and to
endeavor sincerely the reading of it in your Assembly; for it is of special
Concernment to you all; and in the Name of the Lord, and by his Spirit, I do
charge thee not to be negligent in this Matter, as though it were not of worth to
you; and I do lay it upon thee, as a Work of Righteousness and Truth, to be
done by thee, as thou will answer the contrary at the dreadful Day of God, when
the King of Righteousness shall judge thee and all Mankind.

E. Buroughs.
The 24th of the 11th Month, 1659.

This Parliament did so lord it, that about fifteen hundred military Officers
were cashiered, Another from G. Fox Jun.
and others put into their Places. About this Time, George Fox the Younger writ
also a Letter to the Parliament and the Army, which was as follows.

YOur Day into Darkness is turned; the Sun is gone down over you; you have had
a large Day, and Power given unto you, to have done the Will of God; but you
have abused the Power, and slighted your Day; and you have refused to do the
Lord's Work, and have sought to serve your selves and not the Lord; therefore
in Justice and Righteousness, is the Day wherein you might have wrought for God
taken from you, and the thick dark Night of Confusion is come upon you, wherein
you are groping and stumbling, and cannot work; the Decree is gone out, and
sealed against you, and it cannot be recalled; you are not the Men (as ye
stand) in whom God will appear to work Deliverance for his People, and
Creatures; (and yet Deliverance shall come, but not according to Man's
Expectation) But as for you, ye have rejected the Counsel of the Lord, and
grieved his Spirit, and he has long born you; yea, you are departed from the
Lord, and his Presence is departed from you; indeed he has hewed with you (and
if you had been faithful to the End, he would have honored and prospered you,
and would have been your sufficient Reward) ye were his Ax, but you have
boasted your selves against him; therefore as you have beaten, and hewed, and
broken others, even so must you be beaten, hewed, and broken; for you have
grievously provoked the Lord; and if he should now suffer that Tree, which ye
have cut to fall upon you, and to break Part of you, it were just.

O ye treacherous, wilful, proud, self-seeking People, who have despised the
Counsel of the Lord, and would not take Warning, though he has sent his Prophets
and Servants early and late among you, some of whom you have imprisoned and
despitefully used; what will ye do now? Whom will ye now flee unto for Help?
Seeing ye are departed from the Lord, and are now rending and tearing, biting
and devouring one another, for proud, ambitious, self Ends: (Mark) If you would
now build again the Thing that you once destroyed, that shall not be able to
hide or shelter you from the Wrath of the Lamb; that Way whereby you think to
strengthen your selves, thereby shall you make your selves much weaker, and
help forward your own Destruction; you are now but a Rod, remember your End,
which hastens greatly, now Breach upon Breach, Insurrection upon Insurrection,
Overturning upon Overturning, Heaps upon Heaps, Division upon Division shall
there be, until he come to reign, whose Right it is; and all Nations must ^ow
before him, else he will break them with his Iron Rod.

They that trust in, or lean upon you for Help, it is as if they leaned upon a
broken Reed which is not able to help it self, nor others; indeed you have been
made to do many good Things, but you would not go through with the Work which
God will have accomplished, and therefore are these Things come upon you;
therefore tremble and dread before the Lord, ye who have been as strong Oaks,
and tall Cedars, for now shall your Strength fail you, and you shall be weak,
even as the weakest of Men; but if you would yet believe in the Light, and
truly submit to God's Righteous Judgments, many of you might come to witness
your Souls saved, in the Day of the Lord; though many of your Bodies are to be
thrown by (because of your grievous Backslidings) as not counted worthy to be
the Lord's Workmen.

There is a small Remnant yet among you (for whom my Soul breathes) who may be
winnowed out; and if they will own the Judgments of the Lord, and truly and
thoroughly deny themselves, and follow his Leadings, he will heal their
Backslidings, and purge them, that so they may be Instruments in his Hand: But
they that will continue with you in your Sins, shall partake with you of your
Judgments.

The Rod of the Wicked shall not always rest upon the Back of the Righteous;
yet even as Gold is tried, so shall they be, that they may be white, and
without Spot before the Lamb; but God will avenge their Cause, and We then will
be to their Oppressors; and then shall the Majesty and the Glory of the Lord
fill his People (who have long been trodden under) and they shall be the Dread
of all Nations, the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.

George Fox the Younger.
11th Month, (59.)

This Letter being printed, a Copy of it was given to each Parliament Man,
before Monk, with his Army, came into London: And how soon the Predictions
contained therein, as well as those of E. Buroughs in the foregoing Year, came
to be fulfilled, when many of the great Ones were hanged and quartered, we
shall see in the Sequel.

General Monk came now, General Monk pretends to be true to the Parliament and
Commonwealth, but serves the Interest of Cha. Stuart.
with Part of the Army he commanded, out of Scotland into England, and made
also great Alterations among the Officers, putting in such as were believed to
be no Enemies to Charles Stuart; for whatsoever Monk said of his Resolution to
be true and faithful to the Parliament, and to promote the Interest of a
Commonwealth, yet it appeared 'ere long that he aimed at something else; which
he could do the easier, because he wanted not Adherents in the Parliament; though
he did not stick to say to Edmund Ludlow, His Saying to Ludlow and to others.
Excluded Members return: Sir G. Booth set at Liberty, and
We must live and die for and with a Commonwealth: And to others he declared,
That he would oppose to the utmost the setting up of Charles Stuart. In the
mean while he so ordered it, that many Members of the Parliament, that had been
long excluded as unqualified, took Session again in that Assembly; and these
brought it about, that Sir George Booth, who was consined to the Tower, for
having carried on a Design for Charles Stuart, was set at Liberty. Neither was
the City of London in a Condition to oppose Monk; for he caused the
Port-cullies, and Doors of the City-gates, and the Posts to be pulled down; and
the Royalists were now become so bold, that they printed a List of the Names of
the Judges that condemned King Charles the 1st to Death; and some of them were
secured, whilst others fled away. General Lambert was also sent to the Tower,
and Monk, whose Authority now increased, sent for the Lords, who until the Year
1648, had sat in Parliament, and bad them return to the House where they
formerly used to sit.

In these Overturnings G. Fox came to London, to wit, in the Time when they
were breaking the City-Gates. G. Fox writes to those in Power.
He then wrote a Paper to those that were now sinking, and told them, That now
the Prophecies were fulfilling upon them, which had been spoken to them; and
that they who used to call the Quakers Fanatics, and Giddy-heads, now seemed
themselves giddy, and Fugitives, or Wanderers.

From London G. Fox went to Sussex, And from London goes into Sussex and
Dorsetshire, has a great Meeting at Dorchester where he is suspected for a
Jesuit; then passes into Somersetshire.
and from thence to Dorsetshire. At Dorchester he had a great Meeting in the
Evening, at the Inn where he lodged, and there came many Soldiers who were
pretty civil. But the Constables and Officers of the Town came also under
Pretense to look for a Jesuit, whose Head, they said, was shaved. So they took
off G. Fox's Hat, but not finding any bald Place on his Head, they went away
with Shame. This was of good Service among the Soldiers and others, and it
affected the People, who were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Then he passed into Somersetshire, where his Friends Meetings were often
disturbed. One Time there came a wicked Man, who having a Bear's Skin on his
Back, played ugly Pranks in the Meeting; and setting himself opposite to the
Person that was preaching, ^olled his Tongue out of his Mouth, and so made
Sport for his wicked Followers, and caused great Disturbance in the Meeting. A
dreadful Judgment on a Scoffer.
But as he went back from thence, an eminent Judgment overtook him; for there
being a Bull-baiting in the Way, he staid to see; and coming within his Reach,
the Bull pushed his Horn under the Man's Chin, into his Throat, and forced his
Tongue out of his Mouth, so that it hung out in the same Manner as before he
lolled it out in Derision in the Meeting: And the Bull running his Horn into
the Man's Head, swung him about in a most fearful Manner.

G. Fox traveling through Somersetshire, From Somersetshire G. Fox comes into
Devonshire, so to the Land's End in Cornwall, and writes against the wicked
practice of making Spoil of Shipwrecks.
came into Devonshire, and so went into Cornwall, till he came to the Land's
End. Whilst he was in Cornwall, there were great Shipwrecks about the Land's
End. Now it was the Custom of that Country, that at such Times both Rich and
Poor went out to get as much of the Wreck as they could, not caring to save the
People's Lives; and this Custom so prevailed, that in some Parts of the Country
they called Shipwrecks, God's Grace. This grieved G. Fox not a little,
considering how far these professed Christians were below the Heathen at
Melita, who courteously received Paul, and the others that had suffered
Shipwreck with him, and made him a Fire. On this Consideration, he was moved to
write a Paper to the Magistrates, Priests, and others, both high and low; in
which he showed them The Wickedness of their Deeds, and reproved them for such
greedy Actions, telling them how they were ready to fight with one another for
the Spoil, and spend what they got in Taverns or Alehouses, letting those that
escaped drowning, go a begging up and down the Country. Therefore he seriously
exhorted them, to do unto others, what they would have done to themselves.

This Paper he sent to all the Parishes thereabouts. Several eminent People in
Cornwall convinced by G. Fox, who goes thence to Bristol, where Friends Meetings
had been exceedingly disturbed, which by his
And after having had many Meetings in Cornwall, and several eminent People
being convinced of the Truth preached by him, he went to Bristol, where the
Meetings of his Friends were exceedingly disturbed by the Soldiers. Having
heard this he desired George Bishop, Thomas Gouldney, Thomas Speed, and Edward
Pyot to go to the Mayor and Aldermen, and desire them to let his Friends have
the Town Hall to meet in, provided it should not be on such Days when the Mayor
and Aldermen had Business to do in it; and that for this Use they would give
Twenty Pounds a Year, to be distributed amongst the Poor. These four Persons
were astonished at this Proposal, and said, The Mayor and Aldermen would think
them mad; Counsel and Encouragement were kept quiet a good while after.
for the Mayor and Commander of the Soldiers had combined together to make a
Disturbance in their Meetings. But G. fox so encouraged them, that at last they
consented to what he desired: Being come to the Mayor, he was moderate beyond
Expectation; and when they had laid the Thing before him, he said, For his
Part, he could consent to it; but he was but one. So they left him in a loving
Frame of Mind; and coming back; G. Fox desired them to go also to the Colonel
that commanded the Soldiers, and to acquaint him of their rude Carriage, and
how they disturbed the Meetings. But the aforesaid four Persons were backward
to go to him. Next Morning being the first Day of the Week, a Meeting was kept
in an Orchard, where many People came; and after G. Fox had been preaching a
pretty while, there came several rude Soldiers, some with drawn Swords, and
some drunk, and among these one that had bound himself with an Oath, To cut
down, and kill the Man that spoke. But when he came pressing in through the
Crowd, and was within two Yards of G. Fox, he stopped at those four Persons
before mentioned, and fell a jangling with them; but at length his Sword was
put up again. The next Day they went and spoke with the Colonel; and he having
heard how mischievous his Soldiers had been, sent for them, and cut and slashed
some of them. When this was told G. Fox, he blamed those his Friends, thinking
they might have prevented the cutting of the Soldiers, if they had gone to the
Colonel when he would have had them. Yet this had such Effect, that the Meeting
there was kept without Disturbance a good while after.

G. Fox then also had a general Meeting at Edward Pyot's near Bristol, at which
were several Thousands of People, and so many of Bristol, that some said, The
City looked naked: And all was quiet.

But in other Places about this Time Things were not so quiet; for the Soldiers
under General Monk's Command, were often very rude in disturbing of Meetings.
But when Complaint was made to him, who was then at Westminster, he showed that
he would not countenance such Wickedness, Genesis Monk gives out an Order against
the Soldiers disturbing Friends Meetings.
and did in that Respect better than several other Generals had done: for he
gave forth the following Order:

St. James 's March 9. 1659-60.
I Do require all Officers and Soldiers, to forbear to disturb the peaceable
Meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to the Parliament or
Commonwealth of England.

George Monk.

Monk having thus long declared for a Commonwealth, and against a King, began
now to take off the Mask; for the old Lords had now taken their Places again in
the House of Peers, out of which they had been kept so many Years; and by the
Advice of Monk, Charles Stuart (who for several Years had lived at Cologn, and
having made a Voyage to Spain, was from thence come by France to Brussels)
repaired to Breda: And in England it being resolved upon to call him back, It
being resolved to call back Chapter Stuart, he gives out his Declaration from Breda.
and to restore him, he gave forth the following Declaration at Breda, thereby
to persuade those that were yet backward, to acknowledge him.

Charles R.

CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
to all our loving Subjects, of what Degree or Quality soever, Greeting.
If the general Distraction and Confusion which is spread over the whole
Kingdom, does not awaken all Men to a Desire and Longing that those Wounds
which have for so many Years together been kept bleeding, may be bound up, all
we can say will be to no Purpose. However, after this long Silence, we have
thought it our Duty to declare, how much we desire to contribute thereunto: And
that, as we can never give over the Hope in good Time to obtain the Possession
of that Right which God and Nature has made our Due, so we do make it our
daily Suit to the Divine Providence, that he will, in Compassion to us and our
Subjects, after so long Misery and Sufferings, remit and put us into a quiet
and peaceable Possession of that our Right with as little Blood and Damage to
our People as is possible. Nor do we desire more to enjoy what is ours, than
that all our Subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs, by a full and entire
Administration of Justice throughout the Land, and by extending our Mercy where
it is wanted and desired.

And to the End that the Fear of Punishment may not engage any, conscious to
themselves of what is past, to a Perseverance in Guilt for the future, by
opposing the Quiet and Happiness of their Country, in the Restoration both of
King, Peers, and People to their just, ancient, and fundamental Rights: We do
by these Presents declare, that we do grant a free and general Pardon, which we
are ready upon Demand to pass under our great Seal of England, to all our
Subjects, of what Degree or Quality soever, who within forty Days after the
publishing hereof, shall lay hold upon this our Grace and Favor, and shall by
any public Act declare their doing so, and that they return to the Loyalty and
Obedience of good Subjects, excepting only such Persons as shall hereafter be
excepted by Parliament: those only excepted, let all our Subjects, how faulty
soever, rely upon the Word of a King, solemnly given by this present
Declaration, that no Crime whatsoever, committed against us, or our Royal
Father, before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in Judgment, or be
brought in Question against any of them, to the least Endamagement of them,
either in their Lives, Liberties or Estates, or as far forth as lies in our
Power, so much as to the Prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reproach or
Term of Distinction from the rest of our best Subjects; we desiring and
ordaining, that henceforward all Notes of Discord, Separation, and Difference
of Parties, be utterly abolished among all our Subjects, whom we invite and
conjure to a perfect Union among themselves, under our Protection, for the
Resettlement of our just Rights and theirs in a free Parliament, by which, upon
the Word of a King, we will be advised.

And because the Passion and Incharitableness of the Times have produced
several Opinions in Religion, by which Men are engaged in Parties and
Animosities against each other, which, when they shall hereafter unite in a
Freedom of Conversation, will be composed or better understood: We do declare a
Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no Man shall be disquieted or called in
question for Differences of Opinion in Matter of Religion, which do not disturb
the Peace of the Kingdom, and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act
of Parliament, as upon mature Deliberation shall be offered to us for the full
granting that Indulgence.

And because in the continual Distractions of so many Years, and so many and
great Revolutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have been made to, and
by many Officers, Soldiers, and others, who are now possessed of the same, and
who may be liable to Actions at Law upon several Titles, We are likewise
willing that all such Differences, and all Things relating to such Grants,
Sales, and Purchases shall be determined in Parliament, which can best provide
for the just Satisfaction of all Men who are concerned.

And we do farther declare, that we will be ready to consent to any Act or Acts
of Parliament to the Purposes aforesaid, and for the full Satisfaction of all
Arrears due to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under the Command of
General Monk, and that they shall be received into our Service, upon as good
Pay and Conditions as they now enjoy.

Given under our Sign Manual and Privy Signet, at our Court at Breda, this
4-14th Day of April, 1660 in the 12th Year of our Reign.
The Original of this Declaration was sent to the House of Lords, and a
Duplicate in a Letter to the House of Commons, and repeated and sent in a
Letter to General Monk, the Council of State, and the Officers of the Army.
Hereupon it was resolved by the Parliament to prepare an Answer; and both in
the House of Lords, and in the House of Commons, It was voted to proclaim King
Charles at Whitehall, and in London, as lawful Sovereign of his Kingdoms, Is
proclaimed King.
which was done on the 8th of the Month called May.

Now the King, who by the Spaniards was invited to return to Brussels, and by
the French to come to Calais, chose, at the pressing Invitation of the States
General of the United Provinces to go by Holland; and so he went with the
Yachts of the States to Rotterdam, and from thence with Coaches to the Hague,
where having staid some Days, he took Shipping at Schevelighen for England, And
from Holland arrives in England, and comes to London on the Anniversary of his
Birthday.
and made his Entry at London on the Anniversary of his Birthday. Thus we see
Charles the Second, who not long after was crowned, restored not by the Sword,
but by the mavelous Hand of the Lord.

About this Time George Fox the Younger came to Harwich, where he was haled out
of a Meeting, and imprisoned under a Pretense of having caused a Tumult. But to
give to the Reader a true Sight of the Matter, I must go back a little.

About four Years before this Time, The Story at large of G.F. jun. being
imprisoned at Harwich on pretense of a tumult.
some of the People called Quakers being come into the said Town, one of them
spoke a few Words by way of Exhortation to the People that came from the
Steeple-house; and passing on, he and those with him went to an Inn. The Mayor
hearing thereof, sent to them, commanding that they should depart the Town,
which they did after a short Space; but about Night they returned and lodged as
their Inn; and the next Day passed away peaceably. Not long after, the Woman
that kept the Inn, was commanded to come before the Magistrates, who threatened
to take away her License, unless she promised to lodge no more such Persons.
But how eager soever they were for keeping out the Quakers, yet it proved
ineffectual; for it seems some of those that had been spoken to in the Streets,
were so reached, that they came to be obedient to the inward Teachings of the
Lord they had been recommended to. And so a Way was made for Meetings there,
whereby the Number of those of that Society began to increase. And because they
could no longer comply with superstitious Burials, they bought a Piece of
Ground to bury their Dead in, but met with great Opposition at their Burials;
and once, when several came along to bury a Corpse, it was by Force taken from
them, and set by the Seaside, where having lain above Ground Part of two Days
and one Night, it was privately covered by some with small Stones.

In the Month called May, G. Fox the Younger came to Harwich, to preach the
Truth there. The Mayor of the Town, whose Name was Miles Hubbard, having heard
of this, stopped several that were going to the Meeting. The rude Multitude
seeing it, grew insolent, and made a hideous Noise ^^fore the House where the
Meeting was kept, and some were for pulling it down. G. Fox hearing the Noise,
whilst he was preaching, ^^ew very zealous, and with a mighty Power was made to
say, Woe, woe unto the Rulers and Teachers of this Nation, who suffer such
Ungodliness as this, and do not seek to suppress it. Some that heard him thus
speaking, went and told the Magistrates of it, perhaps not in the selfsame
Words as were uttered by him. The Officers then coming, the Mayor commanded the
Constables to take the said G. Fox into Custody; who hearing this, said, If I
have done any Thing worthy of Death or Bonds, I shall not refuse either; but I
desire thee to show rac what Law I have transgressed; which thou ought to do
before thou sendest me to Prison, that I may know for what I am sent thither.
R, Grassingham gees freely with G.F to the Prison.
But the Mayor told him, He should know that afterward; and so he was carried
to Prison. Robert Grassingham, who was Shipwright of the Admiralty in that
Port, being at the Meeting, out of which G. Fox was haled, in Love went freely
along with him to Prison. This seemed to please the Mayor, who some Days before
had been heard to say concerning Grassingham, If I could but get him out of the
Town, I should know what Course to take with the other Quakers. Some time after
G. Fox was imprisoned, a Mittimus was sent to the Jailer, in which the Prisoner
was charged with causing a Tumult in that Borough, and disturbing the Peace
thereof. This Mittimus was signed by Miles Hub^ard Mayor, Anthony Woolward, and
Daniel Smith; and these Magistrates sent Notice of what they had done to the
Parliament, under a specious Pretense, that so they might not fall into
Disgrace. The Parliament receiving this Information, issued forth the following
Order.

Monday, May 21. 1660.
THE House being informed, That two Quakers, that is to say, George Fox and
Robert Grassingham, have lately made a Disturbance at Harwich, and that the
said George Fox, who pretends to be a Preacher, did lately in his preaching
there, speak Words much reflecting on the Government and Ministry, to the near
causing of a Mutiny, and is now committed by the Mayor and the Magistrates
there.

Ordered, That the said George Fox and Robert Grassingham be forthwith brought
up in Custody; and that the Sheriff of the County of Essex do receive them, and
give them his Assistance for the conveying them up accordingly, and delivering
them into the Charge of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be given to the Mayor and Magistrates
of Harwich for their Care in this Business.

William Jessop, Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament.

By this it appeared that the Magistrates of Harwich had special Friends in the
Parliament. R. Grassingham being at Liberty, was gone to London; and when this
Order came to Harwich, G. Fox was delivered to the Sheriff of Essex and his
Men: These went with him to London, and upon the Road they met Grassingham, who
was coming from London to Harwich, in Pursuance of an Order which he had
received from the Commissioner of the Admiralty and Navy, for resitting one of
the King's Frigots. But notwithstanding Grassingham showed his Order to the
Sheriff, Are both committed to the Sergeant at Arms, and write to the House of
Commons..
yet he brought him back to London with Fox, and delivered them into the
Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, attending the House, who committed them to
Lambeth-House. They having been there about three Weeks, wrote a Letter to the
House of Commons, wherein they gave some Account of the Manner of their
Imprisonment, and desired, That they with their Accusers might be brought Face
to Face before the Parliament, saying, That if any thing could be proved
against them, worthy of Punishment, they should not refuse it. But they thought
it to be unjust and unreasonable, that only one should be haled out of a
peaceable Meeting, and sent to Prison, without being examined, only for
declaring against the cursing and the Wickedness of the rude People, and
against such as suffered such Ungodliness, and did not seek to suppress it.

This was the chief Contents of their Paper, which they enclosed in a Letter to
the Speaker of the House of Commons in these Words:

For the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Friend,
WE desire thee to communicate this enclosed to the House of Commons, it being
a few innocent, just, and reasonable Words to them, tho not in the cloquent
Language of Man's Wisdom, yet it is in the Truth which is honorable.

We are Friends to Righteousness and Truth, and to all that are found therein.
Robert Grassingham. George Fox.



But the Speaker did not deliver the Paper, under Pretense that it was not
directed with the ordinary Title, To the Right Honorable the House of Commons.
And so by the Help of their Friends they got it printed, that so each Member of
Parliament might have a Copy of it. Now after they had lain about fourteen
Weeks in Lambeth Gate House without being examined, After about 14 Weeks
Imprisonment at Lambeth the said House orders their discharge.
one of the Members of Parliament moved this Business in the House; whereupon
the following Order was made.

Thursday, October 30. 1660.
Ordered that George Fox and Robert Grassingham, who by virtue of a former
Order of this House were taken into Custody by the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House, for some Disturbance at Harwich, be forthwith released, and set at
Liberty, upon Bail first given to render themselves, whom they shall be in that
Behalf required.

William Jessop, Clerk of the House of Commons.

Shortly after this Order was issued forth, Who are yet a good while detained
for their Fees.
the Sergeant at Arms sent his Clerk to demand Fees and Chamber-Rent of the
Prisoners, asking fifty Pounds for Fees, and ten Shillings a Week for
Chamber-Rent. But since no Evil was laid to their Charge, they could not
resolve to satisfy this unreasonable Demand, yet offered to pay two Shillings
and Sixpence a Week, though the Chamber where they had lain, was the highest Room
in a lofty Tower, and all the Windows open, until they had gotten them glazed,
without any Charge to the Sergeant. Matters standing thus, their Cause was
referred to the King's Privy Council. But it lasted yet a good while before
they were released; for several Evasions were made use of to keep them in
Custody.

Whilst G. Fox was Prisoner, Memorable Exhortations to K. Ch II. by G. F.
he wrote a little Book, which he called A Noble Salutation to King Charles
Stuart. Wherein he showed him how Matters had gone in England, viz. That his
Father's Party scorned those that appeared in Arms against them because of
their Meanness for they were Tradesmen, Ploughmen, Servants, and the like;
which contemptible Instruments God made use of to bring down the Loftiness of
the others. But those of the Parliament Party growing from Time to Time
successful and prevailing, got into the Possessions of those they conquered,
and fell into the same Pride and Oppression which they had cried out against in
others; and many of them became greater Oppressors and Persecutors than the
former had been. Moreover, the Author exhorted the King to obsreve the Hand of
the Lord in restoring of him. Therefore, said he, let no Man deceive thee, by
persuading thee that these Things are thus brought to pass, because the Kingdom
was thy own proper Right, and because it was witheld from thee contrary to all
Right; or because that those called Royalists are much more righteous than
those who are now fallen under Thee. For I plainly declare unto Thee, that this
Kingdom, and all the Kingdoms of the Earth are properly the Lord's. -- And this
know, that it was the just Hand of God, in taking away tha Kingdom from thy
Father and thee, and giving it unto others; and that also it is the just Hand
of the Lord to take it again from them, and bring them under Thee; though I shall
not say, but that some of them went beyond their Commission against thy Father,
when they were brought as a Rod over you; and well will it be for Thee, if Thou
becomest not guilty of the same Transgressions.

The Author farther exhorts the King to consider, That his Station was not
without Danger; because of the Changeableness of the People, a great Part of
which were perfidious, since one while they had sworn for a King and
Parliament; and shortly after they swore against a King, single Person, or
House of Lords; and afterward again they swore for a single Person. Some Time
after, they cried up a Parliament again. And when 0. Cromwell had turn d out the
Parliament, and set up himself, then the Priests prayed for him, and asserted
his Authority to be just; and when he died, they fawned upon his Son Richard,
and blasphemously termed his Father the Light of their Eyes, and the Breath of
their Nostrils; and they told him, that God had left him to carry on that
glorious Work which his Father had begun. Nay, some Priests compared Oliver to
Moses, and Richard to Joshua, who should carry them into the promised Land.
Thus they continually would flatter those that were at the Helm. For when
George Booth made a Rising, and they thought there would be a Turn, then some
of the Priests cried out against the Parliament, and cursed such as would not
go out against them. But when Booth was taken, then many began to petition the
Parliament, and to excuse themselves, that they had no Hand in that Rising.

Next the Author sets forth the Wickedness of the People, by excessive
Drinking, and Drunkenness; thereby, as it were, to show their Loyalty to the
King: And he relates also, how having preached at Harwich, against the grievous
Wickedness of the People, he was haled to Prison in the King's Name. Finally he
exhorts the King to take Heed of seeking Revenge; and to show Mercy.

This Paper, Which were delivered to the King by R. H. and afterward printed.
Diverse Queries proposed to the Quakers, supposedly by the E. of C.
which was not a small one, for it took up several Sheets, was delivered in
Writing by Richard Hubberthorn, into the King's Hand at Whitehall, and was not
long after by the Author given forth in Print.

Now one of the most eminent Royalists drew up diverse Queries to the Quakers,
desiring them to answer to them, and to direct their Answer with this
Superscription, Tradite hanc Amico Regis, that is, Deliver this to the King's
Friend. For it was clearly seen, that several of their Predictions came to be
fulfilled, of which those of Edward Buroughs were not the least. And therefore
some (as it seems) thought that by the Quakers they might get some Knowledge
whether any Stability of the King's Government was to be expected. By the
Queries it appeared, that the Author of them was a Man of Understanding, and of
some Moderation also; and though I don't know who he was, yet I am not without
Thoughts that Edward Earl of Clarendon and High Chancellor, may have been the
Penman thereof. The Tendency of these Queries chiefly was to know from the
Quakers, What their Judgment was concerning the King's Right to the Crown; and
whether they ever did foresee his Return; and also whether they could judge
that his Reign or Government should be blessed or not. Moreover, whether he
might justly forgive or avenge himself? And whether he might allow Liberty of
Conscience to all Sorts of People, Answered by E. Buroughs.
etc. Edward Buroughs answered these Queries, and published his Answer in
Print. It was directed to the King and the Royalists. In it he showed, That in
some of their Writings it had been signified, that they had some Expectations
of the King's Restoration. That the King's coming to the Throne was reasonable
and equitable, because through the Purpose of the Lord. That his Reign and
Government might be blessed, or not blessed, according to his Carriage. And
that he might justly forgive his and his Father's Enemies; for though he and his
Father might have been injured; yet forasmuch as they had applied to the Sword
to determine their Controversy with the Nation, the Sword went against them;
and by that whereby they thought to stand, they did fall; and who then should
they blame for that which befell them, seeing the Sword which they themselves
did choose, destroyed them. However the Author signified, that this was not
meant of the King's Death, that being quite another Case. And if such, who had
destroyed Kingly Government in Name and Title, and pretended to govern better,
and did not make Reformation, but became Oppressors, having broke their
Promises, came to be punished on that Account with Death, or otherwise, such
could not be said to suffer for a good Conscience, nor for Righteousness Sake;
but it was because they were Oppressors; and suffering for that Cause could not
be called Persecution. But none of us (thus ran Edward Burroughs's Words) can
suffer for that Cause, as not being guilty thereof. If we suffer in your
Government, it is for the Name of Christ, because nothing can be charged
against us in this Capacity as we now stand, and in this State unto which we
are now gathered and changed, nor in any Matter of Action or Rebellion against
the King, nor his Father; nor in any Thing concerning the Law and Worship of
our God, and the Matters of his Kingdom, and our pure Consciences. And if any
that are now amongst us, were any Way engaged in the Parliament Service in the
Wars, it was not in Rebellion against the King or his Father, or that we sought
their Destruction, as Men; but upon sober and reasonable Principles, and not
for corrupt Ends, nor to get Honor and Riches to our selves, as some others
might do, who went into the War for self Ends, and continued in Action, after
the Cause which was once engaged for was utterly lost. And that Principle,
which some Time led some into Action to oppose Oppression, and seek after
Reformation, that Principle is still justified, though we are now better informed
than once we were. For though we do now more than ever oppose Oppression, and
seek after Reformation, yet we do it not in that Way of outward warring and
fighting with carnal Weapons and Swords; and you ought to put a Difference
between such as some Time acted in the Wars against you, in and upon sober and
reasonable Principles, and that did not make themselves rich and high in the
World, through your Sufferings, and between such as have acted against you for
Sef-Ends, and have insulted over you, and have made themselves great and rich
in this World through your Afflictions and Sufferings. To the Query, Whether the
great Afflictions sustained by the King diverse Years, from Subjects of his own
Nation, and the Guilt thereof, did lie upon all the Subjects in general? Or
whether upon any, or some particular Sorts of People, who were such more than
others? E. Buroughs made this Answer, So far as his Sufferings were unjust,
the Guilt thereof does not lie upon all the Subjects in general, but upon some
more than others; and such are easy to be distinguished from others, if it be
considered who they are that raised the War in this Nation, against the King,
and who first preached and prayed up the War, and prosecuted it against the
King's Father, and who cast out the Bishops and Prelates from their Places, and
took their Revenues and Benefices, and are become Men as corrupted, as covetous
and self-seeking, as proud and ambitious, as unjust Persecutors, as even the
Men were which they cast out: And who it is that has gotten great Estates in
the Nation, and worldly Honor, and raised themselves from nothing by the Wars,
and by your Suffering; and who got the Estates and Titles of their Enemies, and
pretended to free them from all Oppressions, but have not done it, but have
continued the old Oppressions, and have been striving among themselves who
should rule, and who should be great.mdash;And as for us, who are called
Quakers, we are clear from the Guilt of all the King's Sufferings. We have not
cast out others, and taken their Places of great B^nefices, neither have we
made War with carnal Weapons against any, never since we were a People. Neither
have we broken Oaths and Engagements, nor promised Freedom and Deliverance, and
for Self Ends and earthly Riches betrayed as others, have done. And in many
Particulars it does appear, that we are clear from his Sufferings, for we have
been a suffering People as well as they, by the same Spirit which caused them
to suffer, which has been much more cruel, wicked, and unjust toward us, than
it has been toward them, though our Persecution has been in another Manner.
But what they have done against us, we can freely forgive them, and would have
you to follow the same Example. For if you could accuse them in many Things, so
could we: But this is not a Time to accuse one another, but to forgive one
another, and so to overcome your Enemies. When they had gotten the Victory,
the^ did not reform, but became Oppressors, as well as others, and became cruel
toward others, that would not say and do as they: And for this Cause the Lord
has brought them down, and may justly suffer others to deal with them as they
have dealt with others. Yet notwithstanding I must still say, and it is my
Judgment, that there was very great Oppression and Vexation under the
Government of the late King, and Bishops under his Power, which the Lord was
offended with, and many good People oppressed by; for which Cause the Lord
might and did justly raise up some to oppose, and strive against Oppressions
and Injustice, and to press after Reformation in all Things. This Principle of
Sincerity, which in some Things carried them on in opposing Oppressions, and
pressing after Reformation, I can never deny, but acknowledge it; though many
have lost it, and became Self-Seekers, forgetting the Cause pretended to, etc.

This is but a small Part of the Queries and the Answers thereunto, which E.
Buroughs concluded with a bold Exhortation to the King, to fear and reverence
the Lord.

Now we return again to G. Fox the Elder, G. Fox sen. goes to Gloucester,
Worcester, Drayton and Yorkshire, and has a Meeting at Balby, where some
Thousands are present. A Troop of Horse comes from York to disperse them, but
the Capt. though a desperate Man, gives them but little Disturbance.
whom we left about Bristol; from whence he past to Gloucester, Worcester,
Drayton, (the Place of his Nativity) and Yorkshire. In that Country, at that
Time, a yearly Meeting was kept at Balby, in an Orchard, where some Thousands
of People were met together. At York, about thirty Miles off, Notice being
given of this Meeting, a Troop of Horse came from thence; and when G. Fox stood
preaching in the Meeting on the Stool, two Trumpeters came riding up, sounding
their Trumpets pretty near him: And then the Captain bid him, Come down, for he
was come, he said, to disperse the Meeting. G. Fox, then speaking told him, He
knew they were peaceable People: But if he did question that they met in an
hostile Manner, he might make Search among them; and if he found either Sword
or Pistol about any there, such might suffer: But the Captain told G. Fox, He
must see them dispersed, for he came all Night oh purpose to disperse them. G.
Fox asked him, What Honor it would be to him to ride with Swords and Pistols
amongst so many unarmed Men and Women; But if he would be still and quiet, the
Meeting probably might not continue above two or three Hours: And when it was
done, as they came peaceably, so they should part: For he might perceive, the
Meeting was so large, that all the Country thereabouts could not entertain
them, but that they intended to depart toward their Homes at Night. But the
Captain said, He could, not stay so long. G. Fox desired then, that if he
himself could not stay to see the Meeting ended, he would let a Dozen of his
Soldiers stay. To this the Captain said, He would permit them an Hour's Time;
so he left six Soldiers to stay there, and then went away with his Troop: He
being gone, the Soldiers that were left, told those that were met together,
They might stay till Night, if they would. This they were not for, but parted
about three Hours after, without any Disturbance. But if the Soldiers had been
of such a Temper as their Captain, perhaps the Meeting should not have ended
thus quietly: For he was a desperate Man, having once told G. Fox in Scotland,
That he would obey his Superior s Command; and if it were to crucify Christ, he
would do it; or execute the great Turk's Commands against the Christians, if he
were under him.

Now G. Fox went to Skipton, G. Fox is at a general Meeting at Skipton, which
when Officers came to disturb, and saw their Accounts of Collections, and Care
for the Poor, they commend their Practice and kindly leave them.
where there was a general Meeting concerning the Affairs of the Church. For
many of his Friends suffered much, and their Goods being taken from them, and
some brought to Poverty, there was a Necessity to provide for them. This
Meeting had stood several Years; for when the Justices and Captains came to
break it up, and saw the Books and Accounts of Collections for Relief of the
Poor, and how Care was taken that one County should help another, and provide
for the Poor, they commended such Practice, and passed away in Love. Sometimes
there would come two Hundred poor People belonging to other Societies, and wait
there till the Meeting was done; and then the Friends would send to the Bakers
for Bread, and give every one of those poor People a Loaf, how many soever
there were* For they were taught to do good unto all, though especially to the
Household of Faith.

From hence G. Fox went to Lancaster, G. Fox is taken from M. Fell's at
Swarthmore, had to Ulverstone, and so to Justice Porter's at Lancaster, who
sends him to be a close Prisoner in the common Goal, where he is continued a
long Time.
and so to Swarthmore, where he was apprehended at the House of Margaret Fell,
who was now a Widow, Judge Thomas Fell, her Husband, having been deceased about
two Years before. Now some imagined they had done a remarkable Act; for one
said, He did not think a thousand Men could have taken G. Fox. Then they led
him away to Vlverstone, where he was kept all Night at the Constable's House,
and a Guard of fifteen or sixteen Men were set to watch him; some of which-^^te
in the Chimney, for fear he should go up the Funnel. Next Morning he was
carried to Lancaster, but exceedingly abused by the Way; and being come to Town
was brought to the House of a Justice, whose Name was Henry Porter, and who had
granted the Warrant against him. He asked Porter, For what, and by whose Order
he sent forth his Warrant? And he complained to him of the Abuse of the
Constables and other Officers: for they had set him upon a Horse behind the
Saddle, so that he had nothing to hold by; and maliciously beating the Horse,
made him kick and gallop, and throw off his Rider. But Porter would not take
any Notice of that, and told G. Fox, he had an Order, but would not let him see
it; for he would not reveal the King's Secrets. After many Words were
exchanged, he was carried to Lancaster Prison. Being there a close Prisoner in
the common Jail, he desired two of his Friends, (...) of which was Thomas
Green, T. Green. T.Commings.
the other Thomas Commings a Minister of the Gospel, (with whom I have been
very familiarly acquainted) to go to the Jailor, and desire of him a Copy of
his Mittimus. They went, but the Jailor told them, He could not give a Copy of
it; But yet he gave it them to read; and to the best of their Remembrance, the
Matters therein charged against him were, That G. Fox was a Person generally
suspected to be a common Disturber of the Peace of the Nation, an Enemy to the
King, and a chief Vpholder of the Quakers Sect. And that he, together with
others of his fanatic Opinion had of late endeavored to raise Insurections in
these Parts of the Country, and to embroil the whole Kingdom in Blood.
Wherefore the Jailor was commanded to keep him in safe Custody, till he should
he released by Order from the King and Parliament. No wonder that the Jailor
would not give a Copy of this Mittimus, for it contained almost as many
Untruths as Words. G. Fox then writ an Apology, wherein he answered at large to
all those false Accusations. And Margaret Fell, considering what Injury was
offered to her, by haling G. Fox out of her House, writ the following
Information, and sent it abroad.

To all Magistrates, concerning the wrong Taking up, and Imprisoning of George
Fox at Lancaster.
I Do inform the Governors of this Nation, that Henry Porter, Mayor of
Lancaster, sent a Warrant with four Constables to my House, for which he had no
Authority, nor Order. They searched my House, and apprehended George Fox in it;
who was not guilty of the Breach of any Law, or of any Offense against any in
the Nation. After they had taken him, and brought him before the said Henry
Porter, there was Bail offered, what he would demand for his Appearance, to
answer what could be said to his Charge: But he (contrary to Law, if he had
taken him lawfully) denied to accept of any Bail; and clapped him up in close
Prison. After he was in Prison, a Copy of his Mittimus was demanded; which
ought not to be denied to any Prisoner, that so he may see what is laid to his
Charge: But it was denied him; a Copy he could not have: Only they were
suffered to read it over. And every Thing that was there charged against him,
was utterly false; he was not guilty of any one Charge in it; as will be
proved, and manifested to the Nation. So let the Governors consider of it. I am
concerned in this Thing, inasmuch as he was apprehended in my House; and if he
be guilty, I am so too. So I desire to have this searched out.

Margaret Fell.


After this, Margaret determined to go to London, to speak with the King about
this Matter. Which Porter having heard of, said he would go too; M.Fell
resolves on a Journey to London.
and so he did. But because he had been a zealous Man for the Parliament
against the King, several of the Courtiers put him in Mind of his plundering of
their Houses. And this so troubled him, that he quickly left the Court and
returned home, and then spoke to the Jailor about contriving a Way to release
G. Fox. But in his Mittimus he had overshot himself, by ordering G. Fox to be
kept Prisoner, till he should be delivered by the King or Parliament. G. Fox
also sent him a Letter, and put him in Mind, How fierce he had been against the
King and his Party, though now he would be thought zealous for the King. And
among other Passages he called to his Remembrance, how, when he held
Lancaster-Castle for the Parliament against the King, he was so rough and
fierce against those that favored the King, that he said, He would leave them
neither Dog nor Cat, if they did not bring him in Provision to his Castle.

One Anne Curtis coming to see G. Fox, Goes thither with A. Curtis.
and understanding how he stood committed, resolved also to go to the King
about it; for her Father, who had been Sheriff of Bristol, was hanged near his
own Door, for endeavoring to bring in the King: Upon which Consideration she
was in Hopes to be admitted to the King's Presence to spe? with him: And coming
to London, A. Curtis and M. Fell represents his Case to the King, whose Order
is long evaded
she and Margaret Fell went together to the King, who when he understood whose
Daughter Anne was, received her kindly. She having acquainted the King, with
the Case of G. Fox, desired, That he would be pleased to send for him up, and
hear the Cause himself. This the King promised her he would do, and commanded
his Secretary to send down an Order for the bringing up G. Fox. But it was long
before this Order was executed, for many Evasions were sought; as well by
carping at a Word, as by other Craft; G. F. (...) also.
whereby the sending up of G. Fox was retarded above two Months. He thus
continuing Prisoner, writ several Papers, and among the rest also this:

To the KING.
King CHARLES,
THou came not into this Nation by Sword, nor by Victory of War; but by the
Power of the Lord: Now if thou do not live in it, thou will not prosper. And
if the Lord has showed thee Mercy, and forgiven thee, and thou do not show
Mercy, and forgive, the Lord God will not hear thy Prayers, not them that pray
for thee: And if thou do not stop Persecution, and Persecutors, and take away
all Laws that do hold up Persecution about Religion; but if thou do persist in
them, and uphold Persecution, that will make thee as blind as them that have
gone before thee: For Persecution has always blinded those that have gone into
it; and such, God by his Power overthrows, and does his valiant Acts upon, and
brings Salvation to his oppressed ones: And if thou do bear the Sword in
vain, and let Drunkenness, Oaths, Plays, May-games, (with Fiddlers, Drums,
Trumpets to play at them) with such like Abominations and Vanities be
encouraged, or go unpunished; as setting up of May-poles, with the Image of the
Crown a top of them, etc. the Nations will quickly turn like Sodom and
Gomorrah, and be as bad as the old World, who grieved the Lord till he
overthrew them: And so he will you, if these Things be not suddenly prevented.
Hardly was there so much Wickedness at Liberty before now, as there is now at
this Day; as though there was no Terror, nor Sword of Magistracy; which does not
grace a Government, nor is a Praise to them that do well. Our Prayers are for
them that are in Authority, that under them we may live a godly Life, in which
we have Peace; and that we may not be brought into Ungodliness by them. So
hear, and consider, and do good in thy Time, whilst thou have Power; and be
merciful, and forgive, that is the Way to overcome, and obtain the Kingdom of
Christ.

G. F.


The Sheriff of Lancaster still refused to remove G. Fox, He is still detained.
unless he would become bound, and pay for the Sealing of the Writing, and the
Charge of carrying him up. But this he would not. Then they consulting how to
convey him; it was at first proposed to send a Party of Horse with him: But he
told them, If he were such a Man as they had represented him to be, they had
need to send a Troop or two of Horse to guard him. But considering that this
would be a great Charge to them, they concluded to send him up guarded only by
the Jailor and some Bailiffs. On farther Consideration they found that this
also would be very chargeable; and thereupon told him, If he would put in Bail,
that he would be in London such a Day of the Term, he should have Leave to go
up with some of his own Friends. G. Fox told them, He would neither put in any
Bail, nor give any Money: But if they would let him go up with one or two of
his Friends, he would go up, and be in London such a Day, And at last (...)
permitted to come to London in Company of (...) his Friends (...) order (...)
pear before the Judges.
if the Lord did permit. So at last, when they saw they could not make him bow,
the Sheriff consented, that he should go up with some of his Friends, without
any other Engagement than his Word, To appear before the Judges at London such
a Day of the Term, if the Lord did permit. Whereupon they let him go out of
Prison; and after some Stay, he went with Richard Hubberthorn and Robert
Withers to London, whither he came on a Day that some of the Judges of King
Charles the 1st were hanged and quartered at Charing Cross; Which he performs
accordingly, being accompanied by -- Marsh, Esquire one of the King's Bedchamber,
and is examined by the Judges.
for now what E. Buroughs and others had plainly foretold, was fulfilling on
them.

The next Morning G. Fox, and those with him, went to Judge Thomas Mallet's
Chamber, who then was putting on his red Gown, to sit upon some more of the
King's Judges, and therefore told him, He might come another Time. G. Fox did
so, being accompanied by -- Marsh, Esquire one of the King's Bedchamber. When he
came to the Judge's Chamber, he found there also the Lord Chief Justice Foster,
and delivered to them the Charge that was against him: But when they read those
Words, That he and his Friends were embroiling the Nation in Blood, etc. they
struck their Hands on the Table: Whereupon G. Fox told them That he was the Man
whom that Charge was against; but that he was as innocent of any such Thing, as
a new born Child; and that he brought it up himself, and that some of his
Friends came up with him, without any Guard. As yet the Judges had not minded
G. Fox's Hat; but now seeing his Hat on, they said, Why did he stand with his
Hat on? He told them, He did not stand so in any Contempt to them. Then they
commanded one to take it off; and having called for the Marshal of the King's
Bench, they said to him, You must take this Man and secure him, but you must
let him have a Chamber, and not put him amongst the Prisoners. But the Marshal
said, His House was so full, that he could not tell where to provide a Room for
him, but amongst the Prisoners. Judge Foster then said to G. Fox, Will you
appear to morrow about ten of the Clock at the King's Bench Bar in
Westminster Hall? Yes, said he, If the Lord give me Strength. Hereupon the said
Judge said to the other Judge, If he say Yes, and promises it, you may take his
Word. So he was dismissed for that Time, and the next Day appeared at the
King's Bench Bar at the Hour appointed, being accompanied by Richard
Hubberthorn, Robert Withers, and Esquire Marsh, before named. And being brought
into the middle of the Court, he looked about, and turning to the People, said,
Peace be among you. Then the Charge against him was read, and coming to that
Part which said, That he and his Friends were embroiling the Nation in Blood,
and raising a new War, and that he was an Enemy to the King, etc. those of the
Bench listed up their Hands. He then stretching out his Arms, said, I am the
Man whom that Charge is against; but I am as innocent as a Child concerning the
Charge, and have never learned any War-postures. Do ye think, that if I and my
Friends had been such Men as the Charge declares, that I would have brought it
up my self against myself? Or that I should have been suffered to come up with
only one or two my Friends with me? For had I been such a Man as this Charge
sets forth, I had need to have been guarded up with a Troop or two of Horse:
But the Sheriff and Magistrates of Lancashire had thought fit to ^^t me and my
Friends come up by our selves, almost two hundred Miles, without any Guard at
all, which we may be sure they would not have done, if they had looked upon me
to be such a Man. Then the Judge asked him, Whether it should be filed, or what
he would do with it? And he answered, Ye are Judges, and able, I hope, to judge
in this Matter; therefore do with it what ye will. The Judges said, They did
not accuse him, for they had nothing against him. Whereupon Esquire Marsh stood up
and told the Judges, It was the King's Pleasure that G. Fox should be set at
Liberty, seeing no Accuser came up against him. Then they asked him, Whether he
would put it to the King and Council? He answered, Yes, with a good Will.
Thereupon they sent the Sheriff's Return, which he made to the Writ of Habeas
Corpus, to the King, and this Return was thus:

BY Virtue of his Majesty's Writ to me directed, and hereunto annexed, I
certify, that before the Receipt of the said Writ, George Fox, in the said Writ
mentioned, was committed to his Majesty's Jail, at the Castle of Lancaster, in
my Custody, by a Warrant from Henry Porter, Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace within the County Palatine aforesaid, bearing Date the Fifth of
June now last past; for that he the said George Fox, was generally suspected to
be a common Disturber of the Peace of this Nation, an Enemy to our sovereign
Lord the King, and a chief Vpholder of the Quakers Sect; and that he, together
with others of his fanatic Opinion, have of late endeavored to make
Insurrections in these Parts of the Country, and to embroil the whole Kingdom
in Blood. And this is the Cause of his taking and detaining. Nevertheless, the
Body of the said George Fox I have ready before Thomas Mallet, Knight, one of
his Majesty's Justices, assigned to hold Pleas before his said Majesty, a^ his
Chamber in Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, to do and receive those Things which
his Majesty's said Justice shall determine concerning him, in this Behalf, as
by the aforesaid Writ is required.

GEORGE CHETHAM, Esquire Sheriff.

The King upon Perusal of this, and Consideration of the whole Matter, The King
orders his Release.
being satisfied of G. Fox's Innocence, commanded his Secretary to send the
following Order to Judge Mallet for his Release.

IT is his Majesty's Pleasure, that you give Order for the releasing, and
setting at full Liberty, the Person of George Fox, late a Prisoner in
Lancaster-Jail, and commanded hither by an Habeas Corpus: And this
Signification of his Majesty's Pleasure shall be your sufficient Warrant. Dated
at Whitehall, the 24th of October, 1660.

EDWARD NICHOLAS.

For Sir Thomas Mallet, Knight. one of the Justices of the King's Bench.
When this Order was delivered to Judge Mallet, he forthwith sent his Warrant
to the Marshal of the King's Bench, for G. Fox's Release; which Warrant was
thus;

BY Virtue of a Warrant which this Morning I have received from the Right
Honorable Sir Edward Nicholas, Knight. one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries,
for the releasing and setting at Liberty of George Fox, late a Prisoner in
Lancaster Jail, and from thence brought hither by Habeas Corpus, and Yesterday
committed unto your Custody, I do hereby require you accordingly to release,
and set the said Prisoner, George Fox, at Liberty: For which this shall be your
Warrant and Discharge.

Given under my Hand the 25th Day of October, in the Year of our Lord God,
1660. THOMAS MALLET.

To Sir John Lenthal, Knight, Marshal of the King's Bench, or his Deputy.
G. Fox having been Prisoner now above twenty Weeks, And accordingly he is set
at Liberty, which makes Justice Porter afraid.
was thus very honorably set at Liberty by the King's Command. After it was
known he was discharged, several that were envious and wicked, were troubled,
and Terror seized on Justice Porter; for he was afraid G. Fox would take the
Advantage of the Law against him for his wrong Imprisonment, and thereby undo
him: And indeed G. Fox was put on by some in Authority, to have made him, and
the rest Examples. But he said, He should leave them to the Lord; if the Lord
did forgive them, he should not trouble himself with them.

About this Time, R. Hubberthorn has a long Discourse with the King.
Richard Hubberthorn got an Opportunity to speak with the King, and to have a
long Discourse with him, which soon after he published in Print. Being admitted
into the King's Presence, he gave him a Relation of the State of his Friends,
and said,

Since the Lord has called us, and gathered us to be a People, to walk in his
Fear, and in his Truth, we have always suffered and been persecutcd by the
Powers that have ruled, and been made a Prey of, for departing from Iniquity;
and when the Breach of no just Law could be charged aguinst us, then they made
Laws on Purpose to ^nsnare us; and so our Sufferings were unjustly continued.


King. It is true, those that have ruled over you, have been cruel, and have
professed much which they have not done.


R. H. And likewise the same Sufferings do now abound in more Cruelty against
us in many Parts of this Nation: As for Instance, one at Thetford in Norfolk,
where Henry Fell, ministering unto the People, was taken out of the Meeting, and
whipped, and sent out of the Town, from Pari^ to Parish, toward Lancashire;
and the chief Ground of his Accusation in his Pass (which was shown to the
King) was because he denied to take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; and
so because that for Conscience Sake we cannot swear, but have learned Obedience
to the Doctrine of Christ, which says, Swear not at all; hereby an Occasion is
taken against us, to persecute us; and it is well known, that we have not sworn
for any, nor against any, but have kept to the Truth, and our Yea has been
Yea, and our Nay, Nay, in all Things, which is more than the Oath or those that
are out of the Truth.


King. But why can you not swear? for an Oath is a common Thing amongst Men to
any Engagement.


R. H. Yes it is manifest, and we have seen it by Experience; and it is so
common amongst Men to swear and engage either for, or against Things, that
there is no Regard taken to them, nor Fear of an Oath; that therefore which we
speak of in the Truth of our Hearts, is more than what they swear.


King. But can you not promise as before the Lord (which is the Substance of
the Oath?)


R. H. Yes, what we do affirm, we can promise before the Lord, and take him to
our Witness in it; but our so promising has not been accepted, but the
Ceremony of an Oath they have stood for, without which all other Things were
accounted of no Effect.


King. But how may we know from your Words that you will perform?


R. H. By proving of us; for they that swear, are not known to be faithful, but
by proving of them; and so we, by those that have tried us, are found to be
truer in our Promises, than others by their Oaths; and to those that do yet
prove us, we shall appear the same.


King. Pray what is your Principle?


R. H. Our Principle is this, That Jesus Christ is the true Light which
enlightneth every one that comes into the World, that all Men through him might
believe; and that they were to obey and follow this Light, as they have
received it, whereby they may be led unto God, and unto Righteousness, and the
Knowledge of the Truth, that they may be saved.


King. This do all Christians confess to be Truth? and he is not a Christian
that will deny it.


R. H. But many have denied it both in Words and Writings, and opposed us in
it; and above an Hundred Books are put forth in Opposition unto this Principle.


Then some of the Lords standing by the King, said, that none would deny that
every one is enlightened.

Lord. And one of the Lords asked, How long we had been called Quakers, or did
we own that Name?


R. H. That Name was given to us in Scorn and Derision about twelve Years
since; but there were some that lived in this Truth before we had that Name
given unto us.


King. How long is it since you owned this Judgment and Way?


R. H. It is near twelve Years since I owned this Truth according to the
Manifestation of it.


King. Do you own the Sacrament?


R. H. As for the Word Sacrament, I do not read of it in the Scripture; but as
for the Body and Blood of Christ, I own, that there is no Remission without
Blood.


King. Well that is it: But do you not believe that every one is commanded to
receive it?


R. H. This we do believe, That according as it is written in the Scripture,
that Christ at his last Supper took Bread and brake it, and gave to his
Disciples, and also took the Cup and blessed it, and said unto them, And as
often as ye do this, (that is, as often as they brake Bread) you show forth the
Lord's Death till he come; and this we believe they did; and they did eat their
Bread in Singleness of Heart from House to House: and Christ did come again to
them, according to his Promise; after which they said, We being many, are one
Bread, for we are all Partakers of this one Bread.


King's Friend. Then one of the King's Friends said, It is true; for as many
Grains make one Bread so they being many Members, were one Body.


Another of them said, If they be the Bread, then they must be broken.


R. H. There is Difference between that Bread which he brake at his last
Supper, wherein they were to show forth, as in a Sign, his Death until he came;
and this whereof they spoke, they being many, are one Bread; for herein they
were come more into the Substance, and to speak more mystically, as they knew
it in the Spirit.


King's Friends. Then they said, It is true, and he has spoken nothing but
Truth.


King. How know you that you are inspired by the Lord?


R. H. According as we read in the Scriptures, That the Inspiration of the
Almighty gives Understanding; so by his Inspiration is an Understanding given
us of the Things of God.


Lord. Then one of the Lords said, How do you know that you are led by the true
Spirit?


R. H. This we know, because the Spirit of Truth it reproves the World of Sin,
and by it we were reproved of Sin, and also are led from Sin unto
Righteousness, and Obedience of Truth, by which Effects we know it is the true
Spirit; for the Spirit of the wicked One does not lead into such Things.


King and Lords. Then the King and his Lords said, It was Truth.


King. Well, of this you may be assured, That you shall none of you suffer for
your Opinions or Religion, so long as you live peaceably, and you have the Word
of a King for it; and I have also given forth a Declaration to the same
purpose, that none should wrong you, nor abuse you.


King. How do you own Magistrates, or Magistracy?


R. H. Thus we do own Magistrates: Whosoever is set up by God, whether King as
supreme. or any set in Authority by him, who are for the Punistment of
Evildoers, and the praise of them that do well, such we shall submit unto, and
assist in righteous and civil Things, both by Body and Estate: And if any
Magistrates do that which is unrighteous, we must declare against it; only
submit under it by a patient Suffering, and not rebel against any by
Insurrections, Plots, and Contrivances.


King. Then the King said, That is enough.


Lord. Then one of the Lords asked, Why do you meet together, seeing every one
of you have the Church in your selves?


R. H. According as it is written in the Scriptures, the Church is in God,
These. i. 1. And they that feared the Lord, did meet often together in the Fear
of the Lord, and to us it is profitable, and herein we are edifie^ and
strengthened in the Life of Truth.


King. How did you first come to believe the Scriptures were Truth?


R. H. I have believed the Scriptures from a Child to be a Declaration of
Truth, when I had but a literal Knowledge, natural Education and Tradition; but
now I know the Scriptures to be true by the Manifestation and Operation of the
Spirit of God fulfilling them in me.


King. In what Manner do you meet, and what is the Order in your Meetings?


R. H. We do meet in the same Order as the People of God did, waiting upon him;
and if any have a Word of Exhortation from the Lord, he may speak it; or if any
have a Word of Reproof or Admonition, and as every one has received the Gift,
so they may minister one unto another, and may be edified one by another,
whereby a Growth into the Knowledge of the Truth is administered to one another.


One of the Lords. Then you know not so much as you may know, but there is a
Growth then to be admitted of?


R. H. Yes, we do grow daily into the Knowledge of the Truth, in our Exercise
and Obedience to it.


King. Are any of your Friends gone to Rome?


R. H. Yes, there is one in Prison in Rome.


King. Why did you send him thither?


R. H. We did not send him thither, but he found something upon his Spirit from
the Lord, whereby he was called to go and declare against Superstition and
Idolatry, which is contrary to the Will of God.


King's Friend said. There were two of them at Rome, but one was dead.


King. Have any of your Friends been with the Great ^urk?


R. H. Some of our Friends have been in that Country.


Other things were spoken concerning the Liberty of the Servants of the Lord,
who were called of him into his Service, that to them there was no Limitation
to Parishes or Places, but as the Lord did guide them in his Work and Service
by his Spirit.

So the King promised that we should not any ways suffer for our Opinion or
Religion; and so in Love passed away.

The King having promised Richard Hubberthorn over and again, Who promises on
his Word, Friends should not suffer for their Opinion.
that his Friends should not suffer for their Opinion or Religion, they parted
in Love. But though the King seemed a good natured Prince, yet he was so misled,
that in process of Time he seemed to have forgot what he so solemnly promised
on the Word of a King.

Now in this Discourse, Mention being made of Rome, etc. I Will say by the By, J.
Parrot and J. Love come to Leghorn, are examined by the Inquisition and
dismissed.
that one John Parrot, and John Love being come to Leghorn in Italy, and having
been examined there by the Inquisition, they answered so well that they were
dismissed, Being come afterward to Venice, Parrot was admitted to the Doge, or
Duke, in his Palace, spoke with him, At Venice Parrot speaks with the Duke and
then with Love goes to
and gave him some Books: And from thence he went with his Fellow-traveller to
Rome. Here they bore a Testimony against the Idolatry committed there, in such
a public Manner, that they were taken into Custody. John Love died in the
Prison of the Inquisition; and though it was divulged, that he had fasted to
Death, yet some Nu^s have told, Rome, where Love dies in Prison, and Parrot
afterward turns Apostate.
that he was dispatched in the Night, for fear he should annoy the Church of
Rome. However it was, he died in Sincerity of Heart, and so was more happy than
Parrot, who though then perhaps he was in a pretty good Frame of Mind, yet he
afterward turned an eminent Apostate, having continued Prisoner at Rome a
great while, and at length got his Liberty: He was a Man of great natural
Parts, but not continuing in true Humility, ran out into exorbitant
Imaginations, of which more may be said hereafter. About this Time, Samuel
Fisher and John Stubbs were also at Rome, S. Fisher and J. Stubs spread Books
at Rome, and return unmolested.
where they spoke with some of the Cardinals, and testified against the Popish
Superstition. They also spread some Books amongst the Friars, some of whom
confessed the Contents thereof to be Truth: But said they, if we should
acknowledge this publicly, we might expect to be burnt for it. Notwithstanding
Fisher and Stubbs went free, and returned unmolested.

The Case of Mary Fisher, M. Fisher comes to Smirna, from whence she is sent
back to Venice; thence she goes to Sultan Mahomet's Camp near Adrianople, sends
to the Vizier, who procures Admittance to the Sultan, who favorably receives
her Message, offers her a Guard, and dismisses her with Respect: She then goes
to Constantinople, and returns safe to England.
a Maiden, and one of the first Quakers (so called) that came into New England
(as has been mentioned before) I cannot pass by in Silence. She being come to
Smirna, to go from thence to Adrianople, was stopped by the English Consul, and
sent back to Venice, from whence she came by another Way to Adrianople, at the
Time that Sultan Mahomet the IVth, was encamped with his Army near the said
Town. She went alone to the Camp, and got some body to go to the Tent of the
Grand Vizier, to tell him that an English Woman was come, who had something to
declare from the great God to the Sultan. The Vizier sent word, that next
Morning he should procure her an Opportunity for that Purpose. Then she
returned to the Town, and repaired next Morning to the Camp again: Where being
come, she was brought before the Sultan, who had his great Men about him, in
such a Manner as he was used to admit Ambassadors. He asked her by his
Interpreters (whereof there were three with him) Whether it was true what had
been told him, That she had something to say to him from the Lord God? She
answered, Yea. Then he bad her speak on: And she not being forward, weightily
pondering what she might say, and he supposing that she might be fearful to
utter her Mind before them all, asked her, Whether she desired that any might
go aside, before she spoke? She answered No. He then bad her Speak the Word of
the Lord to them and not to fear, for they had good Hearts and could hear it.
He also charged her, to speak the Word she had to say from the Lord, neither
more nor less, for they were willing to hear it, be it what it would. Then she
spoke what she had upon her Mind.

The Turks hearkened to her with much Attention and Gravity, till she had done,
and then the Sultan asking her, Whether she had any thing more to say? She
asked him, Whether he understood what she said? And he answered, Yes, every
Word; and farther said, That what she had spoken was Truth. Then he desired her
to stay in that Country, saying, That they could not but respect such an one,
as should take so much pains to come to them so far as from England, with a
Message from the Lord God. He also proferred her a Guard to bring her into
Constantinople whither she intended. But she not accepting this Offer, he told
her, it was dangerous traveling, especially for such an one as she; and
wondered that she had passed so safe, so far as she had: saying also, It was in
Respect to her, and Kindness that he prof^rred it, and that he would not for
any Thing she should come to the leas^ H^^rt in his D^^inions. She having no
more to say, the Turks asked her, What she thought of their Prophet Mahomet?
She answered warily; That she knew him not; but Christ, the true Prophet, the
Son of God, who was the Light of the World, and enlightened every Man coming
into the World, him she kn^w. And c^^^erning Mahomet she said, that they might
judge of him to be (...) or f^^s^ ^^cording to the Words, and Prophecies he
spoke; saying farther, If the Word that a Prophet speaks, come to pass, then
shall ye know, that the Lord has sent that Prophet; but if it come not to
pass, then shall ye know that the Lord never sent him. The Turks confessed this
to be true; and Mary having performed her Message, departed from the Camp to
Constantinople, without a Guard, whither she came without the least Hurt or
Scoff. And so she returned safe to England.

Concerning Katherine Evans and Sarah Chivers, A short Hint concerning K. Evans
and S. Chevers.
two Women, who at this Time lay in the Prison of the Inquisition at Malta, and
were not released, till after three Years Confinement, where they suffered most
grievous Hardships; I intend to speak hereafter, when I am come to the Time of
their Deliverance; and then I purpose to make a large, and very remarkable
Description concerning it.

In the mean while I return to the Affairs of England, Affairs in England.
where the Government now was quite altered. Many of the late King's Judges
were now hanged and quartered: Among those was also Colonel Francis Hacker,
Col. Hacker is executed for Treason: A little before his Death he owns Trouble
for what he had done to the Innocent.
of whom about six Years before this Time, it has been said, that he took
George Fox Prisoner. But he now himself was in Prison, and impeached not only
as one of those that kept the King Prisoner, but also that he signed the
Warrant for the King's Execution, and had conducted him to the Scaffold. To all
which and more, he said little, but that what he did, was by Order of his
Superiors; and that he had endeavored to serve his Country. But this did not
avail him, for he was condemned for high Treason, and hanged and quartered in
October. A Day or two before his Death, Margaret Fell visited him in Prison;
and when he was put in Mind of what formerly he had done against the Innocent,
he remembered it, and said, He knew well whom she meant, and had Trouble upon
him for it. For G. F. (who had compared him to Pilate) bad him, When the Day of
his Misery and Trial should come upon him, to remember what he said to him. And
as Hacker's Son in Law, A wicked saying of Hacker's Son Needham.
Needham, did not stick to say, That it was Time to have G. Fox cut off: So it
came to be the Lot of Hacker himself to be cut off at Tyburn, where he was
hanged. Such now was the End of many, who were not only guilty of the King's
Death, and the putting to Death of others who were for King Charles the Second,
but had also transgressed against God, by persecuting godly People. They had
been often warned, and several Times told that God would hear the Cries of the
Widows and Fatherless, And hears the Oppressed, and Distress is brought on the
Persecutors.
that had been cruelly oppressed by them: And as they had made Spoil of the
Goods of those whom in Scorn they called Quakers, so now Fear and Quaking was
brought upon them, and their Estates became a Spoil to others. How plainly E.
Buroughs had foretold this, has been said before; and not to mention others,
R. Huntington's remarkable Passage to the Presbyterians and Independents.
I Will only say, that one Robert Huntington came once into the Steeple-house at
Brough near Carlisle, with a white Sheet about him, and a Halter about his
Neck, to show the Presbyterians and Independents there, that the Surplice was
to be introduced again, and that some of them should not escape the Halter. Now
how mad soever this was said to be, yet Time showed it a Presage of the
impending Disaster of the cruel Persecutors: For when King Charles had ascended
the Throne, his most fierce Enemies were dispatched out of the Way. The
Parliament sitting at this Time, Quakers heard before the H. of Lords with
Moderation. The Kings ^ets about 700 of them at Liberty who had been impris^n'd
under
some of those called Quakers were admitted to appear in the House of Lords,
where they gave Reasons why they could not frequent the public Worship, nor
swear, nor pay Tithes; and they were heard with Moderation. The King also about
this Time showed himself moderate; for being solicited by some, and more
especially by Margaret Fell, he set at Liberty about seven Hundred of the
People called Quakers, who had been imprisoned under the Government of Oliver
and Richard Cromwell. This passed the easier, because those that were now at the
Helm, had also suffered under the former Government:. and R. Cromwell, and an
order is drawn up to permit them the Exercise of their Worship.
There seemed likewise some Inclination to give Liberty of Conscience: But
there being among those that were now in Authority, some also of a malicious
Temper, they always found Means to hinder this good Work; and it just now fell
out so that something started up, which put a Stop to the giving such a Liberty
as aforesaid; though it was advanced so far that an Order was drawn up for
permitting the Quakers the free Exercise of their Worship; only the signing and
Seal to it was wanting, when all on a sudden the Fifth Monarchy-men made an
Insurrection. Insurrection of the Fifth Monarchy-Men.
There was at this Time a great Number of this turbulent People in England: Who
perceiving that their exorbitant Opinion was inconsistent with Kingly
Government, which now had taken Place, thought it not meet for their Cause to
sit still while the Government, which as yet was but new, should be fully
settled and established. Perhaps they had also some Intent to free some of the
late King's Judges, who were imprisoned; for among these was also Sir Henry
Vane, who having been one of the chief of the Common-wealth-party, Sir H. Vane
in Prison.
was likewise said to be one of the Heads of the Fifth-Monarchy Men. It was in
the Night when these People made a Rising; which caused such a Stir, that the
King's Soldiers sounded an Alarm by the beating of Drums. The Train'd-bands
appeared in Arms, and all was as in an Uproar, and both the Mob and Soldiers
committed great Insolences, for several Days; so that the Quakers, though
altogether innocent, became the Object of the Fury of their Enemies, and many
were haled to Prison out of their peaceable Meetings. G. F. seized on at his
Lodgings, to whom -- Marsh Esquire shows extraordinary Respect and Love, and at
last gets him discharged.
At that Time, George Fox was at London, and being lodged in the Pall Mall, at
Night a Company of Troopers came, and knocked at the Door where he was, which
being opened, they rushed into the House, and laid hold on him. One of these,
that had formerly served under the Parliament, clapped his Hand to G. Fox's
Pocket, and asked, Whether he had any Pistol? G. Fox told him, He knew he did
not use to carry Pistols, why then did he ask such a Question of him, whom he
knew to be a peaceable Man? Others of these Fellows ran up into the Chambers,
and there found Esquire Marsh, before mentioned, in Bed, who, though he was one
of the King's Bedchamber, yet out of Love to G. Fox, came and lodged where he
did. When the Troopers came down again, they said, Why should we take this Man
away with us? We will let him alone. Oh, said the Parliament-Soldier, He is one
of the Heads, and a chief Ringleader. Upon this, the Soldiers were taking him
away. But Esquire Marsh hearing of it, sent for him that commanded the Party,
and desired him to let G. Fox alone, since he would see him forth coming in the
Morning, and then they might take him. Early in the Morning there came a
Company of Foot to the House; and one of them drawing his Sword, held it over
G. Fox's Head, which made him ask, Wherefore he drew his Sword at a naked Man?
At which his Fellows being ashamed, bid him put up his Sword; and some Time
after they brought him to Whitehall, before the Troopers came for him. As he
was going out, he saw several of his Friends going to the Meeting, it being
then the first Day of the Week; and he intended to have gone thither himself,
if he had not been stopped; but now it being out of his Power to keep them
Company, he commended their Boldness, and encouraged them to persevere therein.
When he was come to Whitehall, seeing the Soldiers and People were exceeding
rude, he began to exhort them to Godliness. But some great Persons coming by,
who were envious to him, said, What, do ye let him preach? Put him into such a
Place, where he may not stir. So he was put into that Place, and the Soldiers
watched over him: But G. Fox told them, Though they could confine his Body, and
shut that up, yet the Word of Life they could not stop. Some then asked him,
What was? He told them, He was a Preacher of Righteousness. After he had been
kept there two or three Hours, Esquire Marsh spoke to the Lord Gerard, who came,
and bid them set G. Fox at Liberty. When he was discharged, the Marshal
demanded Fees, G. Fox told him, He could not give him any: And he asked him,
How he could demand Fees of him who was innocent? Nevertheless he told him,
that in his own Freedom he would give them two Pence, to make him and the
Soldiers drink. But they shouted at that, which made him say, If they would not
accept it, they might choose; for he should not give them Fees. Then he went
through the Guards, and came to an Inn, where several of his Friends at that Time
were Prisoners under a Guard, and about Night he went to the House of one of
his Friends.

This Insurrection of the Fifth Monarchy-men caused a great Disturbance in the
Nation; On Occasion of the said Insurrection Friends suffer much through the
Nation, and T. Pachyn being dragged out of Bed in a Fever, dies in a Prison,
and several Thousands are imprisoned, of which M. Fell gives the King an
Account. G. F. writes to consolate the Sufferers, and prints a Declaration
against Sediction, etc. which was presented to the King, etc. The Fifth
Monarchy-men clear the Quakers of any knowledge of their Plot, and the King
sets them at Liberty without paying Fees. Many Presbyterian Preachers conform,
on which some of their Hearers join with the Quakers.
and though the Quakers did not at all meddle with those boisterous People, yet
they fell under great Sufferings because of them; and both Men and Women were
dragged out of their Houses to Prison, and some sick Men off their Beds by the
Legs; among which was one Thomas Pachyn, who being in a Fever, was dragged by
the Soldiers out of his Bed to Prison, where he died.

This Persecution going on throughout the Nation, Margaret Fell went to the
King, and gave him an Account how her Friends, that were no wise concerned in
the said Insurrection and Riots, were treated; for several Thousands of them
were cast into Prison. The King and Council wondered how they could have such
Intelligence, since strict Charge was given for the Intercepting of all
Letters, so that none could pass unsearched. But notwithstanding this, so much
was heard of the Numbers of the Imprisoned, that Margaret Fell went a second
Time to the King and Council, and acquainted them of the grievous Sufferings of
Her Friends. G. Fox then writ a Letter of Consolation to his Suffering Friends;
and also published in print a Declaration against all Sedition, Plotters and
Fighters, wherein he manifested, that they were an harmless People, that denied
Wars and Fightings, and could not make use of the outward Sword, or other
carnal Weapons. This Declaration was presented to the King and his Council and
was of such Effect, that the King gave forth a Proclamation, That no Soldiers
should go to search any House but with a Constable. When afterward some of the
Fifth Monarchy-men were put to Death because of their Insurrection, they did
the Quakers, so called, that Right, that they cleared them openly from having
an Hand in, or Knowledge of their Plot. This and other Evidences caused the
King, being continually importuned thereunto, to issue forth a Declaration,
That the Quakers should be set at Liberty without paying Fees. Many of the
Presbyterian Preachers now temporized, and for keeping their Benefices, joined
with the Episcopalians; and did not stick to put on the Surplice. But this gave
Occasion to many of their Hearers to leave them, and join with the Quakers, so
called, who could not comply with the Times. Others, who were a little more
steadfast, made use of their Money to get Liberty, Others purchase their
Liberty, who in Oliver's time would permit none.
though under the Government of Cromwell they would permit no Liberty of
Conscience to others; insomuch that one Hewes, an eminent Priest at Plymouth in
Oliver's Days, when some Liberty was granted, prayed That God would put it into
the Hearts of the chief Magistrates of the Nation, to remove this cursed
Toleration. But this Hewes, after the King was come in, And one Hewes who
before had called Toleration cursed, knew not what to say now.
being asked by one, Whether he would account Toleration accursed now, answered
only by the Shaking of his Head.

Now though many of the Quakers, as has been said, were released from Prison,
yet they suffered exceedingly in their Religious Assemblies. Once a Company of
Irishmen came to the Pall Mall, when G. Fox was there; but the Meeting was
already broke up; and he being gone up into a Chamber, heard one of those rude
Persons, who was a Colonel, At Pall Mall a desperate Irish Colonel calmed by G.
Fox.
to say, He would kill all the Quakers. Whereupon G. Fox came down, and told
him, The Law said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but thou
threatnest to kill all the Quakers, though they have done thee no Hurt: But said
he farther, Here is Gospel for thee: Here Is my Hair, here is my Cheek, and
here is my Shoulder, turning it to him. Laws made against Papists are executed
upon Protestant Dissenters.
This so surprised the Colonel, that he and his Companions stood amazed, and
said, If this be your Principle as you say, we never saw the like in our Lives.
To which G. Fox said, What I am in Words, I am the same in Life. Then the
Colonel carried himself lovingly; though a certain Ambassador who stood without,
and then came in, said, that this Irish Colonel was such a desperate Man, that
he durst not come in with him, for fear he should have done great Mischief.

Notwithstanding such like rude Encounters, yet by the Change of the
Government, some Stop was put to the fierce Current of Persecution; for the
King being but newly settled on the Throne, showed yet an Inclination to
Lenity. But this Quiet did not last long, and was but a Time of Respiration:
For the Churchmen instigated (as it seems very probable) by the Favorers of
Popery, continued envious, and staid but for an Opportunity to show their
Malice. An Instance of which has been seen already on the Insurrection of the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, and in the Sequel will be seen much clearer: since though
they did not seem to persecute for Conscience Sake, yet under a Color of
Justice, Laws were made use of, that had formerly been enacted for the
Suppression of Popery, and to secure the Kingdom against Jesuits, and other
traitorous Papists; these being the Laws, of which G. Fox in his Letter to the
King, had said, that they held up Persecution about Religion.

Now that it may be known what Laws those were, and that it may also appear
what an unreasonable Use has been made thereof, I shall here set them down, or
Abstracts of them; that so it may be more plainly seen, what awkward Means have
been made use of, and how finistrously the Laws were executed. Sometimes I may
interweave among these Abstracts some Observations, or an Account of a Case,
which, though not placed in due Time, may yet be serviceable to give a true
Notion of Things. I now ^epair to those Laws.

In the 27th Year of King Henry the Eighth, a Law was made for Payment of
Tithes: For that King having either given or sold many Chapels and Abbeys to
Laymen, those Laymen had no Right, as Priests claimed to have, to summon to
Ecclesiastical Courts those that failed in paying of Tithes. But for this a Law
was provide, by Virtue of which a Judge of an Ecclesiastical Court might be
helpful to Laymen, and in that Law it was said, If the Judge of an
Ecclesiastical Court make Complaint to two Justices of Peace (Quorum unus) of
any Contumacy or Misdemeanour committed by a Defendant in any Suit there
depending for Tithes, 27 Hen. 8^ cap. 20.
the said Justices shall commit such Defendant to Prison, there to remain till
he shall find sufficient Surety to be bound before them by Recognizance, or
otherwise to give due Obedience to the Process, Proceedings, Decrees and
Sentences of the said Court.

By this Law (which is pretended to be still in Force) many honest People have
suffered, and been kept very long in Prison: For they refusing to find Surety
for the Payment of Tithes, which for Conscience Sake they could not give to
such Ministers who lived from a forced Maintenance, and did not (as they
judged) profit the People; it was in the Power of the Priests to detain them
Prisoners till the pretended Debt was paid; which the Persecuted judged so
unreasonable, that some have therefore continued in Prison for many Years,
choosing rather to die in Goal, than to uphold such Preachers by paying Tithes
to them. And the Quakers so called have never offered Resistance, but Suffering
and Forbearance have always been their Arms, though they were almost continually
vexed with Laws that were never made against them; and more especially were
they molested with the Oath of Supremacy, which was made in the Beginning of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, though (it may be) projected in the Time of Henry
the Eighth, which runs thus: I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my
Conscience, that the [King's] Highness is the only supreme Governor of this
Realm, Oath of Supremacy, 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
and of all other [His] Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal. And that no Foreign
Prince, Prelate, State or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Preeminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual,
within this Realm: And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise, That from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the [King's] Highness
[His] Heirs and lawful Successors; and to my Power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdiction, Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted or belonging to
the [King's] Highness, [His] Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

In the first Year of Queen Elizabeth, an Act was made for Uniformity of Common
Prayer and Church Service, having this Clause. Every Person shall resort to
their Parish Church, 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
or upon Let thereof, to some other, every Sunday and Holiday, upon Pain to be
punished by Censures of the Church, and also to forfeit twelve Pence, to be
levied by the Churchwardens there, for the Use of the Poor, upon the Offender's
Goods by Way of Distress.

Here is to be noted, that some have prosecuted the pretended Offenders on this
Clause to obviate greater Severities; although this Law was made because of the
Papists, thereby to force them to come to Church; for about that Time there
were not so many Protestant Dissenters in England, as afterward; but these
appearing in Time, were as well under the Lash of this Law, as the Papists; for
their religious Assemblies were not reckoned to be Churches, as the
Steeple Houses by a Metonymy generally have been called, at the same Rate as
the Jews Meeting Houses have been called Synagogues, though the Word it self
properly signifies the Assembly of the People.

Now since the aforesaid Law was was not strictly obeyed, not only by Papists,
but also by others, who aiming at a further Reformation, could not longer
comply with the Rites of the Church of England, in the 23d Year of Elizabeth a
more severe Law was made, with this Clause. Every Person not repairing to
Church, 23 Eliz. c. 2.
according to the Statute of 1 Eliz. 2. shall forfeit twenty Pounds for every
Month they so make Default; and if they so forbear by the space of twelve
Months, after Certificate thereof made by the Ordinary to the Kings Bench, a
Justice of Assize, Jail-delivery, or Peace of the County where they dwell,
shall bind them with two sufficient Sureties in 200 l. at least, to the good
Behavior, from which they shall not be released, until they shall repair to
Church according to the said Statute.

This Law it seems was thought not severe enough; therefore in the 29th Year of
the said Queen, another Law was made with this Clause; The Queen may seize all
the Goods and two third Parts of the Lands and Leases of every Offender not
repairing to Church as aforesaid, 26 Eliz. c. 6.
in such of the Terms of Easter and Michaelmas, as shall happen next after such
Conviction, for the Sum then due for the Forfeiture of twenty Pounds a Month,
and yearly after that (in the same Terms) according to the Rate of twenty
Pounds a Month, for so long Time as they shall forbear to come to Church
according to the said Statute of 23 Eliz. 1.

Upon these Acts many were prosecuted; but in the Height of this Proceeding
George Whitehead, Gilbert Latey, and others, solicited King Charles the IId in
the Behalf of their Friends; which had such Effect, that the King ordered Stay
of Process in diverse Counties; yet afterward the Persecution was continued
till after his Death, both as to Imprisonment as well as seizing of Goods: And
other old Laws were also made use of: For in the 35th Year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, when the Papists sometimes were forming Plots against the Queen, an Act
was made, containing the Effect of this Clause.

If any of above sixteen Years of Age shall be convicted to have absented
themselves above a Month from Church, 35 Eliz. c. 1.
without any lawful Cause, impugned the Queen's Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, or frequented Conventicles, or persuaded others so to do, under
Pretense of Exercise of Religion, they shall be committed to Prison, and there
remain until they shall conform themselves, and make such open Submission as
hereafter shall be prescribed: And if within three Months after such Conviction
they refuse to conform, and submit themselves, being thereunto required by a
Justice of the Peace, they shall in open Assize or Sessions abjure the Realm:
And if such Abjuration happen to be before Justices of the Peace in Sessions,
they shall make Certificate thereof at the next Assize or Goal Delivery.

And, If such an Offender refuse to abjure, or going away accordingly, does
return without the Queen's License, he shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall not
enjoy the Benefit of Clergy; but if before he be required to abjure, he makes
his Submission, the Penalties aforesaid shall not be inflicted upon him.

Though it may be supposed this Act was made chiefly against Papists, yet some
few of the Quakers, so called, have been prosecuted thereupon, which was for
their Lives; for if they had been willing to depart the Realm, yet such, who
for Conscience Sake could not swear at all, could not oblige themselves by Oath
that they would do so. And this being very well known, it once happened that
one William Alexander of Needham in Suffolk, W.Alexander etc. indicted on this
Act, through the favorable Advice of the Judge are discharged.
being with several more indicted upon this Act, was asked, Guilty or not
Guilty. He not being hasty to answer, the Judge said, Why don't you plead
Guilty or not Guilty? To which Alexander replied, What would thou advise us
to plead? The Judge, (who sometimes used to be severe enough) said, Do you ask
my Advice? Yes, said Alexander. Then, returned the Judge, You shall have it;
and I Will advise you to plead Not Guilty. So the Prisoners accordingly pleaded
Not guilty. Then said the Judge to the Prosecutors, Now you must prove these
Men, neither to have been at their own Parish Church, nor at any other Church
or Chapel, else they are not within this Act, which is a sanguinary Law. Thus
the Judge carried or his Discourse to a Discharge of Alexander and his Friends
from that severe Indictment: For the Prosecutors were not able to prove this
with Evidence, as the Law required. One William Bennet had also be (...) ^ong
in Prison at Edmondsbury in Suffolk on this Act, W. Bennet and R. Vickris long
imprisoned on the same.
and one Richard V^^kris near Bristol. But now I go back again.

After the Demise of Queen Elizabeth, when James the First had ascended the
Throne, the Papists still continued their wicked Designs, of which the
Gunpowder (...) may serve for an instance. To suppress therefore these
malicious People, and for the better discovering of them, in the third Year of
that King's Reign, an Act was made, in which was contained the following Oath,
which was to be taken by Popish Recusants.

I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, Oath of Allegiance made 3 Jac. c.
4,
profess, testify and declare in my Conscience, before God and the World, that
our Sovereign Lord King James is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of
all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of
himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other
Means, with any other, has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to
dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any
Foreign Prince to invade or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of
his Subjects from their Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give
License or Leave to any of them to bear Arms raise Tumults, or to offer any
Violence or Hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any
of his Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from
my Heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or Sentence of Excommunication
or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his
Successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him,
or his See, against the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution
of the said Subjects from their Obedience, I will bear Faith and true
Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will
defend to the uttermost of my Power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts
whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and
Dignity, by Reason or Color of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise:
And will do my best Endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall
know or hear of to be against him, or any of them. And I do further swear, that
I do from my Heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, this
damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes which are excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any
other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in my Conscience am resolved, that
neither the Pope, nor any Person whatsoever, has Power to absolve me of this
Oath, or any Part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be
lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to
the contrary. And all these Things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and
swear, according to the express Words by me spoken, and according to the plain
and common Sense and Understanding of the same Words, without any Equivocation,
or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this
Recognition and Acknowledgement, heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true
Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

This Oath, commonly called, Afterward called the Test.
The Oath of Allegiance, was afterward called by the Name of the Test; and the
Introduction of it makes Mention of the Gunpowder Plot, and signifies that
this Expedient was contrived to discover Papists; and yet many of the People
called Quakers have suffered thereby many Years; for though they did not refuse
to declare their Allegiance, yet because it was well known they were not for
swearing at all; this Oath was continually made use of as a Snare to imprison
them. Now the Punishment stated against the Recusants was a Praemunire. And how
grievously many Quakers have been oppressed on that Account, though not easily
related, yet I may give Instances in due Places, of several in the Sequel.
Other severe Laws for Persecution have been made since, as will be seen in
their proper Time.

At the Close of this Year, E. Buroughs writes a Consolatory Epistle.
E. Buroughs writ a consolatory Epistle to his Fellow Laborers in the
Ministry of the Gospel, which I cannot omit to insert here, because it shows
very evidently how valiant he was in the Service of Truth, which Epistle is as
follows;

DEarly and well-beloved Brethren, in the heavenly Relation, and blessed
immortal Birth, of which we are born most dearly in our Father's Love; my
Salutation extends unto you all, as one with you perfectly in Sufferings and
in Rejoicings, in Faith and Patience, and even in all Things which you do and
suffer for the Name of the Lord our God; and my S^ul greets you, and embraces
you, and fervently wishes Peace, Love, and Unity, and the Increase of every
good Gift unto you all; for I am perfectly one with you; if you receive of our
Father's Fullness, I am refreshed; and if you rejoice, I am glad; and if you
suffer, and be in Heaviness, I freely partake with you; whatsoever is yours,
whether Liberty or Bonds, whether Life or Death, I partake of the same; and
whatsoever I enjoy, the same also is yours; we are of one Birth, of one Seed,
of one Line, even of the Generation of him who is without Beginning of Days, or
End of Life, who is an High Priest, made after the Power of an endless Life;
and as he was blessed of the Father, so are we, because we are of the same
Birth, and are Partakers of his Nature, and he lives in us, and we in him.

Well, my dear Companions, I need not multiply Words unto you, as if you knew
not these Things; for, what know I, that you know not? Or, what can I say, but
you know the same? Yet bear with me, for my Heart is very full, and my Soul
ready to be poured forth, that I may once more express a little Quantity of
what is abounding in my Heart; for Love, even perfect Love, even that Love
wherewith we are beloved of the Father, fills my Heart at this Time toward
all of you, from the least to the greatest; and I know nothing but Love toward
you all; and I doubt not but in the same Love you do receive this my
Salutation, which is from the Fountain of Love, which at this Time is opened in
my Heart.

Now, dearly Beloved, the present Considerations of my Heart are very many
concerning the great Love of the Father, which hitherto has been showed unto
us; we all know, how that he called us by his Grace, and turned our Hearts from
the Vanities, and evil Ways of this World, and sanctified us by his Word, and
put his Image upon us, and called us by his Name, and redeemed us unto himself,
and gave us the Testimony of his holy Spirit in our own Hearts, That we should
be his People, and he would be our God; he taught us, and instructed us, and
fed us, and gave us Peace and Rest in himself, and freed us from the Bondage of
Sin and Corruption, and from his Terror because of Sin; and he removed our
Transgressions, and blotted them out, and ceased to smite us any more, but
brought us into the Land of Rest, flowing with Mercy, and Peace, and Knowledge,
and all good Things: This did the Lord our God do for us, in the Days of our
Infancy, even when we were yet in our Sins, he called us forth, and cleansed us
from them; and when we were Strangers to him, he made himself known unto us;
and when we were wholly ignorant, he gave us Knowledge, and when we were not a
People, he raised us up, and made us worthy to be called by his Name; and thus,
and after this Manner did the Father love us, and show his Love unto us: This
you know even as I do, and the Consideration of it causes me thus to express
it.

Again, when he had thus wrought for us, and showed Love unto us, he was
pleased to call us out into his Work, to the turning and converting of others
unto the Way of Life; he put his Spirit into us, and gave us Gifts of Knowledge
and Utterance, and armed us with Wisdom, and Strength, and Courage, and every
Way fitted us for that Work and Service in which he has carried us on; he, I
say, fitted us for his Work, and called us into it, and carried us on joyfully
in it, and all this of his free Love, and infinite Power; and what we have
been, and what we have done, it has been only of the Lord, and not of our
selves, even of his Love which to us may be admirable; for alas, what were we
but Children, and neither Prophets, nor Prophets Sons, and our Education
unanswerable for these Things, and to perform this Calling? And therefore it is
the Lord, and only him that has effected his own Purpose through us, and by
us, as Instruments mean of our selves, but by him very excellent.

Again, he has mightily prosper'd us in his Work, and a glorious Effect we
have beheld of our Labors, and Travels, and Testimony; yea, the Lord has been
with us abundantly, and his Arm has compassed us about, and he has often
given us great Victory over the Wise and Prudent of this World; he has made
his own Word often very powerful in our Mouths, to the wounding of the
Consciences of our Enemies; and the Lord has blessed our Testimony, to the
Confounding of the Wisdom of this World, and to the gathering of many unto
himself; and he has gone forth before us in his Authority, and been always
with us in his own Work; and our Testimonies, Labors, and Travels have been
very precious and pleasant unto the Lord, and all his People, and the Effect
thereof causes my Soul to rejoice, because the Lord has been with us, and
prospered us unto a great People, who have received our Witness, and accepted
thereof unto their Salvation, and unto the Lord alone the Glory of all this
appertains.

And for these eight Years and upward, the Hand of the Lord has carried us
through great Labors and Travels in his Service, and many Dangers, and
Persecutions, and Afflictions have attended us all this Time; and ye know that
many a Time has the Lord delivered us from the Hands of such as would have
destroyed us; and we have been delivered again, and again, out of Dangers and
Difficulties, and the Lord has been a present Help unto us in the Time of our
Trouble; for the Plotting of the Wicked, and the Purpose of ungodly Men, has
often been broken for our Sakes, even many a Time have we been delivered out of
the Snare that has been laid for us, and we have seen our Enemies fall before
us on the Right Hand, and on the Left; even the Wise in their Worldly Wisdom,
and the Foolish in their Brutishness, both Professors and Profane has our God
often cut short in their Desires and Endeavors of our Destruction; and we have
been wonderfully preserved unto this Day; and all this I attribute to the
infinite Love and Power of the Lord God, who is blessed for evermore.

And through all these Things we are yet alive, and the Lord does not fail us
unto this Hour, but he lives and walks in us, and with us, and his Testimony is
with us, even the Seal of his good Spirit in our Hearts, that we are his Sons
and Servants, and we are confirmed by many Tokens that he is our God, and we
are his People, and that great Oppression which we have met withal, has not
restrained us, but through it all have we grown, and prospered unto this Day: And
concerning the Things whereof we have testified these diverse Years, I am no Way
doubtful but our God will fulfill them, neither can my Confidence be shaken by
what is or can come to pass; for Antichrist must fall, false Ministry and
Worship, false Ways and Doctrines God will confound, false Power and false
Church the Lord will lay low, and Truth and Righteousness must reign; and God
will gather his People more and more, and glorious Days will appear; God will
exalt his Kingdom upon Earth, and throw down the Kingdom of the Man of Sin; all
Oppression must cease, and the Oppressors shall be no more; and God will free
his People, and they shall be happy in this World, and for ever: These Things
have we prophesied from Day to Day; and my Faith is constant and unmovable,
that God will effect these Things in his Season; for the Lord never yet
deceived me, but what he has said will surely come to pass.

And therefore, Brethren, let us be in Hope and Patience, and live in the Word
of Patience, and not be faint-hearted, as though the Lord had forgotten us, or
was unmindful of us, or as though he would not perform what he had testified of
by us; for he is not a Man, that he should lie, nor as a Man that he is given
to Change: But lift up your Heads, for the Lord is with us, even in our
greatest Tribulations and Afflictions, and he will accomplish his Purpose; for
he is mighty to save his People, and to destroy his Enemies.

It is true, the Gates of Hell at this Time seem to be open against us, and we
are a People like to be swallowed up of our Enemies, and Floods of Wickedness
seem to overflow, and the Waves of the great Sea seem to be void of Mercy, and
the Hope of our Adversaries is to extinguish us from being a People, and to
destroy us from the Face of the Earth^ and the Hands of our Persecutors are
highly exalted at this Day, as though all that we have done for the Lord, by our
Labors and Travels, should now be made of none Effect.

Well, dear Brethren, though it be thus, yet our God can deliver us, and confound
our Adversaries; and we can appeal unto our God, and can spread our Cause
before him; and he knows that our Sufferings and Afflictions are altogether
unjust, and unequal, and unrighteous, and that our Persecutors do afflict us
out of their Envy, and without any just Cause administered unto them by us; our
God knows it, Angels and Saints know it, that we are at this Day a persecuted
People for Religion's-sake; and this our present Affliction is not any just
Punishment, either from the Justice of God, or from the Justice of Men.

For God has given us the Witness of his eternal Spirit, that Wrath is not in
him toward us; his Wrath be to his Enemies, but unto us is Joy and Peace for
evermore: And the Lord clears us, and he justifies us, who then shall condemn
us? He charge no Guilt upon us, as if we were unto our selves the Cause, by
our Evil Deeds, of these our present Sufferings, and as if this were come to
pass upon us, as Punishment from the Hand of God: I say, it is not so; these
our present Sufferings are not out of God's Anger toward us, for his Love is
to us, let his Wrath be to his Enemies: And as I said, neither is this
Suffering in the Justice of Men; for unto all the World we can say, (and God
himself shall plead our Cause) whom have we wronged or done Evil to? What Evil
have we done to any Man's Person? Whose Goods have we falsely taken or coveted?
Against whom have we designed Mischief? Even the Lord himself be Judge between
us and our Persecutors in this Matter; for unto him we are known that we do
desire the Good of all, and not the Hurt of any, and yet we are dealt with as
Evildoers; when as the God of Heaven is Witness in our Consciences, that we
neither plot nor contrive, nor agitate in Thought or Word the Hurt of any Man's
Person; but we walk justly toward all, it being our Principle to do to others
as we would be done unto; and we can plead our Cause unto our God, and he shall
plead our Cause with our Enemies, and this is the present State of our Case;
what we suffer at this Time, it is singly in the Cause of God, and for
Righteousness-sake, and for the Testimony of Jesus, which we hold; therefore
freely let us commit our Cause unto the God of Heaven, and if we die, it is for
him, and if we live, it is to him; and we seek not Vengeance against our
Enemies, but leave it to the Lord to plead with them.

And dearly beloved, I hope I need not exhort you to be patient, and faithful,
in this Day of our Trial, knowing that the Cause is so excellent in which we
are tried, it is God's Cause, and not our own; and I hope you all have the
Testimony of his Spirit in your Consciences, verifying the Truth of the Cause
for which we suffer; and having that Evidence, we need not to be doubtful as
toward God, nor ashamed before Men, if so be that every one feels the Evidence
of the Spirit of God bearing Witness, that we suffer for Righteousness-sake,
and for the Name of Christ Jesus.

And so, dear Brethren, lift up your Heads, and be assured that we are the
Lord's, and in his Cause we are tried, and he will judge and avenge our
Persecutors in his Season, and we shall be a People when the Egyptians lie
dead upon the Seashore, and when the raging Sea is dried up, this same People
shall be safe: For has the Lord done so excellent Things for us? Has he led
us forth, and blessed us unto this Day? And has he preserved us hitherto through
many Tribulations and Dangers? Has he showed infinite Love and Favor unto us
to this Hour? And will he now suffer us to be destroyed from being a People?
Surely no. Will he give our Enemies their Heart's Desire to out us all off,
that they may blaspheme his Name? Surely no. And if it be the Pleasure of the
Lord, that some of us should seal our Testimony with our Blood, good is the
Will of the Lord; not ours but his Will be done; for the Testimony that we have
born for these diverse Years, has been so excellent in it self, and in its
Fruits and Effects, that the finishing of it deserves the best Seal that
possibly we can sign it with, which is indeed our Heart's Blood; and this
dwells upon my Spirit; and yet, though it should be thus, my Confidence is sure,
that the Work of the Lord shall prosper, and our Testimony shall be glorious
for ever, and this People shall never be extinguished from being a People.

And I know not any Thing that remains upon our Part at this Day, but that we
commit our selves into the Hand of the Lord, living in the Seed of God, wherein
our Election is sure, before the World was, and for ever: And let us remember
one another, and pray one for another; and let us stir up all the Children of
our Father to Faithfulness and Patience, while we have Time; I say, let us walk
to the Glory of the Lord, keeping Faith and a good Conscience to our last End;
our Testimony shall dever die, nor our Memories ever perish when we are ceased
to be; and though we suffer now the Loss of Life, and all we have, yet the
Effects thereof will be glorious in Ages to come, and our present Sufferings
will hasten the Glory of God's Work throughout the World: Receive this as my
Salutation to you all.

It is now eight Days since I left Ireland, where my Service has been precious
for the Lord for full six Months, all which Time the Lord carried me in much
Faithfulness and Diligence in his Service, to the confirming of many in the
Truth of God, and to the converting of others; and through and because of the
Presence of the Lord which was with me, I had a very precious Time, and was
wonderfully preserved through many Dangers and Trials; and I traveled near two
thousand Miles to and fro in that Land, and had very free Passage in the
principal Cities and Towns, till my Work for the present was fully ended there,
having more Time than could be expected to clear my Conscience to all People.
It would be too large to mention every partiular Transaction, wherein I
perceived the eminent Hand of God with me; and also many Things I observed
concerning the present State of Things which I shall not mention; for what have
we to do with the Affairs of worldly Kingdoms? But as for Friends, it was well
with them, they grow and increase in the Blessings and Fullness of the Father;
and when I came thence all was quiet, and very few in Prison, though (I suppose)
the Tidings of Things as they are here, will produce the same Sufferings upon
them: But I hope they will be bold and valiant for the Truth, in giving their
Testimony by faithful Sufferings, till these Things be finished.

Thus I remain in Life and Death, and when I am no more, in everlasting
Remembrance, your dear Brother and Companion, by doing and suffering for the
Name of the Lord and his Truth. I am well, and at Liberty as yet.

E. B.
11th of the 12th Month, 1660.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS The SIXTH BOOK.
THE Year 1661 being come, 1661
the Government was altogether changed. Charles the Second was now seated on
the Throne of England in Peace, and the Power of Persecution seemed somewhat
restrained; so that there was an Appearance of some Quiet and Calm. Therefore
I Will now take a Turn to New England, to draw back the Curtains of the bloody
Stage at Boston. We have already seen in the foregoing Relation, Persecution in
New England continued.
how William Robinson,' Marmaduke Stevenson and Mary Dyar were put to Death by
their Persecutors, but their Blood-thirstiness was not yet quenched.

William Leddra, who was banished from Boston on pain of Death, was under such
Necessity of Conscience, that he could not forbear returning thither; where he
came about the Conclusion of the foregoing Year; but was soon taken Prisoner,
and being fastened to a Log of Wood, W. Leddra though banished, returns to Boston,
is taken and locked in Chains in an open Prison in a cold Winter.
was kept Night and Day locked in Chains, in an open Prison, during a very cold
Winter; where we will leave him for the present, and in the mean while insert
here an Apology of the Boston Persecutors, concerning their cruel Carriage,
which may serve to confirm the Truth of what has been already related of their
wicked Dealings. For it seems, The Boston Persecutors, apprending their cruel
Proceedings would be complained of and disapproved in England, send over an
Apology.
that fearing their bloody Deeds would be disapproved by the Court of England,
they thought it safest for them to ^^ld their Transactions with a specious
Pretense; though this was o^ no other Effect than that thereby they yet more
exposed their own Shame to public View, and in Process of Time they also
incurred the King's Displeasure; for though Charles the Second was inclined to
Vo^uptuousness, yet he was good-natured, and the Persecution in his Reign
proceeded chiefly from the Instigation of other malicious Men. But to come to
the Apology or Declaration of the bloody Persecutors, it was as follows:

Although the Justice of our Proceedings against William Robinson, Marmaduke
Stevenson, and Mary Dyar,supported by the Authority of this Court, the Laws of
this Country, and the Law of God, may rather persuade us to expect
Encouragement and Commendation from all prudent and pious Men, than convince us
of any Necessity to apologize for the same: yet forasmuch as Men of weaker
Parts, out of Pity and Commiseration, a commendable and Christian Virtue, yet
easily abused, and susceptible of sinister and dangerous Impressions, for want
of a full Information, may be less satisfied; and Men of perverser Principles
led to calumniate us, and render us as bloody Persecutors; to satisfy the one,
and stop the Mouths of the other, we thought it requisite to declare, that
about three Years since, diverse Persons professing themselves Quakers, (of
whose pernicious Opinions and Practices we had received Intelligence from good
Hands from Barbados and England) arrived at Boston, whose Persons were only
secured to be sent away the first Opportunity, without Censure or Punishment,
although their professed Tenets, turbulent and contemptuous Behavior to
Authority, would have justified a severer Animadversion, yet the Prudence of
this Court was exercised, only in making Provision to secure the Peace and
Order here established, against their Attempts, whose Design (we were well
assured by our own Experience, as well as by the Example of their Predecessors
in Munster) was to undermine and ruin the same.

And accordingly a Law was made and published, prohibiting all Masters of Ships
to bring any Quakers into this Jurisdiction, and themselves from coming in on
Penalty of the House of Correction, till they should be sent away.
Notwithstanding which, by a Backdoor they found Entrance, and the Penalty
inflicted on themselves proving insufficient to restrain their impudent and
insolent Obtrusions, was increased by the Loss of the Ears of those who
offended the second Time; which also being too weak a Defense against their
impetuous frantic Fury, necessitated us to endeavor our Security; and upon
serious Consideration, after the former Experiments by their incessant
Assaults, a Law was made, That such Persons should be banished upon Pain of
Death, according to the Example of England, in their Provision against Jesuits;
which Sentence being regularly pronounced at the last Court of Assistants,
against the Parties abovenamed, and they either returning, or continuing
presumptuously in this Jurisdiction after the Time limited, were apprehended,
and owning themselves to be the Persons banished, were sentenced by the Court
to Death, according to the Law aforesaid, which has been executed upon two of
them. Mary Dyar (upon Petition of her Son, and the Mercy and Clemency of this
Court) had Liberty to depart within two Days; which she has accepted of. The
Consideration of our gradual Proceeding will vindicate us from the clamorous
Accusations of Severity, our own just and necessary Defense calling upon us
(other Means failing) to offer the Point, which those Persons have violently
and wilfully rushed upon, and thereby become Felons de se; which, might it have
been prevented, and the sovereign Law, salus populi, been preserved, our former
Proceedings, as well as the sparing Mary Dyar upon an inconsiderable
Intercession, will manifestly evince, that we desire their Lives absent, rather
than their Deaths present.

Edward Rawson, Secretary.

In this Apology, wherein the Quakers (who always were an harmless People, and
never made Resistance with outward Arms) are compared to the mutinous and
riotous Anabaptists of Munster, it is also said of them, that by a Backdoor
they found Entrance. And this reflects on some who unexpectedly came into
New England by Land, since they could find no Opportunity to come by Sea,
because the Ship-Masters fearing the Severity of the Boston Laws, were
unwilling to carry any Quakers thither. This gave Occasion to Thomas Thirstone
(who having been already at Boston, T. Thirstone and J. Coal go from England
to Virginia, from whence with T. Chapman they travel on foot to New England,
through many Dangers.
was sent away on Board a Ship) to think on other Means; for finding himself
moved in Spirit to go thither again, he and Josiah Coal (of whom Mention has
been made before, and who may be farther spoken of hereafter) went from England
to Virginia, from whence they with one Thomas Chapman traveled several
hundreds of Miles on Foot through vast Wildernesses and Woods, and so at length
came into New England, which made the Persecutors there astonished; for they
thought this impossible, that Way having been accounted unpassable for other
Men than the Indians, many of whom in those Parts are warlike Men, who behaved
themselves well toward our Travelers, whose Journey however was very hard; for
they had not only Hunger and Cold (it being Wintertime) to encounter with, but
they were also in Danger of being devoured by wild Beasts, or of perishing in
unknown Marshes or Bogs. But they were preserved by an Almighty Hand; though this
mavelous Passage was represented like a criminal Sauciness by these
New England Persecutors.

It seems to me that the aforesaid Apology, (which was published in Print, and
likewise answered) was given forth before Mary Dyar was put to Death; but after
her Death the General Court of Boston sent over an Address to King Charles the
Second, signed by their Governor John Indicot, The Substance of an Address from
the General Court at Boston, to K. Chapter II.
to justify their cruel Proceedings. Herein they said, That they had chosen
rather the pure Scripture Worship, with a good Conscience, in that remote
Wilderness among the Heathen, than the Pleasures of England with Subjection to
the Imposition of the then so disposed, and so far prevailing Hierarchy, which
they could not do without an evil Conscience.

Concerning the Quakers they said, that they were open capital Blasphemers, and
Seducers from the Glorious Trinity, the Lord Christ, the blessed Gospel, open
Enemies to the Government it self, and malignant Promoters of Doctrines
directly tending to subvert both Church and State.

Moreover they said, That at last they had been constrained for their own
Safety to pass a Sentence of Banishment against them on Pain of Death, since
the Magistrate in Conscience judged himself called for the Defense of all, to
keep the Passage with the Point of the Sword held toward them; and that this
could do no Harm to them that would be warned thereby; but the Quakers rushing
themselves thereupon was their own Act, and a Crime bringing their Blood upon
their own Heads.

Could they have made the King believe this, they would willingly have done it;
but he had too much Sense to be thus imposed upon, though they did whatever they
could to prevent his hearing the other Party, in Order whereunto they said, Let
not the King hear Men's Words; your Servants are true Men, Fearers of God and
the King, and not given to Change, zealous of Government and Order, not
seditious to the Interests of Caesar.

How smooth and plausible soever this seemed, yet it could not stand the Test;
and E. Buroughs, who answered it in Print, addressed the King thus. O King,
this my Occasion to present Thee with these Considerations is very urgent, and
of great Necessity, To which E. Buroughs returns an Answer in print addressed
to the said King.
even in the Behalf of innocent Blood, hoping that my Work will find such
Favor with thee, as to induce thee to the Reading and serious Consideration
thereof.

E. Buroughs then examining all their pretended Reasons, represented also to
the King, how some of these Petitioners some Time before, had not stuck to
write in a Letter from Boston to one Gordon; There is more Danger in these
Quakers to trouble and overcome England, than in the King of Scots, and all the
Popish Princes in Germany; which plainly denoted, that they reputed the King a
Troubler of England, whom they numbered with the Popish Princes of Germany. What
E. Buroughs obtained of the King for his Friends, we may see hereafter.

But first I return to William Leddra, W. Leddra brought with his Log and
Chains before the Court.
whom I left in Prison. It was on the ninth of the first Month of this Year,
that he was brought into the Court of Assistants, with his Chains and Log at
his Heels. And he asking the Jailer, When he intended to take off the Irons
from his Legs? The Jailer roughly answered, When thou art going to be hanged.
W. Leddra then being brought to the Bar, it was told him by the Rulers,
speaking of their Law, That he was found guilty, and so that he was to die. He
said, What Evil have I done? The Answer was, His own Confession was as good as
a thousand Witnesses. He asked, What that was? To which they answered, That he
owned those Quakers that were put to Death, and that they were innocent.
Besides, That he would not put off his Hat in Court, and that he said, Thee and
Thou. Then said William to them, You will put me to Death for speaking English,
and for not putting off my Clothes? To this Major General Denison returned, A
Man may speak Treason in English. And William replied, Is it Treason to say
Thee and Thou to a single Person? But none answered, only Simon Broadstreet,
one of the Court, asked him, Whether he would go for England? To which he
answered, I have no Business there. Hereupon Broadstreet, pointing to the
Gallows, said, Then you shall go that Way. To which William returned, What will
ye put me to Death for breathing in the Air in your Jurisdiction? And for what
you have against me I appeal to the Laws of England for my Trial; and if by
them I am guilty, I refuse not to die. Of this no Notice was taken, but instead
thereof, they endeavored to persuade him to recant of his Error (as they
styled it) and to conform; to which with a grave Magnanimity he answered, What!
to join with such Murderers as you are? Then let every Man that meets me say,
Lo this is the Man that has forsaken the God of his Salvation.

Whilst the Trial of W. Leddra was thus going on, W.Christison under Sentence
of Banishment on Pain of Death appears in Court.
Wenlock Christison, who was already banished upon Pain of Death, came into the
Court. This struck a Damp upon them, insomuch that for some Space of Time there
was Silence in the Court: But at length one of the bloody Council cried, Here
is another; fetch him up to the Bar. Which the Marshal performing, the
Secretary Rawson said, Is not your Name Wenlock Christison? Yea, said Wenlock.
Well, said the Governor John Indicot, What do thou here? Wast thou not
banished upon Pain of Death? To which Wenlock answered, Yea, I was. And to the
Question, What do thou here then, he answered, I am come here to warn you,
that you should shed no more innocent Blood, for the Blood that you have shed
already, cries to the Lord God for Vengeance to come upon you. Whereupon it was
said, Take him away Jailer.

It having been told W. Leddra, That the last General Court he had Liberty
given him to go for England, or to go out of their Jurisdiction; and that
promising to do so, and come there no more, he might save his Life: He
answered, I stand not in my own Will, but in the Will of the Lord: If I may
have my Freedom, I shall go, Sentence of Death pronounced against W.Leddra.
but to make you a Promise I cannot. But this was so far from giving Content,
that they proceeded to pronounce Sentence of Death against him; which being
done, he was led from the Court to Prison again, where the Day before his
Death, he wrote the following Letter to his Friends.

Most Dear and inwardly Beloved,
THE sweet Influences of the Morning Star, like a Flood distilling into my
innocent Habitation, has so filled me with the Joy of the Lord in the Beauty
of Holiness, that my Spirit is as if it did not inhabit a Tabernacle of Clay,
but is wholly swallowed up in the Bosom of Eternity, from whence it had its
Being.

Alas, alas! What can the Wrath and Spirit of Man, that lusts to Envy,
aggravated by the Heat and Strength of the King of the Locusts, which came out
of the Pit, do unto one that is hid in the Secret Places of the Almighty? Or,
unto them that are gathered under the healing Wings of the Prince of Peace?
Under whose Armor of Light they shall be able to stand in the Day of Trial,
having on the Breastlate of Righteousness, and the Sword of the Spirit, which
is their Weapon of War against Spiritual Wickedness, Principalities and Powers,
and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, both within and without! Oh, my
Beloved! I have waited as a Dove at the Windows of the Ark, and have stood
still in that Watch, which the Master,(without whom I could do nothing) did at
his Coming reward with Fullness of his Love, wherein my Heart did rejoice, that
I might in the Love and Life of God speak a few Words to you, sealed With the
Spirit of Promise, that the Taste thereof might be a Savor of Life to your
Life, and a Testimony in you of my innocent Death: And if I had been altogether
silent, and the Lord had not opened my Mouth unto (...), yet he would have
opened your Hearts, and there have sealed my Innocence with the Streams of
Life, by which we are all baptized into that Body which is in God, with whom,
and in whose Presence there is Life; in which, as you abide, you stand upon the
Pillar and Ground of Truth: For, the Life being the Truth and the Way, go not
one Step without it, lest you should compass a Mountain in the Wilderness; for,
unto every Thing there is a Season. As the Flowing of the Ocean does fill every
Creek and Branch thereof, and then retires again toward its own Being and
Fullness, and leaves a Savor behind it, so does the Life and Virtue of God How
into every one of your Hearts, whom he has made Partakers of his Divine
Nature; and when it withdraws but a little, it leaves a sweet Savor behind it,
that many can say, they are made clean through the Word that he has spoken to
them: In which innocent Condition you may see what you are in the Presence of
God, and what you are without him. Therefore, my dear Hearts, let the Enjoyment
of the Life alone be your Hope, your Joy and Consolation, and let the Man of
God flee those Things that would lead the Mind out of the Cross, for then the
Savor of the Life will be buried: And although some may speak of Things that
they received in the Life, as Experiences; yet the Life being veiled, and the
Savor that it left behind washed away by the fresh Floods of Temptation, the
Condition that they did enjoy in the Life, boasted of by the airy Thing, will
be like the Manna that was gathered Yesterday, without any good Scent or
Savor: For, it was only well with the Man while he was in the Life of
Innocence; but being driven from the Presence of the Lord into the Earth; What
can he boast of? And although you know these Things, and (many of you) much more
than I can say; yet, for the Love and Zeal I bear to the Truth and Honor of
God, and tender Desire of my Soul to those that are young, that they may read
me in that from which I write, to strengthen them against the Wiles of the
subtle Serpent that beguiled Eve; I say, Stand in the Watch within, in the Fear
of the Lord, which is the very Entrance of Wisdom; and the State where you are
ready to receive the Secrets of the Lord: Hunger, and thirst patiently, be not
weary, neither doubt; stand still, and cease from thy own Working, and in due
Time thou shall enter into the Rest, and thy Eyes shall behold thy Salvation,
whose Testimonies are sure and righteous altogether: Let them be as a Seal upon
thine Arm, and as Jewels about thy Neck, that others may see what the Lord has
done for your Souls: Confess him before Men, yea before his greatest Enemies:
Fear not what they can do unto you: Greater is he that is in you, than he that
is in the World: For he will cloth you with Humility, and in the Power of his
Meekness you shall reign over all the Rage of your Enemies in the Favor of
God; wherein, as you stand in Faith, ye are the Salt of the Earth; for, many
seeing your good Works, may glorify God in the Day of their Visitation. Take
heed of receiving that which you saw not in the Light, lest you give car to the
Enemy. Bring all Things to the Light, that they may be proved, whether they be
wrought in God; The Love of the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of
the Eye, are without the Light, in the World; therefore possess your Vessels in
all Sanctification and Honor, and let your Eye look at the Mark: He that has
called you is holy: And if there be an Eye that offends, pluck it out, and cast
it from you: Let not a Temptation take hold, for if you do, it will keep from
the Favor of God, and that will be a sad State; for, without Grace possessed,
there is no Assurance of Salvation: By Grace you are saved; and the Witnessing
of it is sufficient for you, to which I commend you all, my Dear Friends, and
in it remain

Your Brother, William Leddra.
Boston Goal, the 13th of the first Month, 1600-1. The Day before he suffered
Death.

The next Day after this Letter was written, the Execution of W. Leddra was
performed, which was on the 14th of the first Month. After the Lecture was
ended, the Governor John Indicot came with a Guard of Soldiers to the Prison,
where W. Leddra's Irons were taken off, with which he had been chained to a Log
both Night and Day, during a cold Winter; and now they were knocked off,
according to what the Jailer once said, as has been related before. William
then having taken his Leave of Wenlock Christison, and others then in Bonds, W.
Leddra led forth to Execution.
when called, went forth to the Slaughter, encompassed with a Guard to prevent
his speaking to his Friends; which Edward Wharton, an Inhabitant of Salem, and
also banished on Pain of Death, seeing, and speaking against, one amongst the
Company said, O Edward, it will be your Turn next. To which Captain Oliver
added, If you speak a Word, I Will stop your Mouth. Then W. Leddra being brought
to the Foot of the Ladder, was pinioned, and as he was about to ascend the
same, he took Leave of his Friend E. Wharton, to whom he said, His Behavior.
All that will be Christ's Disciples, must take up the Cross. He standing upon
the Ladder, some Body said, William, Have you any thing to say to the People?
Thereupon he spoke thus, For the Testimony of Jesus, and for testifying against
Deceivers, and the Deceived, I am brought here to suffer. This took so much
with the People, that it wrought a Tenderness in Many. But to quench this,
Priest Allen said to the Spectators, People, A notorious Perversion of the
Sripture, by Priest Allen to deceive the People.
I would not have you think it strange, to see a Man so willing to die; for
that is no new Thing. And you may read how the Apostle said, that some should be
given up to strong Delusions, and even dare to die for it. But he did not say
where the Apostle speaks so, neither have I found it any where in Holy Writ;
though I know that Paul says, Romans 5. 7. Peradventure for a good Man some would
even dare to die. But it seems it was sufficient for Allen, if he could but
render Leddra odious; who however continued cheerful: For as the Executioner
was putting the Halter about his Neck, he was heard to say, I commit my
righteous Cause unto thee, O God. The Executioner then being charged to make
Haste, W. Leddra at the turning of the Ladder cried. Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit; and so he was turned off, W. Leddra executed.
and finished his Days. The Hangman cut down the dead Body, and lest it should
be as barbarously used as those of William Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson
(which none holding when cut down, fell to the Ground, to the breaking of W.
Robinson's Skull) Edward Wharton, John Chamberlain, and others, ^aught the Body
in their Arms, and laid it on the Ground, till the Hangman had stripped it of its
Clothes; who having done so, said, that he was a comely Man, as indeed he was.
The Body being stripped, William's Friends took it, laid it in a Coffin, and
buried it. For further Confirmation of what has been related, the following
Letter of one of the Spectators, that was there accidentally, may be added.

Boston, March 26. 1661.
ON the 14th of this Instant, here was one William Leddra, which was put to
Death. The People of the Town told me, He might go away if he would: But when I
made farther Inquiry, I heard the Marshal say, that he was chained in Prison,
from the Time he was condemned, to the Day of his Execution. I am not of his
Opinion; but yet truly methought the Lord did mightily appear in the Man. I
went to one of the Magistrates of Cambridge, who had been of the Jury that
condemned him, (as he told me himself) and I asked him by what Rule he did it?
He answered me, That he was a Rogue, a very Rogue. But what is this to the
Question, (I said) where is your Rule? He said, he had abused Authority. Then I
goes after the Man, W. Leddra.
and asked him, Whether he did not look on it as a Breach of Rule to slight and
undervalue Authority? And I said, That Paul gave Festus the Title of Honor,
though he was a Heathen, (I do not say these Magistrates are Heathens) I said
then, When the Man was on the Ladder, he looked on me, and called me Friend,
and said, Know that this Day I am willing to offer up my Life for the Witness
ot JESUS. Then desired Leave of the Officers to speak, and said, Gentlemen, I
am a Stranger both to your Persons and Country, and yet a Friend to both: And I
cried aloud, For the Lord's-sake, take not away the Man's Life, but remember
Gamaliel's Counsel to the Jews, If this be of Man, it will come to naught, but
if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it: But be careful, ye be not found
Fighters against God. And the Captain said, Why had you not come to the Prison?
The Reason was, because I heard, The Man might go if he would; and therefore I
called him down from the Tree, and said, Come down William, you may go away if
you will. Then Captain Oliver said, It was no such Matter; and asked, What I
had to do with it? And besides, bad me be gone: And I told them, I was willing;
for I cannot endure to see this, I said. And when I was in the Town, some did
seem to sympathize with me in my Grief. But I told them, That they had no
Warrant from the Word of God, nor President from our Country, nor Power from
his Majesty to hang the Man. I rest

Your Friend, Thomas Wilkie.

To Mr. George Lad, Master of the America, of Dartmouth, now at Barbados.

William Leddra being thus dispatched, it was resolved to make an End also of
Wenlock Christison. He therefore was brought from the Prison, to the Court at
Boston, W.Christison brought before the Court, threatened and sent buck to
Prison.
where the Governor John Indicot, and the Deputy Governor Richard Billingham,
being both present, it was told him, Unless you will renounce your Religion,
you shall surely die. But instead of shrinking, he said with an undaunted
Courage, Nay, I shall not change my Religion, nor seek to save my Life; neither
do I intend to deny my Master; but if I lose my Life for Christ's-sake, and the
preaching of the Gospel, I shall save my Life. This noble Resolution gave such
a Check to his Persecutors, that they did not then go on with the Trial, but
sent him away to Prison again. And it being said by some Body, that William
Leddra was dead, a certain Person said to Wenlock, O, thy Turn is next. To
which he gravely replied, The Will of the Lord be done; showing thereby his
entire Resignation. Being now locked up again in Prison, he was kept there till
about the 4th Month: But then the Court being set, a Spirit of Confusion
appeared there, and a Division among several of the Members; for though the
greatest Part were for taking the same Course with him as with those that were
already put to Death, yet several would not consent to it. And as natural
Occurrences sometimes cause Reflections among observing People, so it happened
here; for during their Deliberations how to deal with Wenlock Christison, The
Sun appears not for two Weeks during their Deliberations.
which lasted for the Space of two Weeks, the Sun in the Firmament shone not; a
Thing at that Season somewhat extraordinary; which gave Occasion for some to
say, That the Sun abhorring this bloody Business, hid it self from them. But
after many Debates, the sanguinary Council at length agreed, and Wenlock was
brought to the Bar; where the Governor John Indicot asked him, What he had to
say for himself, why he should not die? He answered, W.Christison brought to
the Bar and examined.
I have done nothing worthy of Death, if I had, I refuse not to die. To this
another said, Thou art come in amongst us in Rebellion, which is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and ought to be punished. Hence it appears how perversely these
Blood-thirsty Persecutors applied the Holy Scriptures to their cruel Ends, and
so made a wrong Use of the Prophet Samuel's Words to Saul: To which false
Conclusion Wenlock answered, I came not among you in Rebellion, but in
Obedience to the God of Heaven, not in Contempt to any of you, but in Love to
your Souls and Bodies; and that you shall know one Day, when you and all Men
must give an Account of the Deeds done in the Body. Take Heed (thus he went on)
for you cannot escape the righteous Judgments of God. Then said Major General
Adderton, You pronounce Woes, and Judgments, and those that are gone before you
pronounced Woes and Judgments; but the Judgments of the Lord God are not come
upon us yet. So insolent and hard Hearted may Man become, as not to stick even
to defy the most High. But before we draw the Curtains of this Stage, we shall
see the tragical End of this Adderton, who now received this Answer from
Wenlock: Be not proud, neither let your Spirits be lifted up; God does but wait
till the Measure of your Iniquity be filled up, and that you have run your
ungodly Race; then will the Wrath of God come upon you to the uttermost. And as
for thy Part, it hangs over thy Head, and is near to be poured down upon thee,
and shall come as a Thief in the Night suddenly, when thou think not of it.
Then Wenlock asked, By what Law will ye put me to Death? The Answer was, We
have a Law, and by our Law you are to die. So said the Jews, of Christ,
(replied Wenlock) We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die. Who empowered
you to make that Law? To which one of the Board answered, We have a Patent, and
are the Patentees; judge whether we have not Power to make Laws. Hereupon
Wenlock asked again, How, have you Power to make Laws repugnant to the Laws of
England? No, said the Governor. Then (replied Wenlock) you are gone beyond your
Bounds, and have forfeited your Patent; and that is more than you can answer.
Are you (asked he) Subjects to the King, yea, or nay? What good will that do
you, replied the Secretary. If you are, (answered Wenlock) say so; for in your
Petition to the King, you desire that he would protect you, and that you may be
worthy to kneel amongst his loyal Subjects. To which one said, Yea, we are so.
Well, said Wenlock, so am I, and for any Thing I know, am as good as you, if
not better; for if the King did but know your Hearts, as God knows them, he
would see that they are as rotten toward him as they are toward God:
Therefore seeing that you and I are Subjects to the King, I demand to be tried
by the Laws of my own Nation. It was answered, You shall be tried by a Bench
and a Jury: For it seems they began to be afraid to go on in the former Course,
of Trial without a Jury, this being contrary to the Laws of England. But
Wenlock said, That is not the Law, but the Manner of it: For I never heard, nor
read of any Law that was in England to hang Quakers. To this the Governor
replied, That there was a Law to hang Jesuits, To which Wenlock returned, If
you put me Death, it is not because I go under the Name of a Jesuit, but of a
Quaker: Therefore I appeal to the Laws of my own Nation. But instead of taking
Notice of this, one said, That he was in their Hands, and had broken their Law,
and they would try him. Wenlock still appealed to the Law of his own Nation.
Yet the Jury being called over, went out, but quickly returned, and brought him
in guilty. Whereupon the Secretary said, Wenlock Christison, hold up your Hand.
I will not, said Wenlock, I am here, and can hear thee. Then the Secretary
cried, Guilty or not Guilty. I deny all Guilt, replied Wenlock, for my
Conscience is clear in the Sight of God. But the Governor said, The Jury has
condemned thee. Wenlock answered, The Lord does justify me; who art thou that
condemnest? They then voted as to the Sentence of Death, but were in a Manner
confounded, for several could not vote him guilty of Death. The Governor seeing
this Division, said, I could find in my Heart to go Home; being in such a Rage,
that he flung something furiously on the Table; which made Wenlock cry, It were
better for thee to be at home than here, for thou art about a bloody Piece of
Work. Then the Governor put the Court to vote again; but this was done
confusedly, which to incensed the Governor, that he stood up, and said, You
that will not consent, record it; I thank God, I am not afraid to give
Judgment. Thus we see that to be drunk with Blood does not quench the Thirst
after Blood; for Indicot the Governor, seeing others backward to vote,
precipitately pronounced Judgment himself, and said, Wenlock Christison,
Indicot pronounces Sentence of Death against him.
hearken to your Sentence: You must return unto the Place from whence you came,
and from thence to the Place of Execution, and there you must be hanged until
you are dead, dead, dead. To which Wenlock said, The Will of the Lord be done,
in whose Will I came amongst you, and in whose Counsel I stand, feeling his
eternal Power, that will uphold me unto the last Gasp. Moreover he cried thus;
Known be it unto you all, that if ye have Power to take my Life from me, my
Soul shall enter into everlasting Rest and Peace with God, where you your
selves shall never come. And if ye have Power to take my Life from me, the
which I do question, I do believe you shall never more take Quakers Lives from
them: Note my Words; do not think to weary out the living God, by taking away
the Lives of his Servants. What do you gain by it? For the last Man that you
have put to Death, here are five come in his Room. And if ye have Power to take
my Life from me, God can raise up the same Principle of Life in ten of his
Servants, and send them among you in my Room, that you may have Torment upon
Torment, which is your Portion; for there is no Peace to the Wicked, says my
God. The holy Confidence with which he uttered these Words, show, and the
Sequel made it appear plainly, that something supernatural was contained in
them: And it is remarkable, that among the imprisoned Quakers, there were then
several that had been banished on Pain of Death; and among these also Elizabeth
Hooton, and Edward Wharton staid in his Habitation contrary to his Sentence of
Banishment. Wenlock having received Sentence of Death, was brought to Prison
again, where having been detained five Days, Is brought back to Prison,
detained five Days, and then with 27 more of his Friends set at Liberty.
the Marshal and a Constable came to him, with an Order from the Court for his
Enlargement, with twenty-seven more of his friends, then in Prison for their
Testimony to the Truth, saying, They were ordered by the Court to make him
acquainted with their new Law. What means this? said Wenlock, Have ye a new
Law? Yes, said they. Then ye have deceived most People, said Wenlock. Why? said
they. Because, said he, they did think the Gallows had been your last Weapon.
Your Magistrates said, that your Law was a good and wholesome Law, made for
your Peace, and the Safeguard of your Country. What, are your Hands now become
weak? The Power of God is over you all.

Thus the Prison Doors were opened, and Wenlock, with twenty-seven more of his
Friends, as aforesaid, set at Liberty, save that two of them, Only P.Pearson
and Jud. Brown were first whipped at the Carts Tail through Boston. The Persecutors
apprehend the King's Displeasure, who is offended on reading a Relation of
their Cruelties in G. Bishop's Book
viz. Peter Pearson, and Judith Brown, being stripped to the Waste, and fastened
to a Cart's Tail, were whipped through the Town of Boston, with twenty Stripes
a-piece.

Now though not long after an Order came from the King, as will be said anon,
whereby these Persecutors were charged to desist from putting the Quakers to
Death, yet it seems they had got some Scent of the King's Displeasure, who had
a Mind to stop their bloody Career: For having got a Book written by George
Bishop, containing a Relation of the cruel Persecution in New England, and
reading a Passage concerning Major General Denison, who to put off those that
complained of their wicked Proceedings, said, This Year ye will go to complain
to the Parliament, and the next Year they will send to see how it is; and the
third Year the Government is changed, he took much Notice of this, and calling
to the Lords to hear it, said, Lo, these are my good Subjects of New England!
But I will put a Stop to them. And it was not long before an Opportunity was
offered; for the News of William Leddra's Death being come into England, with
an Information of the Danger that others were in of going the same Way, their
Friends took it so to Heart, especially Edward Buroughs, To prevent the like,
E. Buroughs goes to the King, who promises to put a Stop thereto, and
immediately grants a Mandamus.
that having got Audience of the King, he said to him, There was a Vein of
innocent Blood opened in his Dominions, which, if it were not stopped, would
overrun all. To which the King replied, But I will stop that Vein. Then
Buroughs desired him to do it speedily, for we know not, said he, how many may
soon be put to Death. The King answered, As speedily as you will. Call (said he
to some present) the Secretary, and I will do it presently. The Secretary being
come, a Mandamus was forthwith granted. A Day or two after, going again to the
King, to desire Dispatch of the Matter, the King said, He had no Occasion at
present to send a Ship thither; but if they would send one, they might do it
as soon as they could. E. Buroughs then asked the King, if it would please him
to grant his Deputation to one called a Quaker, to carry the Mandamus to
New England. The King answered, With a Deputation to S. Shattock, ^ Quaker, to
carry the same.
Yes, to whom you will. Whereupon E. Buroughs named one Samuel Shattock, who
being an Inhabitant of New England, was banished on Pain of Death if ever he
returned thither. And the King accordingly granted the Deputation to him, with
full Power to carry the Mandamus, which was as follows:

Charles R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we great you well. Having been informed, The King's
Mandamus.
that several of our Subjects amongst you, called Quakers, have been and are
imprisoned by you, whereof some have been executed, and others (as has been
represented unto us) are in Danger to undergo the like: We have thought fit to
signify our Pleasure in that Behalf for the future; and do hereby require,
That if there be any of those People called Quakers amongst you now already
condemned to suffer Death, or other corporal Punishment; or that are imprisoned
and obnoxious to the like Condemnation, you are to forbear to proceed any
farther therein; but that you forthwith send the said Persons (whether
condemned or imprisoned) over into this our Kingdom of England, together with
the respective Crimes or Offenses laid to their Charge; to the End that such
Course may be taken with them here, as shall be agreeable to our Laws, and
their Demerits, And for so doing, these our Letters shall be your sufficient
Warrant and Discharge.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 9th Day of September, 1661, in the 13th
Year of our Reign. By his Majesty's Command, William Morris.


The Superscription was,

To our Trusty and Well-beloved John Indicot, Esquire and to all and every other
the Governor or Governors of our Plantations of New England, and of all the
Colonies thereunto belonging, that now are, or hereafter shall be, and to all
and every the Ministers and Officers of our said Plantations and Colonies
whatsoever within the Continent of New England.

Thus favorable the King manifested himself; and in England Persecution for
Religion was a little at a Stand; but it was but a kind of Respite. G. Fox the
Younger, a Man of excellent Qualifications, and great Boldness, foresaw an
imminent Storm, and left any Carelessness might enter among his Friends, in the
fourth Month he writ the following Exhortation to them.

WHat: my heavenly Father has determined for these Men to do, An Exhortation
of G. Fox, Jun.
no Man can stop it: O that Patience might be abode in by all that know his
Name, and his Will submitted unto by them that he has called. O be still,
strive not, but drink the Cup which our Father suffers to be given. I know it
will be bitter to some; but whosoever striveth against it, shall come to Loss
and Shame: For the Lord will yet further try his People, till it be fully and
clearly manifest who are the approved in his Sight. This he will certainly do:
Therefore let not the present Calm beget a wrong Security in any, for so the
Day hastens, and comes swiftly, that another Storm must arise; and in vain
will it be to fly to the tall Cedars and strong Oaks for Shelter; for nothing
but the Name of the Lord can preserve in that Day.

George Fox, the Younger.


That this G. Fox did not reckon amiss, when in this Exhortation he said, The
Day hastens that another Storm must arise, we shall see ere long: But first we
must take a View of Things in America.

This Mandamus to the Rulers of New England being obtained, as has been said,
quick Dispatch was thought necessary to send it thither. And Samuel Shattock
being empowered by the King to carry it, an Agreement was made with one Ralph
Goldsmith, who was Master of a good Ship, and also one of those called Quakers,
for three hundred Pounds, (Goods or no Goods) to sail in ten Days. He then
immediately made all Things ready to set sail; and with a prosperous Gale
arrived in about six Weeks Time before the Town of Boston in New England, R.
Goldsmith arrives at Boston in about six Weeks with S.Shattock,
upon a first Day of the Week. The Townsmen seeing a Ship come into the Bay
with English Colors, soon came on Board, and asked for the Captain. ^^lph
Goldsmith told them, He was the Commander. Then they asked him whether he had
any Letters? And he said, Yes. Whereupon they asked, if he would deliver them;
But he said, No, not to Day. So they went ashore, and reported, there was a
Ship full of Quakers, and that Samuel Shattock was among them, who they knew
was by their Law liable to be put to Death, for coming in again after
Banishment: But they knew not his Errand nor Authority.

All being thus kept close, Who the next Day after delivers the King's Mandamus.
and none of the Ship's Company suffered to go on Shore that Day, next Morning
Samuel Shattock the King's Deputy, and Ralph Goldsmith, the Commander of the
Vessel, went on Shore; and sending the Men that landed them back to the Ship,
they two went through the Town to the Governor John Indicot's Door, and knocked.
He sending a Man to know their Business, they sent him Word, Their Business was
from the King of England, and that they would deliver their Message to none but
the Governor himself. Thereupon they were admitted to go in, and the Governor
came to them, and commanded Shattock's Hat to be taken off, and having received
the Deputation and the Mandamus, he laid off his Hat; and ordering Shattock's
Hat to be given him again, he looked upon the Papers, and then going out, went
to the Deputy Governor, and bid the King's Deputy and the Master of the Ship
follow him. Being come to the Deputy Governor, and having consulted with him
about the Matter, he returned to the two aforesaid Persons, and said, We shall
obey his Majesty's Command. After this, the Master of the Ship gave Liberty to
the Passengers to come a Shore, which they did, Which Endicot the Governor
promises to obey. And Friends meet to return Praise to God for their
Deliverance.
and met together with their Friends of the Town, to offer up Praises to God
for this wonderful Deliverance.

Now forasmuch as several of their Friends were yet in Prison at Boston, the
following Order was given forth by the Council not long after.

To William Salter Keeper of the Prison at Boston.
YOU are required by Authority and Order of the General Court, Order of the
General Court to release the Quakers.
forthwith to release and discharge the Quakers, who at present are in your
Custody. See that you don't neglect this.

By Order of the Court, Edward Rawson, Secretary.
Boston, the 9th of December, 1661.
Then they consulted what to do, that they might not incur the King's
Displeasure; and it was agreed to send a Deputation to him. First Colonel
Temple was sent to acquaint the King with their having set the Quakers at
Liberty; and he was followed not long after by the chief Priest John Norton,
and Simon Broadstreet, Col. Temple first, and after Priest Norton and S.
Broadstreet sent to the King.
one of the Magistrates.

The Year was now spent: But before I conclude it, I must take Notice, as a
pregnant Instance of the mavelous Vicissitude of mundane Affairs, that in the
Forepart of this Year the Body of O. Cromwell, The Bodies of Cromwell, Bradshaw
and Ireton hanged at Tyburn, and their Heads set up on Westminster Hall.
which had been buried with great State in Westminster Abbey, was dug up, as
were also the Bodies of Bradshaw and Ireton, which three Corpses were carried
in Carts to Tyburn, and there hanged on the Gallows. Then the Executioner
chopp'd off the Heads, stamped with his Foot on the Bodies, which were tumbled
into a Pit, dug near the Gallows; and the Heads were exposed on the Top of
Westminster Hall, where I remember to have seen them. And that now befell
Cromwell, which he said about seven Years before in his Speech to the
Parliament, as has been mentioned in its due Place, viz. That he would rather
be rolled into the Grave, and buried with Infamy, than give his Consent to the
throwing away one of the Fundamentals of that Government, to wit, Liberty of
Conscience. And yet he suffered Persecution to go on, as has been related at
large: But now according to his Saying, he was rolled with Infamy into the
Grave; which may serve indeed for a remarkable Instance of the Justice and
equal Judgments of God.

About this Time a Book came out at London, A Popish Book called Semper Idem
published and sold publicly at London.
bearing the Title of Semper idem, [i. e. Always the same,] or a Parallel of
Phanaticks. The Author concealed his Name; but he made it appear sufficiently
that he was a Papist, and it may be a Jesuit: For he inveighed not only against
the Quakers and Baptists, but also against the Presbyterians, and even
Episcopalians, and consequently against all Protestants: Nay the Martyrs that
were burnt in the bloody Reign of Queen Mary, eldest Daughter to King Henry the
VIIIth, were no less vilified than the Quakers, in the said Book, by the
scornful Name of Rebels and Phanaticks. This Book was sold publicly, and it
seemed that none durst oppose it, for Fear of displeasing the Court. But E.
Buroughs, who was of an undaunted Courage, and so continued till his Death,
employed his Pen to refute it, and gave forth his Answer in Print *, Entitled
Persecution impeached, etc. See his Works, p. 793.
plainly showing what the anonymous Author aimed at, viz. That he would have
the cruel Use of Fire and Faggots revived, and wished to see the burning of
reputed Heretics brought again into Vogue. Which was the more to be taken
Notice of, because such a Publication of vilifying the Martyrs with Calumnies,
had not been seen at London for above an hundred Years; and all the groundless
Positions of the said Author, were very notably answered by the said E.
Buroughs. See his Works, p. 850. E. Buroughs writes a Book against
Persecution.
And since Persecution in the latter End of this Year began to appear with open
Face again, he published a Book which he called, Antichrist's Government justly
detected. This he dedicated to all the Rulers, etc. in the (so called)
Christian World, and therein with sound Arguments manifested the Unlawfulness
and Injustice of Persecution, and from whence it had its Rise; and how
dangerous it was to impose a Religion. Next he treated at large concerning
Heresy, and what Punishment pertained to such as are truly convicted of it. But
lest any might think, that he was for opposing the Duty of the Civil Magistrate
against Malefactors, he said, concerning the Punishment of Heresy, (which he
stated to be only an Ecclesiastical Censure) that he only intended this, where
the Error of a Man and his Heresy in his Mind and Judgment did only extend to
the Hurt of his own Soul, and against God, and not to the Harm of his
Neighbor's Person or Estate. But (thus continued he) if his Error and Heresy
do extend farther than only against God, and his own Soul, even to outward
Wrongs, or Evils, or Violence, or visible Mischiefs be committed, as Murders,
or other the like Crimes against Men, to the injuring of others, then I forbid
not outward external Punishment to be corporally inflicted upon the Person and
Estate of such a Man; but it ought to be done, and that by the Laws of Men,
provided for the same End; even such a Man's Error in such his wrong Dealing,
may justly and lawfully be punished with Death, Banishment, or Penalties,
according to the Desert of the Crime, etc. The Author also writ
circumstanstially concerning the Government of Antichrist, and showed the
Deceit that was in it, and who were the Subjects of his Kingdom.

It was somewhat before this Time, G. Fox jun. writes to the King against
P.pery.
that George Fox the Younger, being a Prisoner, and seeing an Intent of
promoting Popery, writ the following Letter to the King.

THe King of Kings has beheld, yea, the King of Kings has seen even all thy
Actings in the Dark, and he has traced thy walking in obscure Places, and thou
have not hid thy Counsels from the Almighty, but he has seen all the Intents
of thy Heart, and thy good Words have not at all deceived him, nor those that
purely stood in his Counsel; for he has seen the Snares, and beheld the Pits
which privily have been preparing for the Innocent (even in the Time when
smooth Words have been given) and he has showed them unto others: Oh! That
thou would have taken Counsel of the Lord, and obeyed the same, thou
should have been prospered; but thou have taken Counsel of them which have
caused thee to crr. Thou have also sought to exalt and establish thy self, and
thy own Honor, and not the Truth and Honor of God only; which if thou had
truly done (in the Self-denial) God would have honored thee: Thou have not
taken the Lord for thy Strength and Stay, but thou have leaned to that which
cannot help thee, even to that which will prove a broken Read unto thee, if
thou come to prove its Strength. Thou have greatly dishonored and grieved
the Lord, by thy setting up Ministers which he loathes, and by thy providing a
forced Maintenance for them by an unjust Law, that so they may yet make a Prey
upon his People, who for Conscience sake cannot put into their Mouths, being
spiritually gathered therefrom by the Word of the Lord. Thou have also grieved
the Spirit of the Lord, in that thou have not put a Difference betwixt that
which the Spirit of the Lord moved, and that which is moved by the evil Lusts
of Men; and hereby thou have justified that which God has condemned, and
condemned that which he has justified, and will justify in the Sight of his
Enemies. O Friend, it is not the Person of any Man which the Lord regards, but
it is Righteousness which he has Respect to, and so far as Man (whatever he
may be) by the drawing of the Truth comes into Righteousness, and acts therein,
so far has the Lord Unity with him, and no farther. These Things should have
been considered by thee. Thou have also grieved the holy God, by thy suffering
all these wicked and profane Shows and Sports (which have abounded since thy
coming in) by which the Lords good Creatures have been abused, wasted, and
devoured. Thou have highly displeased the Lord God, by thy suffering
Persecution to be acted in thy Name, even whilst thou in Words have promised
Liberty, yea, many are this Day in Holes and Prisons for the Testimony of a
good Conscience, and obeying the Doctrine of Christ. Oh! the Lord is grieved
with the Pride and Wickedness that is lived in, both in thy Family and
Dominions, and thou thy self have not been such a Pattern and Example amongst
them as thou ought to have been. O Friend, when I beheld the Wickedness,
Cruelty and Oppression that abound in this Nation in open View, and also the
secret Abominations which are committed, and are plotting and lurking in the
Chambers; verily my Life is even bowed down became of the fierce Wrath of the
Almighty which I see is kindled, and because of the great Destruction, which I
see attends the Wicked, whose Ends and Counsels the Lord will frustrate, and
upon whom he will pour out everlasting Contempt, yea, and it has been often in
me before thou came last into the Land, and also since, even when it has
been shown me, what Idolatry is intended in secret to be brought in, that
certainly it had been better for thee that thou had never come; for I have
seen it tending to thy Destruction: And when I have seen the Abomination and
Cruelties which are committed and intended, there has a Pity arose in me
toward thee for thy Soul's Sake, and it has been my Desire, if it might stand
with the Will of God, that he would put it into thy Heart to go out of the Land
again, that so thy Life might be preserved, and that thou might have Time to
repent; for tho many Men flatter and applaud thee for self Ends, yet I see the
Lord is displeased with thy Ways. Let no Man deceive thee by feigned Words; God
will not be mocked; such as thou sowest, such must thou reap Thou can not
hide thy self from the Lord, nor deliver thy self from the Stroke of his Hand.
O consider, how soon has the Lord taken away thy Brother, who according to
outward Appearance might have lived longer than thou! O, think not that Men can
preserve thee, though all the Nations about promise to help thee! yet when the
Lord appears against thee, Thou must fall, verily there is a great Desolation
near, thy Hand cannot stay it; God has decreed that he may exalt his own
Kingdom: The Nations are like a boiling Pot, a little Flame will set them on
Fire; and the windy Doctrine of the Priests shall help to kindle it. Oh the Day
will be terrible, who may abide it? The Stubble will be consumed, and the Chaste
shall be burned; the Ungodly shall be abased, for they cannot stand in
Judgment; but the Seed shall be exalted. O what shall I say that might be for
thy Safety! verily I can say little, the Lord's Decree must stand, the Lord
(...) highly displeased, and his Wrath is near to be revealed: And he is swift
in his Goings, and he will shorten the Days of his Enemies for his Elect sake.
O that thy Soul might be saved in the Day of the Lord! my Spirit is in
suffering for thee, my Soul is ad^icted within me because of the Approaching of
the Day of thy Calamity, from which no Man can deliver thee. This is the Truth
that must stand, and in Love to thy Soul it is declared, by him who must deal
uprightly with all Men: Though for it I suffer outwardly, yet I have a Witness in
thy Conscience, unto which I am made manifest; and Peace with the Lord is my
Portion, which is better than an earthly Crown.

George Fox, the Younger.

This was given him the 9th Day of the 8th Month, 1660.

Which the D. of Y. resents and advises to Severity against the Author, with
the King's n^ble Return. G. Fox jun. writes against the Abominations of the
Times, and f^retels some Things.
This Letter, (a clear Evidence of the Author's Magnanimity) was delivered to
the King, who read it and seemed to be reached thereby, and touched at Heart:
But his Brother the Duke of York was displeased with it, and being violently
set against the Author, advised the King to use Severity toward him; but the
King being good-natured, said, It were better for us to mend our Lives.

Whilst the said G. Fox was Prisoner in Lambeth House, he writ also a small
Treatise, called, England's sad Estate and Condition lamented. Herein he
reproved the grievous Abominations committed among the Inhabitants Oppression
by Persecution, and the Hypocrisy of the Priests. He also predicted the
Pestilence, as may be mentioned hereafter in due Place; and signified not
obscurely that Endeavors would be used publicly to introduce Superstition and
Idolatry: But that those who intended to do so, should be frustrated by the
Lord in their Attempts. And that others, whose Worship also did displease the
Lord, should grind and waste one another: But that beyond their Expectation he
would pluck out from them, and preserve a holy Seed. And that after he should
have executed his Vengeance upon the rebellious and treacherous Dealers, he
would then bring forth the Remnant of his holy Seed, which should be preserved
from their Fury, and then they shall spread over all, and stand in Dominion.
But, thus continued he, Although these Things, touching the holy Remnant, shall
certainly be fulfilled in their Season, yet before they will be fully
accomplished, great will be the Trials of many of the Righteous, and there will
be great Judgments executed in thee, 0 Land, by him who oftimes makes a
fruitful Land barren because of the Wickedness of them that dwell therein. This
and much more he writ, and published it in Print. Several of his Predictions we
have seen fulfilled, as in the Progress of this History may appear: And this
last we must refer to Time. After the Writing of this Treatise, he also gave
forth the following Prayer.

His Prayer.
Surely it was thou, O Lord, that gave Bounds unto the Sea, that the Floods
thereof could not overwhelm thy Chosen: Thou can let forth the Winds, and
suffer a Storm, and thou can make a Calm when thou please. Have thou the
Glory of all, thou King of Saints, thou Savior of Israel. Thou can do
whatever thou please, therefore will we trust in thy Name, neither will we
fear what Man can do unto us, because thou will not forsake us; but thou will
plead our Cause in the Sight of our Adversaries, and they shall know that thou
art our God, who art able to save to the uttermost. O Lord our Righteousness,
we will praise thy Name; for thy Mercies endure for ever. Our Eyes, O God, are
unto thee, for we have no other Helper. Our Faith, O Lord, stands in thee,
who can not forget thy People. Thou have revealed and brought up Jacob, who
wrestleth with thee, and prevails as a Prince, therefore must the Blessing
come. O Lord, the Birth, the Birth, cries unto thee, thine own Elect which
long has been oppressed. Thou can not deny thy self, therefore have we
Faith, and Hope which makes not ashamed. Oh Lord, how unsearchable are thy
Ways! Thou have even amazed thy People with the Depth of thy Wisdom; thou alone
wilt have the Glory of their Deliverance; and therefore have thou suffered
these Things to come to pass. O Lord, thou art righteous in all thy Judgments:
Only preserve thy People, which thou have gathered, and wilt gather unto thy
self, in the Day of Trial; that so they may sing of thy Power, and magnify thy
Name in the Land of the Living.

This G. Fox writ also, in Prison, several other Papers and Epistles, for
Exhortation and Consolation of his Friends: His Paper to the Heads of the
Nation, exhorting to Justice, and manifesting his resignation and Courage.
But his Work was soon done, so that not long after he departed this Life,
which was in this, or the next Year. He was as may be seen from his Writings, a
Man of extraordinary Resignation and Courage; and that he gave up his Life, if
required, may appear from a small Book he writ, being Prisoner in Lambeth
House, which he called, The Dread of God's Power, uttering its Voice through Man,
unto the Heads of the Nation. Herein he exhorted the Rulers very earnestly to
do Justice; and said among the rest; Friends, I must deal plainly with you in
the Sight of God, who has made me a Prophet to the Nation. I may not flatter
any of you. My Life is in the Hand of my Maker, and not one Hair of my Head can
fall to the Ground without his Providence. He has redeemed my Soul from Hell,
and my Mind from the Earth; and he has given me his good Spirit to lead me. I
am henceforth no more my own, but I am the Lord's, who has formed me to his
Praise, and has brought me forth, that I may sound forth his powerful Truth
amongst the People. Therefore must I not fear Man, neither must I be afraid of
the Sons of Men.

Thus undaunted he showed himself. But it was not long before he made his Exit,
of which I cannot but say something. In his Sickness I find, His Behavior in
his last Sickness, and at his Death.
that though he was weak in Body, yet he was strong in Spirit, so that he would
even sing for Joy of Heart. He exhorted his Friends to keep in Unity,
foreseeing (it may be) that something would rise which might give Occasion of
Division: And then with much Fervency of Spirit, he prayed God, and exhorted
his Friends to keep their Garments unspotted of the World, because great was
the Day of Trial that was at Hand. Afterward recommending them to the Lord, he
took his Leave of them, and slept in perfect Peace with the Lord, being of
sound Memory to the last. Now the Dust was returned to the Earth, and the
Spirit unto God who gave it. Thus he was freed of all Danger of losing the
Crown of immortal Life, which Man by Temptation, and the Casualties of this
Life is liable unto, if he continues not diligently watchful. But this Valiant
Man was now beyond the Reach of all Temptations, and so I leave him, that I may
pass on to other Matters.

In this Year E. Buroughs writ a Paper to the King and his Council, E.
Buroughs writes to the King and Council of Friends Refusal to take the Oath of
Allegiance.
which he called, A just and righteous Plea, in which he proposed at large the
Reasons why the People called Quakers refused to take the Oath of Allegiance,
viz. that it was not because they would not be faithful to the King, but only
for Conscience Sake, since Christ so expressly had commanded his Followers,
Swear not at all, which Command they durst not transgress. Yet to assure the
Government of their Faithfulness, he said thus; We now are and shall be
faithful, The Principles of Friends relating to Government and Governors.
innocent, and peaceable in our several Stations and Conditions, under this
present Government of King Charles the IId. whom we acknowledge supreme
Magistrate and Governor over this Kingdom, and for Conscience Sake we are
obedient and submissive to him, as such, in all his Commands, either by doing
and performing of what he justly requires, or by patient Suffering under
whatsoever is inflicted upon us, in the Matters-for which we cannot be obedient
for Conscience Sake, when any Thing is required of us different from ^oe just
Law of God: And to this Subjection, to the King and his Government, we are
bound by the Law of Righteousness; and such has ever been our Principle and
Practice, and is unto this Day, even to be quiet, and peaceable, and patient
under every Authority that is set over us; and not in Unrighteousness, to plot,
or contrive, or rebel against any Government or Governors, nor to seek our own
Deliverance from Injustice and Oppression in such a Way. And we are persuaded
to seek the Preservation of the King's Person and Authority by all just and
lawful Means, and not to rebel against him with carnal Weapons; and so far as
his Government is in Justice, Mercy, and Righteousness, we declare true and
faithful Subjection and Obedience thereunto; and wherein it is otherwise, we
shall be subject by patient Suffering what is unequally imposed upon us, and
yet not rebel in any tur^^^ent Way of Conspiracies and Insurrections: For our
Principles are not for War, but for Peace with all Men so much as in us lies;
neither may we render Evil for Evil to any, but are to be subject to the King
and his Government, actively or passively, upon the Conditions aforementioned.

And we renounce all foreign Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction of the Pope, or
any else, from having any Supremacy whatsoever over the King, or any the good
Subjects of England. And this we declare, acknowledge, and testify, in the Fear
and Presence of God, (to whom we and all Mankind must give an Account) and that
without secret Equivocation, or any deceitful mental Reservation.

Thus fully E. Buroughs declared himself, and gave also a circumstancial
Relation of the Practice of his Friends meeting together, or their Way of
public Worship, thereby to assure the Government of their peaceable Behavior,
and Fidelity. But all this proved in vain; for it being well known that the
Quakers denied swearing, they continually were vexed and persecuted, under a
Pretense of not giving due Satisfaction of their being faithful to the
Government, and so transgressing the Laws.

The Deputies from New England came to London.
Now the Deputies of New England came to London, and endeavored to clear
themselves as much as possible, but especially Priest Norton, who bowed no less
reverently before the Archbishop, than before the King; and thus fawning upon
the Episcopalians, they found Means to keep in a Condition to vex the Quakers,
so called, though they were forbidden to put them to Death: And that many of the
Bishops were great Enemies to the said Quakers, appeared plainly from the cruel
Persecution, which after a short Calm, arose again in England.

Priest Norton endeavors to acquit himself from assisting in bloody Trials,
but is opposed by J. Copeland.
But to return to the New England Deputies, they would fain have altogether
excused themselves; and Priest Norton thought it sufficient to say, That he did
not assist in the blooy Trial, nor had advised to it: But John Copeland, whose
Ear was cut off at Boston, charged the contrary upon him: And G. Fox, the
Elder, got Occasion to speak with them in the Presence of some of his Friends,
and asked Simon Broadstreet, one of the New England Magistrates, Whether he had
not a Hand in putting to Death those they nicknamed Quakers? He not being able
to deny this, confessed he had. Then G. Fox asked him and his Associates that
were present, Whether they would acknowledge themselves to be Subjects to the
Laws of England? And if they did, by what Law they had put his Friends to
Death? They answered, They were Subjects to the Laws of England, and they had
put his Friends to Death by the same Law, as the Jesuits were put to Death in
England. Hereupon G. Fox asked, Whether they did believe that those his
Friends, whom they had put to Death, were Jesuits, or Jesuitically affected?
They said, Nay. Then, replied G. Fox, Ye have murdered them; for since ye put
them to Death by the Law that Jesuits are put to Death here in England, it
plainly appears, you have put them to Death arbitrarily, without any Law. G. F.
proves Broadstreet, and Associates guilty of Murder by their own Words, which
makes them flinch; so they leave the City, and get back to N. England.
Thus Broadstreet finding himself and his Company ensnared by their own Words,
asked, Are you come to catch us? But he told them, They had caught themselves,
and they might justly be questioned for their Lives; and if the Father of
William Robinson (one of those that were put to Death) were in Town, it was
probable he would question them, and bring their Lives into Jeopardy: For he
not being of the Quakers Persuasion, would perhaps not have so much Regard to
the Point of Forbearance, as they had. Broadstreet, seeing himself thus in
Danger, began to flinch and to sculk; for some of the Old Royalists were
earnest with the Quakers to prosecute the New England Persecutors. But G. Fox
and his Friends said, They left them to the Lord, to whom Vengeance belonged,
and he ^ld repay it. Broadstreat however, not thinking it safe to stay in
England, lest the City, and with his Companions went back again to New England.

Not long before this Time, G. Fox, G. Fox and published the Book called A
Battledoor chiefly compiled by John Stubs and Benj. Furly.
with the Help of John Stubbs and Benjamin Furly, published a Book, called, A
Battledoor. In this Book were set forth Examples of about thirty Languages, to
show that every Language had its particular Denomination for the Singular and
the Plural Number, in speaking to Persons; and in every Page where the
Description began, the Shape of a Battledoor was delineated. This Work was
p^^^oted to public View by G. Fox, to show the Learned, (if possible to
convince them) that the Custom of those called Quakers, to say Thou to a single
Person, tho it were to the King, and not You, was not irregular nor absurd, but
had been used anciently; and that therefore they could not justly be charged
with Unmannerliness, because they followed not the common Custom, which was
crept in by the Pride of Man. Now though G^r. Crou^e does disapprove in G. Fox,
that he put his Name to this Book as well as J. Stubs and B. Furly, yet I don't
think it so improper as the said Author does; for G. Fox was a great Promoter
of that Work; and though he was not skilled in Languages, and some were for
calling him an Idiot or a Fool, yet I know him to have been a Man of good
Understanding, and of deep Judgment. In his Journal he freely owns, that John
Stubs and Benjamin Furly took great Pains in the compiling of the said Book,
which he put them upon, and added also some Things to it; so that in some
Respect he might be esteemed Author too. At the End ot the Book he added,

The Pope set up [You] to [One] in his Pride, and it is Pride which cannot bear
Thou and Thee to one, but would have You, from the Author their Father in their
Pride, which must not but have the Word Thou, which was before their Father the
Pope was, which was God's Language, and will stand when the Pope is ended.

G. F.

This Book (in which J. Stubs and B. Furly gave also Directions for Learners to
read the Hebrew, Some of which Books were presented to the King, his great Men,
and the Universities.
Oriental, and other Languages) was liberally disposed of; some of them were
presented to the King and his Council, to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to
the Bishop of London, and also one to each University. The King confessed, that
the Distinction between Plural and Singular, in Regard of Persons, was the
proper Language of all Nations; and the Archbishop being asked what he thought
of it, was so at a Stand, that he could not tell what to say to it; for it
appears, he would not commend it, neither could he resolve to disapprove it.
Yet it did so inform and convince People, that many afterward were not near so
much offended at saying Tuou and Thee to a single Person, as they were before.

Now many Papists and Jesuits began to fawn upon those called Quakers, Papists
fawn on Quakers in H^pes to Proselyte some.
and said publicly, That: of all the Sects, the Quakers were the best, and
most self-denying People; and that it was great Pity that they did not return
to Holy Mother Church. And though they might have been in Hopes thereby to have
gained Proselytes from the Quakers, yet they were disappointed. In the mean
while they did but ill Service to the Quakers thereby; And some Jesuits
desiring to have Discourse with them, G. Fox (...) and they meet accordingly.
for this gave Occasion to their Enemies to divulge, that there was an Affinity
and Collusion between the Quakers and the Papists. Some Jesuits signifying that
they would willingly discourse with the Quakers, G. Fox consented to it, and in
Order thereunto, Time and Place were appointed: Whereupon two of the Loyalists
came, being dressed like Courtiers, and they asked the Names of G. Fox, and those
with him. G. Fox then asked them the same Question, he had once before (as has
been said already) asked a Jesuit, viz. Whether the Church of Rome was not
degenerated from the Church in the primitive Times; from the Spirit, and Power,
and Practice that they were in in the Apostles Time, The Jesuit, to whom the
Question was put, laid, He would not answer it, G. Fox asked him, Why? But he
would give no Reason. His Companion then said, They were not degenerated from
the Church in the primitive Times. Then G. Fox asked the other Whether he was
of the same Mind? And he said, Yes. G. Fox, to give no Room to any Excuses of a
Mistake, repeated his Question thus; Whether the Church of Rome was now in the
same Purity, Practice Power, and Spirit, that the Church in the Apostles Time
was in. The Jesuits seeing how exact G. Fox would be with them, said, It was
Presumption in any to say, they had the same Power and Spirit which the
Apostles had But G. Fox told them, It was Presumption in them to meddle with
the Words of Christ and his Apostles, and make People believe they succeeded
the Apostles, and yet be forced to confess, they were not in the same Power and
Spirit, that the Apostles were in: This, said he, is a Spirit of Presumption,
and rebuked by the Apostles Spirit. Thereupon he showed them, how different
their Fruits and Practices were from the Fruits and Practices of the Apostles.
This so displeased the Jesuits, that one of them said, Ye are a Company of
Dreamers. Nay, said G. Fox, Ye are the Dreamers, who dream ye are the Apostles
Successors, and yet confess, ye have not the same Power and Spirit which the
Apostles were in. Then he began to tell them also, How they were led by an evil
Spirit; and that this Spirit had induced them to pray by Beads, and to Images,
and to put People to Death for Religion. He spoke yet more; but the Jesuits
soon grew weary of this Discourse, and went away, giving Charge afterward to
those of their Persuasion, not to dispute with the Quakers, nor to read any of
their Books.

G. Fox has large Meetings at Colchester, then^e he goes to Coggeshal, near
which he has a Meeting at the House of a Priest that was convinced, and returns
to London soon after. Some farther Account of J. Perrot.
Some Time after G. Fox went to Colchester, where he had very large Meetings.
From thence he went to Coggeshall; not far from which there was a Priest
convinced of the Truth of the Doctrine held forth by him and his Friends; and
he had a Meeting in his House. And after having visited his Friends in their
Meetings thereabouts, he returned to London, where he found more Work.

For John Perrot, of whom Mention has been made already that he was at Rome,
had so far complied with his vain Imaginations, that he thought himself farther
enlightened than G. Fox and his Friends; and from this Presumption he would not
approve, that when any one prayed in a Meeting, others should put off their
Hats, calling this a Formality, and a common Custom of the World, which ought
to be departed from. And since Novelties often draw People after them, so it
was in this Case, insomuch that he got pretty many Adherents. But he did not
stand here; for as one Error proceeds from another, so he made another
extravagant Step, and let his Beard grow; in which he was followed by some. In
the mean while G. Fox labored both by Word and Writing, to stop his Progress:
And though most of his Friends also bore a Testimony against it, yet there passed
several Years before this strange Fire was altogether extinguished, to the
quenching whereof it contributed not a little that Perrot, who now walked in an
erroneous Path, grew worse from Time to Time, even to that Degree, that being
come into America, he fell into manifest Sensualities, and Works of the Flesh:
For he not only wore gaudy Apparel, but also a Sword; and being got into some
Place in the Government, he became a severe Exactor of Oaths, whereas before he
had professd that for Conscience Sake he could not swear. Before I leave
Perrot, I Will insert here a Letter writ by him, from Rome, when he was released
from Prison: And though I believe he was then in a better State than afterward,
yet in that Letter some Sparks of spiritual Pride may be seen, which though then
under some Limitation, yet in Process of Time so broke forth, that it caused
his Fall. The Letter was thus:

O Israel, J. Perrot's Letter from Rome.
the Most of the Most High God; his Majesty has fulfilled to me the Vision of
my Head, having showed himself to be the holy One, and Just: He has lately
delivered me from the Prison of the City of Rome, besides the two Lambs with
me, whose Faces, through God, are turned to youwards: For which I beseech you
in the holy Spirit of Meekness, to bless the Name of the Lord God. Give Thanks
to him for his Power. The God of Life promote you all in the Virtue of his
Mercy and Forgiveness, and keep you in the Power of his everlasting Love, unto
the End.

JOHN.
Written to you all without the Gates of Rome, the 2d Day of the 4th Month,
1660. Send this forward, and read my Life in your Meetings.




He added not his Surname, Omits his Surname.
in Imitation (as it seems) of the Apostle John. He omitted it likewise in
another Letter he writ from the Prison at Rome, which began thus;

I John the Prisoner, being in the Sense of the Spirit of Life with you all,
etc.

Who were the two Lambs he mentions in his Letter, I cannot tell; whether they
were Persons that had been imprisoned with him in the Inquisition Jail, and
converted by him as he thought; or whether he meant John Stubs and Samuel
Fisher, I know not; it may rather be supposed he meant Charles Bayley and Jane
Stoakes who went to Rome to procure his Liberty; but J. Stubs and S. Fisher
came away long before; yet if I am not mistaken, it was about this Time that
these were at Rome, and they perhaps having endeavored to obtain his Liberty,
departed before him toward England,

When Perrot afterward lived in America, about the Beginning of the Year 1665,
John Tailor writ thus from Jamaica concerning him.

One of the Judges of this Place told me, A Letter from Jamaica concerning him.
that he never had seen, one who so severely exa^ted an Oath from People as
John Perrot did: For he says, that if they will go to Hell, he will dispatch
them quickly. And another Judge that was also present, said, that Perrot had
altogether renounced his Faith, and aimed at nothing but his Profit.

Such a one was John Perrot, R. Rich joins with Perrot, and both quit their
former Profession.
though even some wise Men admired him for a Time; but he became a Man of a rough
Behavior. Whether he ever repented sincerely, I cannot tell. Robert Rich, who
took too much Part in the Extravagancies of James Naylor, as has been related,
did also combine with Perrot, and became estranged from the Quakers, and in
that Condition he died: But he was of the Number of those, of whom the Apostle
John said, They went out from us, but they were not of us.

Now since Persecution continued in England, E. Buroughs writes to the King
and Parliament against Persecution for Religion
Edward Buroughs, who continually was laborious with the Pen to oppose this
Evil, writ also a small Book which he called, The Case of free Liberty of
Conscience in the Exercise of Faith and Religion, presented unto the King and
both Houses of Parliament. In this Treatise he showed, That to deprive honest
and peaceable People of Liberty of Conscience in the Exercise of Worship to God
was unjust, an Intrenching on God's Sovereignty, and an Usurpation of his
Authority. He also recommended it to Consideration, that to impose by Force a
Religion upon Men, was the Way to fill the Land with Hypocrites. And he showed
with sound Reasons, that to persecute People for the Exercise of Religion and
their Worshipping of God, must unavoidably tend to destroy Trading, Husbandry,
and Merchandise. To which he added, that such as were called Heretics were
punished as Malefactors, whereas Drunkards and other vicious Persons were left
unpunished; which to inculcate with more Strength, Remarkable Expressions of
Bishop ^. Tailor.
he made use of the Words of Dr. Tailor a Bishop in Ireland who said thus: Why
are we so zealous against those we call Heretics, and yet great Friends with
Drunkards, and Swearers, and Fornicators, and (...)rate and idle Persons? I am
certain a Drunkard is as contrary to the Laws of Christianity as an Heretic:
And I am also sure that I know what Dru^^^^^ss is; but I am not so sure that
such an Opinion is Heresy, etc.

It happened about this Time in England, that some covetous Persons, to engross
Inheritances to themselves, would call the Marriages of those called Quakers in
Question. A^emarl^able Trial of a Quakers Marriage at Nottingham. ^e^or Judge
^^her.
And it was in this Year that such a Cause was tried at the Assizes at
Nottingham; a certain Man dying, and leaving his Wife with Child, and an Estate
in Copyhold Lands: When the Woman was delivered, one that was near of Kin to
her deceased Husband, endeavored to prove the Child illegitimate: And the
Plaintiff's Council willing to blacken the Quakers, so called, asserted The
Child to be illegitimate, because the Marriage of its Parents was not according
to Law; and said bluntly, and very indecently, That the Quakers went together
like brute Beasts. After the Council on both Sides had pleaded, the Judge,
whose Name was -- A^cher, opened the Case to the Jury, and told them, That
there was a Marriage in Paradise, when Adam took Eve, and Eve took Adam; and
that it was the Consent of the Parties that made a Marriage. And as for the
Quakers, (said he) he did not know their Opinion; but he did not believe they
went together as brute Beasts, as had been said of them, but as Christians; and
therefore he did believe the Marriage was lawful, and the Child, lawful Heir.
And the better to satisfy the Jury, he related to them this Case. A Man that
was weak of Body, and kept his Bed, had a Desire in that Condition to marry,
and did declare before Witnesses, that he did take such a Woman, to be his
Wife; and the Woman declared, that she took that Man to be her Husband. This
Marriage was afterward called in Question: But all the Bishops did at that
Time conclude it to be a lawful Marriage. The Jury having received this
Instruction, gave in their Verdict for the Child, and declared it legitimate.

It has been mentioned before, that G. Fox being Prisoner at Darby in the Year
1650, was exceedingly vexed and ill treated by the Keeper of the Prison. But
this Man being struck with the Terrors of the Lord, became such a notable
Convert, that in the Year 1662 he wrote the following Letter to G. Fox

Dear Friend,
The^^^^ ^ail^^ of Darby Prison being (...) Letter to G. Fox
HAving such a convenient Messenger, I could do no less th^n give thee an
Account of my present Condition, remembering that to the first awakening of me
to a Sense of Life, and of the inward Principle, God was pleased to make Use of
thee as an Instrument; so that sometimes I am taken with Admiration, that it
should come by such Means as it did, that is to say, That providence should
order (...) to be my Prisoner to give me my first real Sight of the Truth. It
makes me many Times to think of the Jailor's Conversion by the Apostles.
Notwithstanding my outward Losses are since that Time such, that I am become
nothing in the World, yet I hope I shall find, that all these light
Afflictions, which are but for a Moment, will work for me a far more exceeding
and eternal Weight of Glory. They have taken all from me; and now instead of
keeping a Prison, I am rather waiting when I shall become a Prisoner my self.
Pray for me that my Faith fail not, but that I may hold out to the Death, that
I may receive a Crown of Life. I earnestly desire to bear from thee, and of thy
Condition, which would very much rejoice me. Not having else at present, but my
kind Love unto thee, and all Christian Friends with thee, in haste I rest

Thine in Christ Jesus, (...)
Darby, the 22d of the (...).

I have heretofore made some Mention of the Imprisonment of Katherine Evans and
Sarah Cheevers, The History of the Imprisonment of K. Evans and S. Cheevers, by
the Inquisition at Malta, and their Delivery.
by the Inquisition at Malta. It was about this Time that they were released:
For G. Fox having understood that the Lord d' Aubery could procure their
Liberty, went to him, and having informed him concerning their Imprisonment,
desired him to write to those in Authority at Malta, for their Release. This he
promised to do, and told G. Fox, if he would come again within a Month, perhaps
he might hear of their Discharge. G. Fox went again to him about that Time, but
he said, he thought his Letters had miscarried; yet he promised he would write
again, and so he did; which was of such Effect, that the said two Women were
discharged of their long Imprisonment. G. Fox had now Opportunity to reason
with this Lord, who was a Roman Catholic, about Religion, and he brought him
to confess, That Christ had enlightened every Man that comes into the World,
with his Spiritual Light; and that he had tasted Death for every Man; and that
the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men; and that it
would teach them, and bring their Salvation, if they did obey it. Then G. Fox
asked him, What the Romanists would do with all their Relics and Images, if
they did own and believe in this Light and receive the Grace to teach them, and
bring their Salvation? And he answered, Those Things were but Policies to keep
People in Subjection.

But leaving these Discourses, I Will now give a clear and circumstantial
Relation of the Imprisonment of the forementioned Katherine Evans and Sarah
Cheevers, chiefly collected from Letters and Papers, written by them in Prison,
and sent from thence to England, where they were published in Print not long
after their Return, in the Year, 1662.

In the Year 1658, these Women having Drawings in their Mind to travel toward
Alexandria, went with a Ship from England to Leghorn in Italy; and having been
thirty one Days between Plymouth and Leghorn, they at length safely landed at
that City, where they found some of their Countrymen and Friends, and staid
there several Days, dispersing many Books when Occasion offered. They spoke
also with People of various Degrees, without being molested by any. From thence
they got Passage in a Dutch Ship bound for Alexandria, or Scanderoon; but the
Master of the Ship, being in Company with another Ship going to Malta, went
also thither, though he had no Business in the Place: But before they came there,
Katherine fell into such an Anguish of Mind, that she cried out, Oh, we have a
dreadful Cup to drink at that Place! Being come into the Harbor, and standing
on the Deck of the Ship, and looking upon the People who stood on the Walls,
she said in her Heart, Shall ye destroy us? If we give up to the Lord, then he
is sufficient to deliver us out of your Hands: But if we disobey our God, all
these could not deliver us out of his Hand. And so all Fear of Man was taken
from them. The next Day, being the first Day of the Week, they went on Shore,
where the English Consul met them, and asked them, What they came there for?
They answered what they thought convenient, and gave him some Books. Then he
told them, There was an Inquisition; and kindly inviting them to his House,
said, All that he had was at their Service while they were there. They
accepting, of this Invitation, went thither, and many came to see them, whom
they called to Repentance, so that several became tender. About Night they went
on Shipboard, and the next Day came again into the City, and going to the
Governor, he told them he had a Sister in the Nunnery who desired to see them.
Thereupon they went to the Nunnery, and talked with the Nuns, and gave them
Books: And one of their Priests, who brought them into the Chapel, would have
them bow to the High Altar: But they refused, being grieved because of the
Idolatry committed there, and went to the Consul's again, where they staid some
Weeks. During that Time, they once went into one of the Places of Worship, in
the Time of Worship; and Katharine standing in the midst of the People, turned
her Back to the High Altar, and kneeling down, she lifted up her Voice in
Prayer to the Lord. The Priest that officiated, put off his Surplice, and
kneeled near her, till she had done. Then he reached forth his Hand to them to
come to him, and offered her a Token, which she taking to be the Mark of the
Beast, refused. Thereupon he put the Piece into Sarah's Hand, but she gave it
him again, and showed him her Purse, that she had to give, if any had Need, and
as yet was in no Want, He then asked, If they were Calvinists or Lutherans? And
they answering, Nay; he ask d, If they would go to Rome to the Pope. They
denying this, he asked, If they were Catholics? To which they said, They were
true Christians, Servants of the living God. But since they had yet learned but
little of the Language spoken there, they expressed themselves very
defectively, which they did, partly in Words, and partly by Signs, as well as
they could: And many that came about them, were amazed: However at last they
departed peaceably. Some Time after they went again to a Mass-house, where the
Sacrament, as they call it, was administered: There were many Lights; and great
Costliness and Fineries; and being grieved because of their Idolatry, they
stood about three Quarters of an Hour, weeping and trembling, especially
Katherine: And this so struck the Congregation with Amazement, that some
removed farther from them for Fear. At length they both went out, but yet under
such a Trembling, that they went along the Street reeling and staggering, so
that they became a Wonder to all that saw them.

They were about three Months at the House of the English Consul; and he, by
Reason of that, being under a Suspicion, did not what he might have done to
save them; but in some Respect he delivered them up to the Inquisition, though by
his Oath he was obliged to protect the English there. In the mean while he kept
them in his House, and suffered them not to go abroad, though the Governor had
told him, he might let them go about their Business; for said he, They are
honest Women. The Consul might also have let them go free, before they came
under the Power of the Black Rod. Now they perceiving that something to their
Prejudice was in Agitation, and making Account un^ already that a Prison would
be their Lot, they signified that they suspected him, and told him, That Pilate
would do the Jews a Service, and yet wash his Hands in Innocence. He being at a
Loss, required a Sign of them, if they were the Messengers of God. And they
gave him to understand, that this might serve for a Sign; That it would be well
with them; but that it should not go off well with him.

Afterward it happened that they were sent for by the Inquisition: And that
Day the Consul's Wife brought them some Victuals; but as she pass^d by,
Katharine was smitten, as with an Arrow, to the Heart, and she seemed to hear a
Voice, saying, She has obtained her Purpose. Then Katharine would not taste of
the Meat, but went aside, and wept exceedingly. The Consul having called her,
told her, The Inquisition had sent for them, having received Letters from Rome,
but that he did hope they should be set free: Which however was not true, for
he knew (as they understood afterward) there was a Room prepared for them in
the Prison of the Inquisition. Neither was it long ere there came one with a
Black Rod, and the Chancellor, and the Consul, who brought them before the Lord
Inquisitor; and he asked them, Whether they had changed their Minds? (for it
seems that had been required of them before.) But they answered, No, and that
they should not change from the Truth. Then he asked; What new Light it was
they talked of. They answered, It was no new Light, but the same the Prophets
and Apostles bore Testimony to. Next he asked, How this Light came to be lost
since the primitive Times? They replied, It was not lost; Men had it still in
them, but they did not know it, by Reason that the Night of Apostasy had
overspread the Nations. Then he said, If they would change their Minds, and do
as they would have them, they should say so, or else they would use them as
they pleased. But they signifying that they would not change, said, The Will of
the Lord be done. He then arose and went away with the Consul, leaving them
there: And the Man with the Black Rod, and the Keeper, took and put them into
an inner Room in the Inquisition, which had only two little Holes in it for
Light or Air. This Place was so exceeding hot, that it seemed as if their
Intent was to stifle them, as we may see in the Sequel. Not long after they
were brought before the Inquisitors to be farther examined, and they not only
asked their Names, but also the Names of their Husbands and Parents, and what
Children they had, and also why they came thither. To which they answered, They
were Servants of the living God, being come there to call them to Repentance.
The next Day they were called again, but then examined asunder; and Sarah being
ask^d, Whether she was a true Catholic? said, That she was a true Christian,
worshipping God in Spirit and Truth. Then they held forth a Crucifix to her,
and would have her swear that she should speak the Truth. To which she said,
She should speak the Truth, but she would not swear; for Christ had commanded,
Swear not at all. The English Consul who was present, endeavored to persuade
her to swear, and said, That none should do her any Harm. She having some Books
with her, they were taken from her; and they asked her, Wherefore she brought
those Books? To which she answered, Because they could not speak their Language
Then they asked her, What George Fox was? She answered, A Minister. Farther
they asked, Wherefore she came thither? And she replied, To do the Will of God
as she was moved of the Lord. The next Question was, How the Lord did appear
unto her? To which she answered, By his Spirit. And being asked, Whether she
did see his Presence, and hear his Voice? Her Answer was, She heard his Voice,
and saw his Presence. They then asked, What he said to her? She answerecd, That
he required of her to go over the Seas to do his Will. This made them ask, How
she knew it was the Lord who required this of her? To which she answered, That
since he had signified to her, that his living Presence should go along with
her, she ^ound him to perform his Promise, for she did feel his living
Presence. After this they went away; and two Days after, the Inquisitors came
and called for Katharine, and offering her the Crucifix, they told her, The
Magistrates commanded her, to swear that she should speak the Truth. To which
she said, That she should speak the Truth, for she was a Witness for God; but
she should not swear; since a greater than the Magistrates, said, Swear not at
all; but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more,
comes of Evil. Then said they, You must obey the Justice, and he commands you
to swear. She returned, I shall obey Justice, but if I should swear, I should
do an unjust thing; for the just (Christ) said, Swear not at all. Then they
asked her, Whether she did (...) that Christ that died at Jerusalem? She
answered, We own the same Christ, and no other; he is the same Yesterday, to
Day, and for ever. Next they asked her, What she would do at Jerusalem? She
answered, She did not know that she should go thither; but she intended to have
gone to Alexandria. They asked, What to do? Her Answer was, The Will of God:
And, said she, if the Lord opened my Mouth, I should call People to Repentance,
and declare to them the Day of the Lord, and direct their Minds from Darkness
to Light. They asked her also, Whether she did see the Lord? She answered, God
was a Spirit, and he was spiritually discerned.

Now though from the Answers of these Women, little could be got to blame them,
yet they were kept close Prisoners, which seemed to grieve the English Consul,
for he came to them with Tears in his Eyes, and said, He was as sorry as for
his own Flesh: For it seems he had received something for delivering them up,
which he would willingly have given back, if thereby he could have obtained
their liberty; But a slavish Fear possessed him, and he never had Peace while
he lived. Some Days after, there came a Magistrate, two Friars, the Man with
the Black Rod, a Scribe, and the Keeper of the Inquisition to examine them; and
they were again required to swear: But they answered as before, that Christ
said, Swear not at all; and that the Apostle James gave the same Charge.
Hereupon the Magistrate asked, If they would speak Truth? And they said, Yes.
He then asked, Whether they believed the Creed? To which they said, They did
believe in God, and in Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered at Jerusalem under Pon(...) and arose again from the Dead the third
Day, and ascended to his (...) shall come to Judgment, to judge both Quick and
Dead. He farther asked, How they did believe the Resurrection? And they
answered, That they believed that the Just and the Unjust should arise,
according to the Scriptures. Next he said, Do ye believe in the Saints, and
pray to them? To which their Answer was, We believe the Communion of Saints,
but we do not pray to them, but to God only, in the Name of Jesus. His next
Question was, Whether they did believe in the Catholic Church? And they
answered, They did believe the true Church of Christ; but the Word, Catholic
(said they) we have not read in Scripture. He also asked, If they believed
(...) Purgatory? To which they said, No; but a Heaven and a Hell. Then one or
the Friars, who was an Englishman, said, We were commanded to pray for the
Dead; for, those that are in Heaven have no Need; and for those that are in
Hell, there is no Redemption; therefore there must be a Purgatory: And he
asked, If they believed the holy Sacrament? To which their Answer was, They
never read the Word Sacrament in Scripture. The Friar replied, Where you read
in your Bibles, Sanctification, it is Sacrament in ours: And he said, Their
holy Sacrament was Bread and Wine, which they converted into the Flesh and
Blood of Christ, by the Virtue of Christ. Then, said the Women, Ye work
Miracles; for Christ's Virtue is the same as it was when be turned Water into
Wine at the Marriage in Cana. The Friar said, If we don't eat the Flesh, and
drink the Blood of the Son of God, we have no Life in us. They replied, The
Flesh and Blood of Christ is spiritual, and we do feed upon it daily; for that
which is begotten of God in us, can no more live without spiritual Food, than
our temporal Bodies can without temporal Food. Then he said, You never hear
Mass. But we, said they, hear the Voice of Christ; he only has the Words of
eternal Life; and that is sufficient, for us. He said, Ye are Heretics and
Heathens. To which they replied, They are Heretics that live in Sin and
Wickedness, and such are Heathens that know not God. Then it was asked them,
Who was the Head of their Church? They told him, Christ. It was farther asked,
What George Fox was? And they said, He is a Minister of Christ. And it being
asked, Whether he sent them? Their Answer was, No; the Lord did move us to
come. Then the Friar said, Ye are deceived, and have not the Faith, though ye had
all Virtues And they replied, Faith is the Ground from whence Virtues proceed.
Hereupon it was told them, If they would take the Holy Sacrament, they might
have their Liberty; or else the Pope would not leave them for Millions of Gold;
but they should lose their Souls and Bodies too. To this they said, The Lord
has provided for our Souls, and our Bodies are freely given up to serve him.
Then it was asked them, If they did not believe Marriage was a Sacrament? And
they answered, It was an Ordinance of God. It was farther asked, If they did
believe Men could forgive Sins? And their Answer was, That none could forgive
Sins but God only. After some other Words to and fro, the Women asked, Wherein
have we wronged you, that we should be kept Prisoners all the Days of our Life?
Our innocent Blood will be required at your Hands. The Friar said, He would
take their Blood upon him. They replied, The Time would come he should find he
had enough upon him without it. Then it was told them, The Pope was Christ's
Vicar, and what he did was for the Good of their Souls. To this they answered,
The Lord has not committed the Charge of our Souls to the Pope, nor to you
neither; for he has taken them into his own Possession: Glory be to his Name
for ever. Then it was said unto them, They must be obedient. And they returned,
They were obedient to the Government of Christ's Spirit, or Light. The Friar
said, None have the true Light but the Catholics: The Light that you have, is
the Spirit of the Devil. Woe (said they) to him that curses Jesus! Can the
Devil give Power over Sin and Iniquity? That would destroy his own Kingdom. You
(replied the Friar) are laughed at, and mocked of every one. But, said they,
What will become of the Mockers? It was no Matter, he said: You run about to
preach: and have not the true Faith. They returned, The true Faith is held in a
pure Conscience, void of Offense toward God and Men. Every one has the true
Faith, that believes in God, and in Jesus Christ whom he has sent: But they
that say, they do believe, and do not keep his Commandments, are Liars, and the
Truth is not in them. The Friar confessed this to be true, though he was
continually very troublesome to them with Threats, to make them turn; and to
this End they were locked up in a Room so exceeding hot, that it was said, it
was impossible they could live long in it. They were also so exceedingly stung
by G^ats, when they lay in Bed, that their Faces became swollen, as if they had
been sick of the Smallpox, so that many began to be afraid of them; and the
Friar said to Sarah, He spi^d an evil Spirit in her Face.

At another Time being examined, they were asked, How many of their Friends
were gone forth in the Ministry, and into what Parts? They answering to that
Query what they knew, it was told them, All that came where the Pope had any
thing to do, should never go back again. But they said, The Lord was as
sufficient for them, as he was for the Children in the fiery Furnace, and their
Trust was in God. Katharine being sickly, was asked, Why she looked so, whether
her Spirit was weak? She answered, Nay, my Body is weak, because I eat no Meat.
The Friar hearing this, offered her a License to eat Flesh; for it was in their
Lent. But she refused this, and said, She could not eat any thing at all. And
going afterward to Bed, she lay there Night and Day for twelve Days together,
fasting and sweating, for she was in much Affliction, and great was her Agony.

After having lain Ten Days, there came to her two Friars, the Chancellor, the
Man with the Black Rod, a Physician, and the Keeper. One of the Friars
commanded Sarah to go out of the Room, and then pulled Katharine's Hand out of
the Bed, and said, Is the Devil so great in you, that you cannot speak? To
which she said, Depart from me, thou Worker of Iniquity: The Power of the Lord
is upon me, and do thou call him Devil^ Hereupon he took his Crucifix to
strike her on the Mouth. And she asked him, Whether it were that Cross that
crucified Paul to the World, and the World unto him? This ignorant Monk said,
It was. But she denied it, and said, The Lord has made me a witness for
himself against all Workers of Iniquity. He then bid her, Be obedient, and went
to strike her, at which she said, Will thou strike me? And he saying, he would;
she further said, Thou art out of the Apostles Doctrine; for they were no
Strikers. I deny thee to be any of them who went in the Name of the Lord. To
which he said, He had brought her a Physician in Charity; and she returned, The
Lord is my Physician and my saving Health. The Monk growing angry, said, She
should be whipped and quartered, and burnt that Night at Malta, and her Mate too.
But she told him modestly, She did not fear; the Lord was on their Side: And he
had no Power but what (...) received: And if he did not use it to the same End
the Lord gave it (...) would judge him. At these Words, they were all struck
dumb, and went away. Then the Friar went to Sarah, and told her, that Katharine
called him Worker of Iniquity. Did she said Sarah, Art thou without Sin? To
which he said, he was. Then, replied Sarah, she has wronged thee.

Late in the Evening something was proclaimed at the Prison-Gate, by beating of
a Drum, and early in the Morning some came again with a Drum and Guns. It seems
to me that this was done on Purpose to frighten these poor Women, and to make
them believe that they should be put to Death; for indeed they looked for
little less, having for several Weeks expected that they should be led to the
Stake: But they were fully resigned, and given up to what the Lord might be
pleased to permit. In the mean while, Katharine continuing sickly, the Friar
came again with the Physician. But she told him, She could not take any Thing,
unless she felt Freedom. He then said, They must never come forth of that Room
while they lived: And pretending to be kind to them, he farther said, You may
thank God and me, that it is no worse; for it was like to be worse. Thereupon
they said, That if they had died, they had died as innocent as ever any
Servants of the Lord. He then said, It was well they were innocent; and turning
to Sarah, he bid her, Take Notice what Torment Katharine should be in at the
Hour of Death; saying, Thousands of Devils would fetch her Soul to Hell. But
Sarah told him, She did not fear any such Thing. He then asked Katharine, if
she did not think it expedient for the Elders of the Church to pray over the
Sick. And she said, Yea, such as are moved of the Spirit of the Lord. He then
fell down on his Knees, and did howl, and wish bitter Wishes upon himself, if
he had not the true Faith. The Physician in the mean while was enraged, because
she did not bow to him.

Now whilst Katharine was sick, Sarah was not without great Affliction; for it
grieved her to see her dear Companion so ill; and she easily foresaw, that if
Katharine died, her own Sufferings would be heavier. But yet she was given up
to the Will of the Lord, and would not in the least grudge at Katharine's
eternal Rest. But in Time, Katharine began to mend, and grow hungry; and
eating, she was refreshed. But the Room wherein they were locked was so
excessively hot, that they were often fain to rise out of their Bed, and lie
down at the Chink of the Door, for Air to fetch Breath. And this Heat was the
greater, because it came not only from without, but within also; which so
affected them, that their Skin was parched, and the Hair fell off their Heads,
and they fainted often; and their Afflictions were so great, that when it was
Day, they wished for Night; and when it was Night, they wished for Day; yea,
through human Weakness they desired Death, eating their Bread weeping, and
mingling their Drink with Tears. Once Katharine asked the Monks, who came to
her with a Physician, and said it was in Charity, Whether they did not keep
them in that hot Room to kill them, and bring a Physician to keep them longer
alive? To this the Friar said, The Inquisitor would lose his Head, if he should
take them thence; and it was better to keep them there than to kill them. Then
they writ to the Inquisitor, and laid their Innocence before him; and said
also, If it were their Blood they thirsted after, they might take it any other
Way, as well as to smother them in that hot Room. But this so incensed him,
that he sent the Friar to them, who took away their Ink-horns, their Bibles
being taken from them before They asked then, Why their Goods were taken away?
To which it was answered, All is ours; and your Lives too if we will. Then they
asked, How they had forfeited their Lives? To which it was told them, For
bringing Books and Papers. They replied, If there were any Thing in them that
was not true, they might write against it. To this the Monk said, They scorned
to write to Fools and Asses, that did not know true Latin. And it was farther
told them, The Inquisitor would have them separated, because Katharine was
weak, and she should go into a cooller Room; but Sarah should abide there. Then
Katharine took Sarah by the Arm, and said, The Lord has joined us together,
and Woe be to them that part us. I had rather die here with my Friend, than
part from her. This so struck the Friar, that he went away, and came no more in
five Weeks, and the Door of their Room was not opened in all that Time.

Then the Monks came again to part them, but Katharine was sick, and broken out
from Head to Foot. They thereupon sent for a Doctor, and he said, They must
have Air, or else they must die. This was told the Inquisitor, and he ordered
the Door to be set open six Hours in a Day. But ten Weeks after, they were
parted; which was such a grievous Affliction, that they declared, Death it self
would not have been so hard to them. But the Monks said, They corrupted each
other, and that being parted, they would bow and submit. But they saw
themselves disappointed; for the Women were stronger afterward than before,
the Lord fitting them for every Condition. Before they were parted, the Friars
brought them a Scourge of small Hempen Cords, asking them, If they would have
it? and saying, they were used to whip themselves till the Blood came. But the
Women said, that could not reach the Devil, he sat upon the Heart. Then the
Monks said, All the People of Malta are for you; if ye will be Catholics, none
but will like you. To which they returned, The Lord has changed us into that
which changes not. The Monks then said, All our holy Women do pray for you;
and ye shall be honored of all the World, if ye will turn. They replied, The
World lies in Wickedness, and the Honor and Glory of the World we have denied.
To this the Monks said, Ye shall be honored of God too; but now ye are hated
of all. This, said one of the Women, is an evident Token whose Servants we are.
The Servant is not greater than his Lord.

Once on a first Day of the Week the Friars came, and commanded them to kneel
down with them to Prayer. They signified they could not pray, but as they were
moved by the Lord. Then the Friars commanded them the second Time, and kneeled
down by their Bedside, and prayed after this Manner; which being done, they
said to the Women, We have tried your Spirits, now we know what Spirit ye are
of. But they told them, They could not know that, unless their Minds were
turned to the Light of Christ in their Consciences. The English Friar then
growing angry, showed them his Crucifix, and bid them look on it. But they told
him, the Lord says, Thou shall not make to thy self the Likeness of any Thing
that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the
Earth; thou shall not bow to them, nor worship them, but I the Lord thy God am
a jealous God. The Friar seeing Sarah speak so boldly to him, called for the
Irons to chain her. She then bowed her Head, and said to him, Not only my Hands
and Feet, but my Neck also for the Testimony of Jesus. The Friar seeming
appeased, said, He would do them any Good he could; far he saw what they did
was not in Malice. And the Friars came often and said to them, If ye would but
do a little, ye should be set at Liberty; but you will do nothing at all, but
are against every Thing. To which they returned, that thy would do any Thing
that might tend to God's Glory.

Whilst they were imprisoned here, it happened that the Inquisition-House was
new built, or repaired, which took up about the Space of a Year and a Half; and
during this Time some of the great Ones came often to see the Building, which
gave Opportunity to these Women to speak to them, and to declare the Truth in
the Name ot the Lord.

Now though they were threatened by the Monks for preaching the Light of Christ so
boldly, yet not only the Magistrates, but the Lord Inquisitor grew moderate
toward them, and gave Order they should have Pens, Ink and Paper to write to
England. And they seemed inclined to have set them at Liberty; but the Friars
workt mightily against it; and had labored about three Quarters or a Year to
part them, before they could bring it to pass. And when at length they had
effected it, they told Katharine, That they should never see one another's
Faces again.

In the mean while, Katharine being sickly, had little Stomach to eat, and had
no Mind to eat any Thing but what came from Sarah to her. And having told one
of the Friars, that she wanted some body to wash her Linen, and to prepare
some warm Victuals for her, he sent to Sarah, to know if she would do it for
her; and she said she would. And by that Means they for some Weeks heard of one
another every Day; and the Friar said once to Katharine, You may free your self
of Misery when you will; you may make your self a Catholic, and have your
Freedom to go where you will: To which she told him, Thus I might have a Name
that I did live, when I was dead. Thou have Catholics enough already.
Endeavor to bring some of them to the Light in their Consciences, that they
may stand in awe, and sin not. But he was so eager, that he said, He would lose
one of his Fingers, if she and Sarah would be Catholics. Then she told him, It
was Babylon that was built with Blood, but Sion was redeemed through Judgment.
Many Ways were used to draw them off; and once they would have persuaded her to
set a Picture at her Bed's Head, for a Representation: But she said as with
Abhorrence, What, do ye think I want a Calf to worship? Do ye walk by the Rule
of Scripture? To which the Friar said, We do, but we have Traditions too. She
replied, If your Traditions derogate or dissent from the Fundamentals of
Christ's Doctrine, the Prophets and Apostles, I deny them in the Name of the
Lord. But he asserted that they did not. Then she asked, What Rule they had to
burn those that could not join with them for Conscience Sake? And he returned,
St. Paul did worse, for he gave them to the Devil; and farther said, that they
did judge all damned that were not of their Faith. Then she objected to him
several of the superstitious Rites of the Church of Rome, and mentioned also
the forbidding of Marriage, which, 1 Timothy 1. 3.
said she, is a Doctrine of Devils, according to the Saying of the Apostle. The
Friar being put to a Nonplus, told her, That St. Peter was the Pope of Rome,
and did build an Altar there, and the Pope was his Successor, and he could do
what he would. But she refuted this with sound Reason. He then boasting of the
Antiquity of their Church, she signified that the Church she was of was yet
older; for, said she, Our Faith was from the Beginning; and Abel was of our
Church. The Friar being at a Loss, and not longer able to hold out against
Katharine, went to Sarah, and talked with her at the same Rate; and she also
told him, Abel was of our Church: To which he said, Abel was a Catholic; and
quite over-shooting himself, he said likewise, and Cain and Judas were so. To
which Sarah returned, Then the Devil was a Catholic; and I will not be one; I
will not turn; though ye would tear me to Pieces, I believe the Lord would enable
me to endure it.

At another Time the said Friar, whose Name was Malachy, came again to
Katharine, and told her, If she would be a Catholic, she should say so;
otherwise they would use her badly, and she should never see the Face of Sarah
again, but should die by her self, and a thousand Devils should carry her Soul
to H^^l. She then asked him, If he were the Messenger of God to her? And he
said, Yes. Why, what is my Sin, said she; or wherein have I provoked the Lord,
that he does send me such a Message? It is, returned the Monk, because you will
not be a Catholic. Whereupon she said, I deny thee and thy Message too, and
the Spirit which speaks in thee; for the Lord never spoke so. He growing angry,
said, that he would lay her in a whole Pile of Chains, where she should see
neither Sun nor Moon. And she intimating how resigned she was, said, He could
not separate her from the Love of God in Crist Jesus, lay her were-ever he
would. And he farther saying, he would give her to the Devil, she resumed, I
don't fear all the Devils in Hell; the Lord is my Keeper. Though thou had the
Inquisition, with all the Countries round about it on thy Side, and I was alone
by my self, I do not fear them; if there were Thousands more, the Lord is on my
Right Hand; and the worst they can do, is but to kill the Body, they can touch
my Life no more than the Devil could Job's. Then the Monk said, she should
never go out of that Room alive. To which she courageously said, The Lord is
sufficient to deliver me; but whether he will or no, I will not forsake the
living Fountain, to drink at a broken Cistern. And ye have no Law to keep us
here, but such a Law as Ahab had for Naboth's Vineyard. The Monk then cursing
himself, and calling upon his Gods, ran away, and as he was pulling the Door,
he said, Abide there, Member of the Devil. To which she said, The Devil's
Members do the Devil's Works; and the Woes and Plagues of the Lord will be upon
them for it.

He then went and told the Inquisitor of it, who laughed at him; and before he
came again, Katharine was moved out of that Room; when he came, he brought one
of the Inquisitor's Men with him, and two very good Hens, and said, The Lord
Inquisitor had sent them in Love to her. To which she said, She received his
Love, but yet she showed herself not very ready to accept them; and signified,
That she was willing to pay for them, being loath to be chargeable to any,
whilst she had of her own. The Friar, who it seems would have had them lay down
their Money, at his Feet, said, They must not count any Thing their own; for in
the primitive Times, they sold their Possessions, and laid them down at the
Apostles Feet. He further said, You shall not want any Thing, though we should
spend a thousand Crowns. But you are proud, because you will not take the
Inquisitor's Hens, which he sent you in Charity. She then asking, What Kind of
Charity this was, since he kept her in Prison? The Friar said, It was for the
Good of their Souls he kept them in Prison, farther adding, If you had not been
going to preach, ye might have gone where ye would. She returned, Our Souls are
out of the Inquisitor's Reach. Why should your Love extend more to us than to
your own Family? For they commit all Manner of Sin, which you cannot charge us
with. Why don't ye put them into the Inquisition, and bid them turn? He then
said, You have not the true Faith; and showing her his Crucifix, asked her, If
she thought he did worship that? And she asked him, What then did he with it?
To which he answered, It was a Representation. And she replied, It did not
represent Christ, for he was the express Image of his Father's Glory, which is
Light and Life. But, continued she, If thou can put any Life in any of thy
Images, then bring them to me. What Representation had Daniel in the Lion's
Den, or Jonas in the Whale's Belly? They cried unto the Lord, and he delivered
them. The Friar, who could not abide to hear her speak so much against Idols,
said, She talked like a mad Woman, adding, I Will give you to the Devil. She not
fearing this, said, Give thy own, I am the Lord's. He then stood up, and said,
I will do to you, as the Apostles did to Ananias and Sapphira. She then
standing up also, said, I deny thee in the Name of the Lord, the living God,
thou have no Power over me. Then away he went with the Hens to Sarah, and told
her, that Katharine was sick, and the Lord Inquisitor had sent two Hens, and
she would be glad to eat a Piece of one, if she would dress one of them
presently, and the other Tomorrow. Sarah no less circumspect, and cautious than
Katharine, and unwilling to receive this Gift, before she knew what might be
expedient, answered him accordingly as Katharine did. Then he carried the Hens
away again, saying, You would fain be burnt, because you would make the World
believe you did love God so well as to suffer in that Kind. Katharine hearing
this, said, I do not desire to be burnt; but if the Lord should call me to it,
I believe he will give me Power to undergo it for his Truth: And if every Hair
of my Head was a Body, I could offer them up all for the Testimony of Jesus.

The Friar coming afterward again, asked Katharine, Whether she had not been
inspired of the Holy Ghost to be a Catholic, since she came into the
Inquisition. She said, No. But he maintaining the contrary, said, You are those
who call the Spirit of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Devil. No, replied
they, (who though they were parted, yet could hear one another) The Spirit of the
Holy Ghost in us will resist the Devil. And the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost
is not wrought in the Will of Man, nor in Man's Time; but in God's Will and
Time. More Discourse they had about this Matter, and then asking for their
Bibles, which had been taken from them, he said, They should never see them
again, for they were false.

Thus they were often troubled and importuned by the Friars, who generally came
two at a Time, though sometimes but one. One of these often lifted up his Hand to
strike them, but did not: For they not being moved by Fear, he was put out of
Countenance, and would say, They were good Women, and he would do them any
Good. As indeed sometimes he did work for them, and would say, It was for God's
Sake, and that they ought to thank him for it. To which they replied, Those
that did any Thing for God, did not look for a Reward from Man; which once made
him so angry, that he said, They were the worst of all Creatures, and they
should be used worse than the Turks, Armenians, and Lutherans. Whereupon one of
them said, The pure Life was ever counted the worst, and if we must suffer, we
are the Lord's, and can trust him. Do what ye will with us, we do not fear any
evil Tidings; we are settled and grounded in Truth; and the more ye persecute
us, the stronger we grow. For this they experienced, indeed, according to what
they signified in their Letters, though they were separated a Year from each
other. The Friars coming once to Sarah, told her, If she would, she might go
out of the Prison, and say and do nothing. And she saying, She would on that
Account, They said, they would come next Morning. But Sarah perceived their
Deceit, and therefore when they came, she, to avoid the Snare, could not
resolve to go forth, though the Friars behaved themselves friendly, and told her
that the Inquisition had said, If they wanted Linen, Woollen, Stockings,
Shoes, or Money, they should have it.

Once it happened that an English Man who lived there, having heard that Sarah
was in a Room with a Window next the Street, got up by the Wall, and spoke a
few Words to her; but he was violently haled down, and cast into Prison upon
Life and Death; for he was one they had taken from the Turks, and made a Papist
of him. The Friars coming to them to know whether he had brought them any
Letters, they said No. Neither had Katharine seen him; yet it was told them, he
was like to be hanged. Of this Sarah gave Information to Katharine, by writing
a few Lines to her, (for it seems they then could not hear one another) and she
told her, she thought the English Friars were the chief Actors of this
Business. This grieved Katharine, and she wrote to Sarah again, (for they had a
private Way to send to each other.) In this Letter, after her Salutation, she
said to Sarah, That she might be sure, the Friars were the chief Actors; but
that she believed the Lord would preserve that poor English Man for his Love,
and that she was made to seek the Lord for him with Tears: And that she desired
her to send him something once a Day, if the Keeper would carry it. That she
her self was ravished with the Love of God to her Soul, and her Beloved was the
chiefest of ten Thousands; and that she did not fear the Face of any Man, ^ho'
she felt their Arrows. Moreover that she had a Prospect of their safe Return
into England: And in the Conclusion, she bid Sarah take Heed, if she was
tempted with Money. But this Letter, (by what Means they never knew) came to
the English Friar's Hands, who translating it into Italian, delivered it to the
Lord Inquisitor; and afterward came with Inquisitor's Deputy to Katharine, and
showed her both the Papers, and asked her, If she could read it? viz the
English one. Yea, said she, I writ it, O, did you indeed? said he. And what is
it you say of me here? Nothing but what is true, replied she. Then he said,
Where is the Paper Sarah sent? Give it, or else I will search your Trunk, and
every where else. She then bidding him search where he would, he said, She must
tell him who it was that brought her Ink, or else she should be tied with
Chains presently. And she returned, She had done nothing but what was just and
right in the Sight of God; and what she did suffer on that Account would be for
Truth's-sake. And she would not meddle with the poor Workmen. Then he said, For
Gods-sake tell me what Sarah did write. And she told him something, and said,
what she spoke was Truth. But returned he, You say it is much we do not tempt
you with Money. And this indeed happened afterward. The Deputy then took
Katharine's Ink, and threw it away; and so they went also; and the poor
Englishman was released next Morning. They now coming to Sarah, told her, That
Katharine honestly had confessed all, and that she had best to confess too: And
they threatened her with a Halter, and that they would take away her Bed and
Trunk, and her Money too. To which Sarah said, It may be she might not send to
Katherine any more: And she asked the Deputy, Whether he was a Minister of
Christ, or a Magistrate? If he were a Magistrate, said she, he might take her
Money, but she would not give it him. He then growing angry, said, She was
possessed. To which she replied, If so, then it was with the Power of an
endless Life.

Thus from Time to Time they suffered many Assaults; and sometimes it so
happened, that those who came to see them, were struck to the Heart, which
offended the Friars. Now at length their Money was almost gone, they having
sometimes employed it for Victuals. But the Friars told them, They might have
kept their Money for other Services; for they should have maintained them
whilst they kept them Prisoners. To this they said, They could not keep their
Money, and be chargeable to others. Then it so fell out, that their Stomachs
were taken away, and they did eat but little for three or four Weeks, till at
length they found themselves obliged to Fasting for several Days together;
which made the Friars say, That it was impossible that People could live with
so little Meat, as they did. And it was told them, The Lord Inquisitor had
said, they might have any Thing they would. To which they signifying that it
was not in their own Will they fasted, said, They must wait to know the Mind of
the Lord, what he would have them to do. They continued weak, especially Sarah,
who apprehending her Death near, did therefore dress her Head as she would lie
in the Grave. They both were so feeble that they could not put on their
Clothes, neither put them off, being also unable to make their Beds. And though
they desired to be together in one Room, yet the Friars would not permit it: In
this Condition they concluded they were like to die: But Heaven had provided
otherwise. Katharine about that Time being exercised in Supplication to the
Lord, that it might please him to put an End to their Trial, which Way it
seemed good in his Sight, thought she heard a Voice, saying, Ye shall not die,
and she took this to be a Heavenly Voice: And from that Time they felt
themselves refreshed with the living Presence of the Lord, to their great Joy
and Comfort, so that they felt Freedom to eat again; and then they were
provided with good Victuals, but yet they were under a Fear of Eating any Thing
which in some Respect might be counted unclean; and therefore they cried unto
the Lord, and said, We had rather die, than eat any Thing that is polluted and
unclean. And Katharine believed it was said to her from the Lord, Thou may
as freely eat, as if thou had wrought for it with thy Hands. And Sarah, who
sometimes had wrought for others in the Inquisition-House, was persuaded that
it was told her by Inspiration, Thou shall eat the Fruit of thy Hands and be
blessed. And so they did eat, and for eight or ten Days they got whatever they
did call for. But afterward they were so straightened for want of Food, that it
did them more Hurt than their Fast. Yet they being preserved alive, the Friars
said, The Lord keeps them alive by his mighty Power, because they should be
Catholics. To which they returned, It should be known one day, the Lord had
another End in it. But the Friars told them plainly, There was no Redemption
from them. Whereupon they said, With the Lord there was Mercy and plenteous
Redemption: And they bid them, Take heed ye be not found Fighters against God.
To which the Friars returned, Ye are foolish Women. Then we are, replied they,
the Lord's Fools; and they are dear and precious in his Sight. The Friars then
showing their shaven Crowns, said, that They were the Lord's Fools; And
pointing at their Gowns, said, They did wear them for God's-sake, to be laughed
at by the World. One of the Friars about this Time did what he could to send
Katharine to Rome: And not succeeding, he said they should go both. But this
not taking Effect, A Friar sent to the Pope with a Charge against Kat. Evans.
the Friar was sent thither, with a Paper to the Pope, containing Matter of
Charge against Katharine; but she speaking zealously to the Scribe, pronounced
Woe against it, and defied it in the Name of the Lord. Before the Friar
departed, he told Sarah, Katharine was a Witch, and that she knew what was done
elsewhere. Thus he said, because once telling Katharine abundance of Lies, she
told him, She had a Witness for God in her, which was faithful and true; and
she believed this Witness.

The English Consul discourses with them
After he was gone, the English Consul came to her with a Dollar from a Master
of a Ship who came from Plymouth: She told him, She did receive her
Countryman's Love, but could not receive his Money. He then asked her, What she
would do if she would take no Money? To which she answered, The Lord is my
Portion, and thus I cannot want any good Thing. We were in thy House near
fifteen Weeks, did thou see any Cause of Death and Bonds in us? And he
saying, No, she signified to him, that in some Respect he had been accessory to
their Imprisonment, and had not been ignorant of the Intent: Thou knew, said
she, that a Room was provided for us in the Inquisition; and had not we been
kept alive by the mighty Power of God, we might have been dead long since.
Endeavoring to excuse himself, he said, How could I help it? Then she put him
in Mind of what happened at his House when they were there, and how they called
them to Repentance, and forewarned them. To which he said, However it be, it
will go well with you. Then she told him how he required a Sign of her, when
they were at his House, if they were the Servants of the Lord God: And she
asked him, Whether that was not true they spoke to him? Thou art a condemned
Person, and stand guilty before God; yet nevertheless repent, thou can
find a Place. Is strangely aff^^ed with what is said.
While she thus spoke to him, his Lips quiver'd, and he trembled so that he
could scarce stand upon his Legs: And though otherwise a very handsome Man, and
in his Prime, yet he now looked as one that was pining away: And this was a
sufficient Sign for the whole City, if they had duly taken Notice of it
Katharine having refused the Piece of Money, he went to Sarah with it: But she
likewise told him, she could not take it; but if he had a Letter for them, she
should be free to receive it. He saying, he had not any, asked her, What she
did want? And she answered, The Lord was her Shepherd, she could not want any
good thing; but she did long for her Freedom. He not willing to discourage her,
said, That you may have in Time: But he did not live to see it, His ^ath^
for the next (...) they heard of him, he was dead.

Whilst the Friar was gone to Rome, it was told them, they were also to be sent
thither; and there was ^^^ed great Working about it; but it seems they could
not agree in the Matter. In the mean while, Katharine and Sarah remained
separated, and there were five Doors between them with Locks and Bolts; and yet
Sarah sometimes found an Opportunity, either by the Carelessness of the Keeper,
or that it was done on Purpose, to come where she could see Katharine; and how
much soever the Friars did watch them, yet she came to Katharine's Door by
Night. But being once discovered, she was locked up again; yet not long after
the Doors were again open, so that they sat in sight of each other.

Sometimes there were of diverse Nations brought Prisoners into the the
Inquisition, They show the Errors of Popery to Prisoners brought to the
Inquisition.
and the Friars and other great Men endeavored in their Way to make Christians
of them. Then these Women would often show them the Errors of Popery, and
declare the Truth for which they were willing to suffer Death, if required: But
this was taken very ill. At length it happened that two Englishmen came into
the City, and tried to obtain their Liberty, but in vain. Yet a little while
after, the Magistrates sent for and asked them whether they were sick, or
whether they did want any Thing; saying, They might write to England, ordering
the Scribe to give them Ink and Paper.

Not long after, Endeavour^ used to procure their Liberty.
came one Francis Steward, a Captain of a Ship, and a Friar of Ireland, who
both took great Pains to get them released; for their Friends in England had
not been wanting in any Thing that might procure their Liberty. But the Time
for it was not yet come. The said Captain, and the new English Consul
endeavored much to procure their Liberty; but it was not in the Magistrates
Power, for the Inquisitor said he could not set them free without an Order from
the Pope. But in vain.
Yet Katharine and Sarah were brought into the Court-Chamber, and the English
Consul asked them if they were willing to go back to England: And they said,
Yes, if it were the Will of God they might. The Captain of the Ship who was
also there, spoke to them with Tears in his Eyes, and told them what he had
done in their Behalf, but in vain. It is the Inquisitor, said he, who will not let
you go free: You have preached among these People. To which they said, That
they had witnessed the Truth, which they were willing to maintain with their
Blood. He replied, If they could be set free, he would freely give them their
Passage, and provide for them. And they returned. His Love was as well accepted
of the Lord, as if he did carry them. They refuse Money proffered
He also offered them Money, but they refused to take any. They then gave him a
Relation of their Imprisonment and Sufferings, and said, They could not change
their Minds, though they were to be burnt to Ashes, or chopped in small Pieces. The
Friar then drawing near, said, They did not work: But this was not true, for
they had Work of their own, and did work as they were able. They also told him,
Their Work and Business was in England. He confessing this was true, said, They
had suffered long enough, and too long, and that they should have their Freedom
within a short Time, but that there wanted an Order from the Pope. In the mean
while it grieved the Captain that he could not obtain their Liberty; and going
away, he prayed God to comfort them; and they beseeched the Lord, to bless and
preserve him unto everlasting Life, and never let him nor his go without a
Blessing from him, for his Love. For h^ ventured himself exceedingly in that
Place by laboring to get their Freedom.

After he was gone, They are again severely (...)
they met with worse Usage, and the Inquisitor coming, looked upon them with
Indignation; for the taking away of their Lives was again on foot, and their
Doors were shut up for many Weeks. After some Time, the Inquisitor came again
into the Tower where they sat; and Sarah called to him, and desired the Door
might be opened for them to go down into the Court to wash their Clothes. He
then ordared the Door to be opened once a Week; and not long after it was open
every Day. And since it had been said that they could not be released without
the Pope's Leave, Sarah said to him, If we are the Pope's Prisoners, we appeal
to the Pope: Send us therefore to him. But those that had their Abode in the
Inquisition, especially the Friars, were their mortal Enemies, although they
would sometimes have fed them with the best of their Victuals, and given them
whole Bottles of Wine, if they would have received it: And it troubled them
exceedingly that they refused to eat and drink with them; which they did,
because they looked upon them as their fierce Persecutors,

Once there came two or three English, Ships into the Harbor, and the English
Consul telling them of it, said, That he did what he could for them, but that
they would not let them go, unless they would turn Catholics, and that
therefore they must suffer more Imprisonment yet. Before Sarah knew these Ships
were come thither, she saw them in the Night in a Dream, and heard a Voice
saying, That they could not go yet. When the Ships were gone, they were sent
for, and it was asked them, If they would be Catholics? To which they
answered, They were true Christians, and had received the Spirit of Christ. One
of the Magistrates showing them the Cross, they told him, They did take up the
Cross of Christ daily, which was the Power of God to crucify Sin and Iniquity.
Knowing that there was a Friar, who, as the Captain had told them, took a great
Deal of Pains for them, but not seeing him there, (for he secretly favoring
them, was now absent) they said to those that were present, One of your Fathers
has promised us our Liberty. But this availed nothing. Yet they acknowledged
his Kindness, and told him afterward, He would never have Cause to repent it

Discourse ^th Friar.
A Friar once coming to them, said, It is God's Will ye should he kept have, or
else we could not keep you. On which Katharine told him, The Lord suffers
wicked Men to do Wickedness, but he does not will them to do it: He suffered
Herod to take off John the Baptist's Head, but he did not will him to do it: He
suffered Stephen to be stoned, and Judas to betray Christ; but he did not will
them to do so; for if he had, he would not have condemned them for it. The
Friar hereupon asking, Are we then wicked Men? She answered, They are wicked
Men, that work Wickedness. But, said he, you have not the true Faith. To which
she answered, By Faith we stand, and by the Power of God we are upheld. Do
thou think it is by our own Power and Holiness we are kept from a vain
Conversation, from Sin and Wickedness? He then saying, That was their Pride;
she told him, We can glory in the Lord; we were Children of Wrath once as well
as others; but the Lord has quickened us that were dead, by the living Word of
his Grace, and has washed, cleansed, and sanctified us in Soul and Spirit, in
Part, according to our Measures; and we do press forward toward that which is
perfect. He then said, Ye are good Women; but yet there is no Redemption for
you, except ye will be Catholics. This was the Old Lesson of the Friars, who
at another Time, said, Ye may be Catholics, and keep your own Religion too,
and ye shall not he known to be Catholics, except ye were brought before a
Justice. To which they returned, What, should we profess a Christ we should be
ashamed of?

Some of those that came to see them, would pity them, for not turning
Catholics; but others showed their Hatred, by crying, that they must be burnt,
and by bawling, Fuoco, Fuoco, [Fire, Fire,] Whilst they were separated from
each other, Katharine was often much concerned for Sarah, and afraid that she
should be ensnared; for one of the Friars many Ti^^^ accost^d her with fawning
Words; Katharine it sollicitous for Sarah. Yet both reavain firm, and often
full of Comfort.
But they both continued steadfast, and were often ravished by the inward Joy
and Consolation they felt. Katharine in one of her Letters, said, That the
Spirit of Prayer was once upon her, but that she was afraid to speak to the
Lord, for Fear she should speak one Word that would not please him. And then it
was returned her from the Lord, Fear not, Daughter of Sion; (...) what thou will, and (...) will grant it thee, whatsoever thy Heart can wish. But she
desired nothing of the Lord, but what would make for his Glory, whether it were
her Liberty, or Bondage, Life, or Death, And in this Resignedness she found her
self accepted of the Lord.

Sometimes they spoke so effectually to those that came to them, The different
Effects of their Discourse on different Persons.
that they could not gainsay them, but were made to confess that God was with
them; though others would make a hideous Noiss, and cry Jesu Maria, and run away
as People that were struck with Fear. Katharine's Prison being so near the
Street, that she could be heard of those that wen by, she was moved sometimes
to call them to Repentance, and to turn to the Light wherewith they were
enlightened, which would lead them out of all their wicked Ways and Works, to
serve the true and living God in Spirit and in Truth. This so reached some,
that they did sigh and groan, and stay to hear her; but not long, it being
forbidden upon great Pain. Yet some that passed by to their Worship-houses,
were so wicked, that they threw Stones at her Window, and often made a sad
Noise, and howled like Dogs.

Thus they were assaulted both from abroad, and within Doors, from the Friars,
who fiercely threatened them for their bold Testimony against Idolatry. Once
when they showed Sarah, Mary and her Babe pictured against a Wall, and would
have her look upon it; she, to show her Zeal against Idol-worship, stamped with
her Foot, and said, Cursed are all Images, and Image-Makers, and those that
fall down to worship them. Sarah's Zeal against Idolatry.


Once it happened, that some French and Spanish Ships came to join with the
Cavaliers of Malta, to fight against the Turks. Sarah hearing this, said God is
angry, God is angry; go not forth to kill one another; Christ came not to
destroy Life, but to save it. This she told many, who were persuaded of
obtaining a Victory: But it fell out otherwise, for their Fleet was beaten by
the Turks, and they returned with great Damage.

A Friar coming once to Katharine, asked her, Why she did not work? Which made
her say to him, What Work do thou do? He answered, I write. To which she
returned, I ll write too if thou will bring me Pen, Ink, and Paper. But he not
willing she should write, said, St. Paul did work at Rome; and by knitting she
might get about three Halfpence a Day. She told him, If we could have had that
Privilege among you, which Paul had at Rome under Caesar, who was a Heathen
Prince, we would have wrought, and not have been chargeable to any; for he
lived in his own hired House two Years preaching the Gospel and Doctrine of the
Lord Jesus Christ. She asked him also, Whether he knew the holy War of God? And
if thou know at, said she, then thou can but know, that we cannot be
without Exercise Day nor Night. This stopped his Mouth; Besides, it was well
known, They are not idle in Prison.
that they spent not their Time idly; for they knit Stockings for those that
were services able to them; they made Garments for the poor Prisoners, and
mendded their Clothes; though they were not willing to work for the Friars, who
sometimes coming to her, kneeled down, and would have Katharine to say after
them the Words they spoke. But this she refused to do, though it made these Men
grow more angry. Such and the like Occurrences so grieved her, that once in
Anguish of Spirit she cried out to God, It were better for me to die than to
live thus: For being almost continually constrained to testify against Idolatry
and Superstition, she would have been willing to have laid down her Life for a
Testimony against it, if it had been required of her. And when once the Friars
told her, that Sarah was to be carried to Rome, whilst she should stay at
Malta, it so grieved her, that with Supplication she asked the Lord, If he did
not count her worthy to go to Rome also, and to offer up her Life there for the
Testimony of Jesus; because, if she was at Liberty to choose, she would rather
do so, than return without her to England.

At another Time, More Discourse with a Friar.
when it was told them, That their Bibles were false, Katharine asked the Friar
that said so, Wherein are they false? He replied, Because the Books of the
Maechabees were not in them. To which she answered, That though something might
be wanting, yet the rest might be good for all that: But if something were
added, then the Bible was corrupted. This struck at some Additions she had seen
in the Bibles there. Then he asked her whether she did not think that every one
must bow at the Name of Jesus: And she answering, Yea, he said, Jesus, and bid
her to kneel down, or to bow her self. To which she said, That her Heart and
whole Body was bowed down under the Name of Jesus; but that she would not bow
at the Will of him or any Body else. He that departs from Iniquity (thus she
continued) bows before the Name Jesus; but they that live in Sin and Wickedness
do not bow before the Son of God. Then he said, That he and his Companions
stood in the same Power, and were led by the same Spirit as the Apostles; which
made her ask, Why then they abused that Power, and used carnal Weapons? He
answered, They did not do so; for their Inquisition, nay, even their Chains and
Fetters were Spiritual. Then he asked her whether she did not think all those
damned that were not of her Persuasion: She said, No; Christ has not taught us
so; for those that are to Day in a State of Reprobation, the Lord, if it please
him, can call to Morrow out of it. He then said, We think you damned, and all
those that are not of our Belief. To which she returned, The Judgment of Man
does not hurt us. Sometimes some came to the Prison upon their Saints-days, and
asked them, What Day it was? And they not being acquainted with those Saints,
would answer, We don't know it. When the others told them that it was such or
such a Saint Day, and that this Saint would punish them that Night, because
they did not observe his Day; They answered, That they knew the Saints to be at
Peace with them, and that therefore they did not fear them. Another Time a
Friar came and told them, It was seventeen Days to Christmas, and that the
Virgin Mary conceived that present Day. On which Katharine made this pretty
Remark, that indeed this was very singular, That she did go with Child but
seventeen Days. Such like Occurrences grieved her exceedingly, when she
considered the gross Darkness these People were in: And as she was crying to
the Lord in Prayer, that it seemed that all their Travel and Labor was
fruitless, she felt this Answer: Be not grieved though Israel be not gathered;
the Seed of Malta is to increase into Multitude; that which ye have sown shall
not die, but live.

After Katharine and Sarah had been imprisoned at Malta about three Years, D.
Baker endeavors for their Release.
there came one Daniel Baker, who did whatever he could, and went also to the
Inquisitor, to obtain their Liberty, but in vain; for he required that some
English Merchants at Leghorn or at Messina should engage for four thousand
Dollars, that they being released, should never return into those Parts. But
they were unwilling to enter into those Terms, as not knowing what the Lord one
Time or other might require of them. Daniel seeing he could not obtain their
Deliverance this Way, He offers to be imprisoned for them, yea to lay down his
Life for their Liberty.
offered himself to be imprisoned instead of them; and this not being accepted,
he went yet farther, and signified, That he was willing to lay down his Life
for their Liberty, if it was not to be purchased otherwise. Great Love indeed!
of which but few Instances are to be found. And they hearing of this, were
touched with exceeding great Admiration. In the mean while he found a Way to
get some Letters delivered to them, and wrote also himself both to comfort and
exhort them to Stedfastness. At length he found Means also to speak to them;
for on a Time as they stood at the Prison-Grates, he being come in their Sight,
saluted them in these Words; The whole Body of God's Elect, right dearly
Beloved, own your Testimony, and ye are a sweet Savor unto the Lord and his
People. To which one of them answered, That it was a Trouble to them that they
could not be more serviceable. This made his Heart melt with Pity and
Compassion, considering the wonderful Mercy of the Lord in preserving them,
without fainting in that sharp Trial. And they beholding one another at a
Distance through the Iron Grates, were mutually refreshed at that Season. They
afterward wrote to him, and signified with the most tender Expressions, how
highly they valued his great Love; and also sent him Letters for their Friends
and Relations in England; and he neglected, not to write back again to them
during his Stay, which was in the Forepart of the Year 1662. 1662
But he was forced to leave them Prisoners there: Yet the Time of their
Redemption drew nigh, which was brought about at the Instance of G. Fox and
Gilbert Latey, by writing to the Lord Aubery, as has been said already.

Some Time before Daniel Baker came to Malta, it had been told them, All Sorts
of Means used to pervert them.
that if they would turn Catholics, they might dwell at Malta. To which their
Answer was, That that they were true Catholics. One of the Magistrates said
that if they would not turn Catholics, they must yet suffer long Imprisonment
by the Pope's Order. And yet it was not true that there was such an Order. It
was also told them, if they would kiss the Cross, they should be released; and
they might stay at the House of the English Consul until an Opportunity offered
to carry them to England. In the mean while they heard that the Pope had given
Order to let them pass to England without doing them any Hurt. But however it
was, they were preserved well contented, and they said resolutely, that they
would not kiss the Cross, nor purchase their Liberty at that Rate. But they
continue steadfast and inflexible.
It seems the Consul aimed at some Advantage by their Releasment, for he told
them that the Inquisitor had said, If any one would engage for three or four
thousand Dollars to be paid if ever they came thither again, they should be set
at Liberty. This he said also to D. Baker, and added, that if none would
engage, they must die in Prison; and that this was the Pope's Order. After
Baker's Departure, Word was sent to some English Merchants, concerning such an
Engagement; but none appeared willing to enter into it; and the Prisoners were
so far from desiring, that they spoke against it. Yet there were many that
sought to obtain their Liberty, showing themselves willing to engage for what
was reasonable, but all their Endeavors were in vain.

Once they fasted three Days, and though it was a cold Season, they sat upon the
Ground, with very little Clothes on, without Stockings or Shoes, having nothing
upon their Heads but Ashes. The Inquisitors seeing it, wondered exceedingly;
and Sarah began to speak zealously against Superstition and Idolatry. And when
the Time of their Fast was expired, Katharine composed the following Hymn to
God.

All Praise to him that has not put
Nor cast me out of Mind,
Nor yet his Mercy from me shut,
As I could ever find.
Infinite Glory, Laud, and Praise
be given to his Name,
Who has made known in these our Days
his Strength and noble Fame.
Oh none is like unto the Lamb,
whose Beauty shines bright,
O glorify his holy Name,
his Majesty and Might.
My Soul praise thou the only God,
a Fountain pure and clear,
Whose Crystal Streams spread all abroad,
and cleanses far and near.
The Well-springs of Eternity,
which are so pure and swe^t,
And do arise continually
my Bridegroom for to meet.
My sweet and dear beloved one,
whose Voice is more to me
Than all the Glory of the Earth,
or Treasures I can see.
He is the Glory of my Life,
my Joy and my Delight,
Within the Bosom of his Love,
he clo^'d me Day and Night.
He does preserve me clean and pure
w^^^in his Pavill'on,
Where I with him should be secure,
and saved from all Wrong.
My Soul praise thou the Lord, I say,
praise him with Joy and Peace;
My Sp'rit and Mind both Night and Day,
praise him and never ^^^se.
O magnify his Majesty,
his Fame and his K^own,
Whose Dwelling is in Sion high,
the Glory of his Crown.
O Praises, Praises to our God,
sing Praises to our King,
O teach the People all abroad,
his Praises for ^o sing.
A Sion Song of Glory bright,
that does shine out so clear,
O manifest it in the Sight
of Nations far and near;
That God may have his Glory (...),
his Honor and his Fame,
And all his Saints may sing (...)
the Praises of his Name.
After Katharine had joyfully sung thus, she went to the Well in the Court, and
drank much Water in the Sight of the Prisoners, as did Sarah also: For they
were dry, and Sarah washing her Head also in cold Water, they cried out in
their Language, Ye will kill your selves, and go to the Devil. But this they
did not fear, neither caught they any Cold, and so became a Wonder to others.

About half a Year after Daniel Baker was gone, it came into Katharine's Heart,
that if she could speak with the Inquisitor, he would grant them their Liberty.
And it was not long after that he came to the Inquisition-Court Chamber, which
they hearing, desired to speak with him, which was granted, and being admitted
into his Presence, they told him, They had not wronged or defrauded any, but
had suffered innocently almost four Years for Conscience Sake, etc. After this,
the Inquisitor was very courteous to them, and promised their Liberty in a few
Days, saying, He would send for the Consul, and get him to engage for five
hundred Dollars to be paid for them if ever they came again. And in Case the
Consul denied this, he would send to Rome to the Pope, to set them at Liberty
without any Obligation.

Not many Days after, the Inquisitor came with his Lieutenant, the Chancellor,
and others, and after some Discourse, asked them, Whether they would return
back again to their Husbands and Children, if it were the Will of God? To which
they answered, It was their Intent in the Will of God so to do. K. Evans and
Sar. Chevers are released.
Hereupon they were released, and the Inquisitor took his Leave very
courteously of them, and wished them a prosperous Return into their own
Country; as likewise did the Magistrates, and the In^erior Officers, not
requiring one Pennyworth for Fees or Attendance; yet in their own Freedom they
gave something to the Keeper, and some poor Men.

Being thus set at Liberty, they kneeled down, and prayed God never to lay to
their Charge what they did unto them, because they knew them not. And then they
were delivered into the Consul's Hands, who told them, that he had engaged for
them to get them free; but they could never find that it was true. Now they
were kept eleven Weeks at the Consul's House, before they could get Passage
from thence. Katharine in the mean while being under a great Concern, because
of a Judgment that was impending over the City, Katharine writes to the Rulers
of Malta, thereto moved by the Lord.
writ a Paper to the Rulers of Malta, in which she said, that on the 25th of
the Month called August it came upon her from the Lord to write thus to them in
his Name; My Wrath is kindled against you, and my Judgment is set up amongst
you, because of your Hardheartedness and Unbelief. I the Lord, who desire the
Death of no Man, but that all should return unto me and live, have cast my
Servants amongst you, contrary to their Will, and without their Knowledge, to
go and forewarn you of the Evil that was coming upon you -- For all the Wicked
shall be brought to Judgment -- I will establish my beloved Son upon his
Throne, and he shall rule in his Princely Power, and reign in his kingly
Majesty, whose Right it is over all, and his own spiritual Government shall be
set up in all Places, righteous Rule and pure Worship in Spirit and in Truth.
There is nothing that can prevent the Lord, who says, If ye will not hear my
Servant, which speaks my Word, whom ye have proved almost these four Years,
whose Life has been harmless and spotless, in pure Innocence amongst you, then
will I bring Woe upon Woe, and Judgment upon Judgment upon you, till the Living
shall not be able to bury the Dead. My Mouth has spoken it, and my Zeal will
perform it; and every Man's Hand shall be upon his Loins for Pain; for the Day
of Recompense is come. But if you will hear my Servant, which speaks in my
Name, and return in your Minds to the Light in your Consciences, which
convinces of all Sin, and deny all evil Thoughts, Words, and Actions, then
will I pour out of my Spirit upon you, and will soon cure you of your Diseases,
and heal you of your Pain.

This and more she wrote, and delivered to the Consul to give it to the grand
Master, and the rest of the Governors. But the Consul not being pleased with
it, threatened her with Imprisonment again. What further became of the Paper, A
dreadful Tempest and Earthquake at Malta.
I do not find, but this, that on the 8th of October there was great Thunder
and Lightning, which set on Fire and blew up one of the Powder-houses about a
Mile out of the City, and another Powder-house was thrown down; and in the City
five Houses were overthrown, most of the Glass Windows of the Palaces and other
Houses broke, the Doors lifted off their Hooks, the Walls torn, and the whole
City terribly shaken, so that being at Midnight, a Cry went up through the whole
City, and the Bells were rung. At the Bed's Feet where Katharine and Sarah lay,
was a Glass Window, which also was broken, but they received no Hurt, though the
House was so shaken, that they did exceedingly fear and quake; but being given
up unto the Lord to live or to die, their Fear was soon taken from them, and
turned into Joy in the Lord. The Consul visits them.
When it was Day, the Consul came to them, and they being still and quiet, he
asked whether they were not dead. And while he was speaking, others came in,
telling what was done in the City; and he told them that even the Ships in the
Harbor had suffered Damage. Then they said, One Woe is past, and behold
another Woe comes quickly, if ye do not repent.

Some Days after, Sarah fasts, and desires the Grand Master to proclaim a Fast.
Sarah fasted, sitting upon the Ground with Ashes upon her Head, her Neck and
Shoulders bare, and she spoke to the Consul to desire the Grand Master to
proclaim a Fast, and to make the People to meet together to wait upon the Lord,
with their Minds turned to him; that so he might turn away his Judgments from
them; for the Hour of his Judgments was come, wherein the painted Harlot should
be stripped naked, and receive a Cup of Trembling from the Hand of the Lord.
The Consul performed this Message to the Magistrates; and the Friars said, the
Women had a good Intent. Some Time after, the Inquisitor came, and talking with
them, said, Your Intent is good, but the Devil has deceived you. And they
asked him, Whether the Devil could give Power over Sin? To which he said, The
Devil could transform himself into an Angel of Light. This they assented to,
but yet said, He could not hide himself from the Children of Light; though they
that were in the dark could not discern him. He could not abide to hear this,
but went away, and the Consul, who was present, wrought against them to get
them into Bondage again, but in vain. Many now died in the Town of a violent
Fever: Whether any other Disaster followed upon their Prediction, I cannot tell.

At length there came one of the King of England's Frigates, They go aboard an
English Frigate, as do some Knights of Malta, and the Inquisitor's Brother, who
is kind to them.
called the Sapphire, commanded by Captain Samuel Titswel, who took them in,
together with some Knights of Malta, among which was the Inquisitor's Brother,
who often spoke to the Captain, that they might not want any Thing that was in
the Ship, and he told them, If they came to Malta again, they should not be
persecuted so. And to the Captain he said, If they go to Heaven one Way, and we
another, yet we shall all meet together at last. But they told him, that Christ
Jesus, the Light of the World, was the only Way to the Father.

Departing from Malta, after some Time they came to Leghorn, where the
Merchants showed them great Kindness, and sent Wine and other Things for their
Refreshment, proffering them also Money; but they were unwilling to accept it.
From thence they came to Tangier, which the King of England had in Marriage
with the Daughter of the King of Portugal. This Place was at that Time besieged
by the Moors, yet Katharine and Sarah entered the Town; and many came flocking
into the House where they were lodged; for they boldly exhorted the People to
depart from Wickedness. They also went to the Governor, who was courteous to
them, and took their Admonitions in good Part, and promised to follow their
Counsel. And he would have given them Money; but they took none, though they
accepted his Love: For he commanded that none of the Garrison should abuse them
either in Word or Deed, upon pain of severe Punishment. Yet the Portuguese and
Irish were ready enough to have done them a Mischief. They being inclined to go
out to the Moors, desired the Governor to let them go forth; but he told them,
they must expect from that savage People nothing but cruel Death or Bonds for
ever. And though they signified to him, that they believed the Lord would
preserve them, since they were persuaded that he required of them to go to the
Moors, yet the Governor in a friendly Manner withheld them from going. Being
thus stopped, they believed that the Lord accepted of their Good Will. When they
went aboard again, though in another Ship, several took Shipping with them, from
a Belief that on their Account they should have a safe Passage. The Captain,
and others that were in the Ship behaved themselves very civilly toward them;
and though they met with Tempests, yet at length they arrived safely in England.

Katharine afterward related, that when (in the Inquisition) she was for many
Days together in Expectation that they should be burnt, she saw in a Dream in
the Night a large Room and a great Wood-Fire, in the Chimney; and she beheld
one sitting in a Chair by the Fire, in the Form of a Servant, whom she took to
be the eternal Son of God. Likewise she saw a very amiable well-favoured
Man-child sitting in a hollow Chair over the Fire, (not appearing to be above
three Quarters of a Year old, and having no Clothes on but a little fine Linen
about the upper Parts) and the Fire flamed about it; yet the Child played and
was merry. She would then have taken it up, for fear it should have been burnt;
but he that sat in the Chair bid her let it alone. Then turning about, she saw
an Angel, and he that sat in the Chair bid her take up the Child, which she
did, and found it had no Harm. And then awaking, she told her Dream to Sarah,
and desired her not to fear, since the heavenly Host thus followed them.

I have collected this Relation of the Occurrences of these Women at Malta from
several Papers and Letters, which not long after their Return Home, were
published in Print. And since no due Order was observed there, and many things
mentioned, which to avoid Prolixity, I have past by, as not very material, I
may have happily missed in some Case or other, as to the Order or Series of Time,
but yet I think the Matters of Fact are not mutilated. Now to give the Reader
an Idea of the Frame of these Women's Minds and their Sufferings, I Will insert
some of their Letters. Among those which they writ to their Friends in England,
was this following;

O Dearly beloved Friends, A Letter sent to their Friends in England.
Fathers, and Elders, and Pillars of God's spiritual House, and Brethren and
Sisters in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Measure of Love and Life of our God,
do we salute you all, and do embrace you (...) that which is eternal; and we do
greatly rejoice, and glorify the Name of our heavenly Father, that he has
counted us worthy to be Partakers of the Death and Sufferings of his blessed
Son, with you; though we be the least of God's Flock, yet we are of the true
Fold, whereof Christ Jesus is Shepherd; and he has had as tender a Care over
us, as he has had of any of his Lambs which he has called forth in this the
Day of his Power, and has carried us through and over as great Afflictions as
most of our Brethren and Sufferers for his Name, both in Mockings, Scoffings,
Scornings, Reproaches, Stripes, Contradictions, Perils at Land, and Perils at
Sea, fiery Trials, cruel Threatenings, Grief of Heart, Sorrow of Soul, Heats and
Colds, Fastings and Watchings, Fears within, and Fightings without, terrible
Temptations and Persecutions, and dreadful Imprisonments and Buffetings of
Satan; yet in all these our Trials the Lord was very gracious unto us, and did
not absent himself from us, neither suffered his Faithfulness to fail us, but
did bear us up, and keep us from fainting in the Midst of our Extremity. We had
not another to make our Moan to, but the Lord alone, neither could we expect a
Drop of Mercy, Favor or Refreshment, but what he did distill from his living
Presence, and work by his own Strength; for we sat one in one Room, and the
other in another, near a Year; as Owls in Deserts, and as People forsaken in
solitary Places. Then did we enjoy the Presence of the Lord, and did behold the
Brightness of his Glory, and we did see you, our dear Friends, in the Light of
Jesus, and did behold your Order, and Stedfastness of your Faith and Love to
all Saints, and were refreshed in all the Faithful-hearted, and felt the Issues
of Love and Life which did stream from the Hearts of those that were wholly
joined to the Fountain, and were made sensible of the Benefit of your Prayers.

O the Sorrows, the Mournings, the Tears! But those that sow in Tears, shall
reap in Joy. A true Sorrow begets a true Joy; and a true Cross, a true Crown:
For when our Sorrows did abound, the Love of God did abound much more: The
deeper the Sorrows, the greater the Joys; the greater the ^ross, the weightier
the Crown.

Dear Friends and Brethren, marvel not that Israel is not gathered, our
Judgment remains with the Lord, and so do our Labors; for it was not for Want
of Travel, nor Pain, nor Love to their Souls; for we could have been contented
to have fed upon the Grass on the Ground, so we might have had our Freedom
amongst them: For, had it not been for the great Opposition, they would have
followed after us, as Chickens after a Hen, both great and small. But oh the
swelling Seas, the raging and foaming Waves, stormy Winds and Floods, and deep
Waters, and high Mountains and Hills, hard Rocks, rough Ways, and crooked
Paths, tall Cedars, strong Oaks, fruitless Trees, and corrupted ones, that
cumber the Ground, and hinder the righteous Seed to be sown, and the noble
Plants from being planted: Oh! they shut up the Kingdom against the
Simple-hearted, and hide the Key of Knowledge from the innocent ones, and will
not enter into the Kingdom themselves, nor suffer them that would enter, but
stir up the Magistrates to form carnal Weapons, thinking to prevent the Lord of
taking to him his Inheritance, and to dispossess his Son, who is Heir of all,
that he might not have a Dewlling Place among them, nor a Habitation nigh them;
because that his Light will discover their Darkness, and his Brightness will
burn up all their Abominations, and mar their Beauty, and stain their Glory,
their Pomp, and their Pride, that it may perish as the untimely Figs, and fall
as the Flower of the Field, and wither as the Grass upon the Housetop. Oh, the
Belly of Hell, the Jaws of Satan, the whole Mystery of Iniquity is at the
Height, and all Manner of Abomination that makes desolate, stands where it
ought not, and is upholden by a Law, That upon Pain of Death none must speak
against it, nor walk contrary to it. But Praises to our God, he carried us
forth to declare against it daily. Oh, the blind Guides, the seducing Spirits,
that do cause the People to err, and compel them to worship the Beast and his
Image, and have his Mark in their Foreheads, and in their Hands, and to bow to
Pictures, and painted Walls, and to worship the Things of their own Hands, and
to fall down to that which their own Fingers have fashioned, and will not
suffer them to look towads Sion upon Pain of Death, nor to walk toward
Jerusalem upon Pain of Faggot and Fire, but must abide in Babel, and believe
whatsoever they speak or do, to be Truth. But oh the Ways, the Worships, the
Fashions, Forms, Customs, Traditions, Observations, and Imaginations which they
have drawn in by their dark Divinations, to keep the poor People in Blindness
and Ignorance, so that they perish for Want of Knowledge, and are corrupted,
because the Way of Truth is not made known among them; they are all in the many
Ways, out of the one true and living Way, and their Ways be so many, and so
monstrous, that they are unrehearsable; but the Lord our God has kindled a
Fire in the Midst of them, that will consume all Forms, Fashions, Customs, and
Traditions of Men, and will burn up the Briars, Thorns, and Tares, Stubble, and
fruitless Trees and corrupted ones, and will blast all the Fruits, Works, and
Labors of wicked and and ungodly Men, with the Mildews of his wrathful
Indignation, and will scatter all his Enemies with the Whirl-winds of his
Displeasure. They do not know the Scriptures: Their Bibles would grieve any
honest Heart to behold them, because of the Corruption.

This Letter was signed by both of them, though perhaps Katharine was the Writer,
who also writ a Letter of Exhortation to the Popish Inquisitor at Malta, and
another to Friar Malachy. Among the Letters she writ to her Husband and
Children, I count the following really worthy to be delivered to Posterity.

For the Hands of John Evans, my right dear and precious Husband, with my
tenderhearted Children, who are more dear and precious to me than the Apple of
mine Eye.
MOST dear and faithful Husband, A Letter of Katharine's to her Husband and
Children.
Friend, and Brother, begotten of my eternal Father, of the immortal Seed of
the Covenant of Light, Life and Blessedness, I have Unity and Fellowship with
thee Day and Night, to my great Refreshment, and continual Comfort, Praises,
Praises be given to our God for evermore, who has joined us together in that,
which neither Sea nor Land can separate or divide.

My dear Heart, my Soul does dearly salute thee, with my dear and precious
Children, which are dear and precious in the Light of the Lord, to thy endless
Joy, and my everlasting Comfort; Glory be to our Lord God eternally, who has
called you with a holy Calling, and has caused his Beauty to shine upon you,
in this the Day of his Power, wherein he is making up of his Jewels, and
binding up of his faithful Ones in the Bond of everlasting Love and Salvation,
among whom he has numbered you of his own free Grace; in which I beseech you
(dear Hearts) in the Fear of the Lord to abide in your Measures, according to
the Manifestation of the Revelation of the Son of God, in you; keep a diligent
Watch over every Thought, Word, and Action, and let your Minds be staid
continually in the Light, where you will find out the Snares and Baits of
Satan, and be preserved out of his Traps, Nets, and Pits, that you may not be
captivated by him at his Will. Oh, my dear Husband and Children, how often have
I poured out my Soul to our everlasting Father for you, with Rivers of Tears,
Night and Day, that you might be kept pure and single in the Sight of our God,
improving your Talents as wise Virgins, having Oil in your Vessels, and your
Lamps burning, and clothed with the long white Robes of Righteousness, ready
to enter the Bedchamber, and to sup with the Lamb, and to feed at the Feast of
fat Things, where your Souls may be nourished, refreshed, comforted, and
sati^fied, never to hunger again.

My dear Hearts, you do not want teaching, you are in a Land of Blessedness,
which flows with Milk and Honey, among the faithful Stewards, whose Mouths
are opened wide in Righteousness, to declare the eternal Mysteries of the
everlasting Kingdom, of the endless Joys, and eternal Glory; whereinto all the
Willing and Obedient shall enter, and be blessed for ever.

My dear Hearts, the Promises of the Lord are large, and are all* Yea and Amen
to those that fear his Name; he will comfort the Mourners in Sion, and will
cause the heavy-hearted in Jerusalem to rejoice, because of the Glad-tydings:
They that do bear the Cross with Patience, shall wear the Crown with Joy; for
it is through the Long-suffering and patient Waitings, the Crown of Life and
Immortality comes to be obtained. The Lord has exercised my Patience, and
tried me to the uttermost, to his Praise, and my eternal Comfort, who has not
been wanting to us in any Thing in his own due Time; we are Witnesses he can
provide a Table in the Wilderness, both spiritual and temporal. Oh, the endless
Love of our God, who is an everlasting Fountain of all ^^^ing Refreshment,
whose Crystal Streams never cease running to every thirsty Soul, that
breaths after the Springs of Life and Salvation!

In our deepest Affliction, when I looked for every Breath to be the last, I
could not wish I had not come over Sea, because I knew it was my eternal
Father's Will to prove me, with my dear and faithful Friend; in all Afflictions
and Miseries the Lord remembered Mercy, and did not leave nor forsake us, nor
suffer his Faithfulness to fail us, but caused the sweet Drops of his Mercy to
distill upon us, and the Brightness of his glorious Countenance to shine into
our Hearts, and was never wanting to us in Revelations or Visions. Oh, how may
I do to set forth the Fullness of God's Love to our Souls! No Tongue can express
it, no Heart can conceive it, nor Mind can comprehend it. Oh, the Ravishments,
the Raptures, the glorious bright-shining Countenance of our Lord God, who is
our Fullness in Emptiness, our Strength in Weakness, our Health in Sickness, our
Life in Death, our Joy in Sorrow, our Peace in Disquietness, our Praise in
Heaviness, our Power in all Needs or Necessities; he alone is a full God unto
us, and to all that can trust him; he has emptied us of our selves, and has
unbottomed us of our selves, and has wholly built us upon the sure Foundation,
the Rock of Ages, Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, where the swelling
Seas, nor raging, foaming Waves, nor stormy Winds, though they beat vehemently,
can he able to remove us. Glory, Honor, and Praise is to our God for ever, who
out of his everlasting Treasures, does fill us with his eternal Riches Day by
Day; he did nourish our Souls with the choicest of his Mercies, and does feed
our Bodies with his good Creatures, and relieve all our Necessities in a full
Measure; Praises, Praises be to him alone, who is our everlasting Portion, our
Confidence, and our Rejoicing, whom we serve acceptably with Reverence and
Godly Fear; for our God is a consuming Fire.

Oh, my dear Husband, and precious Children, you may feel the Issues of Love
and Life, which stream forth as a River to every Soul of you, from a Heart that
is wholly joined to the Fountain! My Prayers are for you Day and Night without
ceasing, beseeching the Lord God of Power to pour down his tender Mercies upon
you, and to keep you in his pure Fear, and to increase your Faith, to confirm
you in all Righteousness, and strengthen you in believing in the Name of the
Lord God Almighty, that you may be established as Mount Sion, that can never be
moved. Keep your Souls unspotted of the World, and love one another with a pure
Heart fervently, serve one another in Love, build up one another in the
eternal, and bear one another's Burdens for the Seed's-Sake, and so fulfill the
Law of God. This is the Word of the Lord unto you, my dearly Beloved.

Dear Hearts, I do commit you into the Hands of the Almighty, who dwells on
high, and to the Word of his Grace in you, who is able to build you up to
everlasting Life, and eternal Salvation. By me, who am thy dear and precious
Wife, and Spouse, in the Marriage of the Lamb, in the Bed undefiled,

K. E.

My dearly beloved Yoke-mate in the Work of our God, does dearly salute you:
Salute us dearly to our precious Friends in all Places. I do believe we shall
see your Faces again with Joy.
This was written in the Inquisition at Malta, in the 11th Month, in the Year,
1661.




The following Letter was written by Sarah to her Husband Henry Cheevers and
Children.

MY Dear Husband, Sarah's Letter to her Husband and Children.
my Love, my Life is given up to serve the living God, and to obey his pure
Call in the Measure of the Manifestation of his Love, Light, Life and Spirit of
Christ Jesus, his only begotten Son, whom he has manifested in me, and
thousands, by the Brightness of his Appearing, to put an End to Sin and Satan,
and bring to Light Immortality, through the Preaching of the everlasting Gospel,
by the Spirit of Prophecy, which is poured out upon the Sons and Daughters of
the living God, according to his Purpose; whereof he has chosen me, who am the
least of all: But God, who is rich in Mercy, for his own Namesake has passed
by m^ne Offenses, and has counted me worthy to bear Testimony to his holy
Name, before the mighty Men of the Earth. Oh the Love of the Lord to my Soul!
My Tongue cannot express, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man, to
conceive of the Things that God has laid up for them that fear him.

Therefore does my Soul breathe to my God for thee and my Children, Night and
Day, that your Minds may be joined to the Light of the Lord Jesus, to lead you
out of Satan's Kingdom, into the Kingdom of God, where we may enjoy one another
in the Life eternal, where neither Sea nor Land can separate; in which Light
and Life do I salute thee my dear Husband, with my Children, wishing you to
embrace God's Love, in making his Truth so clearly manifest amongst you;
whereof I am a Witness, even of the everlasting Fountain that has been opened
by the Messengers of Christ, who preach to you the Word of God, in Season and
out of Season, directing you where you may find your Savior to purge and
cleanse you from your Sins, and to reconcile you to his Father, and to have
Unity with him and all the Saints, in the Light, that ye may be Fellow-Citizens
in the Kingdom of Glory, Rest and Peace, which Christ has purchased for them
that love him, and obey him. What Profit is there for to gain the whole World,
and lose your own Souls? Seek first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness
thereof, and all other Things shall be added to you. Godliness is great Gain,
having the Promise of this Life that now is, and that which is to come; which
is fulfilled to me, who have tasted of the Lord's endless Love and Mercies to
my Soul; and from a moving of the same Love and Life do I breathe to thee my
Dear Husband, with my Children; my dear Love salutes you all; my Prayers to my
God are for you all, that your Minds may be joined to the Light, wherewith you
are lightened, that I may enjoy you in that which is eternal, and have Communion
with you in the Spirit. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, one
Heart, one Mind, one Soul, to serve the Lord with one Consent. I cannot by Pen
nor Paper set forth the large Love of God in fulfilling his gracious Promises
to me in the Wilderness, being put into Prison for God's Truth, there to remain
all Days of my Life, being searched, tried, examined upon pain of Death among
the Enemies of God and his Truth; standing in Jeopardy for my Life until the
Lord had subdued and brought them under by his mighty Power, and made them to
feed us, and would have given us Money or Clothes; but the Lord did deck our
Table richly in the Wilderness. The Day of the Lord is appearing, wherein he
will discover every Deed of Darkness, let it be done never so secretly* the
Light of Christ Jesus will make it manifest in every Conscience; the Lord will
^ip up all Coverings that are not of his own Spirit. The God of Peace be with
you all, Amen.

Written in the Inquisition-Prison, by Sarah Cheevers.


Several other Letters both she and Katharine writ to their Husbands, Friends,
and Relations. But since great Part of my Narrative was fetched from thence, I
pass them by. But by these inserted, one may see that they were not Women of a
dull Temper, but ingenious and cheerful.

In a Letter of Sarah's to her Friends in Ireland, I find these Words:

My Life is given up to the Service of the Lord: Bonds, Chains, Bolts, Irons,
double Doors, Death it self is too little for the Testimony of Jesus, and for
the Word of God; so the Seed be gathered, it is but a reasonable Sacrifice.
Bonds and Afflictions beside the Gospel of Christ. Those that will live godly
in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution. And in a Letter to Daniel Baker,
Katharine said,

The Time is too little for me to disclose the twentieth Part of the terrible
Trials; but whenever we were brought upon any Trial, the Lord did take away
all Fear from us, and multiplied our Strength, and gave us Power and Boldness
to plead for the Truth of the Lord Jesus, and Wisdom of Words to stop the
Mouths of the Gainsayers; but then they would say, We had not the true Faith,
but we had all Virtues. Dearly beloved, pray for us, that we fall not, nor
fail, whereby our Enemies may have any Advantage to rejoice, and say, we served
a God that could not save us, and called upon a God that could not deliver us;
as if we were like them, to call upon Stocks, Stones, Pictures, and painted
Walls, and dead Things, that cannot hear, see, nor speak. We do beseech thee to
tell all our dear Friends, Fathers and Elders, the Pillars of the spiritual
Building, with all the rest of our Christian Brethren, that we do desire their
Prayers, for we have need of them.

This Letter they concluded with the following Poem:

HOW strong and powerful is our KING,
To all that do believe in him?
He does preserve them from the Snare,
And Teeth of those that would them tear.
We that are Suff'rers for the Seed,
Our Hearts are wounded, and do bleed,
To see the Oppression, Cruelty
Of Man that do thy Truth deny.
In Prisons strong, and Dungeons deep,
To God alone we cry and weep:
Our Sorrows none can learn nor read,
But those that in our Bath do tread.
But he whose Beauty shines bright,
Who turns Darkness into Light,
Makes Cedars bow, and Oaks to bend
To him, that is sent to the same End;
He is a Fountain pure and clear,
His Crystal Streams run far and near,
To cleanse all those that come to him,
For to be healed of their Sin.
All them that patiently abide,
And never swerve nor go aside;
The Lord will free them out of all
Bondage, Captivity and Thrall.
They, composed several other Poems, which fell into the Hands of their
Enemies, and Copies of them were given to the Inquisitor. But now I leave them;
and yet before I return to Transactions in England, I shall relate a singular
Case of

Daniel Baker, who being come to Smirna, with Intent to travel from thence to
Constantinople, D. Baker intending for England is moved to go to Malta.
was stopped by the English Consul, and sent to the Isle of Zant, where a Ship
lay bound for Venice, in which he embarked, and coming into that City, he staid
there a Week, and went from thence to Leghorn, with Intent to take Shipping
there for England: But during his Stay in that Place, he inwardly felt Drawings
toward Malta, to try whether he could be helpful to Katharine and Sarah that
were Prisoners there, since he had several Times been stirred up thereto; and
though the Difficulty of the Matter had kept him back, yet he could not have
Peace in his Mind, before he gave himself up to that Service; and so he
embarked in a French Ship for Sicily: And coming at Syra^use, he staid there
five Days, and then they set Sail for Malta; where being arrived, he got
Admittance to the Pope's Inquisitor, to whom he spoke in the Italian Tongue on
this wise, I am come to demand the just Liberty of my innocent Friends, the
English Women in Prison in the Inquisition. The Inquisitor asked him, If he
were related to them as a Husband or Kinsman, and whether he came out of
England on Purpose with that Message. To this Daniel answered, That he came
from Leghorn for that same End. But the Inquisitor told him, He in vain
solicites the two English Women's Release.
They should abide in Prison till they died, except some English Merchants or
others that were able, would engage for the Value of three or four Thousand
Dollars, that they should never return into those Parts. His Request being thus
denied, he went to the English Consul, and spoke with him and several others:
But all his Endeavors proved vain; and he himself was threatened with the
Inquisition; Is in Danger of the Inquisition.
and the Pope's Deputy would have had him bound, that he should neither speak
Good nor Evil to any Body while he was on the Island, save to him and the
Consul.

After a Stay here of three Weeks, From thence goes to Italy, and there embarks
for England.
he passed again to Italy, and from thence took Shipping for England: But being
come into the Streights of Gibraltar, he saw that the high Mountain there, was
the same Place he had seen the foregoing Year in a Dream, when Prisoner in
Worcester Jail in England. Here the Ship wherein he was, with several other
Vessels lay about a Month, Is Wind-bound at Gibraltar.
because of the contrary Wind, so that they could not set set Sail. In the mean
While being under a Burden, he perceived there was a Service for him ashore;
but considering this to be dangerous, he wished to have been excused of it; but
felt no Peace before he fully gave up, whatever either Bonds or Death might
ensue. Whilst the Fleet lay here Wind-bound, diverse Ships attempted to pass
through, but could not: And the like Temptation attended him as that of Jonah,
viz. to flee from the Place, and so to escape the Burden under which he
labored. But he found, as he afterward signified in a prin^ed Relation, that
Obedience was his Duty, though it was required of him to be a Sign against the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome. He then told the Master of the Ship in which he
was a Passenger, something of the Matter, and said that he believed, that God
would soon give Opportunity for the Fleet to pass away, after this Service was
performed. The Master was hard to be persuaded to put him ashore, yet at length
he suffered it, He goes ashore and in a Mass-house publicly testifies against
Idolatry.
upon the Day they used to call Maunday Thursday. Being now landed, he went to
the Town, and so into the Mass-house, where he found the Priest at the high
Altar, upon his Knees, in his white Surplice, adoring the Host. After he had a
While been viewing this Idolatry, he felt the Indignation of God kindled in his
Heart against it: And turning his Back upon the Priest and his dead God, he set
his Face toward the People, and saw the Multitude upon their Knees also,
worshipping they knew not what. In this Posture, spreading forth his Arms, he
slipped off his upper Garment, and rent it from Top to Bottom in diverse Pieces,
which he cast from him with Indignation: Then he took his Hat from off his
Head, as being the uppermost Covering of Man; and casting it down, stamped upon
it with his Feet, and appearing in Sackcloth Covering, he with a loud Voice
thrice sounded Repentance, and said, That the Life of Christ and his Saints was
risen from the Dead. And so he passed away unmolested, sounding the same
Message with Repentance through the Streets, till he came to the Seaside, where
he kneeled down to pray, and give Thanks to the Lord for his wonderful
Preservation, and that he had suffered no Man to touch or do him any Harm.
Delivers a Paper to the Governor.
Being on Shore, he delivered a Paper written in the Spanish Tongue, to the
Governor and Inhabitants of Gibraltar, with some Latin Books. That to the
Governor, etc. was as follows;

Behold, behold, the great Day of God is come, and of his Wrath, and of the
Wrath of his Lamb. The Hour of his Judgment is come. Wherefore O Inhabitants of
the Earth, Repent, Repent, Repent, fear God, and give Glory and Honor to him
that made Heaven and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters. Woe, Woe, Woe to the
Inhabitants of the Earth. John heard another Voice from Heaven saying, Come out
of her my People, that ye partake not of her Sins, and that ye receive not of
her Plagues. These are the Words of the Power of Christ, that is contrary to
the false Church. Behold, behold, Plagues, Plagues, Plagues are coming upon the
Church of Rome, and upon her Heads in all Parts of the World.

Daniel being now come again on Shipboard, At length returns to London, and is
imprisoned soon after.
the next Day the Lord gave them a fair Wind, and all the Fleet set Sail; and
after some Time he arrived safe in England. But being come to London, it was
not long, ere he, who had traveled without Hurt in Foreign Parts, was
imprisoned by his Countrymen, as will be related hereafter: And being shut up
in Prison, he wrote a Narrative of his Travels, from which I took my Relation.

About this Time, J. Stubbs returns from Turkey.
John Stubbs returned into England, having been in the Dominions of the Great
Turk. But I do not find that he met with any singular Occurrences, but that he
had spread some Books. He and Alexander Parker coming to London, He and A.
Parker travel with G. Fox to Bristol, where Friends Meetings are disturbed, and
A. Parker taken away.
found G. Fox there, with whom they traveled toward Bristol. By the Way they
had several Meetings, and being come to Bristol, they understood that the
Officers were likely to come and disturb the Meeting. Yet on the First Day of
the Week they went thither, and A. Parker stood up first to preach; but while
he was speaking, the Officers came and took him away. Then G. Fox stood up, and
preached undisturbed, so that the Meeting ended peaceably. And he staying in
Town that Week, visited his Friends, and was visited by them. The next
First Day, some of his Friends came to him, and endeavored to persuade him not
to go to the Meeting that Day; for, said they, The Magistrates have threatened
to take thee away, and in Order thereto have raised the trained Bands. G. Fox
desired them to go their Way to the Meeting, without telling them what he
intended to do. Yet not long after, he went thither, But being met by some of
his Friends, they did what they could to stop him: And what, said one, Will thou go into the Mouth of the Beast? Will thou go into the Mouth of the Dragon?
said another. But G. Fox would not suffer himself to be thus prevented; but
went on. being come thither, he perceived a Concern and Fear upon his Friends
for him, but his preaching there was so powerful, that all Fear departed from
them: And having concluded his Sermon with a Prayer, he stood up again, and
told the Auditory, now they might see there was a God in Israel that could
deliver: For the Officers and Soldiers had been breaking up another Meeting,
which had taken up their Time: And they were in a great Rage that they had
missed him. For it was resolved on now to persecute the Quakers, and if
possible, to root them out.

G. Fox, after having tarried yet some Days at Bristol, went through Wiltshire
and Barkshire back again to London: G. Fox goes thence back to London, thence
toward Leicestershire, and visits Captain Brown, a Baptist; of whom somewhat
remarkable.
Yet he did not stay long there, but traveled toward Leicestershire, and
passing by Barnet Hills, he found there one Captain Brown a Baptist, whose Wife
belonged to the Society of those called Quakers. This Captain, for Fear his
Wife should go to Meetings, and be cast into Prison, had left his House at
Barrow, and taken a Place on the said Hills, thinking himself more safe there.
G. Fox going to see his Wife, and being come into the House, asked him How he
did? How I do, said he, The Plagues and Vengeance of God are upon me, a
Runagate, a Cain as I am: God may look for a Witness for me, and such as me;
for if all were no faithfuller than I, God would have no Witness left in the
Earth. In this Condition Brown lived there on Bread and Water, and thought it
too good for him; but at length he returned with his Wife to his own House at
Barrow, where he came to be convinced of the Truth professed by those called
Quakers, and died in it; and a little before his Death he said, That though he
had not born a Testimony for Truth in his Life, he would bear a Testimony in
his Death: Desiring to be buried in his Orchard in a plain way.

But I return to G. Fox, who being come into Leicestershire, went to Swanington
to the House of a Widow Woman, where at Night came one called the Lord Beaumont
and a Company of Soldiers, G. Fox taken out of a Friend's House at Swanington
by the L. Beaumont and a Company of Soldiers, and committed to Leicester Jail.
who took him out of the Hall where he was, and brought him to the said Lord,
who asked him his Name; to which he answered, My Name is George Fox, and I am
well known by that Name. Ay, said Beaumont, You are known all, the World over.
Then he put his Hands into George's Pockets to search them, and pulled out his
Comb-case, and afterward commanded one of the Officers to search for Letters:
Which made G. Fox say, That he was no Letter-carrier, asking him, Why he came
amongst a peaceable People with Swords and Pistols without a Constable? since
this was contrary to the King's Proclamation; and it could not be said, there
was a Meeting; for G. Fox had been talking in the Hall only with the Widow
Woman and her Daughter. Beaumont sending then for the Constables, gave them
Charge to watch G. Fox, and some that were with him, that Night: Accordingly
the Constables set a Watch upon them, and next Morning brought them to
Beaumont's House, who then told them, they met contrary to the Act: For not
long before this Time, the Parliament, by the Instigation of the Clergy, had
made an Act against Conventicles, Act against Conventicles.
containing that If any were convicted of having been at a Conventicle, they
should incur a Fine not exceeding Five Pounds, or Imprisonment not above three
Months. G. Fox saying to the "Lord Beaumont, that he did not find them in a
Meeting, and so there was no Transgression of the said Act. Beaumont asked him,
Whether he would take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? To which G. Fox
answered, I never took any Oath in all my Life. And desired him to show that
Oath, that they might see whether it was not for the Discovery of Popish
Recusants. But Beaumont being unwilling, caused a Mittimus to be made, which
mentioned, That they were to have had a Meeting: A cunning Artifice indeed to
vex an innocent People. And with the Mittimus he charged the Constables to
convey them to Leicester Jail. The Constable who was charged to bring G. Fox
and his Friends to Prison, was loath to do it himself: And being Harvest-Time,
it was hard to get any Body to go with them. And therefore they would have
given them the Mittimus, to carry it themselves to the Jailor. This they
refused; though sometimes some of their Friends had done so: For the Constables
had such Experience of their Fidelity, that they durst trust them even in such
a Case, without fearing the Bird would escape. Then the Constable hired a poor
Man, who was loath to go with them on this Errand. Yet they rid with him through
the Country, being five in Number, and some carried their Bibles open in their
Hands, and passing through Towns, they told People, They were the Prisoners of
the Lord Jesus Christ, going to suffer Bonds for his Name's-sake. Being come to
Leicester, and gone into an Inn, the Master of the House seemed somewhat
troubled that they should go to Prison; but they being unwilling to consult
with Lawyers, to which they were advised, suffered themselves to be had to
Prison; G. Fox, with others, imprisoned at Leicester.
where being come, G. Fox asked, Whether the Jailor, or his Wife was Master?
and it was told him, The Wife; who, though she was lame, and not able to go
without Crutches, yet would beat her Husband when he came within her reach, if
he did not (...) as she would have him.

G. Fox perceiving from this, that without her Leave he should not be able to
agree with her Husband, got some body to bargain with her for a Room, for him
and his Friends, and to leave it to them to give her what they would; to which
she consented. But then it was told the Prisoners, the Jailor would not suffer
them to fetch any Drink out of the Town into the Prison; but what Beer they
drank, they must take it of him, and that, as was easily to be guessed, should
be at a dear Rate.

This made G. Fox say, They use Water and Wormwood for Drink.
he could remedy that; for since the Jailor could not deny them Water, he would
get a Pail of it once a Day, and put some Wormwood into it; and that might
serve their Turn. So long as G. Fox was in Prison there, he and his Friends had
a Meeting every First Day of the Week in the Yard, to which came not only the
Debtors and Felons, that were Prisoners, but also several People out of the
Town and Country; whereby many were convinced of the Truth he preached, and
continued to be faithful Witnesses for it.

Whilst G. Fox was confined there, Other Friends sent to the same Jail.
several more of his Friends were sent to Prison, to the Number of about
Twenty. And when the Sessions came, they were brought before the Justices, who
tendered to them the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: Their Trial.
For this was the ordinary Snare, when no other Thing could be found to lay
hold on. But G. F. told them, he never took any Oath in his Life; and ye know
we cannot swear, because Christ and his Apostle forbid it: And therefore this
is but as a Snare to us; yet if ye can prove, that after Christ and his
Apostles forbad Swearing, they did ever command Christians to swear, then we
will take these Oaths; otherwise we are resolved to obey Christ's Command, and
the Apostle's Exhortation. To this it was returned, That they must take the
Oath to manifest their Allegiance to the King. G. Fox, to show that he was not
unfaithful to the King, told them, that formerly he had been sent up a Prisoner
by Colonel Hacker, from that Town to London, under Pretense that he held
Meetings to plot for bringing in King Charles. Then he desired, that their
Mittimus might be read, which set forth the Cause of their Commitment to be,
That they were to have a Meeting: And he said also, that the Lord Beaumont
could not by the Act send them to Jail, unless they had been taken at a
Meeting; and therefore he urged the reading of the Mittimus, that it might be
seen how wrongfully they were imprisoned. But whatever he said, they would not
take Notice of the Mittimus, but called a Jury, and indicted the Prisoners for
refusing to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. When the Jury was sworn
and instructed, and as they were going out, one that been an Alderman spoke to
them, and recommended to them to have a good Conscience: But one of the Jury,
being a peevish Man, told the Justices, there was one affronted the Jury.
Whereupon he was called up, and to try whether he was a Quaker, the Oath was
also tendered to him, and he took it; thus the Snare intended against him did
not hold.

Whilst the Prisoners stood waiting, a Cutpurse had put his Hand into the
Pockets of some of them, A Pick-pocket taken in the Fact, and let go.
which they told the Justices of, and showed them the Man. They then called him
up, and upon Examination he could not deny the Fact, yet they let him go free;
just as if the robbing of those called Quakers was no Crime.

It was not long before the Jury returned, They are found guilty.
and brought the Prisoners in guilty. And then the Justices whispered together,
and bad the Jailor take the Prisoners, and carry them back to Jail. But a
little after, they were in Prison again, the Jailor came to them, and said,
Gentlemen, it is the Court's Pleasure that ye should all be set at Liberty,
etc. Thus they we^^ released on a sudden, Yet released.
which was indeed remarkable, because the Jury had brought them in guilty; on
which passing of Sentence must have followed. But G. Fox's Liberty seems to
have been owing to the following Cause. He had a Letter from the Lord Hastings,
And why.
who having heard of his Imprisonment, had written from London to the Justices
of the Sessions to set him at Liberty. This Letter he had not as yet delivered
to the Justices, who perhaps had some Knowledge of the said Lord's Mind from
another Hand, which made them resolve on this sudden Discharge. G. Fox being
now free, carried this Letter to the Lord Beaumont, who having opened, and read
it, seemed somewhat troubled; and yet threatened him, if he had any more
Meetings at Swanington, he would disperse them, and send him to Prison again.
But notwithstanding these Threatenings, he and his Friends went to Swanington,
and had a Meeting there, without being disturbed. From thence he traveled to
London, where we will leave him, and in the mean while see what happened
elsewhere.

Some Time before, T. Goodair and B. Staples in Prison at Oxford.
Thomas Goodair and Benjamin Staples were imprisoned at Oxford, and being
brought into the Court of Judicature before Sir William Walter, who sat there
as Judge, and Goodair being examined, and nothing found against him, the Oath
of Allegiance was tendered, to which he answered, That he acknowledged the King
as supreme Ruler in Civil Temporal Matters, and that he was willing to obey him
in all just Commands. But, said he, if King Charles, and those who are in
Authority under him, enjoin me any Thing contrary to the Command of Christ,
then I will rather obey Christ than King Charles, or those in Authority under
him. It is for Conscience Sake that I cannot swear, though I could gain the whole
World thereby; for Christ has forbidden it, and said, Swear not at all; and
James says, Above all Things, swear not. But whatever Goodair said, was in
vain, for they would needs have him swear. He continuing to refuse Swearing,
Justice Walter asked those who were with him on the Bench, whether they had any
Thing to say against his passing Sentence against them; They are outlawed for
refusing to swear, and deprived of all their Possessions.
to which they having said, No, he spoke thus to Goodair: Hearken to your
Sentence. You are out of the King's Protection. All your Lands, real Estate and
Chattels, are forfeited, and shall be seized for the King's Use; and you are to
remain Prisoner during the King's Pleasure. Then he bid the Jailor take Goodair
away. And Goodair asked whether the Jailor had Charge to fetter him; for he had
been fettered as Thieves and Felons, before he was brought into the Court.
Whereupon the Judge answered, The Jailor may do with you what he will: For you
are now out of the King's Protection. Then he was led away, and B. Staples
brought to the Bar, to whom the Oath being also tendered, and he refusing to
take it, the same Sentence was passed on him. Both being returned to Prison,
the Jailor said to the other Prisoners that were there for Evil or Debts, If ye
want Coats, ye may take those of the Quakers; for they are now out of the
Protection of the Law. But one of the Prisoners was so honest as to say, He
would rather go naked, than take away those Men's Clothes. How long they were
in Prison, and whether they died there, or were at length released, I know not.
They ^^th were supposed to be discharged at the next General Jail-delivery: For
T. Goodair in 1666, had been Prisoner some Years at Warwick, being praemunired
without legal Trial or Judgment, at length he died at Selby in Yorkshire, 1693.
From ^. W.'s Account.


But now I turn to Ambrose Rigg, Sufferings of A. Rigg and his Father-in-Law,
T. Luxford, caused by Priest Letchford, a cruel Persecutor.
who being come to Hurst Pierpoint, in Sussex, had a Meeting there at the House
of his Father-in-Law Captain Thomas Luxford; this so displeased the Priest
Leonard Letchford, that Rigg was taken and brought before the Justices Walter
Burril, Nisel Rivers, and Richard Bridger, who being minded to bring him under
heavy Sufferings, tendered him the Oath of Allegiance; and he saying, That for
Conscience Sake he could not swear, was forthwith sent to Horsham Prison: And
at the Time of the Assizes brought into the Court, where Judge Samuel Brown
then sa^, and passed the Sentence of Praemunire upon him. Then he was carried
back, and by the Instigation of the said Leonard Letchford, committed close
Prisoner, where he continued above ten Years, and suffered during that Time,
much Hardship by the Malice of the Jailors, since such Prisoners as he was are
^^ut out of the King's Protection. In the mean while, the aforesaid Priest
Letchford summoned Rigg's Wife for Tithes; and she refusing Payment, was also
imprisoned at the Prosecution of this Priest; and then he seized her Goods,
taking away also that which her Husband had earned in Prison by his
Hand-Labour, not leaving him and his Wife a Bed to lie on; nay, he also took
away a Pot they had borrowed from other Prisoners to boil Victuals in, and
vaunted he had Rigg so fast, that it was not in the King's Power to release
him. But notwithstanding his wicked Boast, yet to his great Disquiet and
Vexation he lived to see Rigg released by the King under the great Seal. And
Thomas Luxford, A Rigg's Father-in-Law, being also become one of the Society of
those called Quakers, and refusing to pay him Tithes, felt likewise the Effect
of his Fury; for he caused him also to be cast into Jail, where he kept him six
Years; and the Prisoners being then released by the Sheriff, he was
excommunicated by Letchford and afterward at his Suit, by Virtue of the
Statute De Excommunicato capiendo, shut up again in Prison, from which he was
set at Liberty by an Act of Parliament.

Not long after, Whose sudden Death prevents his farther Cruelties.
Letchford got a Warrant to sue some others of the Quakers so called, belonging
to his Parish, for not paying Tithes. But before he could get them imprisoned,
it happened, that being at Night gone to Bed healthy, in the Morning he was
found stiff dead in his Bed, according to the Testimony of his Neighbors, and
this prevented the Stroke he had levelled against others.

Not being willing to finish this Relation abruptly, I am advanced in Time: But
now I return to the Year 1662. In the Middle of this Year, Sir H. Vane and J.
Lambert tried.
Sir Henry Vane and John Lambert, both vigorous Champions against King Charles
the First, and having been in great Authority under the former Government, were
brought to their Trial. Vane behaved himself with very great Presence of Mind.
How far he was guilty, I am not to enquire; The first beheaded.
but he was declared guilty, and afterward beheaded on Tower Hill. He was
reputed to be a Man of great Knowledge, having been one of the chief Members of
the Long Parliament, and also an Opposer of Cromwell: For he was an entire
Republican, and had a great Share in the Administration of State Affairs.
Lambert who had been an eminent General, saved his Life: For since Vane, as
Ludlow says, pleaded for the Lives and Liberties of his Country, and Lambert
for his own, he evaded the Storm, which took away Vane. Lambert now, though
condemned to Death, begged Mercy, and was confined to perpetual Imprisonment,
and carried to a small Isle near Plymouth, where he finished his Days. The
other imprisoned for Life.


Seeing on the Insurrection of the Fifth-Monarchy-Men Occasion was taken to
make an Act against Plotting and seditious Meetings, the Persecution against
the Quakers increased under a Pretense that their Meetings were dangerous, and
to the Terror of the King's Subjects, and an Act was made against those who
refused to take an Oath, as appeared by the Title of it, viz.

An ACT for preventing Mischiefs and Dangers that may arise by certain Persons
called Quakers, and others refusing to take lawful Oaths.
WHEREAS of late times certain persons under the name of Quakers, Act to
prevent Dangers by Quakers, An. 13 and 14 Car. 2. ^. 1.
and other names of Separation, have taken up and maintained sundry dangerous
Opinions and Tenants, and (amongst others) that the taking of an Oath in any
case whatsoever, although before a lawful Magistrate, is altogether unlawful
and contrary to the Word of God; and the said Persons do daily refuse to take
an Oath, though lawfully tendered, whereby it often happens, that the Truth is
wholly suppressed, and the Administration of Justice much obstructed: And
whereas the said Persons, under a Pretense of religious Worship, do often
assemble themselves in great Numbers in several Parts of this realm, to the
great endangering of the public peace and safety, and to the terror of the
people, by maintaining a secret and strict correspondence amongst themselves,
and in the mean time separating and dividing themselves from the rest of his
Majesty's good and loyal Subjects, and from the public Congregations, and
usual Places of divine Worship:

II. For the redressing therefore, and better preventing the many mischiefs and
dangers that do and may arise by such dangerous Tenants, and such unlawful
Assemblies, (2) Be it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
assembled in Parliament, and by authority of the same, That if any person or
persons who maintain that the taking of an Oath, in any case soever (although
before a lawful Magistrate) is altogether unlawful, and contrary to the Word of
God, from and after the four and twentieth Day of March, in this present Year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty one, shall wilfully and
obstinately refuse to take an Oath, where, by the Laws of the Realm he or she
is, or shall be bound to take the same, being lawfully and duly tendered, (3) or
shall endeavor to persuade any other Person to whom any such Oath shall in
like manner be duly and lawfully tendered, to refuse, and forbear the taking of
the same, (4) or shall by Printing, Writing, or otherwise, go about to maintain
and defend that the taking of an Oath in any case whatsoever is altogether
unlawful; (5) and if the said persons commonly called Quakers, shall at anytime
after the said four and twentieth Day of March, depart from the places of their
several habitations, and assemble themselves to the number of five, or more, of
the age of sixteen years or upwards, at any one time, in any place, under
pretense of joining in a religious Worship, not authorized by the Laws of this
Realm, (6) that then in all and every such cases, the party so offending being
thereof lawfully convict by verdict of twelve men, or by his own confession, or
by the notorious evidence of the fact, shall lose and forfeit to the King's
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for the first offense, such sum as shall be
imposed upon him or her, not exceeding five pounds; (7) and if any person or
persons, being once convicted of any such offense, shall again offend therein,
and shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convicted, shall for the second
offense forfeit to the King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, such
sum as shall be imposed upon him or her, not exceeding ten pounds: (8) the said
respective penalties to be levied by distress and sale of the parties goods so
convicted, by warrant of the parties before whom they shall be so convicted,
rendering the overplus to the Owners, if any be: (9) and for want of such
distress, or nonpayment of the said penalty within one week after such
conviction, that then the said parties so convicted, shall for the first
offense be committed to the Common Goal, or house of Correction for the space
of three months; and for the second offense, during six months, without Bail or
Mainprize, there to be kept to hard labor: (10) which said moneys so to be
levied, shall be paid to such person or persons as shall be appointed by those
before whom they shall be convicted, to be employed for the increase of the
Stock of the House of Correction to which they shall be committed, and
providing materials to set them on work: (11) And if any person after he, in
form aforesaid, has been twice convict of any the said offenses, shall offend
the third Time, and be thereof, in form aforesaid, lawfully convict, that then
every person so offending and convict shall for his or her third offense abjure
the Realm; or otherwise it shall and may be lawful to and for his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, to give order, and to cause him, her, or them, to be
transported into any Ship or Ships, to any of his Majesty's Plantations beyond
the Seas.

III. And it is ordained and enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That all and
every Justice of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery, and
the Justices of the Peace, shall have full power and authority in every of
their Open and General Sessions, to enquire, hear and determine all and every
the said offenses within the limits of their Commission to them directed, and
to make Process for the execution of the same, as they may do against any
person being Indicted before them of Trespass, or lawfully convicted thereof.

IV. And be it also enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for any
Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other Chief Officer of any Corporation, within
their several Jurisdictions, to commit to the Common Goal, or bind over with
sufficient Sureties to the Quarter Sessions, any person or persons offending in
the Pr^misses, in order to his or their Conviction aforesaid.

V. Provided always, and be it hereby further enacted, That if any of the said
persons shall, after such conviction as aforesaid, take such Oath or Oaths, for
which he or she stands committed, and also give security that he or she shall
for the time to come forbear to meet in any such unlawful Assembly as
aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth, such person and persons shall be
discharged from all the penalties aforesaid; any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

VI. Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That all and singular Lords of the Parliament, for every third
Offense committed against the tenor of this Act, shall be tried by their Peers,
and not otherwise.

This Act caused E. Buroughs to write a small Book, E. Buroughs writes an
Apology for the Quakers, and against Persecution.
called, The Case of the People called Quakers stated, to show the Falsehood of
the Accusations charged upon them. First he showed in this Treatise, that
suppose the Quakers were Heretics and erroneous People, which was never yet
proved; yet we found no Examples in Scripture that such should be imprisoned,
or afflicted with corporal Punishments. Having treated of this Matter at large,
he laid down the State of their Way of Meeting and Worship, appealing to others
on this Account, with these Words:

What Judgment do our Neighbors give in this Case? they say, E. Buroughs
shows Quakers Meetings are not dangerous.
concerning our Meetings, That they have known us to meet together in such
Manner, for diverse Years, in Towns and Villages, and never knew, nor understood
of any Harm or Danger therein, nor ever were any way prejudiced, either in
their Persons or Estates, in our Meetings. The very Witness of God in all our
Neighbors does testify, and give Judgment, that our Meetings have always been
peaceable and quiet, and that we come together in Peace and good Order, and
parted in the same, and no Person has been harmed by such our Meetings;
enquire of the Neighborhood, and they will tell you, they believe in their
Consciences, our Meetings are for Good, and have good Effects, and are not
evil, nor bring forth any Evil to any.

And as for the Manner of our meeting and sitting together, it is orderly and
decently, and of good Report among Men; and for any Doctrine that ever was
there held, or heard by any, none can truly accuse it to be either Error, or
Heresy, or Sedition; but on the contrary, they know it witnesses against all
Sin and Iniquity, and tends to the turning of People from Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness, to Truth and Holiness: And many can tell, this is effected, by
our Doctrine, preached in our Meetings; and our Neighbors can witness, that we
part again in Peace and good Order, and in convenient Time; and they can show
you, they are not terrified, nor the Peace of the Land disturbed (on our Part)
by our Meetings, which are in God's Fear, and to the Glory of his Name, which
all Sober Men know, are according to the Law of God, and Gospel, and primitive
Christian Example.

We are accused as heinous Offenders, and imprisoned, because it is supposed, We
do not submit to obey the known Laws of the Land, but break them, and will not
conform to the Church, pay Tithes, take Oaths, have Meetings together, etc.
though we know the Laws of the Land command those Things.

Plea, First, As to submitting to all known Laws of the Land; this is known to
God and our Neighbors, that our Principle and Practice is, and ever has been,
to submit to every Government, and to submit to all Laws of Men, either by
doing or by suffering, as at this Day, we resist not the greatest of
Afflictions and Tribulations that can be imposed on us; and this is well known
to our Neighbors and all People, that we are submissive to all Laws of Men, by
patient suffering without Resistance; even when any Law requires any Thing of
us which we cannot perform for Conscience Sake, that Law we fulfill by patient
Suffering, resisting no Man, nor rendering Evil for Evil to any. And the
Judgment of the Scriptures which are according to both Law and Gospel, and the
Precedents of Saints justify us in this Case, in choosing patiently to suffer
the greatest Penalties of the Law, rather than to obey (by doing) any such Law
as requires things contrary to our pure Consciences; as in the Example of the
three Children, Dan. 3. who were commanded, To fall down and worship the golden
Image, at what Time soever they heard the Sound of the Music, upon the Penalty
of being cast into the midst of the burning fiery Furnace: which Commandment
they could not obey, nor could they fall down to worship the Image; but rather
chused to suffer the Penalty of being cast into the midst of the burning fiery
Furnace, which accordingly was done unto them. Again, in the Case of Daniel,
chap. 6. who was commanded, To make no Petition to any God or Man for thirty
Days, save to King Darius, upon the Penalty and Affliction of being cast into
the Lyon's Den: But Daniel did rather choose to suffer the Penalty, to be cast
into the Den of Lions, than to obey the Commandment; and was cast into the
Lion's Den. By these Examples of holy Men, with many more that might be given
out of the Scriptures, it is evident, That righteous Men will rather choose to
suffer, than to obey any Law of Man contrary to their Consciences. So the Law
of God, and Example of Saints, and holy Scriptures give Judgment for us in this
Case, of ^ather choosing to suffer, than to obey Laws contrary to our
Consciences; and consequently must needs condemn such that persecute and
imprison us, because they require Obedience of us in Things against our
Consciences.

Secondly, Though we disobey Laws, and cannot actively obey every Law of Man,
when it requires and commands Things contrary to a good Conscience, yet
herein also are we justified, by the Law of God, Example of Saints, and holy
Scriptures, and they give Judgment for us, and consequently against our Enemies
in this Case; and in particular in the two Examples beforementioned in Daniel,
the three Children were expressly commanded, to fall down and worship the golden
Image; and Daniel was also required by the King's Decree, Not to pray to any
God or Man, save to King Darius; yet all these holy Men of God did absolutely
disobey the Law and Decree so requiring of them, and did contrary to the
Commandment; for the three Children did not bow, nor Daniel cease to pray to
God, but prayed as at other Times, and yet were justified of God in so doing.
Also, the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ ( Acts 4.18.) were commanded, to
preach no more in the Name of Jesus; but the Apostles did disobey their
Commandment, and went on and preached in the Spirit and Power of Christ,
contrary to the Commandment of the Rulers, and appealed to them, Whether it
were not better to obey God than Man? Many Examples we might collect out of the
Scriptures, that the Servants of God did disobey the Commands of Kings and
Rulers, and could not obey (by doing) any Command contrary to God; but rather
choosed to suffer Afflictions, and Death it self, than to obey such Laws and
Decrees, as required any Thing contrary to a pure Conscience: And this is our
Case at this Day; we cannot obey (by doing) any Thing against our Consciences,
but must break the Laws of Men, and disobey their Commandments, rather than
break the Law of God, and sin against our own Consciences, whatsoever we suffer
because hereof; and yet the Examples of Saints and Scriptures justify us in
this Behalf.

And let all our Enemies cease to cry out, Rebellious and disobedient to Laws
and Government; for we are not such as do wilfully and obstinately disobey any
Laws of Men, but for Conscience Sake, and that we may not sin against God, nor
offend his Witness in us; therefore we cannot obey Laws contrary to our
Consciences, whatsoever we suffer, which we resist not, nor rebel against any
in this Case: So that our Principles and Practices are to obey every Law and
Government, either by doing, or suffering. And though we disobey such Laws as are
not according to the Law of God, and rather do choose to suffer, yet herein we
are justified by the Law of God, and the holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, And as for our Conversations among Men, in Respect of our daily
Walking and Converse with them in our Dealing, in Respect of Honesty, and
Faithfulness, and Truth, and Justness in Works and Words, our Neighbors shall
give, Witness for us: We will not justify our selves, it is God that justifies
us, and the Law of God, Gospel of Christ, Scriptures, Examples of holy Men, our
Neighbors, and the Witness of God in all Men's Consciences, shall bear Witness
to us; and all these do give Judgment for us in these Cases, to whom we do
appeal for Judgment. And, O Lord God everlasting, do thou judge our Cause; do
thou make it manifest in thy due Season to all the World, that we are thy
People, that we love thee above all, that we fear thy Name more than all, that
we love Righteousness, and hate Iniquity, and that we now suffer for thy holy
Name and Truth, and for thy Honor and Justice, and for thy Truth and Holiness:
O Lord, thou know we are resolved to perish, rather than to lose one Grain
hereof. Amen, Amen.

Our Accusations and Answers truly compared, and weighed in the Balance of
Justice and Truth in every Man's Conscience, let all the World judge of the
Case: Do we deserve to be ruined, destroyed, imprisoned, and banished, and that
to be devoured of wild Beasts, as our Enemy threatens us he will do? Is it so?
Are we Heretics? Are we seditious? Are we Drunkards? Are we Double-dealers?
Are we such as the Law of God condemns? What Evil have we done in the Land? Do
we hurt any Body? Are we not innocent before the Lord and Men? We appeal to the
just Witness of God and Men, let it be answered; and though no Man will hear and
consider our Cause this Day, yet the Lord will plead our Cause in his Time and
Season, and make the World to know, We are his People; in the mean Time we are
willing to suffer the Reproaches of ungodly Men, till the Lord works
Deliverance in the Earth.

But now it may (...) objected by the Magistrates and Rulers, That we have now
a Law against you, and you must suffer, for we cannot but put the Law in
Execution, according to our Oaths and Offices; and it is not we that persecute
you, but it is the Law of the Land by which you now suffer; and we cannot be
blamed for your Suffering, we only execute the Law. And after this Manner is
the Reasoning of some at this Day, etc.

Answ. To all which I do answer: It is true, there is a Law (...) enacted
against us, which is pretendedly made the Ground of our Suffering; but whether
that Law be in it self just, or unjust, I shall not now demonstrate, but shall
leave it to the Judgment of all Christian Men that know us, our Principles,
Doctrines, Ways, and Conversations, and let them judge whether we deserve the
Penalties and Punishments, therein described, for any Principle or Practice
hold or maintained by us. And though there be a Law against us, yet the
Magistrates that are Executors thereof, may execute the same with Moderation or
with Violence, with Discretion or too much Rigor; and it will be well for them
to use Moderation and Discretion in this Case: Hereby may they save themselves
from that Weight of Anger and Indignation of the Lord God, that will come upon
all violent Doers, who seek to destroy the Innocent, and rejoice in the
Occasion administered.

And though this Law be enacted against Meetings, not ours, I may say; but such
Meetings as are dangerous to the public Peace, and to the Terror of the
People: But our Meetings are not such, and therefore this Law may not justly
extend in its Execution to the Breaking of our Meetings, no^ to banish us
because of our meeting together, which is for the Worship of God, and are
peaceable and of good Report among all good Men; and are not for Disturbance of
the Peace, (...) Terror of the People, and therefore justly free from this Law,
as aforesaid.

And though this Law is pretended against us, for to banish us, and to rid the
Land of us, as some vainly suppose; yet, must it needs be executed to the
Height of it without Limitation or Restriction? Must this Law be executed to
its Height more than some other Laws, that are as truly enacted, and as fully
in Force as this Act can be? Yet some such Laws there are, which better deserve
Execution than this, yet they lie dormant, as is visibly apparent at this Day,
as in 4 Jac. ^.5. in these Words: Be it enacted, etc. That all, and every
Person or Persons, which after forty Days next following the End of this
present Session of Parliament, shall be drunk, and of the same Offense of
Drunkenness shall be lawfully convicted, shall for every such Offense forfeit
and lose five shilings, etc. to be paid to the Hands of the Churchwardens of
that Parish where the Offense shall be committed, who shall be accountable
therefore to the Use of the Poor of the same Parish. And if the said Person or
Persons so convicted, shall refuse or neglect to pay the said Forfeiture, then
the same shall be levied of the Goods of every such Person or Persons, by
Warrant of Precept from the Court, Judge, or Justices, before whom the same
Conviction shall be: And if the Offender be not able to pay the Sum of five
Shillings, then he shall be committed to the Stocks for the Space of six Hours.
I pray you read the Statute at large, it is worth a sober Man's Pains to read
over, and then judge whether that Law be duly executed at this Day; and also,
whether it deserves not more strict Execution than the present Act against us.
Also the 1 Jac. cap. 7. in these Words; That all Persons calling themselves
Scholars, going about begging; all idle Persons going about in any Country,
either begging, or using any subtle Craft, or unlawful Games or Plays, or
feigning themselves to have Knowledge in Physiognomy, or pretending that they
can tell Fortunes, or such other like fantastical Imaginations; all Fencers,
Rearwards, Common Players of Interludes and Minstrels, wandering abroad, shall
be taken, adjudged and deemed as Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, and
shall suffer such Pains and Punishments as are expressed, 39 Eliz. cap. 4.
(viz.) That every such Person shall be stripped naked from the Middle upwards,
and shall be only whipped until his or her Body be bloody, etc. and shall be
forthwith sent from Parish to Parish, etc. And read the Statute at large, and
then consider how duly it is executed now, and whether it deserves not the
Execution as much as the late Act against us, though in some Places the one is
more executed than the other; where many of our Friends being honest sober
Persons, and of good Conversation, and yet are haled out of their Meetings,
where they are met only to worship God, and for no other End, and sent to
Prison, and persecuted to the very Height of the said Act; whenas idle Persons,
following unlawful Games, and Plays, and Bea^wards, Common Players of
Interludes and Ministrels of diverse Kinds, do wander up and down City and
Country, and having their Playhouses public, where their Wickedness is acted;
such Persons, and such Things, though appearing publicly, yet are permitted, and
little or no Notice taken of them by some of the Magistrates, ^o as to punish
them for Breach of the Laws, for the preventing of these Evils: But such
Wickedness is too much suffered, tho there be diverse Acts of Parliament against
such Persons and such Actions, as well as there is one against our Meetings;
yet the Act against us is more put in Execution in some Places for the breaking
of our Meetings, which are for the Worship of God, than the good Laws for
suppressing Wickedness, though there is better Law for the one than for the
other. Diverse other Laws and Statutes made for good Ends, for the suppressing
of Wickedness in the Land, there are, which are but easily executed at this
Day: But here is one Act against peaceable meeting together for the Worship of
God, which is violently prosecuted and executed upon innocent Men; and let all
just Man judge of these Things: Though there be a Law enacted against our
Meetings, so there is against Drunkards and Drunkenness, and unseasonable
Tippling in Taverns and Alehouses; and against Minstrels Fiddlers, Pipers and
Players, Common Players and Stage Players, that go up and down the Countries,
and have their Play Houses in public Cities; which Statutes ought rather to be
executed, though they are not: But these Things we shall leave to all sober
People to judge of.

And seeing that the Law against us is more put in Execution, than these other
Laws, it does appear, That there is more Envy against us, and our peaceable
religious Meetings, than there is against Profaneness and Wickedness,
Drunkenness and Stage-playing, and such like; and such Magistrates, wheresoever
they are, are not excusable in the Sight of God, though there is a Law against
us, while they prosecute it against us, and not these other good Laws against
profane and ungodly Persons and Practices: And therefore seeing we do suffer,
we must say, It is not only because there is a Law against us; but it is also,
or rather, Because there is Enmity, and Wrath, and Wickedness in the Hearts of
Men against us, which is the main Cause of our Sufferings at this Day.

Thus was E. Buroughs always laborious; and like a faithful and diligent
Minister of Christ, he was so totally devoted to the Service of God and the
Church, both in preaching, and writing in the Defense of the Gospel, that he
scarce reserved any Time for himself, and seldom took Rest, but continued to
work incessantly till the Time of his Departure drew near; plainly manifesting,
that it really was his Meat and Drink to do the Will of his heavenly Father;
and this he endeavored unweariedly to the End of his Days.

Now I turn again to New England, New England Persecution continued.
where, though the murdering Part was acted to the full, yet their
Blood-thirstiness was not quenched; as may appear from the following Relation I
shall give of the cruel Whippings inflicted on some. If I should relate all of
that Kind that happened there, it would make up a pretty big Volume by it self;
and therefore I Will mention some few Instances only.

Among these I meet with Josiah Southick, Inhuman Cruelties exercised on Josiah
Southick.
(whose Father and Mother, Laurence and Cassandra, had been of the first that
were banished from Boston because of their Religion, as has been said before;
and whose Brother and Sister had been ordered to be sold for Bondslaves,) who
having been in Old England, and had found himself obliged, notwithstanding the
severe Law, His Sentence and Speech thereupon.
to return to Boston, was sentenced to be whipped at a Cart's Tail, first at
Boston, and then at Roxbury, and Dedham, when with out-stretch'd Arms he said
to those who sentenced him; Here Is my Body; if ye want a farther Testimony of
the Truth I profess, take it, and tear it to Pieces; it is freely given up; and
for your Sentence, I matter it not: Adding further, It is no more terrifying
unto me than if ye had taken a Feather and blown it up in the Air, and had
said, Take heed it hurt thee not. For surely Tongue cannot express nor declare
the Goodness and Love of God to his suffering People. Then he was stripped and
tied to the Cart's Tail in Boston, where the Hangman scourged him with what
Vehemence he could. It is remarkable that the Whip, used for these cruel
Executions, was not of Whipcord, as those in England, but of dried Guts; and
every String with three Knots at the End; which being fastened to a Stick, the
Hangman many Times laid on with both his Hands, which must cause violent
Torture to the Body. But all this Cruelty was not able to make Josiah faint;
for as he was led through the Streets of Boston at the Cart's Tail, he sung
aloud, and was heard to utter these Words; They that know God to be their
Strength, cannot fear what Man can do. The same Day he was whipped also at
Roxbury, and the next Morning, it being very cold, at Dedham, where he was
discharged, and turned into the Wilderness. For so inhumane were these furious
New England Professors, that they seemed to think, that whatever it was, there
was nothing done amiss to the Quakers: Thieves released, lest they should turn
Quakers.
Nay, it has happened, that being shut up with Thieves, and endeavoring to
turn them from their wicked Lives, they have been ill treated on that Account,
and the Thieves set at Liberty lest they should turn Quakers.

At Dover in New England, Three Women sentenced to be whipped through eleven
Towns.
Anne Coleman, Mary Tomkins and Alice Ambrose were sentenced to very cruel
Whipping, only for being come there. The Warrant was as follows:

To the Constables of Dover, Hampton, Salisbury, Newbury, Rowley, Ipswich,
Wenham, Lyn, Boston, Roxbury, Dedham, and until these Vagabond Quakers are
carried out of this Jurisdiction.
YOU, and every of you, are required in the King's Majesty's Name, to take
these Vagabond Quakers, Anne Coleman, Mary Tomkins, and Alice Ambrose, and make
them fast to the Cart's Tail, and driving the Cart through your several Towns, to
whip them upon their naked Backs, not exceeding ten Stripes a-piece on each of
them, in each Town; and so to convey them from Constable to Constable, till
they are out of this Jurisdiction, as you will answer it at your Peril; and
this shall be your Warrant.

Per Me, Richard Walden.
At Dover, dated December 22. 1662.
Cruel indeed was this Order; because to whip these three tender Women through
eleven Towns, with Ten Stripes a-piece at each Place, through a length of near
eighty Miles, in bitter cold Weather, would have been enough to have beaten
their Bones bare, and their Lives out of their Bodies.

Now in a very cold Day, The Sentence executed at Dover, the Priest looking on
and laughing.
the Deputy Walden at Dover, caused these Women to be stripped naked from the
Middle upward, and tied to a Cart, and then whipped them, while the Priest looked
on and laughed at it; which some of their Friends seeing, and taking Notice of
Walden's Cruelty, testified against; for which Walden put two of them in the
Stocks.

The Women being thus whipped at Dover, They are carried to Hampton.
were carried to Hampton, and there delivered to the Constable, William
Fifield, who having understood from the Constable of Dover what Work he had in
bringing them through a deep Road, thought to have daunted them, and said, I
profess, you must not think to make Fools of Men. To which they answered, They
should be able to deal with him as well as the other. This Constable the next
Morning would have whipped them before Day; but they refused, saying, That they
were not ashamed of their Sufferings. Then he would have whipped them on their
Clothes, when he had them at the Cart. But they said, Set us free, or do
according to thy Order; which was, to whip them on their naked Backs. He then
spoke to a Woman to take off their Clothes; but she said, She would not do it
for all the World. Why, said he, I profess I Will do it my self. And there
whipped.
So he stripped them, and then stood trembling with the Whip in his Hand, and so
he did the Execution, though at first he professed himself so stout. Thence to
Salisbury, and again whipped.
Then he carried them to Salisbury, through Dirt and Snow, half the Leg deep; and
here they were whipped again. Among the rest of the Spectators, Edward Wharton,
accidentally passing along that Way, came to be one; and beholding this
Whipping, one Thomas Broadberry, Clerk of the Courts at Salisbury and Hampton,
said to him, Edward Wharton, What do you here? I am here, answered he, to see
your Wickedness and Cruelty, that so if ye kill these Women, I may be able to
declare how ye murdered them: For indeed their Bodies were so torn, that if
Providence had not watched over them, they might have been in Danger of their
Lives. W. Barefoot obtaining the Warrant, lets them go, Priest Wheelwright
advising the contrary.
But it fell out so, that they were discharged: For the Constable at Salisbury,
who must have carried them to Newberry, was desired by one Walter Barefoot, to
make him his Deputy; who thus receiving the Warrant, set them at Liberty; though
John Wheelwright, the Priest, advised the Constable to drive on, as his safest
Way.

These three Women being thus unexpectedly released, went to New Quechawanah,
where they had a Meeting, and Shubal Drummer the Priest of the Place, came also
thither, and sat quiet. And the Meeting being ended, he stood up, and said,
Good Women, ye have spoken well, and prayed well; pray what is your Rule? They
answering, The Spirit of God is our Rule, and it ought to be thine and all Men's
to walk by. Priest Drummer's rash Expression.
He replied, It is not my Rule, nor I hope ever shall be. A clear Evidence how
Prejudice may biass even discreet People; for being prepossessed thereby, Men
will speak sometimes rashly, without considering what.

Not long after, these Women returned to Dover, to visit their Friends; and
being in a Meeting the next First Day of the Week, the Constables, Thomas
Roberts, and his Brother John, rushed in, and laid Hands on Alice Ambrose as
she was in Prayer, and taking her, one by the one Arm, and the other by the
other, they dragged her out of Doors, almost a Mile, with her Face toward the
Snow, which was near Knee deep, over Stumps and old Trees, having put on their
old Clothes, on purpose not to dirty their better Suits. They are again seized
at Dover, and dragged about in a barbarous Manner.
Then they locked her up in a certain House, and so went back to fetch Mary
Tomkins, whom they dragged in the same Manner; which their Father, old Thomas
Roberts seeing, lamented, and cried, Woe that ever I was Father to such wicked
Children. But they seemed not to matter what their Father said, who had been a
Member of the Church at Dover above twenty Years; but because he no longer
frequented their Worship for their Degeneracy, they took away his Cow, which,
with its Milk, helped to support him and his Wife. Mary Tomkins being brought
into the House where Alice was, Anne Coleman, was also fetched. Next Morning
they got a Canoe, and threatened the Women, They would now do with them, that
they should be troubled with them no more; by which Saying, they seemed to
signify, that they would give them up to the Mercy of the Sea; which made the
Women unwilling to go to the Waterside. Then one Edward Weymouth took Mary by
the Arms, and dragged her on her Back over the Stumps of Trees, down a very
steep Hill; by which she was much bruised, and often dyed away. They also laid
hold on Alice, At the Instigation of Hate-evil Nutwel a ruling Elder.
whom they plucked violently into the Water, and kept her swimming by the
Canoe, so that she was in Danger of being drowned, or frozen to Death. Anne
Coleman was likewise rudely dealt with, and all this in the Presence of one
Hate-evil Nutwel, a ruling Elder, who stirred up the Constables to this wicked
Action, and so showed that he bore a wrong Name. But the wicked Intention of
these Men was stopped by a Power from on high, for on a sudden a great Tempest
arose, so that they brought the Women back again to the House, and about
Midnight they turned them all out of Doors in the Snow, the Weather being so
frosty, that Alice's Clothes were frozen like Boards. How barbarously soever
these Women were treated, yet the Lord was pleased to preserve and support them.

Afterward it happened that Anne Coleman, Anne Coleman and others again
whipped.
and four of her Friends were whipped through Salem, Boston, and Dedham, by Order
of William Hawthorn, who before he was a Magistrate, had opposed Compulsion for
Conscience; and when under the Government of Cromwell it was proposed to make a
Law, That none should preach without License, he publicly said at Salem, That
if ever such a Law took Place in New England, he should look upon it as one of
the most abominable Actions that were ever committed there, and that it would
be as eminent a Token of God's having forsaken New England, as any could be:
And yet afterward this Man beca^^^ a fierce Persecutor of those who asserted
Liberty of Preaching; the formerly it may be, if any one had foretold him how
he would be given to Persecution, he would have said as Hazael to the Prophet
Elisha, What, is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great Thing? But to
return to Anne Coleman, when she was to be whipped at Dedham, and fastened to the
Car^, Deputy Bellingham having seen Hawthorn's Warrant, said, The Warrant is
firm, and then bad the Executioner go on; who thus encouraged, laid on so
severely, that with the Knot of the Whip, he (...) the Nipple of her Breast,
which so totur'd her, that it almost o^^ her her Life; and she, who was a
little weakly Woman, thinking this would have been her Lot, said once, that if
she should happen to (...) thus, she was willing that her Body should be laid
before Bellingham's Door, with a Charge from her Mouth, That he was guilty of
her Blood.

The Usage Elizabeth Hooton met with, I ^^n't pass by in Silence, because of
her Age, being about sixty, who hearing of the Wickedness committed by those of
New England, was moved to make a Voyage to America.

In Order thereto, A Relation of the cruel Usage of Eliz. Hooton, and J.
Broksup.
she went from England in the Year 1661, having one Joan Broksup with her, a
Woman near as aged as her self, who freely resolved to be her Companion: And
because they could not find a Master of a Ship that was willing to carry them
to New England, because of the Fine for every Quaker that was brought thither,
they s^t sail toward Virginia, where they met with a Ketch which carried them
Part of the Way, and then they went the rest by Land, and so at length came to
Boston. But there they could not soon find a Place of Reception, because of the
Penalty on those that received a Quaker into their Houses. Yet at length a
Woman received them. Next Day they went to the Prison to visit their Friends;
but the Jailor altogether unwilling to let them in, carried them to the
Governor Endicot, who with much scurrilous Language, called them Witches, and
asked Elizabeth, What she came for? To which she answered, To do the Will of
him that sent me. And he demanding, What was that? She replied, To warm thee of
shedding any more innocent Blood. To which he returned, That he would ^^ng more
yet. But she told him, He was in the Hand of the Lord, who could take him away
first. Which was fulfilled, for after that, he never took away the Lives of any
more of those called Quakers.
This so displeased him, that he sent them to Prison, where many more of their
Friends were. After Consultation what to do with them, they were carried two
Days Journey into the Wilderness, among Wolves and Bears: But by Providence
they got to Rhode Island, where they took Ship for Barbados, They are
imprisoned, and after carried into the Wilderness among the Beasts of Prey.
and from thence to New England again, and so returned to Boston. But then they
were put into a Ship which carried them to Virginia, from whence Elizabeth
departed to Old England, where she staid some Time in her own Habitation.

But it came upon her to visit New England again; and so she did, taking her
Daughter Elizabeth along with her. And being arrived, those of the Magistrates
that were present, would have fined the Master of the Ship an Hundred Pounds
for bringing her over contrary to their Law. But he telling them, That
Elizabeth had been with the King, and that she had Liberty from him to come
thither to buy her a House, this so puzzled these snarling Persecutors, that
they found themselves at a Loss, and thus were stopped from seizing the Master's
Goods.

Elizabeth being come to Boston, notwithstanding the Rulers, went to them, and
signified that she came thither to buy a House for her self to live in. She was
four Times at the Court for that Purpose, but it was denied her: And though she
said, That this Denial would give her Occasion, if she went to England again,
to lay it before the King, it was in vain, and had no Influence upon them.

Departing then, At Cambridge, Elizabeth is kept two Days in a Dungeon, without
Food.
and passing through several Places, she came to Cambridge, and was thrust into a
stinking Dungeon, where there was nothing to lie down or sit on. Here they kept
her two Days and two Nights, without affording her any Thing to eat or drink;
and because a certain Man in Compassion brought her a little Milk, he was also
cast into Prison, and fined five Pounds. Is ordered to be whipped at 3 Towns.
Which is done accordingly.
Being brought to the Court, they ordered her to be sent out of their Coasts,
and to be whipped at three Towns, ten Stripes at each. So at Cambridge she was
tied to the Whipping-past, and lashed with ten Stripes, with a three-string'd
Whip, with three Knots at an End: At Water-Town she had ten Stripes more with
Willow Rods; and to make up all, at Dedham, in a cold frosty Morning, she
received ten cruel Lashes at a Cart's Tail. And being thus beaten and (...),
Then left a Prey to the savage Beasts in the Wilderness.
she was put on Horseback, and carried many Miles into the Wilderness; and
toward Night they left her there, where were many Wolves, Bears, and other
wild Beasts, and many deep Waters to pass through: But being preserved by an
invisble Hand, she came in the Morning into a Town called Re^oboth, being
neither weary nor faint; and from thence she went to Rhode Island, where coming
to her Friends, she gave Thanks to God, for having counted her worthy, and
enabled her to suffer for his Name's-sake, beyond what her Age and Sex, morally
speaking, could otherwise have born.

After some Stay there, she returned to Cambridge about eighty Miles to fetch
her Linen and Clothes, which the inhumane Persecutors would not suffer her to
take with her after they had whipped her. Having fetched these Things, and going
back with her Daughter and Sarah Coleman an ancient Woman, she was taken up by
the Constable of Charlestown, and carried Prisoner to Cambridge; where being
asked by one of the Magistrates whose Name was Daniel Gookin, Wherefore she
came thither, seeing they had warned her not to come there any more: She
answered, That she came not there of her own Accord, but was forced thither,
after she had been to fetch her Clothes, which they would not let her take with
her when she was whipped, and sent away; but that now returning back, she was
taken up by Force out of the Highway, and carried thither. Then the other old
Woman was asked, Whether she owned Elizabeth and her Religion? To which she
answered, She owned the Truth. And of Elizabeth's Daughter he demanded, Do
thou own thy Mother's Religion? To which she was silent. And yet they were sent
to the House of Correction, with Order to be whipped. Next Morning the
Executioner came betimes before it was Light, and asked them, Whether they
would be whipped there? Which made Elizabeth ask, Whether he was come to take
away their Blood in the Dark? and whether they were ashamed that their Deeds
should be seen? She with her Daughter and another Woman again whipped.
But not heeding what she said, he took her down Stairs, and whipped her with a
three string'd Whip. Then he brought down the ancient Woman, and did the like
to her. And taking Elizabeth's Daughter, he gave the like to her also, who
never was there before, nor had said or done any Thing. After this, Elizabeth
the Mother was whipped again at a Cart's Tail at Boston, and other Places, where
she came to see her Friends; since which I have several Times seen her in
England in a good Condition.

I could relate many more Severities of the New England Persecutors; Many
Severities omitted.
but I long to come to an End, and therefore shall make a large Step, and
outrun some Space of Time.

In the Year 1664, Cruel Treatment of M. Tomkins and Alice Ambrose at Virginia,
and after at Boston.
it happened that Mary Tomkins and Alice Ambrose came again to Boston, having
been in Virginia, where, for their Religion they had not only been pillory'd,
but whipped also, each of them, with thirty two Stripes, with a Whip of nine
Cords, and every Cord with three Knots; and they were handled so severely, that
the very first Lash drew Blood, and made it run down from their Breasts. Being
afterward arrived at Boston, Mary grew so sick, that she was thought to be
near Death; which made Edward Wharton with Wenlock Christison come from Saelm,
to visit her. But after they had been there a little Time, in came two
Constables, and notwithstanding Mary's weak Condition, forced them all to the
Governor's House. Now though Mary seemed to be a little on the mending Hand, yet
she was so ill, that she fell down as it were dead in the Way. But one of the
Constables staid with her till she came to her self again, and then brought her
before the Governor, where was also Deputy Bellingham and Thomas Daufort, one
of the Magistrates; who ordered all four of them to be whipped; but because Mary
was so weak, and lest probably she might die under their Hands, they gave Order
that she and Alice should not be whipped at Boston, but at the Towns beyond. And
this was to have been executed, but that Colonel Temple coming in, interceeded
and prevailed for three of them. And now ^^ard became the Mark of their Fury,
on whom they vented their Passion, though they had nothing to charge him with,
but that he was come from Salem to Boston, to visit his sick Friend; and for
this pretended Crime the following Warrant was framed.

To the Constables of Boston, Charlestown, Malden, and Ly^*
YOU are required to take into your Custody respectively Edward Wharton,
convicted of being a Vagabond from his own Dewlling Place; and the Constable of
Boston is to whip him severely with thirty Stripes on his naked Body. And from
Constable to Constable, you are required to convey him until he come to Salem,
the Place where he says he dwells: And in so doing this shall be your
Warrant.

John Endicot.
Dated at Boston the 30th of June, 1664.
Pursuant to this Warrant, Edward, (who therein was called a Vagabond, for no
other Reason but that he was gone from his Dewlling Place) was led away to the
Marketplace, and there being stripped, his Arms were bound to the Wheel of a
great Gun: Then the Constable John Loel, E. Wharton severely whipped.
bad the Hangman to Do his Work severely; which he did so cruelly, that it was
testified, Pease might lie in the Holes that the Knots of the Whip had made in
the Flesh of his Arms and Back. And his Body was swelled and very black from
the Wa^^^ upwards. Such was the doing of those, who be enjoy the free Exercise
of their Worship, had left Old England; and thus they ^ented a Man that was of
good Repute, and had lived in that Country above twenty Years; and was once by
the Governor himself acknowledged to be his Friend, Endicot's barbarous
Ingratitude.
when he supplied him with Necessaries in his Want, saying then that if ever it
lay in his Power, he would req^ite him: Which now he did, but in what an
inhuman and barbarous Manner! That this Governor Endicot once had been a Man
of but a mean Condition, appears from a Letter, written to him, shor^ly after
the Death of May Dyar, by one John Smith, because he had not only caused his
Wife to be whipped severely, but had also kept her Prisoner a whole Winter,
s^parate from her Children, and had been assisting in the making of an Order,
that no Man or Woman should bring any Thing to the imprisoned Quakers, or carry
any Thing from them upon the Penalty of five Pounds for the first Time, and ten
Pounds for the second. In this Letter John Smith said,

O my Spirit is grieved for the^, J. Smith's Letter to him.
because that the Love I did once see in thee, is departed from thee; and there
remains in thee a Spirit of Cruelty, of Hard-heartedness to thy poor
Neighbors, which thou have formerly been much beholden to, and helped by in
Time of Want, when thou had no Bread to ea^. ^ consider of these Times, and
forget them not, and of the Love thou did find among poor People in thy
Necessity, and how evil thou have dealt with, and requited some of them now;
and how thou do walk and act contrary to what thou did formerly profess:
Yea, I have heard thee say, That all the Armies (...) Earth cannot subdue one
Lust in Man or Woman. And now thou pronouncest Sentence of Death upon some,
because they cannot submit to your Will^, nor worship as ye do.

But I return to Edward Wharton, who after his whipping was not led the direct
Way to Salem, but by Charlestown, and so about the Country, as if they had a
Mind to make a Show of him. Yet at Charlestown the Constable was so
compassionate, that he entertained him in his House, and anointed his Stripes.
And the next Day he was conveyed to his Home. He was again cruelly whipped.
Since that Time the said Wharton was whipped again se^^rely; but I pass by
Particulars to avoid Prolixity. Yet I cannot sor^^ar to say, that before he was
whipped at Boston, as has been said, it was told him, That if he would promise
the Governor, to come no more to the Quaker's Meeting in Boston, then it was
likely the Governor would let him (...) his Liberty. To which Edward returned,
Not for all the World. (...) Friends, I have a Back to and to the Smiter, and I
have felt your cruel (...) ^^ings before now; and the Lord has made me able to
bear them: And as I (...) his Fear, I need not fear what you shall be suffered
to do unto me.

The Case of one Anne Needham being also very remarkable, Anne Needham
I Will give a (...) of it. She was fined at Boston for being one of those called
Quak^^ but her Husband refusing to pay the Fine, asking them, (...) Law for
Adultery was Death, whether if his Wife had committed Adultery (...) must by
that Law have suffered Death? She then was sentenced to be wla^p^ which the
Constable Thomas Roo^s performed with great. Severely scourg^d^
Cruelty (...) seeing she kept silent whilst he lashed her, he did whatever he
c^^^ with his tormenting Whip, to make her cry out; but all his Ende^^^ proved
in vain; which made him say, That the Quakers were a (...) People: Though this
Epithet much better fitted himself, and all (...) cruel Persecutors, that were
really become hard-hear^ed to the high^ Degree, insomuch that they had not only
shaken off Humanity, but (...) Sense of Piety; which I shall prove by
Instances, whereof some (...) blasphemous.

One Barlow, The wickedness of Barlow formerly a Preacher.
who formerly had been a Preacher at Exeter, afterward turned Lawyer, and at
length being become a Marshal, would boast, that when he went to distrain for
Fines, he would think what Goods were most serviceable to the Quakers, and then
he would take them away. By such Doings he encouraged others to Vice: For a
certain Indian taking a Knife from an Englishman's House, and being told he
should not steal, answered, That He himself had thought so; but now he saw that
Barlow and the Magistrates did so by the Quakers. This Barlow in the Days of
Cromwell, being grown rich with the Spoils of the Innocent, grew poor after
King, Charles was restored; which made Barlow say, that, He hoped for a good
Time again; and took the shameful Liberty to add, He thought the Quakers would
not let him want.

At Hampton, Unbecoming Behavior of Priest Cotton.
Priest Seaborn Cotton, understanding that one Eliakim W^rdel had entertained
Wenlock Christison, went with some of his Herd to Eliakim's House, having like
a sturdy Herdsman put himself at the ^^^d of ^is Followers, with a Truncheon in
his Hand. Wenlock seeing him in this Posture, asked him, What he did with that
Club. To which he answered, He came to keep the Wolves from his Sheep. Wenlock
then asking, Whether those he led, were his Sheep, got no Answer, but instead
thereof was led away by this Crew to Salisbury. This same Cotton having heard
that Major Shapleigh was become a Quaker, said, He was sorry for it, but he
would endeavor to convert him. And afterward drinking in a House in an Isle
in the River Piscataway, and hearing the Major was there in a Warehouse, he
went thither; but going up Stairs, and being in Drink, he tumbled down, and got
such a heavy Fall, that the Major himself came to help this drunken Converter.

When Edward Wharton was told once by Governor Endicot, Governor Endicot in
Confusion.
That every Soul ought to be subject to the higher Power; He thereupon asked,
Whether that which set up the golden Image, and required all to fall down and
worship it, was the higher Power? He answered Yea. Then Edward queried, Whether
the Power that required Daniel to be cast into the Lion's Den, for praying to
any besides the King, for thirty Days, was the higher Power? The Governor said
Yea. The next Question Edward asked, was, Whether the three Children that were
cast into the Fiery Furnace, for not falling down to, and worshipping the
Golden Image did well? and whether Daniel for praying to his God contrary to
what the said higher Power did command, did well? The Governor replied Yea
also. But Secretary Rawson, seeing how the Governor had talked himself into a
Noose, to help him out, said, They did obey the higher Power by suffering, To
which Edward returned, So do we too.

Another of these Magistrates, The impiou^ and blasph^mous Answers ^ B.
Pembleton.
whose Name was Bryan Pembleton, was asked by George Waiton and his Wife Alice,
who was reputed one of the most godly Women thereabout, What the Anointing was
which the Apostle John exhorted the Saints unto in that Day^ But what a wicked
Man this Pembleton was, may appear by the abominable Answer he gave viz. That
John was either a Fool or a Madman, or else he did not know what he said. And
blasphemous in a very high Degree was what he said ^o the Question, What was
that Light which shone about Paul? For his Answer was, It was the Light of the
Devil for ought he did know.

Joshua Scotaway, Profane Words of another Magistrate.
also one of the Magistrates, asked Mary Tom^ins in the Court at Boston Where
she dwelt? To which she answered, in the Words of the Apostle, In God; for in
him we live, and move, and have a Being. To which Scotaway did not stick to
say, So does every Dog and Cat. No Wonder truly, that Men thus darkened in their
Minds grew also quite hardened in Persecuting, so as to glory in it; as did
Thomas Daufort, Dreadful saying of Tho. Daufort.
a Magistrate of Cambridge, who, in the Governor's House at Boston, laying his
Hand on Wenlock Christison's Shoulder, said to him, Wenlock, I am a mortal Man,
and die I must, and that are long; and I must appear at the Tribunal Seat of
Christ, and must give an Account for my Deeds done in the Body: And I believe
it will be my greatest Glory in that Day, that I have given my Vote, for thee
to be soundly whipped at this Time. This made Wenlock say, O wicked Man, if thou
have nothing to glory in, in that Day, but in drawing the Blood of the
Innocent, and in laying Stripes upon the Servants of the Living God, thy Glory
will be turned into Shame, and Woe will be thy Portion.

But no Exhortation, A warning by a Girl of about 14 Years of Age.
how extraordinary soever, seemed to take any Hold on these Persecutors: For
once a Girl of thirteen or fourteen Years of Age, called Hannah Wright, whose
Sister had been banished for Religion, was stirred with such Zeal, that coming
from Long Island, some Hundreds of Miles from Boston, into that Bloody Town,
she appeared in the Court there, and warned t^^ Magistrates, To spill no more
innocent Blood, this Saying so struck them at first, that they all sat silent,
till Rawson the Secretary said, What shall we be baffled by such a one as this!
Come let us drink a Dram.

Here we see the Religion of these Men, Fruits of Unfaithfulness.
who once were so precise, that they would not join with the Worship of the
Church of England. But it seems not improbable that they fell away to this
Hardness of Heart, because being convinced in their Understandings of some
superstitious Ceremonies that were yet remaining in the Church of England, they
were not faithful to testify against those Things, and to set their Light on
the Candlestick; but that to shun the Cross, and avoid Sufferings, they chose
to go into a strange Country. And yet they were so presumptuous as to say, They
were the purest Church on Earth, and their Magistrates and Preachers were very
godly Men. And it may be, some of their cruel Executioners, seeing how their
Magistrates (as has been said of Thomas Daufort) did glory in Cruelty, have
been foolish enough to persuade themselves, that their excessive Whipping was
some kind of meritorious Work. But whatever these English People thought, they
were worse than others. For in some Places of America lived also Swedes, who in
regard of their Worship were no less despised by the English, than of old the
Samaritans by the Jews: And yet these Swedes entertained the Quakers, when they
came amongst them, far better than the English did; and thus they made it
appear that they surpassed them in Life, if not in Profession. But the precise
New England Men seemed to place great Virtue in a sturdy Severity, of which the
following is an Instance.

A Dutchman, an Ostender whose Name was John Laurence, was committed for
Adultery, and brought before the Court at Boston, where the Governor John
Endicot asked him, Whether he was guilty or not guilty? To which the Prisoner,
who, as it seems spoke but bad English, said, No Guilt. On which Endicot said
in a scoffing Manner, No Gelt; There Is no Money: For Gheld signifies Money in
Dutch. Thus the Dutchman's Words and Meaning were scoffingly perverted; and
though there was no clear Evidence against him, yet he was condemned to be
hanged. But he denying the Fact, the Execution was deferred; and in the mean
while the Priests John Wilson, and James Mayo came to him in Prison, to see
what they could get out of him; and Mayo told him, His Time was near at an End,
and that he must shortly die; and therefore he would have him now to confess.
To which the Prisoner returned, What will you have me to confess, that which I
never did? But Mayo did not desist, but said, Confess my Son, and give Glory to
God. Yet the Prisoner continued in denying the Charge, and affirmed, he was
clear. But said the Priest, You cannot be clear, for our Lord and Savior
says, Whosoever looks upon a fair Woman, and lus^eth after her, he has
committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. Truly a very perverse Use of
the Scripture, for compassing a false End. But the Dutchman seeing how they
came to betray him, was cautious; and at length after a long and tedious
Imprisonment, found Means to break Prison, and thus escaped from those who grew
accustomed to be merciless; so that sometimes others as well as Quakers, felt
the Weight of their Severity.

As it happened, E. Nicholson and her two Sons accused of Murder, and though
Nothing proved, she is fined, and they cruelly whipped.
about the Time that William Leddra was put to Death, when one Elizabeth
Nicholson and her two Sons Christopher and Joseph, were charged with the Death
of her Husband and their Father Edmond Nicholson, who was found dead in the
Sea. And Information being given that these People did sometimes show Love to
those they called cursed Quakers, they were all three fetched from their
Habitation at Salem, and carried to Boston, and were tried for their Lives,
merely on Suspicion; but nothing of Murder was proved against them; yet the
Mother was fined a great Sum, and her two Sons were sentenced to stand under
the Gallows certain Hours, with Ropes about their Necks, and to be whipped in the
Marketplace, which was performed accordingly. And because these young Men were
not daunted, Priest Wilson standing by, said, Ah cursed Generation. And at
Salem they were whipped also, which was done so mercilesly, that one of the young
Men sunk down, or died away under the Torture, though he was raised up, and came
to Life again.

By this we may see how these New England Persecutors were become inured to
excessive Severity. The Deaths of some of New England Persecutors.
But before I leave them, I must also mention the dreadful Exit of some of them.

The last Act of Governor Endicot's bloody Part was the cruel Whipping of
Edward Wharton at Boston, Of Governor Endicot.
related before: For the Time was now come that he must go off the Stage, to
give an Account of his extravagant Severity before another Tribunal than that
of his sanguinary Court. The Measure ot his Iniquity was now filled up, and he
was visited with a loathsome Disease, insomuch that he stunk alive, and so died
with Rottenness, his Name being like to give a bad Savor through Ages to come.

Yet more remarkable was the Death of Major General Adderton, General Adderton.
who when Mary Dyar was hanged, said scoffingly, and in an insulting Way, That
she hung as a Flag, for others to take Example by; and who also, when Wenlock
Christison being condemned to Death, warned the Persecutors because of the
righteous Judgments of God, presumptuously said, You pronounce Woes and
Judgments, and those that are gone before you, pronounced Woes and Judgments;
but the Judgments of the Lord God are not come upon us as yet. But how he
himself was struck by these Judgments, and served for an Example to others, we
are to see now.

He upon a certain Day having exercised his Soldiers, and riding proudly on his
Horse toward his House, when he came about the Place where usually they loosed
the Quakers, so called, from the Cart, after they had whipped them, a Cow came
and crossed the Way, at which his Horse taking a Fright, threw him down so
violently, that he died, his Eyes being started out of his Head, his Brains out
of his Nose, his Tongue out of his Mouth, and his Blood out of his Ears. Thus
God's Judgments came upon him suddenly, and at unawares.

And John Norton, J. Norton chief Priest.
the Chief Priest of Boston, died likewise on a sudden. It was he who promoted
the putting to Death of those Martyrs that died at Boston, as has been
related; and when he saw the Magistra^es paused upon the Execution of W.
Robinson and M. Stevenson, he encouraged them thereto, especially because John
Winthorp, Governor of Connecticut, earnestly dissuaded the shedding of innocent
Blood. He it was also, who when William Brend was beaten so barbarously with a
Rope, as has been related in its due Place, did not stick to say, Since Since
William Brend endeavored to beat their Gospel Ordinances black and blue, it
was but just upon him if he was beaten black and blue also. But this Norton was
now struck with a Blow that made him sink: For having been at his Worship-house
in the Forenoon, and intending to go in the Afternoon, as he was walking in his
House, he fetched a great Groan, and leaning his Head against the Mantle-tree
of the Chimney, he was heard to say, The Hand, or the Judgments of the Lord are
upon me. These were his last Words, and he sunk down, and had fallen into the
Fire, if he had not been caught by somebody that was present. More Examples of
this Nature I could produce, but these may suffice.

What I have related ot these Cruelties, and much more, was published in Print
about that Time, that so the King and Parliament of England might know what
happened there. For those Actions were done in public View, and known there,
all about the Country. All that they did, was to set a false Color upon their
Severity, and to disguise Matters: And i^ was their Happiness, that they had
not to do with revengeful People, else they might have been involved in great
Streights: But the Friends of the Persecuted committed Vengeance to God, though
some of the Great Ones in England advised them to sue the Persecutors, which
according to Law they might have done.

Richard Bellingham, a fierce Persecutor, and Governor, after John Endicot, R.
Bellingham dies distracted.
went distracted ten Years after, and so died. Not long before, William
Coddington, Governor of Rhode Island, writ a Letter to him, wherein he put him
in Mind of the former Times; for he, (the said Coddington) had been one of the
first Erectors of Colonies in New England, and the first that built an House in
Boston, and afterward was a Magistrate seven Years; but when Persecution
arose, he declared against it; and the Case was debated for three Days in the
Court; but the moderate Party was the weakest, and was opposed by all the
Priests, except one John Cotton, who said, he remembered, how at their Departure
from England, J. Cotton the only Priest who opposes Persecution.
he had preached on Acts iv. 11. and had showed from that Text, That there was
an inward Grace which was to be minded; and that therefore he would not give
his Vote for persecuting the Assertors of that Doctrine: Showing thereby much
more Sense of Religion, than the other persecuting Priests. Now though Coddington
was one of the greatest Merchants, or Traders in that Country, and in all
Probability might have acquired great Riches there; yet seeing his good Counsel
was not hearkened to, he resolved to depart that Place, and go and live
somewhere else. But whatever he said in his Letter to Bellingham, this Man
remained hardened, like Pharaoh, having showed himself cruel, even when Mary
Fisher and Anne Austin first came to Boston, where he treated them in a
barbarous Manner.

Yet one Thing remarkable I may mention here, which when I first: heard, I
could not fully give Credit to; but thinking it worth the while to make a
narrow Enquiry into it, I did so, not only by Writing, but also from the Mouths
of Persons that had been Eyewitnesses, or had been informed by such; and from
these I got this concurring Information, viz. The Country for many Miles about
Boston will now ^ield no Wheat, etc. the formerly very fertile.
That the (...) about Boston was formerly a very fruitful Soil, that produced
excel^^^ Wheat; but that since the Time this Town had been stained with the
Blood of the Quakers, so called, no Wheat, etc. would grow to Perfection within
many Miles, though the Ground had been plowed and sown several Times: For the
very next Harvest, viz. in the Year 1660, after they had so barbarously and
unchristian-like put the Quakers to Death, the Blast was sent upon their Wheat,
so that it stank upon the Ground, and would never grow since, near Boston, to
be worth the Seed, and Labor of plowing and sowing, etc. so that they were
forced to be content with Indian Corn, and such other Grain as would grow,
after they had to little Purpose made many Trials of plowing and sowing for
Wheat in vain; being then forced to buy their Wheat etc. from New York,
Long Island, Maryland, Virginia, and afterward from Pennsylvania, and the
Jerseys. Now there having been so many re-iterated Instances of Unfruitfulness
near the Town, ancient People who are still alive, and remember the first
Times, generally agree in their Opinion, that this is a Judgment from Heaven,
and a Curse on the Land, because of the shedding of innocent Blood at Boston.
This Relation I had from so many credible Persons, (though the one knew nothing
of the other, as differing much in Time) yet what they told me did so well
agree in the main, that I could not but believe it, though I don't use to be
credulous; and therefore I have been the more exact in my Enquiry, so that I
can no longer question the Case; but it seems to me as a Punishment on that
Blood-thirstiness which now has ceased long ago.

In the Island of Barbados those called Quakers suffered also much by the
People, instigated not a little by the Priests, Samuel Graves, Matthew Gray,
Thomas Manwaring, and Francis Smith; for these being often drunk, T. Clark
grievously beaten at Barbados.
gave Occasion thereby to be reproved: And one Thomas Clark coming once into
the Place of public Worship, and exhorting the Auditors to desist from
Lewdness, and to fear God, was so grievously beaten with Sticks, that he fell
down in a Swoon, and Graves, who had preached then, went to the House of the
said Clark, pulled his Wife out of Doors, and tore her Clothes from her Back.
And Manwaring, who had threatened Clark, that he would procure a Law to be made,
by which his Ears should be cut off, once wrote in a Letter to him, I am sorry
that your Zeal surpasses your Moderation, and that a Club must beat out of you
what the Devil has inspired. And this was because Clark had told him, that his
Conversation was not becoming a Minister of the Gospel. Other rough Treatment
Clark met with, I pass by, though once he was set in the Stocks, and imprisoned.
But now I leave America, and return to England.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The SEVENTH BOOK.
HAVING now left America, Severe Persecution in London, and ^ver all the
Kingdom. Of which a Relation is printed of 4200 that were imprisoned.
and being returned to England, let us go and see the State of Persecution at
London, where desperate Fury now raged; though it was not in that chief City
alone, the Quakers, so called, were grievously persecuted: For a little before
this Time, there was published in Print a short Relation of the Persecution
throughout all England, signed by twelve Persons, showing that more than four
Thousand and two Hundred of those called Quakers, both Men and Women, were in
Prison in England, and denoting the Number of them that were imprisoned in each
County, either for frequenting Meetings, or for denying to swear, etc. Many of
these had been grievously beaten, or their Clothes torn, or taken away from
them; and some were put into such stinking Dungeons, that some great Men said,
they would not have put their hunting Dogs there. Some Prisons were crowded
both full of Men and Women, so that there was not sufficient Room for all to
sit down at once; and in Ch^shire, sixty eight Persons were in this Manner
locked up in a small Room; an evident Sign that they were a harmless People,
that would not make any Resistance, or use Force. Many die in Jails.
By such ill Treatment many grew sick, and not a few died in such Jails; for no
Age or Sex was regarded, but even ancient People, of sixty, seventy, and more
Years of Age, were not spared: And the most of these being Tradesmen,
Shopkeepers, or Husbandmen, were thus reduced to Poverty; for their Goods were
also seized, for not going to Church, so called, or for not paying Tithes. Many
Times they were fain to lie in Prison, on cold nasty Ground, without being
suffered to have any Straw; and often they have been kept several Days without
Victuals: No Wonder therefore that many died by such hard Imprisonments as
these.

At London, About 500 imprisoned in London and Suburbs.
and in the Suburbs, were about this Time no less than five Hundred of those
called Quakers imprisoned, and some in such narrow Holes, that every Person
scarcely had Convenience to lie down; and the Felon^ were suffered to rob them
of their Clothes and Money. Many that were not imprisoned, nevertheless
suffered Hardships in their religious Meetings, especially that in London,
known by the Name of Bull and M^th. Meetings disturbed, and the Persons
cruellybeaten.
Here the trained Bands came frequently, armed generally with Muskets, Pikes,
and Halberts, and conducted by a military Officer, by Order of the City
Magistracy, and rushing in, in a very furious Manner, ^ell to beating them,
whereby many were grievously wounded, some fell down in a Swoon, and some were
beaten so violently, Of which some died, and one J. Trowel in particular.
that they liv^^ not long after it: Among these was one John Trowel, who was so
bruised and crushed, that a few Days after he died. His Friends therefore
thought it expedient to carry the Corpse into the aforesaid Meeting Place, that
it might lie there exposed for some Hours, to be seen of every one. This being
done, raised Commiseration and Pity among many of the Inhabitants; for the
Corpse, beaten like a Jelly, The Coroner's Inquest sit on him.
looked black, and was swollen in a direful Manner. This gave Occasion to send
for the Coroner; and he being come, impanelled a Jury of the Neighbors, and
gave them in Charge, according to his Office, to make true Enquiry upon their
Oaths, and to present what they found to be the Cause of his Death. They
viewing the Corpse, had a Surgeon or two with them, to know their Judgment
concerning it; and then going together in private, at length they withdrew,
without giving in their Verdict, only desiring the Friends to bury the Corpse,
which was done accordingly that Evening. And though the Coroner and Jury met
diverse Times together upon that Occasion, and had many Consultations, But bring
in no Verdict. A Letter to the Lord Mayor about it, and
yet they never would give in a Verdict; but it appeared sufficiently, that the
Man was killed by violent Beating. The Reasons some gave for the Suspense of a
Verdict, were, That though it was testified, that the same Person, now dead, was
seen beaten, and knocked down, yet it being done in such a confused Crowd, no
particular Man could be fixed upon, so that any could say, that Man did the
Deed. And if a Verdict was given, that the deceased Person was killed, and yet
no particular Person charged with it, then the City was liable to a great Fine,
at the Pleasure of the King, for conniving at such a Murder in the City, in the
Day Time, not committed in a Corner, but in a public Place, and not
apprehending the Murderer, but suffering him to esscape. In the mean while, the
Friends of the deceased were not wanting to give public Notice of the Fact,
and sent also a Letter to the Lord Mayor, A Relation thereof printed.
which afterward they gave out in Print, together with a Relation of this
bloody Business. In this Letter it was said,

IT may be supposed thou have heard of this Thing, for it was done not in the
Night, but at the Mid Time of the Day; not suddenly, at unawares, or by Mishap,
but intendedly, and in a long Space of Time a doing; and not in a Corner, but
in the Streets of the City of London; all which Circumstances do highly
aggravate this Murder, to the very Shame and Infamy of this famous City, and
its Government.

A certain Person who spread some of these printed Relations, was imprisoned
for his Pains; nevertheless another brought one of them to the King, And
brought to the King.
and told him how the Thing had been done; at which the King said, I assure you
it was not by my Advice that any of your Friends should be slain: Ye must tell
the Magistrates of the City of it, and prosecute the Law against them. This
Saying of the King was not long after published in Print: The Disperser of it
imprisoned by Alderman Brown.
But Violence prevailed still; for the Person that was apprehended for
spreading the said Books, was sent to Prison by the special Order of Alderman
Brown, of whom since Mention may be made several Times in this Work, it gives
me Occasion to say something of what kind of Man he was.

In the Time of Cromwell he had been very fierce against the Royalists, A short
Character of him.
especially at Abingdon, not far from Oxford: For this Error he endeavored now
to make Compensation, by violent persecuting of the harmless Quakers; otherwise
he was a comely Man, and could commit Cruelty with a smiling Countenance. But
more of his Actions may be represented hereafter.

The Quakers, Quakers being kept out of their Meeting Houses, preach in the
^eets.
so called, seeing that they could not obtain Justice, let the Matter of the
murdered Person alone; for Suffering was now their Portion, and therefore they
left their Cause to God. Oftentimes they were kept out of their Meeting Houses
by the Soldiers; but then they did not use to go away, but stood before the
Place, and so their Number soon increased; and then one or other of their
Ministers generally stepped upon a Bench or some high Place, and so preached
boldly. Thus he got sometimes more Hearers than otherwise he might have had.
But such an one sometimes was soon pulled down, which then gave Occasion for
another to stand up and preach, and thus often four or five one after another,
were taken away as innocent Sheep, and carried to Prison with others of their
Friends, it may be, forty or fifty at once. This puts me in Mind of what I
heard my Mother, Judith Zinspenning say, who in the Year next following, being
gone for England, with William Caton and his Wife, who lived at Amsterdam, to
visit her Friends there, and coming to London, went with others to the Bull and
Mouth Meeting; but Entrance being denied, they stayed in the Street, where she
saw one Preacher after another, pulled down, at the Instant Cry of some Officer
or other, Constable, take him away. Several being thus led away, the Constable
came also to her, and perceiving by her Dress that she was a Dutch Woman,
pulled her by the Sleeve, and said with Admiration, What, a Dutch Quaker! but
meddled no farther with her. This keeping of Meetings in the Streets became now
a Customary Thing in England; for the Quakers, so called, were persuaded that
the Exercise of their public Worship was a Duty no Man could discharge them
from, Accounting public Worship an indispensable Duty.
and they believed that God required the performing of this Service from their
Hands. And by thus meeting in the Streets, it happened sometimes that more than
one, nay, it may be three or four at a Time, did preach, one in one Place, and
another in another, which in their Meeting-places could not have been done
conveniently. But thus they got abundance of Auditors, and among these
sometimes eminent Men, who passing by in their Coaches, made their Coachmen
stop. At this Rate they found there was a great Harvest, and thus their Church
increased under Sufferings; and in those sharp Times they were pretty well
purified of Dross, since the Trial was too hot for such as were not sincere;
for by frequenting their Meetings in such a Time, one was in Danger of being
either imprisoned, or beaten lame, or unto Death: But this could not quench the
Zeal of the Upright.

Now the taking away of one Preacher, As one Preacher's taken away, another
stands up; even Women, and sometimes Boys.
and the standing up of another, became an ordinary Thing in England, and it
lasted yet long after, as I my self have been an Eyewitness of there. And when
there were no more Men-preachers present, it may be, a Woman would rise, and
minister to the Meeting; nay, there were such who in Years being little more
than Boys, were endued with a manly Zeal, and encouraged their Friends to
Stedfastness. In the mean while, many also were imprisoned, without being haled
out of their Meetings; for some have been apprehended for speaking only
something on the Behalf of their Friends, as Rebecca Travers, Rebecca Travers
imprisoned.
who going to the Lieutenant of the Tower, desired him to have Compassion on
some who were imprisoned for frequenting of Meetings. But he grew angry at
this; and when she went away, one of the Keepers gave her ill Language: On
which, she exhorting him, to be good in his Place, whilst it was the Lord's
Will he had it, he was so offended, that going back to the Lieutenant, he
complained that she had spoken Treason, and thereupon she was apprehended, and
sent to Prison. Nay, the rude Soldiers were encouraged to Cruelty by Officers
who were not a Whit better, for they themselves would sometimes lay violent
Hands on peaceable People; as amongst the rest the aforementioned Alderman
Richard Brown, who formerly had been a Major General under Cromwell, and now
behaved himself with such outrageous Fierceness, that even the Comedians did
not stick to expose him, A Relation of Alderman Brown's Cruelties published,
and presented to the Mayor and Sheriffs.
by an Allusion to his Name Brown, and saying, The Devil was brown.

A Book was also printed, wherein many ^ase Abuses, and also his furious
Behavior were exposed to public View; and this Book was dedicated to him with
this small Epistle:

Richard Brown,
IF thou art not sealed up already for Destruction, and if Repentance be not
utterly hid from thy Eyes, the Lord convert thee, and forgive thee of all thy
hard and cruel Dealings toward us: We desire thy Repentance rather than thy
Destruction; and the Lord God of Heaven and Earth give Judgment of final
Determination between thee and us, that all the Earth may know whether thy
Cause against us, or our Cause be just before him, who only is the righteous
Judge.


The said Book, though published without the Author's Name, yet one of them was
not only sent to Brown, but as a Sign that the Quakers, so called, owned it,
others were, by about thirty of them, delivered to the Lord Mayor, and the
Sheriffs of London, that so they might know what was acted under their
Authority; for some, though not authorized, yet being Favorites at Court, made
bold to act against the Quakers whatever their Malice prompted them to.
Arbitrary Proceedings of Philip Miller, who without Warrant takes up J. Crook,
etc.
Among these was one Philip Miller, who, though not an Officer, yet in the Month
called May of this Year, came into a Meeting of the said People in John's
Street, in the Parish of Sepulchers, at London, without any Order or Warrant,
and ha^^g (...) his Hand, commanded the Rabble who attended him, (...) he
pleased; and then he fetched a Constable, whom he forced by his Threats to go
along with him, and five Persons he apprehended, among whom was John Crook, of
whom farther Mention is like to be made again. Some Days after, this Miller
came to the said Meeting Place again, and struck several Persons with his Cane,
because they would not depart at his Command; and then he charged the
Constables, whom he brought along with him, to secure and take into Custody
whom he pleased.

About the latter End of the aforesaid Month, And of Capt. Reeves at the Bull
and Mouth, who is supported by Alderman Brown with great Fury.
on a First Day of the Week, one Captain Reeves, and some Soldiers with Muskets
and drawn Swords, came violently rushing into the Bull and Mouth Meeting, where
they pulled down him that was preaching, and presently laid hold of another,
who desired Reeves to show his Order for this his doing: To which he answered,
He would not in that Place; but it appeared afterward that he could not, as
having no Warrant. Yet he caused his Soldiers to take away about forty Persons,
(some of whom were not at the Meeting, but had been taken up in the Streets)
and have them into Paul's Yard, where they were kept till the public Worship
was ended there; and then Alderman Richard Brown came into the Place where the
Prisoners were guarded, and with great Rage and Fury laid Hands first on a very
aged Person, and pulled him down twice by the Brim of his Hat, whereby he lost
it. Then he served another in like Manner, and a Soldier struck this Person a
great Blow with a Pistol on his bare Head: Two others Brown used in the like
Manner, and then he sent them all to Newgate, guarded by Soldiers.

The same Day some Soldiers came to a Meeting in Tower-street, Twenty one
Persons seized by Soldiers, with at Warrant at a Meeting, and carried before
the said Brown, who sends them to Newgate
and without any Warrant took away twenty one Persons, called Quakers, and
carried them to the Exchange, where they kept them some Time, and then brought
them before the said Richard Brown, who in a most furious Manner, struck some,
and kicked others; which made one of the Prisoners, seeing how Brown smote one
with his Fist on the Face, and kicked him on the Shin, say, What Richard, will thou turn Murderer? Thou did not do so when I was a Soldier under thy Command
at Abingdon, and thou commanded'st me with others to search People's Houses for
Pyes and Roast-meat, because they kept Christmas as a holy Time; and we brought
the Persons Prisoners to the Guard for observing the same. For such a precise
Man the said Brown was at that Time, that he pretended to root out that
superstitious Custom; though there is Reason to question whether his Heart were
sincere in this Respect: However, such blind Zeal was unfit to convince People
of Superstition; and Brown well knowing that by his former Carriage he had very
much disobliged those of the Church of England, endeavored now to make amends
for it by his fierce Brutality against the harmless Quakers, and so to come
into Favor with the Ecclesiastics and Courtiers. One of Brown's Family having
heard what was said to him, replied, There Is an Abingdon Bird. To which Brown
returned, He is a Rogue for all that, and struck him with his Fist under the
Chin, which made another Prisoner say, What, a Magistrate and strike! Upon
which Brown with both his Hands pulled him down to the Ground by the Brim of
his Hat, and then commanded the Soldiers to take them all away, and carry them
all to Newgate.

Upon a First Day of the Week, Others taken at the Bull and Mouth, and by him
sent to Newgate.
in the Month called June, a Company of Soldiers came into the Bull and Mouth
Meeting, with Pikes, drawn Swords, Muskets, and lighted Matches, as if they
were going to fig^t; though they knew well enough they should find none there but
harmless People. The first Thing they did was to pull down him that preached,
whom they haled out of the Meeting, rejoicing as if they had obtained some
great Victory: Then they brought him to the Main-guard at Paul's, and returned
to the Bull and Mouth, where they apprehended some more, whom they also carried
to Paul's. After some Hours these Prisoners were carried to the House of the
forementioned Brown; and he asking the Names of the Prisoners, Among them J.
Perrot answers to Brown.
and hearing that of John Perrot, said, What, you have been at Rome, to
subvert, but recalling himself, said, to convert the Pope. On which Perrot told
him, He had suffered at Rome for the Testimony of Jesus. Whereupon Brown
returned, If you had converted the Pope to your Religion, I should have liked
him far worse than I do now. To which Perrot replied, But God would have liked
him better. After some more short Discourse, Brown committed them all to
Newgate.

After this Manner, The Barbarity of one Cox, a Wine-Cooper.
the Meetings of those called Quakers were disturbed at that Time, of which I
could produce, if necessary, many more lnstances. Once one Cox, a Wine-Cooper,
came with some Soldiers into a Meeting, where, after great Violence used, they
took up two Men of those called Quakers, whom they beat most grievously,
because they refused to go along with them, though they showed no Warrant for it.
At length the Soldiers carried them both upon Muskets into Paul's Yard; and
when they laid them down, they dragged one of them by the Heels on his Back, in
a very barbarous Manner; which being done, the said Wine-Cooper was heard to
say, He would go and get a Cup of Sack, for these Devils had even wearied him
out: And yet he went to another Meeting Place of these People, where he also
behaved himself very wickedly; and being asked for his Order, his Answer was,
holding out his Sword, This is my Order. Thus it seems he would ingratiate
himself with Brown, who now being in Favor at Court, was knighted, and
sometime after also chosen Lord Mayor of London; and by his furious Behavior
the Soldiers were also encouraged to commit all Manner of Mischief; insomuch,
that being asked, what Order they had for their Doings, one lifting up his
Musket, said, This is my Order: So that Things now were carried by Club-Law.
Nor did the Soldiers respect Age, but took away out of a Meeting at Mile-End,
Two Boys taken at Mile-End are sent to Bridewel, yet remain steadfast.
two Boys, one about thirteen, and the other about sixteen, who were brought
before the Lieutenant of the Tower, who to one present, saying, He supposed
they were not of the Age of sixteen Years, and then not punishable by the Act,
returned, They were old enough to be whipped; and they should be whipped out of
their Religion. And so he sent them to Bridewel, where their Hands were put
into the Stocks, and so pinched for the Space of two Hours, that their Wrists
were much swollen; and this was done because they refused to work, as being
persuaded that they had not deserved to be treated so; they also eating nothing
at the Charge of the said Workhouse. These Lads, though pretty long in that
Prison, yet continued steadfast, rejoicing they were counted worthy to suffer
for the Name of the Lord; and they wrote a Letter to their Friends Children,
exhorting them to be faithful in bearing their Testimony for the Lord, against
all Wickedness and Unrighteousness.

Some Days before this Time, Private Dwellings broke open, and visiting termed
a Meeting.
Thomas and John Herbert, living in London, and other Musketeers, came with
their naked Swords into some private Dwellings, and broke two or three Doors;
(for when some Persons were seen to enter a House, though it was only to visit
their Friends, it was called a Meeting.) Five Persons only being in a House are
sent to Bridewel by Alderman Brown.
Now it happened in one House these rude Fellows found five Persons together,
one of whom was William Ames, who was come thither out of Holland, and another
was Samuel Fisher: And when it was demanded what Warrant they had, they held up
their Swords, and said Do not ask us for a Warrant; this is our Warrant: And
thereupon they took away these Persons by Force, and carried them to Paul's
Yard, where they were a laughing stock to the Soldiers; and from thence they
were brought to the Exchange, where they met with no better Reception from the
rude Soldiers; and from thence they were conducted to Alderman Brown's House in
Ivy-Lane. He seeing these Prisoners, sent them to Bridewel with a Mittimus, to
be kept; at hard Labor. But afterward bethinking himself, and finding that
his Mittimus was not founded on Justice, (for these Persons were not taken from
a Meeting) next Morning he sent another Mittimus, wherein they were charged
with unlawful assembling themselves to Worship. Now suppose one of the
Musketeers had heard any of these Persons speak by Way of Exhortation to
Faithfulness in this hot Time of Persecution, this would have been taken for
sufficient Charge, W. Ames being sick and near Death, discharged
though not cognizable by Law: But they ran upon Shifts, how poor or silly
soever. Thus these Persons were committed to Bridewel, and required to beat
Hemp; and they were treated so severely, that W. Ames grew sick, even nigh to
Death, wherefore he was discharged; for in a Sense it might be said, that his
Dewlling Place was at Amsterdam in Holland, since he was there the most Part of
the Time for some Years, successively, and that he might not be chargeable, he
worked at Wool-combing; and it being alleged that he was of Amsterdam, it
seems they would not have him die in Prison, as some of his Friends had done.
The others having been six Weeks in Bridewel, were presented at the Sessions in
the Old Bailey: But instead of being tried for what was charged against them,
they were required to take the Oath of Allegiance, as the only Business
(according to what the Deputy Recorder said) they were brought thither for. The
Prisoners then demanded, that the Law might be read, by Virtue of which the
said Oath was required of them. This was promised by the Court to be done; but
instead thereof they ordered the Clerk to read only the Form of the Oath, but
would not permit the Law for imposing it to be read. But before the Prisoners
had either declared their Willingness to take it, or their Refusal of it, they
were commanded to be taken away; which the Officers did with such Violence,
that they threw some of them down upon the Stones. This made Samuel Fisher say,
Take Notice People, that we have not yet refused to take the Oath; but the
Court refuses to perform their Promise which they made but just now before you
all, that the Statute for it should be read. If such Doings as this ever
prosper, It must be when there is no God. The rest with J. Howel sent to
Newgate.
But this was not regarded; and the Prisoners, without any Justice, were sent
to Newgate. Among these, was also one John Howel, who had been sent by Alderman
Brown to work at Bridewel, because he being brought before him, did not tell on
a sudden what was his Name: And being demanded in the Court why he did not tell
his Name, he answered, Because he had been beaten and abused in the Presence of
Richard Brown, when he was brought before him. Brown, who was also on the
Bench, asked him roughly, Wherein were you abused? And Howel replied, Blood was
drawn on me in thy Presence; which ought not to be done in the Presence of a
Justice of Peace. But Brown growing very impetuous, returned, Hold your
Prating, or there shall as much be done again here in the Presence of the Court.

About Mid-summer, D. Baker, with four others, taken from Bull and Mouth
Meeting.
Daniel Baker returned into England, (who, as has been related, had been at
Malta) and about a Fortnight after his Arrival, he with four others, was taken
by a Band of Soldiers from the Bull and Mouth Meeting, and carried to Paul's
Yard, where having been kept for some Hours, they were brought to Newgate; but
in the Evening they were had before Alderman Brown, Carried before Ald. Brown.
to whom Baker with Meekness said, Let the Fear of God and his Peace be set up
in thy Heart. But Brown fell a laughing, and said, I Would rathet hear a Dog bark;
and using more such scoffing Expressions, he charged Baker, etc. with the
Breach of the King's Law in meeting together. To which Baker said, The Servants
of God in the Apostles Days were commanded to speak no more in the Name of
Jesus; and they answered, (and so do I too,) Whether it be better to obey God
than Men, judge ye. He also instanced the Case of the three Children at
Babylon, and Daniel, who obeyed not the King's Decrees. But Brown grew so
angry, that he commanded his Men to smite Daniel on the Face. He is there
illegally and barbarously abused.
This they did, and pulling him four or five Times to the Ground, they smote
him with their Fists, and wrung his Neck so, as if they would have murdered
him. This these Fellows did to please Brown, showing themselves to be ready for
any Service, how abominable soever. And Baker reflecting on his Travels,
signified, that even Turks and Heathens would abhor such brutish Actions. His
Fellow Prisoners were also abused by Brown, All of them sent to Newgate.
and then sent to Newgate again. And after some Days they were called to the
Sessions, where their Indictment was read, which like others in such Cases did
generally run in these Terms; That the Prisoners, under Pretense of performing
religious Worship, otherwise than by the Laws of the Kingdom of England
established, unlawfully and tumultuously did gather and assemble themselves
together, to the great Terror of his Majesty's People, and to the Disturbance
of the Peace of the King, in Contempt of our said Lord the King, and his Laws,
to the evil Example of all others in the like Case offending, etc. The
Indictment being read, no Witness appeared against the Prisoners, save Brown,
who sat on the Bench: And therefore the Oath, as the ordinary Snare, was
tendered to them; for it was sufficiently known, that their Profession did not
suffer them to take any Oath. They denying to swear, were sent back to Prison,
to stay there until they should have taken the Oath. If I would here set down
all such like Cases as have happened, I might find more Work than I should be
able to perform: For this vexing with the Oath was become so common, that some
have been taken up in the Streets, and brought to a Justice of Peace, that he
might tender the Oath to them, and in Case of Denial, send them to Prison, though
this was directly contrary to the Statute of Magna Charta, To take u^ Persons
arbitrarily, to tender Oaths to, contrary to Magna Charta.
which expressly says, No Freeman shall be taken nor imprisoned, or be
disseized of his Freehold or Liberties, but by the Law of the Land. But this
was not regarded by Richard Brown, who did whatever he would; for Force and
Violence were now predominant: And sometimes when the Prisoners were brought to
the Bar, for frequenting Meetings, Freedom was denied them to justify
themselves; but to be hectored and ba^^^ed was their Lot.

Once it happened that a Prisoner, who had been a Soldier formerly under Brown,
seeing that no Justice or Equity was observed, called to him saying, A Prisoner
boldly charges Brown on the Bench with Murder which he denies not.
That he was not fit to sit on the Bench; for he made the Son to hang the
Father at Abingdon; so that he could prove him to be a Murderer. This bold
Saying caused some Disturbance in the Court, and Brown, how heavy soever the
Charge was, did not deny the Thing in Court, nor clear himself from it: Yet the
other Quaker Prisoners did not approve this Upbraiding, but signified, That
though the Fact were true, yet they were not for reproaching any Magistrate upon
the Bench, whose Place and Office they did respect and honor. But I don't find
that Brown (on that Account) ever prosecuted him that spoke so boldly, although
otherwise he did whatever he would, without fearing that his
Fellow-Magistrates, who respected him that was a Favorite at Court, would
disclaim it, as may appear by this following Instance.

A certain Person, who had been taken by the Soldiers out of a Meeting to
Prison, in a very violent and abusive manner, because he was not willing to go,
said in the Court, That his refusing to go, was because they would not show him
any Warrant for their apprehending him; since for ought he knew, they might be
Robbers or Murd^rers, with whom he was not bound to go. But Brown, who was for
violence, said to this, If they had dragged him through all the Kennels in the
Streets, they had served him right, if he would not go. This he spoke in such a
furious Manner, that one of the Prisoners told him, Another seeing him furious,
tenderly warns him, notwithstanding outrageous Violence continues in the Court.
Thou have had many Warnings and Visitations in the Love of God, but have
slighted them; therefore beware of being sealed up in the Wrath of God.
Hereupon one of the Jailors came with his Cane and struck several of the
Prisoners so hard, that diverse of them were much bruised; and it was reported
by some, that Brown cried, Knock him down, though others (for mitigating it a
little) would have it, Pull, him down: But the former seems most probable; for
the Blows were so violent, that some of the Spectators cried out Murder!
Murder! and asked, Will ye suffer Men to be murdered in the Court? Whereupon
one of the Sheriffs in Person came down from his Seat to stop the Beating. But
Brown, was so desperately filled with Anger, that he said to the Prisoners, If
any of you be killed, your Blood shall be on your own Head: And the Hangman
standing by with his Gag in his Hand, threatened the Prisoners to gag any of
them, that should speak any Thing. Thus Innocence was forced to give Way to
Violence. And once, when one at the common juridical Question, Guilty, or not
guilty, answered, I deny I am guilty, and I can say I am not guilty; One
sentenced as mute, and fined for answering, I can say, I am not guilty.
and also in Latin, Non reus sum. Yet he was sentenced as mute, and fined
accordingly, though the Words he spoke, fully signified, not guilty, albeit he
had not expressed them in the same Terms. But now they were for crossing the
Quakers in every Respect.

I Will yet mention some more Instances of Brown's Brutality, Farther Instances
of Brown's unbecoming behavior.
before I leave him. Another being demanded to answer to his Indictment,
Guilty, or not Guilty, and not presently answering, but thinking a little what
to speak safely, Brown scoffingly said, We shall have a Revelation by and by.
To which the Prisoner said, How long will ye oppose the Innocent? How long will
ye persecute the righteous Seed of God? But whilst he was speaking, Brown
indecently began to cry in the Language of those Wenches that go crying up and
down the Streets, Aha, Aha! Will you have any Wall-fleet Oysters? and, Have you
any Kitchin-stuff, Maids? And when a Prisoner at the Bar said, He could not for
Conscience Sake forbear meeting among the People of God: Brown scurrilously
returned, Conscience, a Dog's Tail. And when Alderman Adams speaking to one of
the Prisoners, said, I am sorry to see you here. Sorry? said Brown, What should
you be sorry for! Yes, said Adams, He is a sober Man. But Brown, who could not
endure to hear this, reply 'd, That there was never a sober Man amongst them,
meaning the Quakers. The Spectators, who took much Notice of him, discommended
this his Carriage exceedingly. But he seemed to be quite hardened; for at a
certain Time, two Persons being upon their Trial for robbing of a House, he
told them, They were the veriest Rogues in England, except it were the Quakers.

Sometimes it happened that the Prisoners were brought to the Bar, without
being indicted; and when they said. What have we done? and desired Justice;
Brown having no Indictment against them, often cried, Will you take the Oath?
And they then saying, That For Conscience Sake they could not swear, were
condemned as Transgressors, though such Proceedings as these, were directly
against the Law. But this seemed at that Time little to be regarded.

However some Time before, it happened at Thetford in the County of Norfolk,
that Judge Windham, Judge Windham sharply reproves the Justices for committing
Persons and bringing them to the Bar without an Accuser.
at that Time showing himself just in the like Case, sharply reproved the
Justices upon the Bench, for having not only committed some Persons to Prison,
but also had them up to the Bar, when no Accuser appeared against them. But
Richard Brown did whatever he would, and showed himself most furiously wicked,
when any Prisoner was brought before him with his Hat on.

One John Brain being taken in the Street, and not in any Meeting, was brought
by some Soldiers before Brown, who seeing him with his Hat on, J. Brain's most
cruel Usage by the Order and in the Presence of R. Brown, who afterward sent
him to Prison.
ordered him to be pulled down to the Ground six or seven Times; and when he
was down, they beat his Head against the Ground, and stamped upon him; and Brown
like a Madman, bad them pull off his Nose; whereupon they very violently
pulled him by the Nose. And when he was got up, they pulled him to the Ground
by the Hair of his Head, and then by the Hair pulled him up again. And when he
would have spoken in his own Behalf against this Cruelty, Brown bad them Stop
his Mouth: Whereupon they not only struck him on the Mouth, but stopped his
Mouth and Nose also so close, that he could not draw Breath, and was like to be
choked: At which Actions Brown fell a laughing, and at length sent him to Jail.

Thomas Spire being brought before Brown, he commanded his Hat to be taken off;
More Instances of Brown's barbarous Behavior to T. Spire.
and because it was not done with such Violence as he intended, he caused it to
be put upon his Head again, saying, It should not be pulled off so easily: Then
he was pulled down to the Ground by his Hat, and pulled up again by his Hair.
William Hill being brought before him, he commanded his Hat to be pulled off,
so that his Head might be bowed down; whereupon he being pulled to the Ground,
was plucked up again by the Hair of his Head. George Ableson was thus pulled
five Times one after another to the Ground, and plucked up by his Hair, and so
beaten on his Face, or the Sides of his Head, that he staggered and bled, and
for some Days was under much Pain.

Nicholas Blithold being brought before Brown, N. Blithold.
he took his Hat with both his Hands, endeavoring to pull him down to the
Ground; and because he fell not quite to the Ground forwards, he pushed him to
throw him backwards, and then he gave him a Kick on the Leg, and thrust him out
of Doors. T. Lacy, and others.
Thomas Lacy being brought before him, he himself gave him a Blow on the Face;
and Isaac Merit, John Cook, Arthur Baker, and others were not treated much
better; so that he seemed more fit to have been a Hangman, than an Alderman, or
Justice. But I grow weary of mentioning more Instances of his Cruelty. These
his abominable Achievements were published in Print, more at large than I have
mentioned them; and the Book as has been said already, was dedicated to him.
And yet I do not find any ha^^ been prosecuted on that Account; though his
Wickedness was extravagant, and such as if he wanted to have Stakes erected at
Smithfield to (...) his Wood; being by Trade a Wood-Monger.

In this hot Time of Persecution, Francis Howgil writ and gave forth the
following Paper for Encouragement of his Friends.

THE Cogitations of my Heart have been many, F. Howgil's Paper for Incouragment
of his Suffering Friends.
deep, and ponderous some Months, Weeks, and Days concerning this People which
the Lord has raised to bear Testimony unto his Name, in this the Day of his
Power; and Intercession has been made often for them to the Lord and a patient
Waiting to know his Mind concerning them for the Time to come; which often I
received Satisfaction in as to my self; but yet something I was drawn by the
Lord, to wait for, that I might comfort and strengthen his Flock by an assured
Testimony. And while I was waiting out of all visible Things, and quite out of
the World in my Spirit, and my Heart upon nothing but the living God, the Lord
opened the Springs of the great Deep, and overflowed my whole Heart with Life
and Love; and my Eyes were as a Fountain, because of Tears of Joy, because of
his Heritage, of whom he showed me and said unto me in a full, fresh, living
Power, and a holy, full Testimony, so that my Heart was ravished there with Joy
unspeakable, and I was out of this Body with God, in his heavenly Paradise,
where I saw and felt Things unutterable, and beyond all Demonstration or
Speech. At last the Life closed with my Understanding, and my Spirit listened
unto him; and the everlasting God said, shall I hide any thing from them that
seek my Face in Righteousness? Nay, I will manifest it to them that fear me; I
will speak, do thou listen, and publish it among all my People, that they may
be comforted and thou satisfied. And thus said the Living God of Heaven and
Earth, upon the 28th of the 3d Month, 1662.

The Sun shall leave its shining Brightness, and cease to give Light to the
World; and the Moon shall be altogether Darkness, and give no Light unto the
Night; the Stars shall cease to know their Office or Place; my Covenant with
Day, Night, Times and Seasons shall sooner come to an End, than the Covenant I
have made with this People, into which they are entered with me, shall end or
be broken. Yea, though the Powers of Darkness and Hell combine against them, and
the Jaws of Death open its Mouth, yet I will deliver them, and lead them
through all. I will confound their Enemies as I did in Jacob, and scatter them
as I did in Israel in the Days of Old. I will take their Enemies, I will hur^
them hither and thither as Stones hurled in a Sling; and the Memorial of this
Nation, which is holy unto me, shall never be routed out, but shall live through
Ages, as a Cloud of Witnesses in Generations to come. I have brought them to
the Birth, yea, I have brought them forth; I have swaddled them, and they are
mine. I will nourish them, and carry them as on Eagles Wings; and though Clouds
gather against them, I will make my Way through them: Though Darkness gather
together on a Heap, and Tempests gender, I will scatter them as with an
East Wind; and Nations shall know they are my Inheritance, and they shall know
I am the living God, who will plead their Cause with all that rise up in
Opposition against them.

These Words are holy, faithful, eternal, good and true: Blessed are they that
hear and believe unto the End; and because of them no Strength was left in me
for a while; but at last my Heart was filled with Joy, even as when the Ark of
God was brought from the House of Obed-Edom, when David danced before it, and
Israel shouted for Joy.

Francis Howgil.

That this Writing of F. Howgil, who was a pious Man, of great Parts, together
with many other powerful Exhortations of such who valiantly went before, and
never left the oppressed Flock, tended exceedingly to their Encouragement in
this hot Time of Persecution, is certain. For how furious soever their Enemies
were, yet they were resolved to continue faithful in Supplications and fervent
Prayers to God, that he might be pleased to assist them in their upright Zeal,
who aimed at nothing for Self, but from a true Fear and Reverence before him,
durst not omit their Religious Assemblies. And they found that the Lord heard
their Prayers, insomuch that I remember to have heard one say, that at a
Meeting where they seemed to be in Danger of Death from their fierce
Persecutors, he was as it were ravished, so that he hardly knew whether he was
in or out of the Body. They then persevering thus in Faithfulness to what they
believed the Lord required of them, in Process of Time, when their Enemies had
taken such Measures that they were persuaded they had found out such Means, by
which they should suppress and extinguish the Quakers, they saw the Lord God
Almighty rose up in their Defense, and quashed and confounded the wicked
Devices of their cruel Persecutors, as will be seen in the Course of this
History.

In the mean while let us take a View of the Persecution in Southwark.
Proceedings in Southwark.
Here the Quakers Meetings were no less disturbed than in London. Several
Persons having been taken from their religious Meetings, were committed; and
after having been in White-Lion Prison about nine Weeks, Several Persons
indicted.
were brought to the Bar, where Richard Onslow sat Judge of the Sessions. The
Indictment drawn up against them was as follows,

The Jurors for our Lord the King do present upon their Oath, The Indictment.
that Arthur Fisher, late of the Parish of St. Olave in the Borough of
Southwark, in the County of Surrey, Yeoman, Nathanael Robinson, of the same,
Yeoman; John Chandler of the same, Yeoman, and others, being wicked, dangerous,
and seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons, and above the Age of sixteen
Years, who or the 29th Day of June, in the Year of the Reign of our Lord
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc. the Fourteenth, have obstinately refused, and every one of them
has obstinately refused to repair unto some Church, Chapel, or usual Place of
Common Prayer, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England,
in the like Case set forth and provided (after Forty Days next after the End of
the Session of Parliament, begun and holden at Westminster, on the 19th Day of
February, in the Year of our Lady Elizabeth, late Queen of England, the
thirty-fifth, and there continued until the Dissolution of the same, being the
tenth Day of April, in the 35th Year abovesaid,) To wit on the 3d Day of
August, in the Year of the Reign of the said Charles, King of England, the
fourteenth abovesaid, in the Parish of St. Olave aforesaid, in the Borough of
Southwark aforesaid, in the County aforesaid; of themselves, did, voluntarily
and unlawfully join in, and were present at an unlawful Assembly, Conventicle,
and Meeting, at the said Parish of St. Olave, in the County aforesaid, under
Color and P^etence of the Exercise of Religion, against the Laws and Statutes
of this Kingdom of England, in Contempt of our said Lord the King that now is,
his Laws, and to the evil and dangerous Example of all others in the like Case
offending against the Peace of our said Lord the King that now is, his Crown
and Dignity, and contrary to the Form of the Statute in this same Case set
forth and provided.

I have inserted this Indictment, that the Reader may see not only the Manner
of proceeding, but also with what black and heinous Colors the Religious
Meetings of those called Quakers were represented. This lndictment being read,
the Prisoners desired that they might be tried by the late Act of Parliament
against Conventicles. But it was answered, They might try them by what they
would, that was in Force. Then the Prisoners desired that that Statute ( viz.
the 35th of Elizaheth) might be read. This was done but in Part, and it was
said to the Clerk, It was enough. The Prisoners said then, That that Act was
made in the Times of Ignorance, when the People were but newly stepped out of
Popery; and they showed also how unjustly they were dealt with. Then being
required to plead Guilty or Not guilty to the Indictment, some who were not
very forward to answer, were haled out of the Court, as taken pro confessis;
and so sent back to Prison. The rest, being twenty-two in Number, Some dilatory
in their Answer, sent back to Prison. Others plead Not guilty.
pleaded Not guilty. Then the Jurymen were called, and when they excepted
against one, the Judge would not allow it, because he did not like the Reason
they gave, viz. That they saw Envy, Prejudice, and a vain Deportment in him.
Another was excepted against, because he was heard to say, That he hoped ere
long, that the Quakers should be arraigned at the Bar, and be banished to some
Land, where there was nothing but Bears. At this the Court burst out into a
Laughter; yet the Exception was admitted, and the Man put by. The Prisoners not
thinking it convenient to make more Exceptions, the Jury were sworn. Then two
Witnesses were called, who testified at most, that in such a Place they took
such Persons met together, whose Names were specified in Writing. Their Answer.
Then the Prisoners bid the Jury, Take heed how they did sport or dally with
holy Things, and that those Things, which concerned the Conscience, were holy
Things. And as a Man was not to sport with the Health or Illness of his
Neighbor, so he was not to sport with the Liberty or the Banishment of his
Neighbor. And whereas they were accused of being wicked, dangerous, and
seditious Sectaries; that was not true; for they were not wicked, but such as
endeavored to live soberly, righteously, and godly in the World; concerning
the Truth of which, they appealed to themselves. Neither were they seditious,
but peaceable. And whereas they were charged for not coming to hear the
Common Prayer, this was incongruous; for the Service Book was not quite printed
several Weeks after the said 29th of June; so that they could not be charged of
neglecting to hear that which was not to be heard read any where. This puzzled
the Court not a little; and other pinching Reasons were also given by the
Prisoners, some of which were Men of Learning; insomuch that the Judge was not
able to answer the Objections but by Shifts and Evasions. At length the Jury
went out to consult; and one of them was heard to say, as they were going up
Stairs, Here is a deal to do indeed to condemn a Company of innocent Men.

After some Time, the Jury coming in again, and being asked, Whether the
Prisoners at the Bar were guilty or not guilty, they said, They were guilty in
Part, and not guilty in Part. But this Verdict did not please the Judge. They
are brought in guilty by the Jury after twice going out.
The Jury then going out again, and prevailing upon one another, quickly
returned, and declared the Prisoners guilty, according to the Form of the
Indictment. Hereupon the Judge Onslow pronounced Sentence, viz. That they
should return to Prison again, and lie there three Months without Bail; and if
they did not make Submission according as the Law directed, either at, or
before the End of the aforesaid three Months, that then they should abjure the
Realm: But in case they refused to make Abjuration, or after Abjuration made,
should forbear to depart the Realm within the Time limited, or should return
again without License, they should be proceeded against as Felons.

Just before Sentence given, the Judge said to one of the Prisoners, There was
a Way to escape the Penal^ viz. Submission. And being asked, What that was? The
Judge answered, To come to Common Prayer, and refrain these Meetings. The
Prisoner giving Reasons for Refusal of both, the Judge said, Then you must
abjure the Land. Abjure, returned the Prisoner, is forswear. To which one of
the Justices said laughingly, And ye cannot swear at all. Just as if it were
but Jest, thus to treat religious Men. But they had signified already to the
Jury, That they must rather die than do so. How long they were kept Prisoners,
and how released, I could not learn; but this I know, that many in the like
Cases have been long kept in Jail, till sometimes they were set at Liberty by
the King's Proclamation.

In this Year it was the Share of John Crook (who himself once had been a
Justice) to be taken out of a Meeting at London in John's Street, as has been
said already, by one Miller, though not in Office. And he with others was brought
to his Trial in the said City before the Lord Mayor of London, the Recorder of
the same, the Chief Justice Forster, and other Judges and Justices, among which
was also Richard Brown.

Now since J. Crook published this Trial in Print, Trya^ of J. Crook.
and by that we may judge, as ex ungue Leonem, of other Trials of the Quakers,
I Will give it here at large.

J. Crook being brought to the Sessions House in the Old Baily, with two of his
Friends, viz. Isaac Gray, Doctor of Physic, and John Bolton, Goldsmith: One of
the Prisoners was called to the Bar, and then asked by the

Chief Judge. What Meeting was that you were at?


Prisoner. I desire to be heard, Where is my Accuser?


Chief Judge. Your Tongue is not your own, and you must not have Liberty to
speak what you list.


Pris. I speak in the Presence and Fear of the everlasting God, that my Tongue
is not my own, for it is the Lord's, and to be disposed of according to his
Pleasure; and not to speak my own Words; and therefore I desire to be heard: I
have been so long in Prison -- Then he was interrupted by the Judge.


Judge. Leave your Canting; and commanded him to be taken away, which he was
accordingly by the Jailor. This was the Substance of what the Prisoner
aforesaid spoke the first Time.


C. Judge. Call John Crook to the Bar; which the Crier did accordingly, he
being amongst the Felons, as aforesaid.


John Crook being brought to the Bar: C. Judge. When did you take the Oath of
Allegiance?


J. Crook. I desire to be heard.


C. Judge. Answer to the Question, and you shall be heard.


J. Cr. I have been about six Weeks in Prison, and am I now called to accuse my
self? For the answering to this Question in the Negative, is to accuse my self,
which you ought not to put me upon; for, Nemo debet seipsum prodere. I am an
Englishman, and by the Law of England I ought not to be taken, nor imprisoned,
nor disseized of my Freehold, nor called in question, nor put to answer, but
according to the Law of the Land; which I challenge as my Birthright, on my own
Behalf, and all that hear me this Day; (or Words to this Purpose) I stand here
at this Bar as a Delinquent, and do desire that my Accuser may be brought forth
to accuse me for my Delinquency, and then I shall answer to my Charge, (if any
I be guilty of.)


C. Judge. You are here demanded to take the Oath of Allegiance, and when, you
have done that, then you shall be heard about the other; for we have Power to
tender it to any Man.


J. Cr. Not to me upon this Occasion, in this Place; for l am brought hither as
an Offender already, and not to be made an Offender here, or to accuse my self;
for I am an Englishman, as I have said to you, and challenge the Benefit of the
Laws of England; for by them is a better Inheritance derived to me as an
Englishman, than that which I received from my Parents; for by the former, the
latter is preserved; and this is the 29th Chapter of Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right, mentioned in the third of Car. 1. and in other good Laws of
England; and therefore I desire the Benefit and Observance of them: And you
that are Judges upon the Bench, ought to be my Council, and not my Accusers,
but to inform me of the Benefit of those Laws; and wherein I am ignorant, you
ought to inform me, that I may not suffer through my own Ignorance of those
Advantages which the Laws of England afford me as an Englishman.


Reader, I here give thee a brief Account of my Taking and Imprisoning, that
thou may the better judge what Justice I had from the Court aforesaid; which
is as follows;

I being in John's Street, London, about the thirteenth Day of the third Month
(called May) with some of the People of God, to wait upon him, as we were sat
together, there came in a rude Man (called Miller) with a long Cane in his
Hand, who laid violent Hands upon me, with some others, beating some,
commanding the Constables who came in after him, but having no Warrant, were
not willing to meddle, but as his Threatenings prevailed, they being afraid of
him, joined with him to carry several of us before Justice Powel (so called)
who the next Day sent us to the Sessions at Hick's-Hall; where after some
Discourse several Times with them, manifesting to them the Illegality both of
our Commitment, and their Proceedings thereupon; yet notwithstanding, they
committed me and others, and caused an Indictment to be drawn against us,
founded upon the late Act against Quakers and others, and then remanded us to
New-Prison, where we continued for some Days, and then removed us to Newgate,
where we remained until the Sessions in the Old Bailey aforesaid: Whereby thou
may understand what Justice I met withal, by what went before, and now
farther follows.

Chief Judge. We sit here to do Justice, and are upon our Oaths; and we are to
tell you what is Law, and not you us: Therefore, Sirrah, you are too bold.


J. Crook. Sirrah is not a Word becoming a Judge; for I am no Felon; neither
ought you to menace the Prisoner at the Bar: For I stand here arraigned as for
my Life and Liberty, and the Preservation of my Wife and Children, and outward
Estate, [they being now at the Stake] therefore you ought to hear me to the
full, what I can say in my own Defense, according to Law, and that in its
Season, as it is given me to speak: Therefore I hope the Court will bear with
me, if I am bold to assert my Liberty, as an Englishman, and as a Christian;
and if I speak loud, it is my Zeal for the Truth, and for the Name of the Lord;
and mine Innocence makes me bold --


Judge. It is an evil Zeal; [interrupting John Crook].


J. C. No, I am bold in the Name of the Lord God Almighty, the everlasting
Jehovah, to assert the Truth, and stand as a Witness for it: Let my Accuser be
brought forth, and I am ready to answer any Court of Justice. --


Then the Judge interrupted me, saying, Sirrah, with some other Words I do not
remember: But I answered, You are not to threaten me, neither are those Menaces
fit for the Mouth of a Judge; for the Safety of the Prisoner stands upon the
Indifferency of the Court: And you ought not to behave your selves as Parties,
seeking all Advantages against the Prisoner, but not heeding any Thing that may
make for his Clearing or Advantage. -- The Judge again interrupted me, saying,

Judge. Sirrah, you are to take the Oath, and here we tender it you (bidding,
read it.)


J. C. Let me see mine Accuser, that I may know for what Cause I have been six
Weeks imprisoned, and do not put me to accuse my self, by asking me Questions;
but either let my Accuser come forth, or otherwise let me be discharged by
Proclamation, as you ought to do. -- Here I was interrupted again.


Judge Twisden. We take no Notice of your being here, otherwise than of a
Straggler, or as any other Person, or of the People that are here this Day; for
we may tender the Oath to any Man. And another Judge spoke to the like Purpose.


J. C. I am here at your Bar as a Prisoner, restrained of my Liberty, and do
question whether you ought in Justice to tender me the Oath on the Account I am
now brought before you, because I am supposed to be an Offender; or else why
have I been six Weeks in Prison already? Let me be cleared of my Imprisonment,
and then I shall answer to what is charged against me, and to the Question ^ow
propounded; for I am a Lover of Justice with all my Soul, and am well known by
my Neighbors, where I have lived, to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both
toward God, and toward Man.


Judge. Sirrah, leave your Canting.


J. C. Is this Canting, to speak the Words of the Scripture?


Judge. It Is Canting in your Mouth, though they are Paul 's Words.


J. C. I speak the Words of the Scripture, and it is not Canting, though I speak
them; but they are Words of Truth and Soberness in my Mouth, they being
witnessed by me, and fulfilled in me.


Judge. We do ask you again, whether you will take the Oath of Allegiance? It
is but a short Question, you may answer if you will.


J. C. By what Law have you. Power to tender it? Then after some Consultation
together by Whispering, they called for the Statute-Book, and turning over the
Leaves, they answered,


Judge. By the Third of King James.


J. C. I desire that Statute may be read; for I have consulted it, and do not
understand that you have Power by that Statute to tender me the Oath, being
here before you in this Place, upon this Occasion, as a Delinquent already; and
therefore I desire the Judgment of the Court in this Case, and that the Statute
may be read.


Judge. Then they took the Statute-Book, and consulted together upon it, and
one said, We are the Judges of this Land, and do better understand our Power
than you do, and we do judge we may lawfully do it.


J. C. Is this the Judgment of the Court?


Judge. Yes.


J. C. I desire the Statute to be read that impowers you to tender the Oath to
me upon this Occasion in this Place; for, Vox audita perit, sed litera scripta
manet, therefore let me hear it read.


Judge. Hear me.


J. C. I am as willing to hear as to speak.


Judge. Then hear me: You are here required to take the Oath by the Court, and
I will inform you what the Penalty will be, in Case you refuse; for your first
Denial shall be recorded, and then it shall be tendered to you again at the End
of the Sessions; and upon the second Refusal you run into a Praemunire, which is
the Forfeiture of all your Estate, (if you have any) and Imprisonment.


J. C. It is Justice I stand for; let me have Justice, in bringing my Accuser
Face to Face, as by Law you ought to do, I standing at your Bar as a
Delinquent; and when that is done, I will answer to what can be charged against
me, as also to the Question; until then, I shall give no other Answer than I
have already done, (at least at present.)


Then there was a Cry in the Court, Take him away, which occasioned a great
Interruption; and J. Crook spoke to this Purpose, saying, Mind the Fear of the
Lord God, that you may come to the Knowledge of his Will, and do Justice; and
take heed of oppressing the Innocent, for the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will
assuredly plead their Cause: And for my Part, I desire not the Hurt of one of
the Hairs of your Heads; but let God's Wisdom guide you. These Words he spoke
at the Bar, and as he was carrying away. On the Sixth Day of the Week, in the
Forenoon following, the Court being sat, John Crook was called to the Bar.

Chief Judge. Friend Crook, we have given you Time to consider of what was said
Yesterday to you by the Court, hoping you may have better considered of it by
this Time; therefore, without any more Words, will you take the Oath^ And
called to the Clerk, and bid him read it.


J. C. I did not, neither do I deny Allegiance, but do desire to know the Cause
of my so long Imprisonment; for, as I said, I stand at your Bar as a
Delinquent, and am brought hither by Force, contrary to the Law; therefore let
me see my Accuser, or else free me by Proclamation, as I ought to be, if none
can accuse me: For the Law is grounded upon right Reason, and whatsoever is
contrary to right Reason, is contrary to Law; and therefore if no Accuser
appear, you ought to acquit me first, and then I shall answer, as I have said,
If any new Matter appear; otherwise it is of Force, and that our Law abhors,
and you ought not to take Notice of my so being before you; for what is not
legally so, is not so; and therefore I am in the Condition, as if I were not
before you: And therefore it cannot be supposed, in right Reason, that you have
now Power, at this Time, and in this Place, legally to tender me the Oath.


Judge. Read the Oath to him; and so the Clerk began to read.


J. C. I desire Justice, according to the Laws of England; for you ought first
to convict me, concerning the Cause of my so long Imprisonment: For you are to
proceed according to Laws already made, and not to make Laws; for you ought to
be Ministers of the Law.


Judge. You are a saucy and an impudent Fellow: Will you tell us what is Law,
or our Duties? Then said he to the Clerk, Read on; and when the Clerk had done
reading;


J. C. said, Read the Preface to the Act; I say again, Read the Title and
Preamble to the Act; for Titles to Laws are Claves Legum, as Keys to open the
Law; for by their Titles, Laws are understood and known, as Men by their Faces.
Then the Judges would have interrupted me, but I said as follows: If you will
not hear me, nor do me Justice; I must appeal to the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, who is Judge of Quick and Dead, before whom we must all appear, to give
an Account for the Deeds done in the Body; for he will judge between you and me
this Day, whether you have done me Justice or not.


These Words following (or the like) I spoke, as going from the Bar, being
pulled away, viz. Mind the Fear of the Lord God, that you may do Justice, lest
you perish in his Wrath. For sometimes the Court cried, Pull him away, and then
said, Bring him again; and thus they did several Times, like Men in Confusion
and Disorder.

The same Day, in the Afternoon, Silence being made, John Crook was called to
the Bar, before the Judges and Justices aforesaid. The Indictment being read,
the Judge said,

Mr. Crook, You have heard your Indictment, what say you? Are you guilty or Not
Guilty?


J. C. I desire to speak a few Words in Humility and Soberness, in regard my
Estate and Liberty lies at Stake, and am like to be a Precedent for many more;
therefore I hope the Court will not deny me Right and Benefit of the Law, as
being an Englishman: I have some Reason, before I speak any Thing to the
lndictment, to demand and tell you, that I desire to know mine Accusers; I have
been kept these six Weeks in Prison, and know not, nor have not seen the Faces
of them.


Judge. We shall afford you the Right of the Law, as a^ Englishman: God forbid
you should be denied it; but you must answer first Guilty, or Not Guilty, that
so in your Trial you may have a fair Hearing and Pleading; but if you go on as
you do, (and will not answer, Guilty, or Not Guilty) you will run your self
into a Praemunire, and then you lose the Benefit of the Law, and expose your
self, Body and Estate, to great Hazards; and whatever Violence is offered to
your Person or Estate, you are out of the King's Protection, and lose the
Benefit of the Law; and all this by your not answering, Guilty, or Not Guilty,
If you plead Not Guilty, you may be heard.


J. C. It is recorded in the Statutes of the 28 Edw. 3. and 3. and 42 Edw. 3.
and 3. in these Words, No Man is to be taken, or imprisoned, or be put to
answer without Presentment before Justices, or Matter of Record, or by due
Process, or Writ-original, according to the old Law of the Land; and if any
Thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and
holden for Error. And also in the 25th of Edw. 1. 2. and the 3 Car. 1. and the
29 cap. Mag. Chart. No Freeman shall be taken and imprisoned, but by the Law of
the Land: These Words [The Law of the Land] are explained by the Statute of 37
Edw. 3. 8. to be without due Process of Law; and if any Judgments are given
contrary to Mag. Chart. they are void, 25 Edw. 1. 2.


Judge. Mr. Crook, You are out of the Way, and do not understand the Law; though
you adore the Statute Law so much, yet you do not understand it.


J. C. I would have you tell me the right Way.


Judge. Mr. Crook, hear me: You must say, Guilty, or Not Guilty: If you plead
Not Guilty, you shall be heard, and know how far the Law favors you. And the
next Thing is, there is no Circumstance whatsoever that is the Cause of your
Imprisonment, that you question, but you have, as a Subject, your Remedies, if
you will go this Way, and wave other Things, and answer, Guilty, or Not Guilty;
and what the Law affords you, you shall have, if you do what the Law requires
you; or else you will lose the Benefit of the Law, and be out of the King's
Protection.


J. C. Observe how the Judge would draw me into a Snare, viz. by first pleading
(Guilty or Not Guilty) and when I have done so, he, and his Brethren intend
suddenly to put me (as an out-lawed Person) out of the King's Protection; and
how then can I have Remedy for my false Imprisonment? Therefore first clear me,
or condemn me, from my false Imprisonment, while I am in a Capacity to have the
Benefit of the Law, and not to outlaw me for an Offense created by your
selves; and then, to stop my Mouth, you tell me, That if I have been wronged or
false imprisoned, I may have my Remedy afterward: This is to trapan me, and
contrary to both Law and Justice, etc.


Judge. You must plead, Guilty, or Not Guilty.


J. C. I do desire in Humility and Meekness, to say, I shall not; I dare not
betray the Honesty of my Cause, and the honest Ones of this Nation, whose
Liberty I stand for, as well as my own; as I have a Cause to think I shall, if
I plead to the present Indictment, before I see the Faces of my Accusers: For
truly, I am not satisfied in my Judgment and Conscience, that I ought to plead
to a created Offense by you, before I be first acquitted of the Cause of my
being brought Prisoner to your Bar; and therefore it sticks with me to urge
this farther, viz. That I may see my Accusers. --


Interruption. Judge. The errantest Thief may say, he is not satisfied in his
Conscience.


J. C. My Case is not theirs, yet they have their Accusers; and may not I call
for mine? And therefore call for them, for you ought to do so; as Christ said
to the Woman, (Woman, where are thine Accusers^) So you ought to say to me,
(Man, where are thine Accusers?) -- Interrupted.


Judge. Your Indictment is your Accuser, and the Grand Jury have found you
Guilty, because you did not Swear: What say you, Mr. Crook, are you Guilty, or
Not Guilty? If you will not answer, or what you have said, be taken for your
Answer, as I told you before, you lose the Benefit of the Law; and what I tell
you, is for your Good.


J. C. What is for Good, I hope I shall take it so.


Judge. If you will not answer, you run your self into a Praemunire, and you
will lose the Benefit of the Law, and of the King's Protection, unless you
plead Guilty, or Not Guilty.


J. C. I stand as brought forcibly and violently hither; neither had I been
here but by a violent Action, and that you should take no Notice of it seems
strange to me; and not only so, but that you should hasten me so fast into a
Course, that I should not be able any ways to help my self, by reason of your
hasty and fast Proceedings against me, to put me out of the King's Protection,
and the Benefit of all Law: Was ever the like known, or heard of, in a Court of
Justice?


Judge. Friend, this is not here in Question, whether you are unjustly brought
here, or not: Do you question That by Law, but not disable your self to take
Advantage by the Law: If brought by a wrong Hand, you have a Plea against them;
but you must first answer Guilty or Not Guilty.


J. C. How can I help my self when you have outlawed me? Therefore let
Proclamation be made in the Court, That I was brought by Force hither, and let
me stand cleared by Proclamation, as you ought to do; for you are Discernere
per Legem, quid sit justum, ^o deter^^ by Law is just.
and not to do what seems good in your own Eyes -- Here I was interrupted
again, but might have spoken Justice Crook's Words in Hambden's Case, who said,
That we who are Judges speak upon our Oaths, and therefore must deliver our
Judgments according to our Consciences; and the Fault will lie upon us, if it
be illegal, and we deliver it for Law: And farther said, We that are Judges
must not give our Judgments according to Policy, or Rules of State, nor
Conveniences, but only according to Law. These were his Words, which I might
have spoken; but was interrupted.


Judge. What, though no Man tendered the Oath to you, when you were committed,
(as you say) it being now tendered to you; from the Time you refused it, being
tendered to you by a lawful Authority, you refusing, are indicted: We look not
upon what you are here for, but h^^ ^^ding you, we tender, you the Oath; and
you refusing it, your Imprisonment is now just, and according to Law.


[Something omitted which I spoke afterwards]. J. C. How came I here, if you
know not? I have told you it is Force and Violence, which our Law altogether
condemns; and therefore I not being legally before, am not before you; for what
is not legally so, is not so; and I not being legally brought to your Bar, you
ought not to take Notice of my being here.


Judge. No no, you are mistaken; so you may say of all the People gazing here,
they not being legally here, are not here: I tell you, a Man being brought by
Force hither, we may tender him the Oath; and if he take it not, he may be
committed to Prison; Authority has given us the Power, and the Statute Law
has given us Authority to tender the Oath to any Person, and so have we
tendered it to you; and for your not taking it, you are indicted by the Grand
Jury: Answer the Accusation, or confute the Indictment; ou must do the one or
the other, answer Guilty or not guilty.


J. C. Here I was interrupted, but might have said, That the People that were
Spectators, beholding and hearing the Trials, are not to be called Gazers, as
the Judge terms them; because it is their Liberty and Privilege, as they are
Englishmen, and the Law of England allows the same; so that they are not to be
termed Gazers upon this Account, but are legally in that Place, to hear Trials,
and see Justice done, and might have spoken (if Occasion had been) any Thing in
the Prisoner's Defense, tending to clear up the Matter in Difference, and the
Court must have heard them or him; And this as a Stander-by, or Amicus Curiae,
so says Cook.


J. C. The Law is built upon Right Reason, or Right Reason is the Law; and
whatever is contrary to right Reason, is contrary to Law; the Reason of the Law
being the Law it self. I am no Lawyer, and my Knowledge of it is but little,
yet I have a Love to it for that Reason I have found in it, and have spent some
leisurable Hours in the Reading thereof; and the Law is that which I honor,
and is good in its Place; many Laws being just and good (not all) but, I say, a
great Part of it, or much of it; and that is not my Intention in the least to
disparage, or derogate from.


Judge. Mr. Crook, you have been told, you must plead Guilty, or Not Guilty, or
else you run your self into a Praemunire; be not your own Enemy, nor be not so
obstinate.


J. C. I would not stand obstinately before you, neither am I so; if you
understand it otherwise, it is a Mistake indeed.


Judge. Will you speak to the Indictment, and then you may plead? If you will
not answer Guilty, or Not Guilty, we will record it, and Judgment shall go
against you. Clerk, enter him.


Recorder. Mr. Crook, if you will answer, you may plead for your self, or will
you take the Oath? The Court takes no Notice how you came hither; What say you?
Will you answer? For a Man may be brought out of Smithfield by Head and
Shoulders, and the Oath tendered to him, and may be committed, without taking
Notice how he came here.


J. C. That kind of Proceeding is not only unjust but unreasonable also --
[Here was some Interruption] and against the Laws aforesaid, which say, No Man
shall be taken or imprisoned, but by Warrant, or due Process of Law: So that
this Speech of the Recorder's savours more of Passion than Justice; and
Cruelty, than due Observance of Law; for every forcible Restraint of a Man's
Liberty, is an Imprisonment in Law. Besides, this kind of Practice, to take Men
by Force, and imprison them, and then ask them Questions, the answering of
which makes them Guilty, is not only unrighteous in it self, but against Law,
and makes one evil Act the Ground of another; and one Injury offered to one,
the Foundation of another; and this is my Case this Day. --


[Interruption.] Judge. Mr. Crook, You must not be your own Judge; we are your
Judges; but for our Parts we will not wrong you: Will you answer Guilty, or Not
Guilty? If not, you will run your self into a Praemunire unavoidably, and then
you know what I told you, would follow, for we take no Notice how you came
hither, but finding you here, we tender you the Oath.


J. C. Then it seems You make the Law a Trapan to ensnare me, or as a Nose of
Wax, or what you please: Well! I shall leave my Cause with the Lord God, who
will plead for me in Righteousness. But suppose I do take the Oath [now] at
this Time, you may call me again [to-morrow.] and make a new Tender; or others
may call me before them.


Judge. Yes, if there be new Matter; or if there fall out any emergent
Occasion, whereby you may minister on your Part new Occasion: Mr. Crook, will
you swear?


J. C. If I do take it to Day, it may be tendered me again tomorrow, and so
next Day, ad infinitum, whereby a great Part of my Time may be spent and taken
up in taking the Oath, and swearing.


C. Judge. When you have [once] sworn, you may not be put upon it again, except
you minister Occasion on your Part.


J. C. Is this the Judgment of the Court, that the Oath [once] taken by me is
sufficient, and ought not to be tendered a Second Time, without new Matter
ministered on my Part?


Judge. Yes, you making it appear you have [once] taken it.


J. C. Is this the Judgment of the whole Court? for I would not do any Thing
rashly.


Judges. Yes, it is the Judgment of the Court. To which they all standing up,
said, Yes.


J. C. Then it seems there must be some new Occasion ministered by me after I
have [once] taken it, or it ought not to be tendered to me the second Time.


Judges. Yes.


J. C. Then by the Judgment of this Court, if I make it appear that I have
taken the Oath [once] and I have ministered no new Matter on my Part, whereby I
can be justly charged with the Breach of it, then it ought not to be tendered me
the second Time: But I am the Man that have ^^k^d it [once] being a Freeman of
the City of London, when I was made free; witness the Records in Guild Hall,
which I may produce, and no new Matter appearing to you on my Part; if there
do, let me know it; if not, you ought not, by your own Judgment, to tender me
it the second Time; for, De non apparentibus, and non existentibus eadem Ratio
est. --


Interrupted by the Shout of the Court, when these last Words might have been
spoken. Judge. Mr. Crook, you are mistaken, you must not think to surprise the
Court with Criticisms, nor draw false Conclusions from our Judgments.


J. C. If this he not a natural Conclusion from the Judgment of the Court, let
right Reason judge; and if you recede from your own Judgments in the same
Breath (as it were) given even now, what Justice can I expect from you? For, if
you will not be just to your selves, and your own Judgments, how can I expect
you should be just to me?


Judge. Mr. Crook, If you have taken it, if there be a new Emergency, you are
to take it again; as for Instance, The King has been out of England, and now
is come in again, there be many have taken it twenty, thirty, or forty Years
since, yet this new Emergency requires it again; and although you have taken it,
yet you must not make it appear before you answer Guilty, or Not Guilty;
therefore do not wrong your self, and prejudice your self and Family: Do you
think that every Fellow that comes hither shall argue as you do? We have no
more to do, but to know of you, whether you will answer (Guilty, or Not Guilty)
or take the Oath, and then you shall be freed from the Indictment; if you will
not plead, Clerk, record, it: What say you? Are you Guilty, or Not Guilty?


J. C. Will you not stand to your own Judgments? Did you not say even now, That
if I had [once] taken the Oath, it ought not to be tendered to me the Second
Time, except I administered new Matter on my Part that I have not kept it, etc.
but no such Matter appearing, you ought not to tender it to me the second Time,
by your own Confession, much less to indict me for Refusal.


Judge. If you will not plead, we will record it, and Judgment shall be given
against you, therefore say, Guilty, or Not Guilty, or else we will record it.


[The Clerk beginning to record it.] J. C. Before I answer, I demand a Copy of
my Indictment; for I have heard it affirmed by Council learned in the Law, That
if I plead before I have a Copy, or have made my Exceptions, my Exceptions
afterward against the Indictment will be made void: Therefore I desire a Copy
of the Indictment.


Judge. He that said so, deserves not the Name of a Council, for the Law is,
You must first answer, and then you shall have a Copy. Will you plead, Guilty,
or Not Guilty?


J. C. If my pleading Guilty, or Not Guilty, will not deprive me of the Benefit
of quashing the Indictment for Insufficiency, or other Exceptions that I may
make against it, I shall speak to it.


Judge. No it will not. Will you answer, Guilty, or Not Guilty? If you plead
not, the Indictment will be found against you; Will you, answer? We will stay
no longer.


J. C. I am upon the Point: Will not my Pleading deprive me of the Benefit of
the Law? For I am tender in that Respect, because it is not my own Case [only]
but may be the Case of [Thousands] more; therefore I would do nothing that
might prejudice others, or my self, as a Christian, or as an Englishman.


Judge. Understand your self, (but we will not make a Bargain with you, said
another Judge) you shall have the Right done you as an Englishman, the Way is
to answer, Guilty, or Not Guilty: If you plead, and find the Indictment not
good, you may have your Remedy: Answer, Guilty, or Not Guilty?


J. C. As to the Indictment, it is very large, and seems to be confused, and
made up of some Things true, and some Things false; my Answer therefore is,
What is true in the Indictment I will not deny, because I make Conscience of
what I say, and therefore, of what is true, I confess my self Guilty, but what
is false, I am Not Guilty of that.


Judge. That is not sufficient; either answer Guilty, or Not Guilty, or
Judgment will be given against you.


J. C. I will speak the Truth, as before the Lord, as all along I have
endeavored to do: I am not guilty of that which is false, contained in the
Indictment, which is the Substance thereof.


Judge. No more ado, the Form is nothing, Guilty, or Not?


J. C. I must not wrong my Conscience, I am not guilty of what is false, as I
said before; what is true, I am guilty of; what is not true, I am not guilty of
that; which is the Substance thereof, as I said before.


Recorder. It is enough, and shall serve turn. Enter that, Clerk.


The Seventh Day of the Week, called Saturday.

Silence being made, John Crook was called to the Bar. The Clerk of the
Sessions read something concerning the Jury, which was empannelled on purpose
(as was said,) the Jury being discharged, who were Eyewitnesses of what passed
between us and the Court: And this Jury, being diverse of them Soldiers, some of
whom did by Violence and Force pull and hale Friends out of their Meetings, and
some of us out of our Houses; and these were of the Jury by whom we were to be
tried. The Clerk reading the Indictment (as I remember.)

J. C. I desire to be heard a few Words, which are these, That we may have
Liberty till the next Quarter Sessions, to traverse the Indictment, it being
long, and in Latin, and like to be a Precedent: And I hope I need not press it,
because I understood that you promised, (and especially the Recorder, who
answered, when it was desired, you shall) that we should have Council also, the
which we cannot be expected to have had the Benefit of, as yet, the Time being
so short, and we kept Prisoners, that we could not go forth to advise with
Council, neither could we tell how to get them to us; we having no Copy of the
Indictment before this Morning; and because so suddenly hurried down to the
Sessions, we cannot reasonably be supposed to be provided (as to Matter of Law)
to make our Defense.


Judge. We have given you Time enough, and you shall have no more; for we well
try you at this Time, therefore swear the Jury.


J. C. I desire we may have Justice, and that we may not be surprised in our
Trial, but that we may have Time till the next Quarter Sessions, our Indictment
being in Latin, and so large as it is; and this is but that which is
reasonable, and is the Practice of other Courts: For, if it be but an Action
above forty Shillings, it is not ordinarily ended under two or three Terms. And
in the Quarter Sessions, if one be indicted for a Trespass, if it be but to the
Value of five Shillings, he shall have Liberty to enter his Traverse, and, upon
Security given to prosecute, he shall have Liberty till the next Sessions,
which is the ordinary Practice, which Liberty we desire, and we hope it is so
reasonable, it will not be denied, especially upon this Occasion, we being like
to be made a Precedent: And Courts of Justice have used to be especially
careful in making of Precedents; for we are not provided, according to Law, to
make our Defense at this Time, and therefore if we be put upon it, it will be a
Surprizal.


Judge. There is no great Matter of Law in the Case, it is only Matter of Fact,
Whether you have refused to take the Oath or not, that is the Point in Issue:
And what Law can arise here?


Recorder. Mr. Crook, The Keeper of the Prison was spoken to, to tell you, that
we intended to try you this Day, and therefore ordered him, that Council might
come to you, if you would; and also, that the Clerk should give you a Copy of
the Indictment: This is fair; therefore we will go on to swear the Jury; for
the Matter is, Whether you refuse the Oath, or not? And that is the single
Point, and there needs neither Law nor Council in the Case; and therefore we
considered of it last Night, when we sent you Word, and did determine to try
you; and therefore it is in vain to say any Thing, for the Court is resolved to
try you now; therefore swear the Jury, Crier.


J. C. I hope you will not surprise us: Then the other Prisoners (who also were
indicted) cried out (having spoken something before) Let us have Justice, and
let not the Jury be sworn till we be first heard. So there was a great Noise,
the Court being in a Confusion, some crying, Take them away; others, Stay, let
them alone; others saying, Go on to swear the Jury: Which the Crier in this
Uproar and Confusion did do something, as if he had done it: Then we all cried
out for Justice and Liberty till the next Sessions; the Court being in a
Confusion, some crying one Thing, and some another, which now cannot be called
to Mind, by Reason of the great Distraction that was in the Court; neither what
we said to them, nor they to us, the Noise was so great, and the Commands of
the Court so various to the Officers, some commanding them to take us away;
others, to let us alone; others, to bring us nearer; others cried, Put them
into the Bail-dock; others, to put them within the farthest Bar, where the
Felons used to stand; where we were forced into accordingly: And in this
Hurliburly and Confusion that was among them, some Men were sworn, to testify
that we refused to take the Oath, which we never positively did; other Officers
of the Court, whom they would have sworn, refused to swear, though pressed to it
by the Chief Justice, they desired to be excused. Then spoke one of the
Prisoners again pretty much, but could hardly be understood, by Reason of the
Noise in the Court; but the People, to whom he spoke with a loud Voice, by Way
of Exhortation, might hear the Substance of what he said, which cannot now
particularly be called to Mind; but it was to express the Presence and Love of
God to himself, and to exhort others to mind his Fear, that they also might be
acquainted with God, etc.


Judge. Stop his Mouth, Executioner. Which was accordingly done.


Prisoners. Then we cried out, Will you not give us leave to speak for our
selves; We except against some of the Jury, as being our Enemies, and some of
them who by Force commanded us to be pulled out of our Meetings, contrary to
Law, and carried us to Prison without Warrant, or other Process of Law; and
shall these be our Judges? We except against them.


Judge. It is too late now, you should have done it before they had been sworn
Jurymen. Jury, go together, that which you have to find, is whether they have
refused to take the Oath, or no, which have been sworn before you, that they
did refuse, You need not go from the Bar. And like Words said the Recorder, and
others, there being a Confusion and Noise in the Court, many speaking together.


Prisoners. Then we cried for Justice, and that we might be heard, to make our
Defense, before the Jury gave their Verdict; but the Judge and Recorder said,
we should not be heard, (making good by their Practice, what the Chief Judge
had said the Day before, viz. That if we had Liberty to speak, we would make
our selves famous, and them odious) crying again. Stop their Mouths,
Executioner; which was done accordingly, with a dirty Cloth, and also
endeavored to have gagged me, J. C.
striving to get hold of my Tongue, having a Gag ready in his Hand for that
Purpose; and so we were served several Times. Then I called out with a loud
Voice, Will you condemn us without hearing? This is to deal worse with us, than
Pilate did with Christ, who, though he condemned him without a Cause, yet not
without hearing him speak for himself; but you deny us both.


Judge. Let Mr. Gray come to the Bar. Room being made, he was convey^d to an
Officer in the inner Bar, where he spoke to the Court to this Purpose: I desire
to know whether, according to Law, and the Practice of this Court, my self, and
my Fellow Prisoners, may have Liberty to put in Bail, to prosecute our Traverse
at the next Sessions?


Court. No, we will try you presently.


Judge. Stop their Mouths, Executioner: And this was the Cry of many upon the
Bench, they being still in a continued Confusion; some crying to the Jury, Give
in your Verdict, for we will not hear them; with other Words, which could not
be heard for the Noise, the Court being in Confusion.


J. C. You might as well have caused us to have been murdered before we came
hither, as to bring us hither under Pretense to try us, and not give us Leave
to make our Defense; you had as good take away our Lives at the Bar, as to
command us thus to be abused, and to have our Mouths stopped: Was ever the like
known? Let the righteous God judge between us. Will you hear me? You have often
promised that you would.


Judge Hear me, and we will hear you: Then he began to speak, and some others
of the Bench interrupted him; sometimes they speaking two or three at a Time,
and a Noise amongst the Officers of the Court: But the Judge said, We may give
you Liberty till the next Sessions, but we may choose; and therefore we will try
you now.


J. C. I bad the People take Notice of their Promise, That I should have
Liberty to speak, saying, See now you be as good as your Words.


Judge. The Law of England is not only just, but merciful; and therefore you
shall not be surprised, but shall have what Justice the Law allows. --


[Interruption.] J. C. I remember what the Judge said even now, That the Law of
England was a MERCIFVL Law; that the Court had said before, They might, if ^hey
would, give us Liberty till the next Sessions, but they would not; and the
Maxim of the Law also is, Summum j^^, est summa injuria; therefore I hope your
Practice will make it good, that it is a merciful Law; and not to execute
Summum jus, etc. upon me, and thereby condemn your selves out of your own
Mouths.


Judge. Jury, give in your Verdict.


J. C. Let me have Liberty first to speak; it is but few Words, and I hope I
shall do it with what Brevity and Pertinency my Understanding will give me
Leave, and the Occasion requires; it is to the Point in these two Heads, viz.
Matter of Law, and Matter of Conscience: To Matter of Law, I have this to say,
First, as to the Statute it self, it was made against the Papists, occasioned
by the Gun-powder-Plot, and is entitituled, For the better Discovery and
suppressing of Popish Recusants: But they have Liberty, and we are destroyed,
what in you lies.) -- (Interrupted by the Judges, and Disturbance of the
Court,) As to Conscience, I have something to say, and that is, It is a tender
Thing, and we have known what it is to offend it; and therefore we dare not
break Christ's Commands, who has said, S^ear not at all; and the Apostle James
said, Above all Things, my Brethren, swear not. -- (Interrupted) The Court
calling again to the Executioner to stop my Mouth; which he did accordingly,
with his dirty Cloth, as aforesaid, and his Gag in his Hand.


Judge. Hear the Jury; who said something to him, which was supposed to give in
the Verdict, according to his Order; for they were fit for his Purpose, as it
seems, they beginning to lay their Heads together, before we had spoke any
thing to them, only upon his Words.


Judge. Crier, make Silence in the Court: Then the Recorder, taking a Paper
into his Hand, read to this Purpose, viz. The Jury for the King do find, that
John Crook, John Bolton, and Isaac Gray, are guilty of refusing to take the
Oath of Allegiance; for which you do incur a Praemunire, which is the Forfeiture
of all your real Estates during Life, and your personal Estates for ever; and
you to be out of the King's Protection, and to be imprisoned during his
Pleasure: And this is your Sentence.


J. C. But we are still under God's Protection.


Then the Prisoners were remanded to Newgate, where J. Crook found Opportunity
to make a Narrative of the whole Trial which was printed as aforesaid, together
with the Latin Indictment, in which he showed several Errors, either by wrong
Expressions, or by Omissions. Thus the Injustice of these arbitrary Proceedings
were exposed to public View, when this Trial appeared in Print; that the King
himself might see thereby, how ill his Subjects were treated. But at that Time
there were so many among the great Ones and Bishops, who were inclined to
promote the Extirpation of the Quakers, that there seemed no humane Help. J.
Crook, showed also circumstantially, how in many Cases of the Trial, they had
acted against Law; for he himself having formerly been a Justice, knew well
enough now an after what Manner Justice ought to be administered and maintained.
How long he continued Prisoner, I cannot tell. But by this Trial alone the
Reader may see, how the Quakers, so called, were treated in Regard of the Oath:
And such Kind of Proceeding was the Lo^ of many of them, because the Intent of
those in Authority seemed to be to suppress them quite.

Now follows a Copy of the Indictment, with some Notes and Observations on the
same; whereby it may appear, how false it is, and how easily it might have been
quashed for Insufficiency, had we been allowed Time, (which by Law they ought
to have granted) and been suffered to have made our own Defense; but that they
would not do but stopped our Mouths, as before is said, by the Hands of the
Executioner, to prevent what otherwise (as the Judge said) might have come to
pass, viz. by having Liberty to make our Defense, by that Means we should make
our selves famous, and them odious.

London Sess. JVr. pro Dno. Rege super sacru. suu. presentant quoth. Ad. General.
Quarteral. Session. Pacis Dni. Regis tent. pro Civitat. London. ap^d. Guihald.
ejusdem Civitat. die Mercurij scilt. vicesimo quinto die Junii Anno Regni Dni.
n'ri Caroli sc'di Dei gna. Angliae, Scot' Franc' and Hiberniae, Regis Fidei
defensor. etc. quarto decimo, coram Joh. Frederick Milite Majore Civitat.
London. Thoma Adams Milite and Baronet, Rico Brown Milite and Baronet and Thoma
Aleyn Milite and Baronet, Aldr'is d'ce Civitat. ac al. Sociis suis Jus^^ dci.
d'ni Regis ad Pacem in Civitat. praed. conservand. Nee non ad diver's felon.
transgr. and al. malef'ca infra candem Civitat. perpetrat. audiend. and
tormin^nd. assign. Sessio. ista pacis adjornat. fuit. per p^^^at. Justic. dc'i
d'ni Regis ib'm usque diem Jovis scilt. vicesim, sext. diom ejusdem mensis
Junii anno supradic^o ad horam septimam ante merid. ejusdem diei apud
Justicehall in le Old Baily in Paro^h. soi. Sepulchri in Warda de Farringdon
extra London-praed. tenend. coram praefat. Justic. and al Sociis suis ad
faciend. ulterius prout Cur. Con. etc. Ac ad ^und^m diem Jovis vicesimum sextum
diem Junii Anno quarto decimo supradicto General, Quarteral. Sessio ista pacis
tent. fuit pro Civitat. London, pr^d. per adjornament. praed. apud Justicehall
praed. in Paroch and Ward, praed. coram praefat. Johe Frederick Milite Majore
Civitat. London, Thoma Adams Milite and Baronet, Richardo Brown Milite and
Baronet, and Thoma Aleyn Milite and Baronet, Aldr'is d'o^ Civitat. ac Willo
Wild Milite and Baronet, ^^o Scrivien. dc'i d'ni Regis ad Legem ac Recordator.
Civitat. praed. Ac al. Socii^ sui^ Justic. d'ci D'ni Regis ad Pacem in Civitat.
praed. conservand. Neonon ad. diverse. felon. transgr, and al. male^a. infra
candem Civitat. perpetrat. audiend. ^t tertminand. assign. Ac adtuw^ et ib m.
praed. General. Quarteral. Sessio Pacis praed. ulterius adjornal fuit per
praefat. usque diem Veneris scilt. vicesim. septim. diem. dci. mensis Junii
Anno quarto decimo supradicto, ad horam septimam ante merid, ejusdom diei apud
Justicehall praed, in Parochia ^t Wards praed, tenend coram praefat, Justic, et
al Sociis (...) faciend. ulterius prout Cur, Con. Ac superiende ad istam candem
General. Quarteral. Session, Pacis te^t, pro Civitat, London. per Adjornament.
praed apud Justicehall praed. in Paroch, and Warda praed. dco die Veneris
vices^mo septimo die Junii Anno qu^rto decimo suprad^cto, coram praefat. Johe
Frederick Milite Majore Civitat. London. Thoma Adams Milite and Baronet, Rico
Brown Milite and Baronet This is Error, for R. C. Arm. was not before-named.
Rico Chiverton Armigero et Thoma Aleyn Milite et Baronet, Aldr'is d'ce
Civitat. Ac Willo Wild Milite et Baronet, uno Scrivien. d'ci. D'ni Regis ad
Legam a^ Recordator. ejusdem Civitat. ac al Sociis suis Justic. d'ci. D'ni
Regis ad Pacem in Civitat. praed. conservand. Nee won ad diverse. felon.
transgr. ^t al. malef'ca infra ^aud. Civitat. perpetrat. audiend. et terminand.
assig^. in aperta General. Quarteral. Session. praed. prefat. Justicias. Pacis
ult. ^oi^t existentes major pars Justic. Pacis ipsius D'ui Regis infra d'cam
Civitat. London' ad tunc seilt. dco. vicesimo septimo die Junii Anno quarto
decimo suprad^o. ^pud d'cam Paroch. Sci. Sepulchri in Ward^ de Farringdon extra
London praed. presen. existend. obtuler. Anglice did tender Johi Crook nup^^ de
London Generoso, Johi Bolton nuper de London. Aurifabro, et Isaac Gray nuper de
London. Generoso et eor. cuilibt. separatim per se (ad tun^ existen. et
cuilibt. eor. existen. ultra Aetat. octodecim Annor. This is Error, because it
is not said Et subditi, d'ni Regis.
) Jurament. content. in quodam Actu in Parliament. Dni. Jacobi nuper Regis
Angliae tent. per Prorogationem This should be Prorogationes, for there was a
double Prorogation.
apud Westminster. in Com Middles. quinto die Novembris Anno Regni sui Angliae Franc.
et Hiberniae tertio, et Scotiae tricesimo novo nuper edit et pro vis in his
Anglicanis verbis sequen. viz. This is Error, because it wants A. B.
I do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my
Conscience, before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the
Second It ought to be with some Expression of mutatis mutandis, of the Name of
K. Charles the second, instead of K. James, who is only named in the Ad. This
is error* (...)
is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries: And that the Pope, neither or himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other Means with any other,
has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or Leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any Violence, or Hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects, within his Majesty's Dominions. Also, I do swear from my Heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration, or Sentence of Excommunication, or
Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made, or granted by the Pope, or his
Successors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or
his See, not agreeable to the Statute; for that says only K. James: and
certainly the Stat. intended no otherwise; for it is said, For the Trial of his
Majesty's Subjects, how they stand affected etc. and not the Subjects of his
Majestys's Heirs and Successors
against the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said
Subjects from their Obedience; I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my Power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against his, or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by Reason
or Color of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my
best Endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which I shall know, or
hear of, to be against him, or any of them. And I do farther swear, That I do
from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure, as impious, and Heretical, this
damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which be excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed and murdered by their Subjects, or any
other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in (My) not in the Statute.
my Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any Person whatsoever,
has Power to absolve me of this Oath, or any Part thereof, which I acknowledge
by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce
all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these Things I do
plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express Words
by me spoken, and according to the plain and common Sense and Understanding of
the same Words, without any Equivocation, or mental Evasion, or secret
Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgment
heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me
God. Ac ad prefat. Justic. pacis ult. no' iat Ad pacem conservand. nec nou etc*
left out.
ad tunc and ibidem, is left out.
scilt. dco. vicesimo septimo die Junii Anno quarto decimo supradicto apud
Paroch, and Ward. praed. in dca. Generalis. left out.
Quarteral. Session. pacis praed. eosdem Joh'em Crook, Joh'em Bolton, and
Isaacum Gray, and eor. quemlibt. separatim per se requisiver. ad Jurament.
illud super Sacrosco. Dei Evangel. capiend. Quodque iidem Johes Crook, Johes
Bolton, and Isaacus Gray, Jurament. praed. sic per pr. noi' at Justiq. pacis
ejusdem Johi Crook, Johi Bolton, and Isaaco Gray, ut praefectur. oblat. and
requisite. adtunc and ibm. obstinate and pertinaciter cape recusaver. and
quilibt. eor Recusavit. Contra debitam quoadlibet eor. Legeanci^m, ought here
to be inserted; for if he be not a natural Subject, the Oath is not to be
tendered to him. Immediately after the tender to J. C. J. B. and I. G. though
they be termed subditos dci end. Re.
In malum exemplum omniu. alior. dcti Dni Regis nunc fidel. subdit. Et in
contempt. dci Dni. Regis nun^ Legumque suar. Contra formam Statut. praed. Ac
contra Pacem dci. Dni Regis nunc coron. and Dignitat. suas, etc.

WILD.

Any Englishman that understands Latin, may, notwithstanding the Abbreviations,
indifferently understand this Indictment, but a Forreigner not understanding
English, though a Scholar, will be at a Loss in many Places: Yet to complete my
Work, I thought it convenient not to omit such an Authentic Piece.

Memorand. That in the Writ of Oyer and Terminer, Pasche 9. Hen. 8. upon the
Insurrection in London, it was resolved clearly by all the Justices of England,
That the Justices of Oyer and Terminer cannot enquire one Day, and the same Day
determine; no more can the Justices of the Peace, etc. But the Justices of
Jail-delivery, and Justices in Air, may well do it; El 8. Keyleway's Rep. f.
159, b. pl. 2. But they do not call themselves so in the Indictment.

If one in his Absence be found guilty of an Offense whereby he incurs a
Praemunire, he has two Months Time allowed him, after he is outlawed, to be
heard. 27 Edw. 3.1 Cap. Cook upon Littl. sect. 201. so. 134, b. says, That the
ancient Law was, upon Trials for Felony, etc. the Defendant had fifteen Days
Time, or more, (if he prayed it) to consider of his Answer.

With this agrees Britton, fo. 10 b.

Fortes^ue, in libro de laudib. Legum Angliae.

Mirror of Justice, Cap 4. sect. 7.

The Statute of 28 Edw. 1. 9. provides, That Inquests shall be of the next
Neighbors, most sufficient, and least suspicious, upon Penalty of double
Damages.

25 Edw. 3. Cap. 3. No Indictor be upon the Inquests for Felony nor Trespass,
if challenged.

34 Edw. 3. 4. Juries to be of the next People, not to be suspected or
procured. With this agrees Regist. fo. 178.

11 Hen 4. 9. That if any Indictment be made, but by Inquest returned by the
Sheriff, (without denomination to him of their Names) by any but his sworn
Officer, it shall be void.

By these and the like Treatments we see how the Persecutors endeavored to
root out the Quakers, if possible; for the effecting of which, Alderman Richard
Brown did whatever he could, continually letting loose the Reins to his
exorbitant Malice, without regarding whether that which he was bent against was
really punishable, or not, whereof the following Instance may serve for an
Evidence. A certain Mender of old Shoes who belonged to the Society of the
Quakers, was desired by a laboring Man on a seventh Day of the Week late at
Night, to mend a Pair of Shoes for him, that he might have them again in the
Morning, because he had no other to wear. The Cobbler, to accomodate the Man,
sat up at Work till after Midnight; but the Shoes not being finished then, he
went to Bed; and rising early in the Morning, went to his Work again, as
privately as he could in his Chamber. But an envious Neighbor informed against
him for working on a Sunday; whereupon he was had before the said R. Brown, who
committed him to Bridewel, to be there kept to hard Labor. And he refusing to
beat Hemp, as being fully persuaded that he had not deserved such a Punishment,
was cruelly whipped, but he bore it with great Constancy, and not yiedling, he
was turned up among those of his Society, who were imprisoned ^here on a
religious Account.

As ^his Case, which befell an honest Man, was to be pitied, so there happened
about that Time something among the Quakers, at London, which was facetious and
ridiculous: For several of them being taken out of their religious Meetings,
were confined in Newgate, The Condition of Friends Confinement in Newgate.
where in the Night, they lodged in a large Room, having in the middle of it a
great Pillar, to which they fastened their Hammocks, at the one End, and to the
opposite Wall on the other, quite ^ound the Room, in three Stories high, one
over another; so that they who lay in the upper and middle Rows, were fain to
go to Bed first, being obliged to climb up to the higher, by getting into the
lower: And under the lower Rank of Hammocks, by the Wall-side, were laid Beds
upon the Floor. Such a Multitude of Bedding for so many Persons in one Room,
could not but somewhat infect the Air, and cause an unhealthy Steam; so that
some ^^ew sick, and one of the Prisoners died. This caused some Bustle, and it
was not without good Reason, that an ancient grave Citizen, having seen the
Prisoners thus crowded up, said, This is enough to breed an Infection among
them. And this having been told to Sir William Turner, one of the Sheriffs of
London, he came into Newgate, and bidding the Turnkey bring down the said
Prisoners to him in the Press-yard, where he was, he ordered they should return
to Bridewel, where they had been before. A shabby Fellow thrust in among them
removed by Means of T. Elwood.
Now among these was a shabby Fellow, who, to get Victuals without working, had
thrust himself among the Quakers, when they were taken at a Meeting, on Purpose
to be sent to Prison, and to be maintained by them. This lazy Varlet was no
small Burden to our Prisoners; for whenever any Victuals were brought in to
them, either for their Money, or sent to them by their Friends, he did not
stick to thrust in with his Knife in Hand, and make himself his own Carver; and
such was his Impudence, that if he saw the Provision was short, he would be
sure to take enough, though others wanted. But how burdensome soever this lazy
Drone was to the Prisoners, they could get no Relief; for to whom should they
complain? Since the Keepers as well as others were for vexing and oppressing
them. But now at length an Opportunity was come to be rid of his troublesome
Company. Among the Prisoners, was Thomas Elwood, a Man of Literature, and of an
acute Wit, with whom, long after, I entered into a familiar, and pleasing
Correspondence by Letters. The said Elwood, when he had heard that they were to
be sent to Bridewel, drew near to the Sheriff, and pointing to the aforesaid
Fellow, said, That Man is not only none of our Company, but an idle dissolute
Fellow, who has thrust himself among our Friends, that he might live upon
them; therefore I desire we may not be troubled with him at Bridewel. The
Sheriff smiling, and seeing this Fellow standing with his Hat^on, and looking
as demurely as he could, that the Sheriff might take him for a Quaker, called
him forth, and said to him, How came you to be in Prison? I was taken at a
Meeting, said he. But what Business had you there, said the Sheriff? I went to
hear, returned the Fellow. Ay, you went upon a worse Design, it seems, replied
the Sheriff; but I^ll disappoint you, continued he; for I will change your
Company; and send you to them that are like your self. Then calling for the
Turnkey, he said, Take this Fellow, and put him among the Felons; and be sure
let him not trouble the Quakers any more. The Fellow not a little astonished at
the hearing of this Doom, on a sudden parted with his Quakership; for off went
his Hat, and falling to bowing and scraping, he said to the Sheriff, Good your
Worship, have Pity upon me, and set me at Liberty. No, No, said the Sheriff, I
will not so far disappoint you: Since you had a Mind to be in Prison, in Prison
you shall be for me. Then bidding the Turnkey once more to take him away, he
had him up, and put him among the Felons. After this Manner this pretended
Quaker was rewarded according to his Deeds; R. Hubberthorn taken at a Meeting,
abused by R. Brown, and sent to Newgate.
and so the true Quakers got rid of him Breaking off now this jocose and
diverting, though true Narrative, I return to a serious Relation of the
Sufferings of the faithful, which caused the Death of some of them; among these
was Richard Hubberthorn, who some Time before, as has been related, had a
Conference with the King, who then promised him, that he and his Friends should
not suffer for their Opinions or Religion. But now he was in the Month called
June, violently haled from the Meeting bearing the Name of the Bull and Mouth,
and brought before Alderman Richard Brown, who with his own Hands pulled down
his Hat upon his Head, with such Violence, that he brought his Head near to the
Ground, and then committed him to Newgate, where being thronged among others,
he soon grew sick; and his Sickness so increased, that he had hardly been two
Months in Prison, before he was taken away by Death. And dies there.
Two Days before his Departure, being visited by some of his Friends, who asked
him if any Thing was upon his Spirits, he said, That there was no need to
dispute Matters, for he knew the Ground of his Salvation, and was satisfied for
ever in his Peace with the Lord. He also said, That Faith which has wrought my
Salvation, I well know, and have grounded Satisfaction in it. In the Morning
before he deceased, one Sarah Blackberry was with him, to whom he said, Do not
seek to hold me, for it is too strait for me, and out of this Straitness I must
go; for I am wound into Largeness, and am to be lifted up on high, far above
all. In this Frame of Mind he departed this Life, in the Evening, and so
entered with Happiness into Eternity.

Now I come also to the glorious Exit of E. Buroughs, that valiant Hero,
Passages previous to the Death of E. Buroughs.
of whom Mention has often been made in this History. For several Years he had
been very much at London, and there preached the Gospel with piercing and
powerful Declarations. And that City was so near to him, that oftentimes, when
Persecution grew hot, he said to Francis Howgil his Bosom Friend, I can freely
go to the City of London, and lay down my Life for a Testimony to that Truth,
which I have declared through the Power and Spirit of God. And being in this Year
at Bristol, and thereabouts, and moved to return to London, he said to many of
his Friends, when he took his Leave of them, That he did not know he should see
their Faces any more; and therefore he exhorted them to Faithfulne^^ and
Stedfastness in that wherein they had found Rest for their Souls. And to some
he said, I am now going up to the City of London again, to lay down my Life for
the Gospel, and suffer amongst Friends in that Place.

Not long after, coming to London, and preaching in the Meeting House called
the Bull and Mouth, he was violently pulled down by some Soldiers and had
before Alderman Richard Brown, and committed to Newgate. Several Weeks
afterward, being brought to the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, he was fined
by the Court twenty Marks, and to lie in Prison till Payment. But judging this
unreasonable in a high Degree, he could not bend thereto for Conscience Sake.
He was kept there in Prison about eight Months, with six or seven Score
Prisoners besides upon the same Account. But they being so crowded, that for
want of Room their Natures were suffocated, many grew sick and died, of which
Number he was one. And though a special Order from the King was sent to the
Sheriffs of London, for his and some other Prisoners Release, yet such was the
Enmity of some of the City-Magistrates, especially Brown, that they did what
was in their Power to prevent the Execution of the said Order. And thus E.
Buroughs continued Prisoner, though his Sickness increased. During the Time of
his Weakness he was very fervent in Prayer, as well for his Friends as for
himself; and many consolatory and glorious Expressions proceeded from his
Mouth. Some of his Expressions during his Weakness.
Once he was heard to say, I have had the Testimony of the Lord's Love unto me
from my Youth; and my Heart, O Lord, has been given up to do thy Will. I have
preached the Gospel freely in this City, and have often given up my Life for
the Gospel's Sake; and now, O Lord, rip open my Heart, and see if it be not
right before thee. Another Time he said, There is no Iniquity lies at my Door;
but the Presence of the Lord is with me, and his Life I feel justifies me.
Another Day he was thus heard in Prayer to God, Thou have loved me when I was
in the Womb; and I have loved thee from my Cradle; and from my Youth unto this
Day; and have served thee faithfully in my Generation. And to his Friends that
were about him, he said, Live in Love and Peace, and love one another. And at
another Time, he said, The Lord takes the Righteous from the Evil to come. And
praying for his Enemies and Persecutors, he said, Lord forgive Richard Brown,
if he may be forgiven. And being sensible that Death was approaching, he said,
Though this Body of Clay must turn to Dust, yet I have a Testimony that I have
served God in my Generation; and that Spirit which has lived and acted, and
ruled in me, shall yet break forth in Thousands. The Morning before he departed
this Life, (which was about the latter End of this Year The 14th of the Month
called Febr. 1662. His Death.
) he said, Now my Soul and Spirit is centred into its own Being with God; and
this Form of Person must return from whence it was taken. And after a little
Season he gave up the Ghost. This was the Exit of E. Buroughs, who in his
flourishing Years, viz. about the Age of eight and twenty, in an unmarried
State, changed this mortal Life for an incorruptible, and whose youthful
Summer-Flower was cut down in the Winter Season, after he had very zealously
preached the Gospel about ten Years.

About the 19th Year of his Age he first came to London with a public
Testimony, His Capacity and Service.
and continued almost eight Years together to preach the Word of God in that
City, with great Success, so that many came to be convinced, and great Addition
was made to the Church there. In his Youth he surpassed other; of his Age in
Knowledge, and though G. Croese, who writ the pretended History of the Quakers,
calls him a Rustic Fellow, yet he was no more such than the said Author
himself, who is a Country-Preacher: For he was well educated and instructed in
that Learning which the Place of his Nativity, viz. the Barony of Kendal in
Westmorland, afforded. Insomuch that though he was not skilful in Languages, yet
he had the Tongue of the Learned; and in his public Ministry was very fluent,
and elegant in Speech, even according to the Judgment of learned Men.

His Enemies now began to rejoice, for they seemed to imagine that the Progress
of that Doctrine, which he so powerfully and successfully had preached, by his
Decease would have been stopped or retarded: But they made a wrong Reckoning.
Francis Howgil then gave forth a kind of Epicedium, which though in Prose, yet
was not void of Poetical Expressions, and was as follows:

SHall Days, F. Howgil's Testimony concerning him.
or Months, or Years wear out thy Name, as though thou had no Being? Oh nay!
Shall not thy noble and valiant Acts, and mighty Works which thou have wrought
through the Power of him that separated thee from the Womb, live in Generations
to come? Oh yes! the Children that are yet unborn, shall have thee in their
Mouths, and thy Works shall testify of thee in Generations, who yet have not a
Being, and shall count thee blessed. Did thy Life go out as a Snuff of the
Candle? Oh nay! Thou have penetrated the Hearts of many, and the Memorial of
the Just shall live for ever, and be had in Renown among the Children of Men
for ever; for thou have turned many to Righteousness, and shall shine as a Star
of God in the Firmament of God's Power, for ever and ever; and they that are in
that, shall see thee there, and enjoy thee there, though thou be gone away hence,
and can no more be seen in Mutability: yet thy Life and thy Spirit shall run
parallel with Immortality. Oh Edward Buroughs! I cannot but mourn for thee,
yet not as one without Hope or Faith, knowing and having a perfect Testimony of
thy Well-being in my Heart, by the Spirit of the Lord; yet thy Absence is
great, and Years to come shall know the Want of thee. Shall I not lament as
David did for a worse Man than thee, even for Abner, when in Wrath he perished
by the Hand of Joab, without any just Cause, though he was a valiant Man? David
lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a Fool dies? (Oh nay! he was
betrayed of his Life,) Even so have thou been bereaved of thy Life by the Hand
of the Oppressor, whose Habitations are full of Cruelty. Oh my Soul, come not
thou within their Secret, for thy Blood shall be required at the Hands of them
who thirsted after thy Life; and it shall cry as Abel's, who was in the Faith;
even so were thou, it shall weigh as a ponderous Millstone upon their Necks, and
shall crush them under, and be as a Worm that gnaweth, and shall not die. When
I think upon thee, I am melted into Tears of true Sorrow; and because of the
Want that the Inheritance of the Lord has of thee, my Substance is even as
dissolved. Shall I not say as David did of Saul and Jonathan, when they were
slain in Mount Gilboa, The Beauty of Israel is slain upon the high Places: Even
so wast thou stifled, in nasty Holes, and Prisons, and many more, who were
precious in the Eyes of the Lord: And surely precious wast thou to me, 0 dear
Edward, I am distressed for thee my Brother; very pleasant have thou been to
me, and my Love to thee was wonderful, passing the Love of Women: Oh thou whose
Bow never turned back, neither Sword empty from the Blood of the Slain, from
the Slaughter of the Mighty; who made Nations and Multitudes shake with the
Word of Life in thy Mouth, and wast very dreadful to the Enemies of the Lord;
for thou did our like a Razor, and yet to the Seed or God brought forth; thy
Words dropped like Oil, and thy Lips as the Honey-com^. Thou shall be recorded
amongst the Valiants of Israel, who attained to the first Degree, through the
Power of the Lord, that wrought mightily in thee in thy Day, and wast worthy of
double Honor, because of thy Work's Sake. Thou wast expert to handle thy
Weapon, and by thee the mighty have fallen, and the Slain on the Lord have been
many; many have been pricked to the Heart through the Power of the Word of Life;
and Coals of Fire from thy Life came forth of thy Mouth, that in many a
Thicket, and among many Briars and Tho^ns it came to be kindled, and did devour
r^^ch Stubble that cumbred the Ground, and stained the Earth. Oh how certain a
Sound did thy Trumpet give! And how great an Alarm did thou give in thy Day,
that made the Host of the Uncircumcised greatly distressed! What Man so
valiant, though as Goliath of Gath, would not thy Valor have encountered with,
while many despised thy Youth! And how have I seen thee with thy Sling and thy
Stone (despised Weapons to war with) wound the Mighty! and that which has
seemed contemptible to the Dragon's Party, even as the ^aw-bone of an Ass; w^n
it thou have slain the Philistines Heaps upon Heaps, as Sampson, Thou have put
thy Hand to the Hammer of the Lord, and have often fastened Nails in the Heads
of the Lamb's Enemies, as Jael did to Sisera; and many a rough Stone have thou
polished and squared, and made it fit for the Buildings of God; and much knotty
Wood have thou hewed in thy Day, which was not fit for the Building of God's
House, O thou Prophet of the Lord; and shall for ever be recorded in the Lamb's
Book of Life, among the Lord's Worthies, who have followed the Lamb through great
Tribulations, as many can witness for thee from the Beginning, and at last has
overcome, and found worthy to stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, the Hill of
God, as I have often seen thee, and thy Heart well tuned as a Harp, to praise
the Lord, and to sound forth his great Salvation, which many a Time has made
glad the Hearts of them that did believe, and strengthened their Faith and
Hope. Well, thou art at Rest, and bound up in the Bundle of Life; and I know
Tears were wiped away from thy Eyes, beca use there was no Cause of Sorrow in
thee: For I know thou witnessed the old Things done away, and there was no
Curse, but Blessings were poured upon thy Head as Rain, and Peace as a mighty
Shower, and Trouble was far from thy Dwelling; though in the outward Man Trouble
on every Side, and has had a greater Share in that, for the Gospel-sake (though
a Youth in thy Time) than many besides: But now thou art ^reed from that, and
have obtained a Name through Faith, with the Saints in Light. Well, had thou
more to give up than thy Life for the Name of Jesus in this World? Nay, and to
seal thy Testimony committed unto thee with thy Blood, as thou have often said
in thy Day, which shall remain as a Crown upon thee for ever and ever. And now
thou art freed from the Temptations of him who had the Power of Death, and art
freed from thy outward Enemies, who hated thee because of the Love that dwelt
in thee, and remains at the Right Hand of God, where there is Joy and
Pleasure for evermore in the everlasting Light, which thou have often testified
unto, according to the Word of Prophecy in thy Heart, which was given unto thee
by the Holy Ghost; and art at Rest in the Perfection thereof, in the Beauty of
Holiness: Yet thy Life and thy Spirit I feel as present, and have Unity with
it, and in it, beyond all created and visible Things, which are subject to
Mutation and Change; and thy Life shall enter into others, to testify unto the
same Truth, which is from everlasting to everlasting; for God has raised, and
will raise up Children unto Abraham, of them that have been as dead Stones,
whose Power is Almighty, great in his People in the midst of their Enemies.

With these sublime Expressions F. Howgil lamented his endeared Friend E.
Buroughs.

In the latter End of this Year William Ames also deceased at Amsterdam, The
Sickness and Death of W. Ames.
being come from England in a weak Condition, for he had suffered so much
Hardship in Bridewel, in London, that his Health was much impaired when he came
into Holland. In his Sickness, which was a lingering Disease, he was told, that
among the Baptists and Collegians, it was said of him, that he had changed his
Judgment, and was grieved for having judged them wrongfully. But to this he
said, It was not so, but that he still judged their Way of Worship, especially
their Disputations and Will Worship, to be out of the Way of the Lord: And in
this Belief he died in Peace.

In his Youth he was of a cheerful Temper, Something concerning his
Convincement and Conversion.
and a Lover of such Company: But being in that Condition often disquieted in
his Mind, he became a closer Follower of the Priests and Teachers, and
exercised himself diligently in reading the holy Scriptures, which, though good
in it self, yet did not bring him to true Peace with God, though being or a quick
Understanding, he could talk much out of them, insomuch, that entering into
Society with the Baptists, he became a Teacher among them. But though he was now
more precise, and endeavored to avoid the committing of Sins, yet he found
that Root, from whence they sprang, remained alive in him; for when he met with
something that was contrary to his own Will or Mind, Anger soon prevailed:
Neverthless in that State he would speak of Justification, Sanctification, and
cleansing by the Blood of Christ, though he himself was not come to that pure
Washing. In this State he perceived that he was no true Member of Christ,
because Regeneration was still wanting. Thus he saw that a high Profession
would not avail, and that something more was required to obtain a happy State:
But as yet he knew not what it was that thus disquieted him, though sometimes on
the committing of any Sin, he felt something that struck him with Terror. At
length it pleased the Lord, that he hearing one of the Quakers, so called,
preach, That which convinces Man of Sin, was the Light of Christ, which
enlightens every Man coming into the World, this Doctrine entered so deep with
him, that he embraced it as wholesome; and thus walking with great
Circumspection and Fear before the Lord, he found that by giving diligent Heed
to that which inwardly reproved and condemned him of Evil, he came to be
delivered therefrom, and to witness Sanctification. And thus advancing in
Godliness, he himself became a zealous Preacher of that Doctrine, which had
struck him so to the Heart. He was indeed a zealous Man, and though some were
ready to think him too zealous, yet he was discreet, and I know that he was
condescending in indifferent Matters, thinking that there were Customs, which
though not followed in one Country, were yet tolerable in another. He was also
generous, and left he might seem to be burdensome to any, he rather chose to
work with his Hands.

Now I return again to the Occurrences of G. Fox, 1663
whom we left at London, G. F. goes to Norwich and Cambridgsh. and writes a few
Lines on the Death of E. B.
where having spent some Time, he went about the Beginning of the Year, 1663,
to Norwich, and from thence to Cambridgeshire, where he heard of E. Burroughs's
Decease: And being sensible how great a Grief this Loss would be to his
Friends, wrote the following Lines to them.

Friends,
BE still and quiet in your own Conditions, and settled in the Seed of God that
does not change; that in that ye may feel dear E. B. among you in the Seed, in
which, and by which, he begot you to God, with whom he is; and that in the Seed
ye may all see and feel him, in which is the Unity with him in the Life; and to
enjoy him in the Life, that does not change, which is invisible.

G. F.


G. Fox afterward traveling through several Places, came again to London, where
having visited his Friends in their Meetings, which were numerous, Afterward
goes with T. Briggs to Tenterden, in Kent, where they are taken into Custody,
and examined but civilly dismissed.
he traveled with Thomas Briggs, into Kent, and coming to Tenterden, they had
a Meeting there, where many came, and were convinced of the Truth that was
declared. But when he intended to depart with his Companion, he saw a Captain,
and a Company of Soldiers, with Muskets and lighted Matches; and some of these
coming to them, said They must come to their Captain. And when they were
brought before him, he asked, Where was G. Fox? Which was he? To which G. Fox
answered, I am the Man. The Captain being somewhat surprised, said, I will
secure you among the Soldiers. Yet he carried himself civilly, and said, some
Time after, You must go along with me to the Town. Where being come, he brought
G. Fox, and T. Briggs, with some more of their Friends, to an Inn, which was
the Jailor's House. And after a while, the Mayor of the Town, with the said
Captain, and the Lieutenant, who were Justices, came and examined G. Fox,
asking, Why he came thither to make a Disturbance? G. Fox told them, He did not
come to make a Disturbance, neither had he made any there. They then said,
There was a Law, which was against the Quakers Meetings, made only against
them. G. Fox, told them, He knew no such Law. Then they produced the Act that
was made against Quakers and others. G. Fox seeing it, told them, That Law was
against such as were a Terror to the King's Subjects, and were Enemies, and
held Principles dangerous to the Government; and therefore it was not against
his Friends, for they held Truth, and their Principles were not dangerous to
the Government, and their Meetings were peaceable, as was well known. Now it
was not without good Reason that George said, he knew no such Law; since they
had said, there was a Law made only against the Quakers Meetings; whereas the
Act had the Appearance of being made against Plotters, and Enemies to the King,
which certainly the Quakers were not. Yet it was said to G. Fox, He was an
Enemy to the King. But this he denied, and told them, how he had once been cast
into D^rby Dungeon, about the Time of Worcester-Fight, because he would not
take up Arms against the King; and how afterward he had been sent up to
London, by Colonel Hacker, as a Plotter to bring in King Charles, and that he
was kept Prisoner at London, till he was set at Liberty by Oliver Cromwell. They
asked him then, Whether he had been imprisoned in the Time of the Insurrection?
And he said Yes, but that he was released by the King's own Command. At length
they demanded Bond for his Appearance at the Sessions, and would have had him
promise to come thither no more. Bat he refused the one as well as the other.
Yet they behaved themselves moderate, and told him, and Thomas Briggs, and the
others, Ye shall see we are civil to you; for it is the Mayor's Pleasure you
should all be set at Liberty. To which G. Fox returned, Their Civility was
noble: And so they parted; and he passed o^ to many Places, where he had
singular Occurrences; and though Wiles were laid for him, yet sometimes he
escaped the Hands of his persecuting Enemies.

Coming into Cornwall, G. F. comes into Cornwall where he recovers Geo. Bewly,
who had been seduced with J. Hellen, by B. Pope, a Ranter.
he found there one Joseph Hellen, and George Bewly, who though they professed
Truth, yet had suffered themselves to be seduced by Blanch Pope, a ranting
Woman, who had ensnared them chiefly by asking, Who made the Devil, did not
God? This silly Question, which Hellen and Bewly were at a Loss to answer, they
propounded to G. Fox, and he answered it with No: For, said he, all that God
made was good, and was blessed but so was not the Devil: He was called a Serpent,
before he was called a Devil and an Adversary; and afterward he was called a
Dragon, because he was a Destroyer. The Devil abode not in the Truth, and by
departing from the Truth he became a Devil. Now there is no Promise of God to
the Devil, that ever he shall return into Truth again; but to Man and Woman,
who have been deceived by him, the Promise of God is, that the Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head, and break his Power and Strength to
Pieces. With this Answer G. Fox gave Satisfaction to his Friends; but Hellen
was so poisoned, and run out, that they denied him; but Bewly was recovered
from his Fault by sincere Repentance.

G. Fox having performed his Service there, Has Service at Helstone near
Falmouth.
went to Helstone, near Falmouth, where he had a large Meeting, at which many
were convinced, for he opened to the Auditory, The State of the Church in the
primitive Times, and the State of the Church in the Wilderness, as also the
State of the false Church that was got up since: Next he showed that the
everlasting Gospel was now preached again, over the Head of the Whore, Beast,
Antichrist, and the false Prophets, which were got up since the Apostles Days;
and that now the everlasting Gospel was received and receiving, which brought
Life and Immortality to Light. And this Sermon was of such Effect, that the
People generally confessed, it was the everlasting Truth that had been declared
there that Day.

G. Fox passing on, And at length comes to the Land's-End where N. Jose, a
Fisherman, had a public Testimony.
came at length to the Land's-End, where there was an Assembly of his Friends,
and also a Fisherman, called Nicholas Jose who preached among them, having
three Years before been convinced there by the Ministry of G. Fox.

Whilst he was in these Parts, there happened a very dismal and dreadful Case.

One Colonel Robinson was, since the King came in, made Justice of the Peace,
and became a cruel Persecutor of those called Quakers, of whom he sent many to
Prison; and hearing that some Liberty was allowed them, by the Favor of the
Jailor, to come home sometimes to visit their Wives and Children, he made
Complaint thereof to the Judge at the Assizes, Judge Kneeling fines a Jailor,
on the Complaint of Col. Robinson for favoring Friends with some Liberty.
against the Jailor, who thereupon was fined an hundred Marks, by Judge
Keeling. Not long after the Assizes, Robinson sent to a neighboring Justice,
desiring he would go with him a Fanatick-hunting, (meaning the Disturbing of
Quakers Meetings.) On the Day that he intended thus to go a hunting, he sent
his Man about with his Horses, and walked himself to a Tenement that he had,
where his Cows and Dairy were kept, and where his Servants were then milking.
Being come there, he asked for his Bull, and the Maids said, they had shut him
into the Field, The dreadful Judgment that fell on the (...) Robinson going a
Fanatick-Hunting, as he called it.
because he was unruly amongst the Kine. He then going into the Field, and
having formerly accustomed himself to play with the Bull, he began to fence at
him with his Staff, as he used to do; but the Bull snuffing, went a little
back, and then ran fiercely at him, and then stuck his Horn into his Thigh, and
lifting him upon his Horn, threw him over his Back, and tore up his Thigh to
his Belly, and when he came to the Ground, he broke his Leg, and the Bull then
gored him again with his Horns, and roared, and licked up his Blood. One of the
Maidservants hearing her Master cry out, came running into the Field, and took
the Bull by the Horns to pull him off; but he, without hurting her, gently put
her by with his Horns, and still fell to goring of him, and licking up his
Blood. Then she ran and got some Workmen that were not far off, to come and
rescue her Master; but they could not all beat off the Bull, till they had
brought Mastiff Dogs to set on him; and then the Bull fled. His Sister having
Notice of this Disaster, came and said, Alack Brother, what a heavy Judgment is
this! And he answered, Ab Sister, it is a heavy Judgment indeed: Pray let the
Bull be killed, and the Flesh given to the Poor. So he was taken up, and
carried home, but so grievously wounded, that he died soon after; and the Bull
was become so fierce that they were forced to kill him by shooting. This was
the Issue of Robinson's mischievous Intent to go a Fanatick-hunting. I remember
that in my Youth, I heard with Astonishment the Relation of this Accident from
William Caton, who by a Letter from England, had received Intelligence ot it;
for the Thing was so remarkable, that the Tidings of it were soon spread afar
off.

Now I return to G. Fox, G. F. travels to Bristol, ^^to Wales, Warwicksh.
Darbysh. an^ comes to York whence he writes against Plotting, etc. See Journal,
page 267. Comes to Swarthmore, and goes to visit Colonel Kirby, who had sent to
search for him, but dismisseth him courteously.
who from Cornwall traveled to Bristol, and so into Wales, from whence passing
through Warwickshire and Darbyshire, he came to York. Here he heard of a Plot;
which made him write a Paper to his Friends, wherein he admonished them to be
cautious, and not at all to medd^^ with such Bustlings. And traveling toward
Lancashire, he came to Swarthmore, where they told him, that Colonel Kirby had
sent his Lieutenant thither to search for him, and that he had searched Trunks
and Chests. G, Fox having heard this, the next Day went to Kirby-Hall, where
the said Colonel lived; and being come to him, he told him, I am come to visit
thee, understanding that thou would have seen me; and now I would fain know
what thou have to say to me, and whether thou have any Thing against me. The
Colonel, who did not expect such a Visit, and being then to go up to London to
the Parliament, said before all the Company, As I am a Gentleman, I have
nothing against you: But Mrs. Fell must not keep great Meetings at her House;
for they meet contrary to the Act. G. Fox told him, That Act does not take hold
on us, but on such as meet to plot and contrive, and to raise Insurrections
against the King; and we are none of those, but are a peaceable People. After
some Words more, the Colonel took G. Fox by the Hand, and said, He had nothing
against him; and others said, He was a deserving Man.

Then G. Fox parted, and returned to Swarthmore, and shortly after he heard,
there had been a private Meeting of the Justices and Deputy Lieutenants at
Houlher-Hall, where Justice Preston lived, and that there they had issued a
Warrant to apprehend him. Now he could have gone away, and got out of their
Reach; but considering that there being a Noise of a Plot in the North, if he
should go away they might fall upon his Friends; but if he staid, and was
taken, his Friends might escape the better; he therefore gave up himself to be
taken. Next Day an Officer came with his Sword and Pistols to take him: The
Justices have a private Meeting for his Apprehension, which be hears of, but
will not withdraw, and s^ is taken.
G. Fox told him, I knew thy Errand before, and have given up my self to be
taken; for if I would have escaped Imprisonment, I could have been gone forty
Milles off; but I am an innocent Man, and so matter not what ye can do to me.
Then the Officer asked him, How he heard of it, seeing the Order was made
privately in a Parlour. G. Fox said, It was no Matter for that; it was
sufficient that he heard of it. Then he asked him to show his Order. But he
laying his Hand on his Sword, said, You must go with me before the Lieutenants,
to answer such Questions as they shall propound to you. Now though G. Fox
insisted to see the Order, telling him it was but civil and reasonable to show
it; yet the Officer would not; and then G. Fox said, I am ready. So he went
along with him, And examined before Justice Rawlinson, Sir G. Middleton,
Justice Preston, etc. and at last appointed to appear again.
and Margaret Fell also, to Houlher-Hall. Being come thither, there was one
Justice Rawlinson, Sir George Middleton, Justice Preston, and several more,
whom he knew not. Then they brought one Thomas Atkinson, one of his Friends, as
a Witness against him, for some Words which he had told to one Knipe, who had
informed against him; and these Words were, That he had written against the
Plotters, and had knocked them down: But from these Words little could be made.
Then Preston asked him, Whether he had an Hand in the Battledoor? (being a
Folio Book already mentioned) Yes, said G. Fox. He then asked him, Whether he
understood Languages? He answered, Sufficient for my self. Preston having
spoken something more on that Subject, said, Come, we will examine you of
higher Matters: Then said George Middleton, You deny God, and the Church, and
the Faith. Nay, replied G. Fox, I own God, and the true Church, and the true
Faith: But, asked he, (having understood Middleton to be a Papist) What Church
do thou own? The other, instead of answering this Question, said, You are a
Rebel and a Traitor. G. Fox perceiving this Middleton to be an envious Man,
asked him, Whom he spoke to? or whom he called Rebel? The other having been
silent a while, said at last, I spoke to you* G. Fox then striking his Hand on
the Table, told him, I have suffered more than Twenty such as thou, or any that
are here; for I have been cast into Darby- Dungeon for six Months together, and
have suffered much because I would not take up Arms against this King, before
Worcester- Fight: And I have been sent up Prisoner out of my own Country by
Colonel Hacker to O. Cromwell, as a Plotter to bring in King Charles. Ye talk of
the King, a Company of you; but where were ye in Oliver's Days: and what did ye
do then for the King? But I have more Love to him, for his eternal Good and
Welfare, than any of you have. Then they asked him, Whether he had heard of the
Plot? And he said, Yes. Hereupon he was asked, How he had heard of it, and whom
he knew in it? And he answered, He had heard of it through the High Sheriff of
Yorkshire, who had told Dr. Hodgson, that there was a Plot in the North; but
that he never heard any Thing of it in the South; and that he knew none of them
that were in it. Then they asked him, Why would you write against it, if you
did not know some that were in it. My Reason was, answered he, because ye are
so forward to mash the Innocent and Guilty together; therefore I writ against
it to clear the Truth from such Things, and to stop all forward foolish Spirits
from running into such Things: And I sent Copies of it into Westmorland,
Cumberland, Bishopric, and Yorkshire, and to you here; and I sent also a Copy
of it to the King and his Council; and it is like it may be in Print by this
Time. Then said one of them, O, this Man has great Power. Yes, said he, I have
Power to write against Plotters. But, said one of them, You are against the
Laws of the Land. Nay, said he, for I and my Friends direct all the People to
the Spirit of God in them, to mortify the Deeds of the Flesh: This brings them
into Well-doing, and from that which the Magistrates Sword is against; which
eases the Magistrates, who are for the Punishment of Evildoers, etc. Middleton
now weary, as it seemed, of his speaking, cried, Bring the Book, and put the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to him. But G. Fox knowing him to be a Papist,
asked him, Whether he, who was a Swearer, had taken the Oath of Supremacy? For
this Oath tending to reject the Pope's Power in England, was a kind of Test to
try People whether they were Papists, or no: But as for us, said G. Fox, we
cannot swear at all, because Christ and his Apostle have forbidden it. Now some
of these that sat there, seeing Middleton was thus pinched, would not have had
the Oath put to G. Fox, The Oath a Snare to Quakers, as the Popish Sacrament
had been to Protestants.
but others would, because this was their last Snare, and they had no other Way
to get him into Prison; for all other Things had been cleared: But this was
like the Papists Sacrament ot the Altar, by which they formerly ensnared the
Martyrs: And in the low Countries they asked the Baptists, Whether they were
rebaptized? And if this appeared, then they said, We don't kill you, but the
Emperor's Decree condemns you. So they tendered G. Fox the Oath, and he
refusing to take it, they consulted together about sending him to Jail; but all
not agreeing, he was only engaged to appear at the Sessions; and so for that
Time they dismissed him.

Then he went back with Margaret Fell to Swarthmore, where Colonel West who was
at that Time a Justice of the Peace, came to see him. And G. Fox asking him,
what he thought they would do with him at the Sessions, he said, They would
tender the Oath to him again. The Time of the Sessions now approaching, He
appears at the Sessions and being reexamined ^s at last committed for refusing
the Oath.
G. Fox went to Lancaster, and appeared according to his Engagement, where he
found upon the Bench, Justice Flemming, who in Westmoreland, had offered five
Pounds to any Man that would apprehend G. Fox. There were also the Justices
Spencer and Rawlinson, and Colonel West. There was a great Concourse of People
in Court, and when G. Fox came up to the Bar, and stood with his Hat on, they
looked earnestly upon him. Then Proclamation being made for all to keep Silence
on Pain of Imprisonment, he said twice, Peace be among you. Then Rawlinson, who
was Chairman, spoke, and asked, If he knew where he was? To which he answered,
Yes, I do; but it may be my Hat offends you: But that is a low Thing, that is not
the Honor I give to Magistrates: For the true Honor is from from above; and I
hope it is not the Hat which ye look upon to be the Honor. To which the
Chairman said, We look for the Hat too. Whereupon do you show your Respect to
Magistrates, if you don't put off your Hat? G. Fox replied, In coming when they
call me. They then bid one take off his Hat. After some Pause, the Chairman
asked him, Whether he knew of the Plot? To which he returned, That he had heard
of it in Yorkshire by a Friend that had it of the High Sheriff. The next
Question was, Whether he had declared it to the Magistrates? And his Answer
was, I have sent Papers abroad against Plots and Plotters, and also to you, as
soon as I came into the Country, to take all Jealousies out of your Minds
concerning me and my Friends: For it was and is our Principle to declare
against such Things. Then they asked him, If he knew not of an Act against
Meetings? To which he made Answer, That he knew there was an Act that took hold
of such as met to the terrifying of the King's Subjects, and were Enemies to
the King, and held dangerous Principles. But I hope, said he, ye do not look
upon us to be such Men for our Meetings are not to terrify the King's Subjects,
neither are we Enemies to him, or any Man. That which followed hereupon, was
the tendering of the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to him. To which he told
them, That he had never taken any Oath in his Life; and that he could not take
any Oath at all, because Christ and his Apostle had forbidden it. Then
Rawlinson, who was a Lawyer, asked him, Whether he held it was unlawful to
swear? An Insnaring Question.
G. Fox presently perceived this Question to be put on Purpose to ensnare him;
for by a certain Act 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 1. such who said, 13 and 14 Car. 2.
Cap. 1.
It was unlawful to swear, were liable to Banishment, or to a great Fine.
Therefore to avoid this Snare, he told them, That in the Time of the Law
amongst the Jews, before Christ came, the Law commanded them to swear; but
Christ who did fulfill the Law in the Gospel Time, commands, not to swear at
all; and the Apostle James forbids swearing, even to them that were Jews, and
had the Law of God. Now after much other Discourse, the Jailor was called, and
G. Fox committed to Prison. He then having the Paper about him which he had
written against Plots, desired it might be read in the Court: But this they
would not suffer. Being thus committed for refusing to swear, he said to those
on the Bench and all the People, Take Notice that I suffer for the Doctrine of
Christ, and for my Obedience to his Command. Afterward he understood, the
Justices said, that they had private Instructions from Colonel Kirby to
prosecute him, notwithstanding his fair Carriage, and seeming Kindness to him
before.

Leaving G. Fox in Prison, I am to say that the Act already mentioned, whereby
a Penalty was laid on all such who should say, It was not unlawful to take an
Oath, was that which extended to Banishment, being made not long before, and
expressly levelled against the Quakers, as plainly appeared by the Title. See
the same before printed at large.


This is that Act, by Direction whereof the Quakers, so called, were afterward
banished, as may be related in due Time and Place; and though the King himself
was pretty good-natured, yet he suffered himself to be so swayed by the
Instigations of some envious Men, as well among the Ecclesiastics as among the
Laity, that he gave the Royal Assent thereto.

Whilst G. Fox was Prisoner at Lancaster, many of his Friends were also
imprisoned, for frequenting Religious Meetings, refusing to take Oaths, and for
not paying Tithes to the Priests: But since he was not brought to his Trial
till next Year, we will leave him still in Jail, and in the mean while take a
Turn to Colchester, where Persecution now was exceeding fierce.

In the Month of October, Cruel and bloody Persecution at Colchester, W. More
Mayor.
William More Mayor of that Town, came on a First Day of the Week, and broke up
the Meeting of the Quakers, so called, and committed some of them to Prison;
the next Week he did so again; and a Week after he caused a Party of the
County-Troop to come to the Meeting. These beat some, and did much Mischief to
the Forms, Seats, and Windows of the Meeting Place. And afterward the Mayor
employed an old Man to stop People from going in at the Gate to the
Meeting-Room; who told those that would have entered, that the Mayor had set
him there to keep them out. Now though they knew he was no Officer, nor had any
Warrant, yet they made no Resistance, but continuing in the Street, thus kept
their Meeting in a peaceable Manner, being not free for Conscience Sake to
leave off their public Worship of God, though in that Time of the Year it was
cold, and often wet Weather; and thus it continued many Weeks, though attended
with so much Difficulty.

In the Forepart or December, there came about forty or the King's Troopers, on
Horseback, in their Armor, with Swords, Carbines and Pistols, crying, What a
Devil do ye here? And falling violently upon this harmless Company, they beat
them, some with Swords, and others with Carbines, without Distinction of Male
or Female, old or young, until many were much bruised, chasing them to and fro
in the Streets. The next First Day of the Week, these furious Fellows came
again, having now got Clubs, wherewith, as well as with Swords and Carbines,
they most grievously beat those that were peaceably met together in the Street
to worship God. This cruel Beating was so excessive, that some got above an
hundred Blows, and were beaten so black and blue, that their Limbs lost their
natural Strength: One there was whom a Trooper beat ^o long, till the Blade of
his Sword fell out of the Hilt, which he that was thus beaten seeing, A
remarkable Instance.
said to the other, I will give it thee up again, which he did, with these
Words, I desire the Lord may not lay this Day's Work to thy Charge.

But to avoid Prolixity, I shall not mention all the particular Misusages which
I find to have been committed there. These cruel Doings continued yet several
Weeks, and some were beaten so violently, that their Blood was shed in the
Streets, and they sunk down, and fainted away. E. Grant killed.
One Edward Grant, a Man of about threescore and ten Years of Age, (whose Wife
and Daughters I was well acquainted with) was so terribly knocked down, that he
outlived it but a few Days. So hot was this Time now, that these Religious
Worshippers, when they went to their Meeting, seemed to go to meet Death; for
they could not promise to themselves to return Home either whole or alive. But
notwithstanding all this, their Zeal for their Worship was so lively, that they
durst not stay at Home, though humane Reasoning might have advised them thereto.
And some of them had been People of Note in the World, among others one Giles
Barnardiston, G. Barnardiston educated at the University, and afterward made a
Colonel; convinced by G. Fox jun becomes a Minister, and Sufferer.
who having spent six Years in the University, in the Study of human
Literatur^, afterward came to be a Colonel; but in Process of Time, having
heard G. Fox the younger preach, he was so entirely convinced of the Truth by
him declared, that laying down his military Command, he entered into the Society
of those called Quakers, and continuing faithful, he in Time became a Minister
of the Gospel among the said People; being a Man of a meek Spirit, and one whom
I knew very well. This Barnardiston did not forbear frequenting Meetings, how
hot soever the Persecution was, being fully given up to hazard his Life with
his Friends. S. Fromantle a Merchant, barbarously beaten; his Wife greatly
endangers her own Person to save her Husband's.
One Solomon Fromantle, a Merchant, with whom I was well acquainted, was so
grievously beaten, that he fell down, and lost much of his Blood in the Street;
and yet the barbarous Troopers did not leave off beating him: His Wife, a
Daughter of the aforesaid Edward Grant, fearing lest he should be killed, fell
down upon him, to cover and protect him from the Blows with the Hazard of her
own Body, as she herself told me in the Presence of her said Husband; a
conjugal Love and Fidelity well worthy to be mentioned, and left upon Record.
And though she then did not receive very fierce Blows, yet there were some Women
whose Lot it was to be sorely beaten with Clubs, whereinto Iron Spikes were
driven, as among the rest an aged Widow, who received no less than twelve such
bloody Blows on several Parts of her Body; and another Woman was pierced in her
Loins with such a spiked Club. An ancient Man of sixty-five Years was followed
a great Way by three on Foot, and one on Horseback, and so beaten and bruised,
that a Woman, pitying this old Man, spoke to these mischievous Fellows to leave
off; but this so incensed him that was on Horseback, that he gave her a hard
Blow with his Sword on the Shoulder, with cursing and railing. This Barbarity
continued, till the Persecutors seemed to be more wearied out than the
Persecuted, who seemed to grow valiant in these sore Tribulations, how grievous
soever. A great Promoter of this furious Violence was Captain Turner, Capt.
Turner. a great Promoter of these Violences.
who drove on his Troopers to act this; nay, such was his Malice, that once at
the breaking up of a Meeting, he not only gave Order to beat the People, but
also to spoil the Doors, Windows, and Walls, so that the Damage came to five
and twenty Pounds.

Now I could enter upon large Relation of the Trial of many Prisoners at
Worcester, Proceedings at Worcester before the Judges Hide and Terril.
before the Judges Hide and Terril; but since that Trial was much after the
same Manner as that of John Crook, here beforementioned at large, I Will but
cursorily make some Mention of it. When the Prisoners being brought to the Bar,
asked Why they had been kept so long in Prison? They were answered with the
Question, Whether they would take the Oath of Allegiance? And Endeavors were
used to draw some to betray themselves, by asking them, Where they had been on
such a Day? For if they had said, At Meeting, then it would have appeared from
their own Mouth that they had acted contrary to the Law; but they answered
warily, That they were not bound to accuse themselves. Others by Evidence were
charged with having been at a Meeting; and when they said, That their Meetings
were not always for public Worship, but that they had also Meetings to take
Care for Widows, Fatherless, and others that were indigent, yet it was said to
the Jury, that though there was no Evidence that there had been any Preaching in
the Meeting, Yet if they did but believe that the Prisoners had kept a Meeting
for religious Worship, it was sufficient for them to approve the Indictment.
Strange Advice to a Jury.
And yet such Proceedings in other Cases would have been thought unwarrantable.

E. Bourn ^ined for having been at a Meeting. His Question to the Judge
answered rashly.
One Edward Bourn being imprisoned for having been at a Meeting, and afterward
brought to his Trial, the Oath was tendered to him. Among other Words he spoke
in Defense of himself, he said, Suppose Christ and his Apostles kept a Meeting
here in this Time, would this Act against Conventicles also take hold of them?
Yes, said the Judge, it would. But bethinking himself, he said, I will not answer
your Questions. Ye are no Apostles. The Conclusion was, that Bourn and several
of his Friends were fined each of them five Pounds.

N^w since those that were fined thus, did not use to pay the Fines, judging
that the Thing which they were fined for was an indispensable Duty they owed to
God, and therefore they could not pay any such Fine with a good Conscience,
Distress made often for two or three times the Value.
the Consequence therefore generally was Imprisonment, and Distraining of their
Goods, whereby some lost twice, and it may be, thrice as much as the Fine
amounted to. Some of the Prisoners made it appear, that they had been somewhere
else, and not in the Meeting, at the House of one Robert Smith at such Time as
the Evidence declared by Oath; yet because they gave no satisfactory Answer to
the Question, Whether they had not been there on that Day? they were deemed
guilty. R. Smith premunired f^r refusing the Oath of Allegiance, while Papist
on the Bench are not regarded.
The said Robert Smith was premunired: For the Oath of Allegiance being tendered
to him, and he menaced by the Judge with a Praemunire, asked, For whom that Law
[for taking the said Oath] was made? Whether not for Papists? And on Suspicion
that some of that Persuasion sat on the Bench, he asked also, Whether they, for
the Satisfaction of the People there present, ought not also to take the Oath?
But the Judge waved this, telling him, He must take the Oath, or else Sentence
should be pronounced against him. Smith asked then, Whether the Example of
Christ should decide the Question? But the Judge said, I am not come here to
dispute with you concerning the Doctrine of Christ, but to inform you
concerning the Doctrine of the Law. Then Smith was led away, and afterward,
when an Indictment for his refusing the Oath was drawn up, he was brought into
the Court again, and asked, Whether he would answer to the Indictment, or no?
And the Reasons he gave, not being accepted, the Judge said, before Smith had
done speaking, This is your Sentence, and the Judgment of the Court. You shall
be shut out of the King's Protection, and forfeit your personal Estate to the
King for ever, and your real Estate during Life. To this Robert said with a
composed Mind, The Lord has given, and if he suffers it to be taken away, his
Will be done. Thus Robert Smith suffered, with many more of his Friends, there
and elsewhere, all which I believe my Lifetime would not be sufficient to
describe circumstantially.

Passing then by the other Persecutions of this Year, I Will relate one
remarkable Case that happened in this Year 1663, where Patience triumphed very
eminently over Violence. But before I enter upon this Narrative, it will not be
amiss to go back a little, and mention some singular Cases of the chief Actor
of the Fact I am going to describe.

His Name was Thomas Lurting, Relation of T. Lurting, who of a fighting Sailor,
became a peaceable Christian.
who formerly had been Boatswain's Mate in a Man of War, and often had been
preserved in imminent Dangers, as once being at the Canary Islands, under
Admiral Blake Commander: In this Expedition, they ruined the Admiral and
Vice Admiral of the Spanish Galleons; and this being done, he with seven Men
was sent with a Pinnace to set three Galleons in the Bay on Fire; which Order
he executed by setting one of them on Fire, which burnt the other two. But
returning, and passing by a Breast-work, they received a Volley of small Shot,
by which two Men, close to one of which Thomas sat, were killed, and a third
was shot in his Back, but Thomas received no Harm. And going out of the Bay,
they came within about four Ships Length of the Castle, which had forty Guns;
and when they came directly over against the Castle, the Guns were fired, and a
Shot ^ut the Bolt-rope a little above Thomas's Head, without hurting him. In
more Dangers he was eminently preserved, but that I may not be too prolix, I Will
now relate, how from a fighting Sailor, he became a harmless Christian.

About the Year 1654, it happened that among the Soldiers which were in the
Ship he was in, there was one that had been at a Meeting of those called
Quakers in Scotland, and there were two young Men in the Ship who had some
Converse with him; but he was soon taken away from the Ship. Yet these two
young Men seemed to be under some Convincement; for about six Months after,
they scrupled to go and hear the Priest, and to put off their Hats to the
Captain; by which they came to be called Quakers. These two met often together
in Silence, which being seen by others of the Ship, their Number increased; but
this troubled the Captain exceedingly, and the Priest grew not a little angry,
and said to ou^ Boatswain, O Thomas, an honest Man and a good Christian; here
is a dangerous People on Board, viz. the Quakers, a blasphemous People, denying
the Ordinances and Word of God. This made Thomas so furious, He beats the
Quakers aboard.
that in a bigoted Zeal he ^ell to beating and abusing these Men, when
religiously met together. But this was not the Way to have a quiet and sedate
Mind; for the Remembrance of his former Deliverances stuck so close upon him,
that he could no more beat any of the said People; and then he came to a
farther Sight, insomuch that he clearly saw what a Fellow the Priest was: For
when Thomas could no longer abuse the said People, then he was not accounted by
him either an honest Man, Is under Trouble of Mind.
or a good Christian. Now being under Condemnation because of his Outgoings, he
made many Promises to the Lord; but these being made in his own Will, were of
little Effect. Yet by the Grace of God it was showed him that since he did not
perform these Promises, he could not be benefitted thereby, which caused to him
much Trouble.

Among those in the Ship called Quakers, R. Dennis has much Influence upon him.
was one Roger Dennis, whom be entirely loved, and therefore never struck him;
for this Man had a Check on Thomas, to that Degree, that looking only upon him,
he durst not touch any of those which he intended to have abused. In this
State, feeling no Peace in his Mind, after some Time, he much desired to be
alone, the more freely to pour out his Heart before the Lord; and though he then
felt himself inwardly condemned, yet Judgments became pleasant to him, because
thereby his Heart was tendered and broken; in which State he could not forbear
sometimes to cry out, 0 Lord! But this being observed by the Ship's Crew made
some say, He was mad; and others, He was distracted; and of this some writ home
to England. Now it fell to his Share to be mocked and ridiculed; but he
endeavored to be fully given up, if he might but have Peace in his Conscience
with God.

And being one Evening alone, He is moved, but very averse to join with the
Quakers.
he was very earnest with the Lord to know what People he should join himself
to; and then it was plainly showed him, the Quakers. But this so startled him
at that Time, that he desired of the Lord, rather to die than to live: For to
join with a People whom he so often had been beating and abusing, seemed to be
harder to him than Death it self; and by the Subtilty of Satan he was often
assaulted by various Thoughts, to keep him off from the said People. But when
the Lord made him mindful of his manifold Preservations and Deliverances, it
mollified his Heart, so that at Length he came to this Resolution, Whether
Quaker, or no Quaker, I am for Peace with God. Yet resolves to do it.
Yet it cost him many a bitter Sigh, and many a sorrowful Tear, before he could
come to a full Resignation. But the inward Reproofs of the Lord, attended with
Judgments, followed him so close, that he could no longer forbear, but gave up.
And then he took Opportunity to discover his Heart to his Friend Roger Denis,
who spoke so to the Purpose, that he had great Satisfaction. But not long
after, Temptations assaulted him again in this Manner, What, to join thy self
to such a foolish People? And the very Thoughts of this were so grievous to
him, that he grew even weary of his Life; for thus to expose himself to Scorn,
seemed to him an intolerable Cross. But this Struggling was not the Way to get
Peace with God. He goes to their Meeting.
The first Day of Week being come, he resolved to go to the small Meeting, who
were now six in Number; but it being reported that he was among the Quakers,
many of the Company left their Worship to see him; and they made a great Noise.
When the Worship was over, the Captain asked the Reason of that Noise; and it
was told him, that Thomas was amongst the Quakers; on which he sent for him,
there being several Officers also present; but the first that spoke was the
Priest, saying, Thomas, I took you for a very honest Man, and a good Christian,
but am sorry you should be so deluded. And the Captain endeavored to prove
from the Bible, the Quakers were no Christians. Thomas in the mean while was
still and quiet; and the others seeing they could not prevail upon him that
Way, took another Course, and said, that the Quakers sometimes came to him,
saying, Do such and such a Thing, But because he knew this to be altogether
false, and saw how they would bear him down with Lies, he was the more
strengthened; so that going to his Friends, he said to them, When I went to the
Captain, I was scarce half a Quaker; but by their Lies and false Reports, they
have made me almost a whole Quaker; or at least I hope to be one.

He continuing to meet with his Friends for performing of Worship, They are
vexed by the Captain.
some more came to be joined to them, so that in less than six Months after,
they were twelve Men, and two Boys, one of which was the Priest's. Now there
was none aboard that would abuse the Quakers, though much tried by the Captain;
for he got some Men out of other Ships on Purpose to vex them: But how fiercely
soever these behaved themselves, a higher Power limited them. At length there
was a Sickness in the Ship, which swept away above Forty in a short Time; and
most of them called Quakers had the Distemper also, but none died of it, though
some were brought very low: But they took great Care of one another when sick,
and whatever one had, was free for all; which Care being seen by others, made
some of them cry upon their Deathbed, O carry me to the Quakers, for they take
great Care one of another, and they will take some Care of me also. He becomes
more friendly.
This Visitation in the Ship changed the Captain so much, that he was very kind
to Thomas, and often sent him Part of what he had. Thomas seeing him in such a
good Humor, desired of him to have the Cabin he lay in before his Change;
which Request was granted, for none were willing to lie therein, because they
told one another it was troubled with an evil Spirit, since three or four had
died therein within a short Space of Time. This Cabin he made use of also for a
Meeting Place; and the Captain was now so well pleased with him, that when
something was to be done, he would often say, Thomas, Take thy Friends, and do
such or such a Thing: For as yet they were not against fighting, Thomas and
friends successful in Expeditions.
and therefore no complete Quakers. And thus when Thomas and his Friends were
sent out on some Expedition, they did their Work beyond his Expectation. But
though they were not brought off from Fighting, yet when with others they annoy^d
their Enemies, they would take none of the Plunder, and in all desperate
Attempts, they received no Hurt, though several others were killed and wounded;
and they behaved themselves so valiantly, that their Captain would say to other
Captain, That he cared not if all his Men were Quakers, for they were the
hardiest Men in his Ship. But though this was a Time of Liberty, yet Thomas looked
upon it as a Forerunner of farther Exercise; for he saw what was done in
pretended Friendship, was but to serve their own Ends; and therefore he
expected a Time of Trial would come, and so it did.

For being come to Leghorn, they were ordered to go to Barcelona, to take or
burn a Spanish Man of War. Their Station was to lie against a Castle, and
batter it; which they did; and one Corner of the Castle playing some Shot into
their Ship, Thomas was for beating down that Part: And those called Quakers
fought with as much Courage as any, he himself being stripped to his Wastcoat:
And going into the Fore-castle, he levelled the Guns, but said, Fire not, till
I go to see where the Shot lights, that we may level higher or lower; he being
yet as great a Fighter as any: He becomes averse to fighting.
But as he was coming out of the Fore-Castle-Door, to see where the Shot fell,
suddenly it run through him, What, if now thou kill'st a Man? This struck him as
a Thunderbolt, and he that can turn all Men's Hearts at his Pleasure, changed
his in a Minute^s Time to that Degree, that whereas just before he bent all his
Strength to kill Men, he now found in himself no Will thereto, though it were to
gain the World; for he presently perceived it was from the Lord; and then
putting on his Clothes, he walked on the Deck, as if he had not seen a Gun
fired: And being under great Exercise of Mind, some asked him, If he was hurt:
And he answer^d, No; but under some Scruple of Conscience on the Account of
Fighting, though then he knew not that the Quakers refused to fight.

When Night came, they went out of the Reach of the Castle-shot; and he took
Occasion to speak with two of his Friends in the Ship, and enquired their
Judgment concerning Fighting; but they gave little Answer to it, but said
however, If the Lord sent them well home, they would never go to it again. They
resolve against it.
To which he returned, That if he stood honest to that of God in his own
Conscience, and they came to it tomorrow, with the Lord's Assistance he would
bear his Testimony against it; for he clearly saw, that forasmuch as they had
been such great Actors in Fighting, they now must bear their Testimony against
it, and wait what would be the Issue; saying with themselves, The Will of the
Lord be done. The next Day they heard that several were killed on Shore, which
grieved Thomas not a little. Some Time after, one of Thomas's Friends went to
the Captain to be cleared; and he asking Why? His Answer was, That he could
fight no longer. To which the Captain said, He that denies to fight in Time of
Engagement, I will put my Sword in his Guts. Then, said the other, thou will be
a Manslayer, and guilty of shedding Blood: For which the Captain (who was a
Baptist-Preacher) beat him sorely with his Fist and Cane; and he that had been
their Friend, was now become their open Enemy.

Some Time after (about the Year 1655,) being at Leghorn, they were ordered to
go a cruizing; and one Morning spied a great Ship bearing down upon them, which
they supposed to be a Spanish Man of War. Presently Orders were given to clear
the Ship for Fight. Thomas then being upon the Deck, few plainly that a Time of
Trial was now come, and he prayed to the Lord very earnestly for Strength: And
that which seemed most expedient to him, was to meet with his Friends; which,
after Notice given, was done accordingly. Being all met, he told them, how it
was with him, and that Things seemed very dark and cloudy, yet his Hopes were,
that the Lord would deliver him, and all such as were, of his Faith; to which
he added, I lay not this as an Injunction upon any one, but leave you all to
the Lord: Moreover he said, I must tell you, that the Captain puts great
Confidence in you; therefore let us be careful that we give him no just
Occasion; and all that are of my Mind, let us meet in the most public Place
upon the Deck, in the full View of the Captain, that he may not say we deceived
him, in not telling him that we would not fight, so that he might have put
others in our Room. Then Thomas went upon the Deck, and set his Back against
the G^^r-Capstan, and a little after turning his Head, he saw his Friends
behind him; at which, though he rejoiced, yet his Bowels rolled within him, for
them, who stood there as Sheep ready for the Slaughter. Within a little Time
came the Lieutenant, and said to one of them, They refuse to fight.
Go down to thy Quarters: To which he returned, I can fight no more. The
Lieutenant then going to the Captain, made the worst of it, saying, Yonder the
Quakers are all together; and I do not know but they will mutiny, and one say^,
he cannot fight. The Captain having asked his Name, came down to him, ^lung his
Hat overboard, and taking Hold of his Collar, beat him with a great Cane, and
dragged him down to his Quarters. Then he went upon the Half-deck again, and
called for his Sword; which his Man having brought him, he drew with great
Fury. No sooner was this done, but the Word of the Lord, as Thomas took it, run
through him, saying, The Sword of the Lord is over him; and if he will have a
Sacrifice, proffer i^ him. And this Word was so powerful in him, that he
quivered and shook, though he endeavored to stop it, fearing they should think
he was afraid, which he was not; for turning his Head over his Shoulder, he
said to his Friend Roger, I must go to the Captain. To which he returned, Be
well satisfied in what thou do. And Thomas replied, There was a Necessity
upon him. Then seeing the Captain coming on with his drawn Sword, he fixed his
Eye with great Seriousness upon him, and stepped toward him, keeping his Eye
upon him, (in much Dread of the Lord) being carried above his furious Looks. At
which the Captain's Countenance changed pale, The furious Captain calm of a
sudden.
and he turning himself about, called to his Man to take away his Sword; and so
he went off. Not long after, the Ship they expected to fight withal, proved to
be a Genoese, their Friend; and before Night the Captain sent the Priest to
Thomas, to excuse his Anger, it having been in his Passion. To which Thomas's
Answer was, That he had nothing but good Will to him; and he bad the Priest
tell the Captain, That he must have a Care of such Passions; for if he killed a
Man in his Passion, he might seek for Repentance, and perhaps not find it. They
come home.
Thus Thomas overcame this Storm, and at length got safe home.

Now leaving Men of War, He goes in a Merchant Ship, and being often pressed into
the King's Service, meets with many Troubles.
he afterward went to Sea in a Merchantman, or trading Ship. But then it fell
to be his Lot several Times to be pressed into the King's Service; and being
car^yed into a Man O^ War, he sustered very much: Once he fasted five Days,
taking only at Times a Draught of Water; for he could easily guess, that if he
had eaten of their Victuals, it would have gone the harder with him, since he
scrupled to do any Ship-work, though it did not belong to fighting; for he judged
all this to be Assistance to those whose Business it was to fight; and that
therefore in such a Ship he could do nothing, whatever it was, but it was being
helpful and assisting. In this Condition he met with several rude Occurrences
for some Years together. Being once at Harwich, hard at work in a Ship, heaving
out Corn in a Lighter, he was pressed; but one of the M^n saying, that he was a
Quaker, the Captain, who with his Boat was come a-board, said in a scoffing
Manner to him, Thou art no Quaker; for if thou wast a Quaker, thou should be
waiting upon the Lord, and let his Ravens feed thee, and not be toiling thy
Body. For Thomas being stripped to his Shirt and Drawers, his Shirt was wet
with Sweat; and being a little Time silent, said at length to the Captain, I
perceive thou have read some Part of the Scriptures: Did thou never read,
that he is worse than an Infidel that will not provide for his Family? I have
often heard the Quakers blamed for not working, but thou art the first that
ever I heard blame them for working. At this the Captain said, Turn him away,
he is a Quaker. But a little after he cried, Pull him again, he is no Quaker;
and said to Thomas, Thou art no Quaker; for here thou bring Corn, and of it
is made Bread, and by the Strength of that Bread we kill the Dutch; and
therefore no Quaker: Or art not thou as accessory to their Deaths, as we?
Answer me. Thomas not presently answering, was much scoffed and jeered by the
Seamen; but at length he said to the Captain, I am a Man that can feed my
Enemies, and well may I you, who pretend to be my Friends. To which the Captain
replied, Turn him away, he is a Quaker: And thus that Stormceased. But a few
Days after, he was pressed again out of the same Vessel, and carried on board a
Man of War; there he was ordered to go into the Cabin, where the Captain and
several Officers were; and being entered, the Captain began to curse the
Quakers, and swore, That if he did not hang Thomas, he would carry him to the
Duke of York, and he would. But Thomas said very little, and felt himself kept
by the Lord from Fear. And when the Captain had tired himself with scolding and
railing, he said more mildly, What, do thou say nothing for thy self? To
which Thomas answered, Thou say enough for thee and me too: And he found it
most safe to say little: This was indeed the best Way; for generally no
Reasons, how good soever, avail with passionate Men, who often think it a
Disparagement to them, when they hearken to what is said by one they look upon
to be their Inferior: But such sometimes find they reckon amiss; as this
Captain did, who, notwithstanding his Haughtiness, was soon struck by a
superior Power; for the next Night a sudden Cry was heard, Where is the Quaker,
Where Is the Quaker? Thomas hearing this, said, Here I am: What lack you at this
time of the Night? To which it was told him, You must came to the Captain
presently. He then coming to the Cabin-door, the Captain said, Is the Quaker
there? To which Thomas having answered, Yes, the Captain said, I cannot sleep,
thou must go on Shore. Thomas replied, I am in thy Hand, and thou may do
with me as thou please. So with the Boat he was put on Shore at Harwich, by
Order of the Captain, who in his Fury had said, That Hanging was too good for
him: But now because his Mind was disquieted, he could not sleep, though Thomas,
who lay on the hard Boards, slept very well.

Having said thus much of this Seaman, let us now take a View and behold how,
and in what an industrious Manner, he, without passing the Bounds of a
peaceable Disposition, retook a Ship that was taken by a pyrate, which happened
in the Year 1663, after this Manner.

A Master of a Ship, A farther Relation of Occurrences that bafel T. Lurting,
etc. M^te to G. Pattison, Master of a Ship taken by the Algerines. The Pirates
come up with them, and command the Master with four Men on board them.
whose Name was George Pattison, one of the Society of those called Quakers,
about the Month October, being with his Ship in the Mediterranean, coming from
Venice, near the Island Mayyork, was chased by a Pyrate of Algiers; and their
Vessel sailing well, they endeavored to escape; but by carrying overmuch Sail,
some of their Materials gave Way, by which Means the Turks came up with them,
and commanded the Master on board, who accordingly, with four Men more, went in
his Boat, leaving only his Mate, (the beforementioned Thomas Lurting) with
three Men and a Boy on board his Vessel. As soon as tho^^ came on board the
Pyrate, the Turks put thirteen or fourteen of their Men into the Boat, to go
toward the English Ship. In the mean while the Mate was under great Exercise
of Mind, the rather because the Master, with four of his Men, were then with
the Turks, and those that were left, were somewhat unruly. In this Concern
however, T. Lurting the Mate encouraged.
he believed it was told him inwardly by the Lord, Be not afraid, for thou
shall not go to Algiers: For having had formerly great Experience of the Lord's
Deliverances, as has been said above, he had already learned to trust in God,
almost against Hope: On the Consideration of this, all Fear was removed from
him; and going to the Ship's Side to see the Turks come in, he received them as
if they were his Friends; and they also behaved themselves civilly: Then he
showed them all the Parts of the Vessel, and what she was laden with.
Afterward he said to the Men that were with him, Be not afraid, for all this
we shall not go to Algiers: But let me desire you, as ye have been willing to
obey me, to be as willing now to obey the Turks. This they promised him; and by
so doing he soon perceived they gained upon the Turks; for they seeing the
Seamens Diligence, grew the more careless and favorable to them: And having
taken some small Matter of the Lading, some went again to their own Ship, and
eight Turks staid with the English. Then the Mate began to think of the Master,
and the other Four that were in the Turks Ship; as for himself and the others
with him, he had no Fear at all; nay, he was so far from it, that he said to
one of his Men, Were but the Master on board, and the rest of our Men, if there
were twice as many Turks, I should not fear them. By this he encouraged the
Seamen, who not being of his Persuasion, thought much otherwise than he, and
would have been ready enough to have killed the Turks, if they had seen
Opportunity. In the mean while the Mate's earnest Desire to the Lord was, that
he would put it into the Heart of the Turks, The Master with the four Men sent
back.
to send the Master and the four others back. And his Desire was answered; for
soon after the Master and those Men were sent on Board. Then all Manner of Fear
concerning going to Algiers was taken away from him, which made some say to
him, He was a strange (...), since he was afraid before he was taken, but now
he was not. For before they were taken, he having heard there were many Turks
at Sea, endeavored to persuade the Master to have gone to Leghorn, and there
to stay for a Convoy, and so long they would have no Wages. But to this the
Master would not agree. Now the Mate, to answer the Seamen, who blamed his
Behavior, said to them, I now believe I shall not go to Algiers; and if ye
will be ruled by me, I will act for your Delivery, as well as my own. However,
though he spoke thus boldly, yet he saw no Way for it, for the Turks were all
armed, and the English without Arms. Now these being altogether, except the
Master, be said to them, What if we should overcome the Turks, The Mate opposes
their Resolution to kill the Turks.
and go to Majorca? At which they very much rejoiced, and one said, I will kill
one or two; and I, said another, will ^ut as many of their Throats as you will
have me. But at these Sayings, the Mate was much troubled, for he intended not
to hurt any, and therefore told the Men, If I knew that any of you would touch
a Turk at that Rate, I would tell it the Turks my self. But, said he, if ye
will be ruled, I will act for you; if not, To whom they agree.
I will be still. They seeing that he would not suffer them to take their own
Course, agreed to do what he would have them: Well, said he, if the Turks bid
you do any Thing, do it without Grumbling, and with as much Diligence and
Quickness as you can, for that pleases them, and will cause them to let us be
together. To this the Men all agreed; and then he went to the Master, and told
him their Intentions. But his Answer was, if we offered to rise, and they
overcame us, we had as good be burnt alive. The Mate knew very well the Master
was in the right, viz. that if they failed in the Attempt, they were like to
meet with the most cruel Treatment from the Turks that could be thought of. Now
the Reason why the Master though a very bold spirited Man, did not readily
consent to the Proposal, was, because he feared they would shed Blood; but his
Mate told him, They were resolved, and he questioned not but to do it, without
shedding one Drop of Blood; and besides, he would rather have gone to Algiers,
than to kill one Turk. Speaking thus, he so swayed the Master, that at last he
agreed to let him do what he would, provided they killed none. Now since two
Turks lay in the Cabin with the Master, The Master gives Liberty to the Mate.
it was agreed that he should continue to lie there, lest they should mistrust
any Thing. In the mean while it began to be bad Weather, so that they lost the
Company of the Turkish Man of War, which was the Thing the Mate much desired;
and the Turks seeing the Diligence of the English Sailors, grew careless
concerning them, which was what the Mate aimed at. The second Night after, the
Captain of the Turks, and one of his Company, being gone to sleep in the Cabin
with the Master, the Mate persuaded one to lie in his Cabin, and about an Hour
after, another in another Cabin, and at last it raining very much, he pesuaded
them all to lie down and sleep: The Mate disarms them while they are asleep.
And when they were all asleep, he coming to them, fairly got their Arms into
his Possession. This being done, he told his Men, Now we have the Turks at our
Command, no Man shall hurt any of them; for if ye do, I will be against you:
But this we will do, now they are under Deck, we will keep them so, and go for
Majorca. Now having ordered some to keep the Doors, Sail for Majorca.
they steered their Course to Majorca, and they had such a strong Gale, that in
the Morning they were near it. Then he ordered his Men, if any offered to come
out, not to let above one or two at a Time: And when one came out, expecting to
have seen his own Country, he was not a little astonished instead thereof to
see Majorca. Then the Mate said to his Men, Be careful of the Door, for when he
goes in, we shall see what they will do. But have a Care not to spill Blood.
The Turk being gone down, and telling his Comrades what he had seen, and how
they were going to Majorca, they, instead of rising, all fell a crying, for
their Courage was quite sunk, and they begged, that they might not be sold. He
promises not to sell them.
This the Mate promised them, and said They should not. And when he had
appeased them, he went into the Cabin to the Master, who knew nothing of what
was done, and gave him an Account of the sudden Change, and how they had
overcome the Turks. Which, when he understood, he told their Captain, That the
Vessel was now no more in their Possession, but in his again; and that they
were going for Majorca. At this unexpected News the Captain wept, and desired
the Master not to sell him; which he promised he would not. They hide them from
the Spaniards.
Then they told him also, they would make a Place to hide them in, that the
Spaniards coming aboard should not find them. And so they did accordingly, at
which the Turks were very glad. Being come into the Port of Majorca, the
Master, with four Men, went ashore, Arrive at Majorca.
and left the Mate on board with ten Turks. The Master having done his
Business, returned on Board, not taking License, lest the Spaniards should come
and see the Turks: But another English Master being an Acquaintance, lying
there also with his Ship, came at Night on board; and after some Discourse,
they told him what they had done, under Promise of Silence, lest the Spaniards
should come and take away the Turks. They refuse to sell them.
But he broke his Promise, and would have had two or three of the Turks, to
have brought them to England. His Design then being seen, his Demand was
deny^d: And seeing he could not prevail, he said to Pattison and his Mate, That
they were Fools, because they would not sell the Turks, which were each worth
two or three hundred Pieces of Eight. But they told him, That if they would
give many Thousands, they should not have one, for they hoped to send them home
again; and to sell them, the Mate said, He would not have done for the whole
Island. The other Master then coming ashore, told the Spaniards what he knew
of this, who then threatened to take away the Turks. The Spaniards informed,
threaten to take them away.
But Pattison and his Mate having heard this, called out the Turks, and said to
them, Ye must help us, or the Spaniards will take you from us. To this the
Turks, as one may easily guess, were very ready, and so they quickly got out to
Sea: And the English, to save the Turks, put themselves to the Hazard of being
overcome again; for they continued hovering several Days, because they would
not put into any Port of Spain, They put out to Sea.
for Fear of losing the Turks, to whom they gave Liberty for four or five Days,
The Turks loose on D^^^, attempt to rise, but are prevented.
until they made an Attempt to rise; which the Mate perceiving, he prevented,
without hurting any of them, though he once laid hold of one: Yet generally he
was so kind to them, that some of his Men grumbled, and said, He had more Care
for the Turks than for them. To which his Answer was, They were Strangers, and
therefore he must treat them well. At length, after several Occurrences, the
Mate told the Master, That he thought it best to go to the Coasts of Barbary,
because they were then like to miss their Men of War. To this the Master
consented. However, to deceive the Turks, they sailed to and fro for several
Days; for in the Day Time they were for going to Algiers, but when Night came,
they steered the contrary Way, and went back again, by which Means they kept
the Turks in Ignorance, so as to be quiet.

But on the Ninth Day, being all upon Deck, when none of the English were there
but the Master, his Mate, and the Man at the Helm, they began to be so untoward
and haughty, that it rose in the Mate's Mind, What if they should lay hold on
the Master, and casthim over board: For they were ten lusty Men, and he but a
little Man. This Thought struck him with Terror; but recollecting himself, and
taking Heart, he stamped with his Foot, and the Men coming up, one asked for
the Crow, and another for the Ax, to fall on the Turks; but the Mate had them,
Not to hurt the Turks, and said, I will lay hold on their Captain: Which he
did, for having heard them threaten the Master, he stepped forward, and laying
hold of the Captain said, He must go down; which he did very quietly, and all
the rest followed him. They draw toward the Barbary. Shore, designing to land
the Turks.
Two Days after, being come on the Coast of Barbary, they were, according to
what the Turks said, about fifty Miles from Algiers, and six from Land; and in
the Afternoon it fell calm. But how to set the Turks on Shore was yet not
resolved upon. The Mate saw well enough, that he being the Man who had begun
this Business, it would be his Lot also to bring it to an End. He then
acquainted the Master that he was willing to carry the Turks on Shore; but how
to do this safely, he as yet knew not certainly; for to give them the Boat, But
at a Loss how to do it with Safety.
was too dangerous, for then they might get Men and Arms, and so come and
retake the Ship with its own Boat; and to carry them on Shore with two or three
of the Ship's Men, was also a great Hazard, because the Turks were ten in
Number: And to put one half on Shore was no less dangerous; for then they might
raise the Country, and so surprise the English when they came with the other
half. In this great Strait the Mate said to the Master, If he would let him
have the Boat and three Men to go with him, he would venture to put the Turks
on Shore. The Master, relying perhaps on his Mate's Conduct, consented to the
Proposal, though not without some Tears dropped on both Sides. Yet the Mate taking
Courage, said to the Master, I believe the Lord will preserve me, for I have
nothing but Goodwill in venturing my Life; and I have not the least Fear upon
me; The Mate proposes with 3 to go with him in the Boat, to put them on Shore,
being 10 in Number.
but trust that all will do well. The Master having consented, the Mate called
up the Turks, and going with two Men and a Boy in the Boat, took in these ten
Turks, all loose and unbound. Perhaps some body will think this to be a very
inconsiderate Act of the Mate, and that it would have been more prudent to have
tied the Turks Hands, the rather because he had made the Men promise, that they
should do nothing to the Turks, until he said, He could do no more; for then he
gave them Liberty to act for their Lives so as they judged convenient. Now
since he knew not how near he should bring the Turks ashore, and whether they
should not have been necessitated to swim a little, it seemed not prudent, to
do any Thing which might have exasperated them; for if it had fallen out so
that they must have swain, then of Necessity they must have been un^^ed, which
would have been dangerous. Yet the Mate did not omit to be as careful as
possible he could. For calling in the Captain of the Turks, he placed him first
in the Boat's Stern; then calling for another, he placed him in his Lap, and
one on each side, and two more in their Laps, until he had placed them all;
which he did to prevent a sudden rising. He himself sat with a Boat-hook in his
Hand on the Bow of the Boat, having next to him one of the Ship-men, and two
that ^owed, having one a Carpenters Adds, and the other a Coopers
Heading-knife. These were all their Arms, besides what belonged to the Turks,
which they had at their Command. Thus the Boat went off, The Boat puts off
toward the Shore.
and stood for the Shore. But as they came near it, the Men g^owing afraid, one
of them cried out of a sudden, Lord have Merey on us, there are Turks in the
Bushes on Shore. The Turks in the Boat perceiving the English to be afraid, all
rose at once. But the Mate, who in this great Strait continued to be hearty,
showed himself now to be a Man or Courage, and bid the Men to Take up such Arms
as they had; but do nothing with them until he gave them Leave. And then seeing
that there were no Men in the Bushes, and that it was only an Imagination, all
Fear was taken away from him, and his Courage increasing, he thought with
himself, It is better to strike a Man, than to cleave a Man's Head; and turning
the Boat-hook in his Hand, he struck the Captain a smart Blow, and bid him sit
down; which he did instantly, and so did all the rest. After the Boat was come
so near the Shore, He sets the Turks on Shore.
that they could easily wade, the Mate bid the Turks jump out, and so they did,
and because they said, they were about four Miles from a Town, he gave them
some Loaves, and other Necessaries. G^ves them Provisions.
They would fain have persuaded the English to go with them ashore to a Town,
promising to treat them with Wine, and other good Things: But though the Mate
trusted in divine Providence, yet he was not so careless as freely to enter
into an apparent Danger, without being necessitated thereto: For though he had
some Thoughts that the Turks would not have done him any Evil, yet it was too
hazardous thus to have yielded to the Mercy of those that lived there: And
therefore he very prudently rejected their Invitation, well knowing that the
Scripture says, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. The Turks seeing they
could not persuade him, took their Leaves with Signs of great Kindness, and so
went on Shore. The English then putting the Boat closer in, threw them all
their Arms on Shore, being unwilling to keep any Thing of theirs. And when the
Turks got up the Hill, they waved their Caps at the English, and so joyfully
took their last Farewell. The Boat comes aboard, and they sail with a fair Wind.
And as soon as the Boat came again on board, they had a fair Wind, which they
had not all the while the Turks were on board. Thus Thomas Lurting saved the
Ship and its Men; which being thus wonderfully preserved, returned to England
with a prosperous Wind. Now before the Vessel arrived at London, the News of
this extraordinary Case was come thither, and when she was coming up the
Tham^s, the King, with the Duke of York, and several Lords being at Greenwich,
it was told him, there was a Quakers Ketch coming up the River, that had been
taken by the Turks, and redeemed themselves without sighting: The King being at
Greenwich, ^^me^ in a Barge to the Ship's-side, and has the Narration from the
(...)
The King hearing this, came with his Barge to the Ship's-side, and holding the
entering Rope in his Hand, he understood from the Mate's own Mouth, how the
Thing had happened. But when he heard him say, how they had let the Turks go
free, he said to the Master, You have done like a Fool, for you might have had
good Gain for them: And to the Mate he said, You should have brought the Turks
to me. But the Mate answered, I thought it better for them to be in their own
Country. At which the King and others smiled, and so went away, thinking that
the Master had done foolishly; but he and his Mate were of another Opinion, and
they made it appear that they did approve the Lesson of our Savior, Love your
Enemies, and do Good to those that hate you, not only with their Mouths, but
that they had also put it into Practice.

Though I have described this Fact from a printed Relation, yet I have added some
Circumstances from the Mouth of the said Mate, with whom I had some
Acquaintance.

Several Years afterward, Some Quakers Slaves at Algiers
when some Seamen of those called Quakers were in Slavery at Algiers, G. Fox
writ a Book to the Grand-Sultan, and the King at Algiers, wherein he laid
before them their indecent Behavior, G. Fox writes to the Sultan concerning
them.
and unreasonable Dealings, showing them from their Alcoran that this
displeased God, and that Mahomet had given them other Directions. To this he
added a succinct Narrative of what has been related here of G. Pattison's Ship
being taken and re-taken, and how the Turks were set at Liberty, without being
made Slaves; by which the Mahometans might see what kind of Christians the
Quakers were, viz. such as shew^d effectually that they loved their Enemies,
according to the Doctrine of their supreme Lawgiver, Christ. Now concerning
those Quakers at Algiers, of whom Mention has been made that they were Slaves
there, it was a pretty long Time before Opportunity was found to redeem them:
They are suffered to walk loose through the Town. And to have religious Meetings.
But in the mean while they so faithfully served their Masters, that they were
suffered to go loose through the Town, without being chain^d or ^etter'd; and
Liberty was also allowed them to meet at set Times for religious Worship; and
their Patrons themselves would sometimes come and see what they did there; and
finding no Images or Prints, as Papist Slaves in the Exercise of their Worship
made use of, but hearing from their Slaves that they reverently adored and
worshipped the living God, Their Way of Worship comm^nded by their Patrons.
Creator of Heaven and Earth, they commended them for it, and said it was very
good, and that they might freely do so. And since one of them was raised to
speak by Way of Edification to his Friends, some other English Slaves
frequenting that Meeting, came to be united with them. In the mean while the
Name Quakers came to be known at Algiers, as a People that might be trusted
beyond others.

It was in this Year, W. Caton interprets to the Author's Mother at a Meeting
in Kingstone.
that William Caton went into England with his Wife from Holland, (where he was
married) and two Friends more, one of which was Judith Zinspenning, my Mother,
who was moved to speak at the Meeting at Kingstone, where W. Caton interpreted
for her. At another Time being in a Meeting at London, and he not present, and
feeling her self stirred up to declare of the loving Kindness of the Lord to
those that feared him, she desired one Peter Sybrands, to be her Interpreter;
but he, though an honest Man, yet not very fit for that Service, one or more
Friends told her, they were so sensible of the Power by which she spoke, that
though they did not understand her Words, yet they were edify^d by the Life and
Power that accompanied her Speech, and therefore they little mattered the Want
of Interpretation; and so she went on without any Interpreter. She had indeed a
very good Talent, and left such Repute behind, that I coming several Years
after into England, Kindness was showed me in several Places on her Account.
After a Stay of some Weeks at London, and thereabouts, she went to Colchester,
in Order to return with W. Caton's Wife to Holland; but making some Stay in
that Town, She writes a Book of Proverbs.
she there wrote a Book of Proverbs, which W. Caton having translated into
English, was printed at London: And after her Departure, he staying behind,
traveled through Essex, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire,
Nottinghamshire, and Yorkshire; and coming into Lancashire, he repaired to
Swarthmore, and found there not only his ancient Mistress Margaret Fell, who
received him very kindly, but also G. Fox, not long before he was taken
Prisoner.

From thence Caton went to Sunderland, He embarks for Holland.
and so to Scarborough, where meeting with a Vessel bound for Holland, he
embarked, and went off with a fair Wind: But it was not long before the Wind
changed; and being about ten Leagues from the Land, the Sky began to look
tempestuous; which made Caton advise the Master to return; but he thinking the
Weather would soon change, was unwilling to do so; yet it fell out otherwise, A
dreadful Storm.
for a violent Storm arose, by which the Ship was so exceedingly tossed, that she
grew leaky, and took so much Water, that the Pumps continually must be kept
going. But this so wearied the Seamen, that Caton also fell to pumping; for
though he found himself prepared to meet Death, if it had been the Will of the
Lord, yet he knew it to be the Duty of a Man to preserve his Life by lawful
Means, as long as possible; besides he pitied the poor Seamen, and so was made
willing to help them as much as lay in his Power. They are in extreme Danger.
But at length they lost the Use of the Rudder, and were near the Sands and
Shallows, by which the Danger was greatly increased, and Death seemed to
approach.

Now Caton, though given up in the Will of the Lord, and prepared to have found
his Grave in the Deep, yet did not omit to call upon the Lord, and to pray to
the Most High for Deliverance, if it were consistent with his holy Will; and
when the Storm was at the highest, his Supplication was heard, and the Tempest
on a sudden began to cease, and the Wind to abate, which gave him Occasion to
praise the Almighty for the great Mercy showed to him and the Mariners. And
driven to Yarmouth, where W. Caton is taken up and imprisoned above six Months.
Yet the Wind being contrary, the Master resolved to enter Yarmouth, where
Caton met with another Storm: For on the first Day of the Week, being at a
Meeting of his Friends, he with seven more were apprehended, and carried to the
Main Guard. The next Day they were brought before the Bailiffs of the Town, who
tendered them the Oath of Allegiance; which they refusing to take, were sent to
Prison, where he was kept above six Months, so that it was not till the next
Year that he returned into Holland.

Whilst he was in Jail, S. Crisp.
Stephen Crisp came the first time into Holland, to visit his Friends there,
and to edify them with his Gift. It will not be amiss here to say a little of his
Qualifications. A brief Account of him.
He was a Man of notable natural Abilities, and had been zealous for Religion
before ever he entered into Followship with those called Quakers. But when the
Report of this People spread it self in the Place where he lived, he made
Enquiry after them and their Doctrine, and though he heard nothing but Evil
spoken of them, it nevertheless made some Impression upon his Mind, when he
considered how they were derided, hated, slandered, and persecuted; because
this generally had been the Lot of those that truly feared God. But having
heard that one of their Tenets was, that Sin might be overcome in this Life,
this seemed to him a great Error. And therefore when James Parnel came to
Colchester, he armed himself with Arguments to oppose him earnestly: For
looking upon him as one that was but a Youth, he thought he should be able to
prevail upon him. He himself was then about seven and twenty Years of Age,
being not only well versed in sacred Writ, but also in the Writings of many of
the ancient Philosophers. He is convinced by J. Parnel.
Now after he had heard Parnel preach very powerfully and found his Words more
piercing than he had imagined, he ventured to oppose him with some Queries: But
he soon found, that this young Man was endued with sound Judgment; and with all
his Wisdom and Knowledge he was not able to resist him, but was forced to
submit to the Truth he held forth. Now he thought himself so enriched, that for
a Month or two he made it his Business by the Strength of his Reason to defend
the Truth he had embraced. But he soon found that this was not sufficient; for
Self was not subdued under the Cross, and he was not yet come to an
experimental Knowledge of what he asserted and defended with Words. In this
Condition he saw that he must truly become poor in Spirit, if God ever should
enrich him with heavenly Wisdom. This brought him to Mourning and Sorrow, by
which he came more and more to be weaned from his natural Knowledge, wherein he
used to delight. And continuing faithful in this Way of Self-denial, he at
length began to enjoy Peace in his Mind, and so advanced in Virtue and real
Knowledge, that in Time he became an eminent Minister of the Gospel, and
traveling to and fro, many were converted by his Ministry.

About this Time appeared in England, L. Muggleton. and J. Reeves, their
m^nstrous Blasphemies.
one Lodowick Muggleton, who pretended that he and one John Reeves were the two
Witnesses which are spoken of, Rev. xi. 3. And though it was not long before
Reeves died, yet Muggleton continued in his wild Imaginations, which grew to
that Degree, that he gave forth a Paper, in which he said, that he was the
Chief Judge in the World, and in passing the Sentence of eternal Death and
Damnation upon the Souls and Bodies of Men. That in Obedience to his Commission
be had already cursed and damned many Hundreds of People both Body and Soul,
from the Presence of God, elect M^n, and Angels, to Eternity. That he went by
as certain a Rule in so doing, as the Judges of the Land do when they give
Judgment according to Law. And that no infinite Spirit of Christ, nor any God
could or should be able to deliver from his Sentence and Curse, etc. These
abominable Blasphemies he gave forth in public.

Richard Farnsworth, R. Farns. worth publishes a Book against them.
a zealous and intelligent Minister among those called Quakers, answered this
Blasphemer in Writing, and discovered the Horribleness of his profane and
cursed Doctrine and Positions; and he said among the rest, in a Book he
published in Print, Consider the Nature of thy Offense, how far it extends it
self; and that is, to pass the Sentence of eternal Death and Damnation, both
upon the Bodies and Souls of Men and Women, and that to Eternity. Consider that
thy Injustice done by Color of Office, deserves to have a Punishment
proportionable to the Offense; and can the Offense in the Eye of the Lord be
any less than Sin against the Holy Ghost, because thou have pretended to do it
in the Name of the Holy Ghost, and so would make the Holy Ghost the Author
of thy Offense, which it is not? And seeing thou art guilty of Sin against the
Holy Ghost, there is a Punishment already proportioned for such an Offense; and
also thou art punishable by the Law of the Land, for presuming under Pretense
of a Commission, and as a Judge, to pass the Sentence of Death upon the Bodies
of Men and Women, and pretending to go by as certain a Rule in so doing, as the
Judges of the Land do, etc Thus continued Farnsworth to answer Muggleton at
large, and showed him how his Judgment was not only contrary to Truth, but also
against the Law of the Land. But he was daring enough to give a Reply to this
serious Answer, Muggleton replies.
and said in it, That he should commend Farnsworth, First, For setting his Name
to it; and Secondly, For setting down his Words so truly and punctually, that
it made his Commission and Authority to shine the more bright and clear. And
that he was as true an Ambassador of God, and Judge of Men's spiritual Estate,
as any ever was since the Creation of the World. And if you Quakers and others
(thus continued he) can satisfy your selves, that there never was any Man
commissioned of God to bless and curse, then you shall all escape that Curse I
have pronounced upon so many Hundreds; and I only shall suffer for cursing
others without a Commission from God. But my Commission is no pretended Thing,
but as true as Moses 's, the Prophets, and the Apostles Commission was. A
Multitude more of Abominations this Blasphemer belched out, and among the rest,
That no Man could come to the Assurance of the Favor of God, but in believing
that God gave this Power unto John Reeves and himself. That be had Power given
him over all other Gods and infinite Spirits whatsoever. That he [Muggleton]
had the Keys of Heaven, and of Hell; and that none could get into Heaven,
except he opened the Gates. That he had Power to remit their Sins who received
his Doctrine, and to retain and bind their Sins more close upon their
Consciences, for their despising or not receiving his Doctrine. That he was
single in Doctrine, Knowledge, Judgment and Power, above all Men, either
Prophets or Apostles, since the Beginning of the World, or that should be
hereafter whilst the World does endure. That there was no true Minister,
Messenger, nor Ambassador of God in the World but himself, neither should there
be sent any of God after him to the World's End. That a God, without him, spoke
to him by Voice of Words to the hearing of the Ear. That no Person condemned by
him could make his Appeal unto God, neither by himself nor by any other;
because God was not in the World at all. This Power to condemn (says he) has
God given unto me, and in this Regard I am the only and alone Judge what shall
become of Men and Women after Death; neither shall those that are damned by me,
see any other God or Judge but me. I am loath to transcribe more of these most
horrible Blasphemies; and we have Cause to wonder at the long Forbearance of
God, that he thus bore the disdainful Affront offered by this inhumane Monster
in Defiance of his Almightiness. This Muggleton said also to Farnsworth, That
Because he was not under the Sentence of his Commission by Verbal Words or
Writing, he should give Answer to his Letter. For (said he) I never give Answer
in Writing to any one that is under the Sentence of my Commission. This
Shuffle, not to be bound to answer, when he had shut up any one under his
pretended Damnation, seemed comical and facetious. Yet Farnsworth did not omit
to answer his blasphemous Positions publicly, and to show the Absurdity of
Muggleton and John Reeves's being the two Witnesses. Hereafter I shall have
Occasion again to make Mention of this Muggleton, for he lived yet several
Years; and I don't find that any Punishment was inflicted on him by the
Magistrates, other than the Pillory, and half a Year's Imprisonment; though many
think, not without good Reason, that such Blasphemers ought to be secluded from
Conversation with Men.

Francis Howgil, F. Howgil imprisoned for refusing to swear.
in the latter Part of this Year, being in the Market at Kendal in Westmorland
about his Business, was summoned by the High Constable to appear before the
Justices of the Peace at a Tavern. For being a zealous Preacher among those
called Quakers, Occasion was watched to imprison him under some Color of
Justice, how unjust soever. Being come to the Place appointed, the Oath of
Allegiance was tendered him; and because for Conscience Sake he refused to
swear, they committed him to Prison till the Assizes at Appleby. Then appearing
at Appleby, the same Oath was tendered him in Court by the Judges; for not
taking of which he was indicted, only he had Liberty to answer to the
Indictment at the next Assizes. In the mean Time, there being a Jail Delivery
at Appleby, he was required to enter into Bond for his good Behavior. But well
knowing this was only a Snare to bring him into further Bonds, he refused, and
so was re-committed to Prison, And not being tried till next Year, we shall
leave him there.

About this Time happened a singular Case, which I cannot well pass by
unmention'd. O. Atherton dies in Prison.
One Oliver Atherton, a Man of a weak Constitution, having refused to pay
Tithes to the Countess of Derby, who laid Claim to the Ecclesiastical Revenues
of the Parish of Ormskirk, where he lived, was by her Prosecution imprisoned at
Lancester, in a moist and unwholesome Hole, which so weakened him, that after
having lain there two Years and a halt, he grew sick, and a Letter was writ in
his Name to the Countess, in which was laid before her not only what the Cause
was why he had refused the Payment of Tithes, viz. for Conscience Sake; but
also that his Life was in Danger, if he staid longer in that unwholesome Prison;
and that therefore she ought to show Compassion, lest she drew the Guilt of
innocent Blood upon her.

Now, though Oliver's Son, who brought this Letter met with rough Treatment for
not uncovering his Head, yet the Letter has delivered into her own Hands. But
the Countess continued hard-hearted. ^^^frey the Son returned to his Father in
Prison, and told him (who was now on his Deathbed) that the Countess would not
allow him any Liberty. To which he said, She had been the Cause of much
Bloodshed; but this will be the heaviest Blood to her, which ever she sp^lt.
And not long after, he died. His Friend, having got his Corpse, carried it to
Ormskirk; but at Ga^slang, Preston, and other Towns they pass^d, they ^a^tened
to the Market-Cross the following Ins;cription, which also had been put on his
Coffin.

This is Oliver Atherton from the Parish of Ormskirk, who by the Countess of
Derby had been persecuted to Death, for keeping a good Conscience toward God
and Christ, in not paying of Tithes to her.

Now tho three more, who with him were imprisoned for the same Cause, gave
Notice of this to the Countess, that they might not likewise die in Prison, as
their Fellow-Prisoner had, yet she would show no Pity; and threatened to accuse
those at Garslang, to the King and his Council, for having suffered the putting
up of the said In^cription ^ut by this she opened People's Mouths the more, and
an omnipotent Hand prevented the executing of her Threatening: For exactly three
Weeks (...) Day Atherton was buried, she died.

This Year also in October, The Death of H. Smith.
Humping Smith, a Preacher among those called Quakers, having been Prisoner a
Year at Winchester for his Religion, was by Death delivered from his bonds. He
had a Vision in the Year 1660. in the Month called July, concerning the Fire of
London, which happened six Years after, a Relation of which he gave touch in
Print.

In the Year 1662, Which he foresaw with his Imprisonment.
being about London, he said to some of his Friends, That he had a narrow Path
to pass through; and more than once signified he saw he should be imprisoned, and
that it might cost him his Life. And coming not long after to Alton in
Hampshire, he was taken from a Meeting of his Friends, and committed to a
stinking close Prison at Winchester where after a whole Year's Imprisonment he
^ell sick, and in the Time of his Sickness spoke many excellent Words to those
about him, signifying, that he was given up to the Will of the Lord either in
Life or Death. Express us in his last Sickness.
And lying in great Weakness, he said, My Heart is filled with the Power of
God. It Is good for a Man at such a Time as this, to have the Lord to be his
Friend. At another Time he was heard to say, Lord, thou have sent me forth to
do thy Will, and I have been faithful unto thee in my small Measure, which thou
have committed unto me; but it ^oo^ wilt yet try me farther, thy Will be done.
Also he said, I am the Lord's, let him do what he will. Not long before his
Departure, he prayed very earnestly, saying, O Lord, hear the inward Sighs and
Groans of thine ^ppres^ed, and deliver my Soul from the Oppres^or. Hea^ me, O
Lord, uphold and preserve me I know that my Redeemer lineth. Th^^ art strong
and mighty, O Lord. He also prayed to God, that he would deliver his people
from their cru^^ Oppressors. And for those that had been convinced by his
Ministry, that the Lord would be their Teacher. He continued quiet and sensible
to the last Period of his Life, dying a Prisoner for ^earing witness to Truth;
and thus he stepped from this troublesome and transitory Life into one that is
everlasting.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The EIGHTH BOOK.
IN the foregoing Year we left G. Fox in Lancaster-Prison, 1664
where at the Sessions the Oath of Allegiance being tendered to, At Lancaster G.
Fox is brought before Judge Twisden, and examined.
and refused by him, he was brought to his Trial in the Month called March,
which begins the Year 1664. Being brought to the Bar before Judge Twisden, he
said Peace be amongst you all. At which the Judge looking upon him, said, What!
Do you come into the Court with your Hat on? Whereupon the Jailor taking it
off, G. Fox said, The Hat is not the Honor that comes from God. Then said the
Judge, Will you take the Oath of Allegiance? G. Fox answered, I never took any
Oath in my Life. Well, said the Judge, Will you swear, or no? G. Fox reply^d, I
am a Christian, and Christ commands me not to swear; and so does the Apostle
James likewise; and whether I should obey God or Man, do thou judge. I ask you
again, said the Judge, Whether you will swear or no? To which he made Answer, I
am neither Turk, Jew, nor Heathen, but a Christian, and should show forth
Christianity. Do thou not know (thus he went on) that Christians in the
Primitive Times under the ten Persecutions, and some also of the Martyrs in
Queen Mary's Days refused Swearing, because Christ and the Apostle had
forbidden it? Ye have Experience enough, how many Men have sworn first to the
King, and then against him. But as for me, I have never taken an Oath in all my
Life; and my Allegiance does not lie in swearing, but in Truth and
Faithfulness: For I honor all Men, much more the King. But Christ, who is the
great Prophet, who is the King of Kings, the Savior of the World, and the
great Judge of the whole World, he says, I must not swear. Now the Point is,
whether I must obey Christ, or thee. For it is in Tenderness of Conscience, and
in Obedience to the Command of Christ, that I do not swear. And we have the
Word of a King for tender Consciences. G. Fox having spoke thus much, asked the
Judge, If he did own the King? To which he said, Yes, I do own the King. Why
then, said he, Do thou not observe his Declaration from Breda, and his
Promises made since he came into England, That no Man should be called in
Question for Matters of Religion, so long as they lived peaceably? Now if thou
ownest the King, why do thou call me into Question, and put me upon taking an
Oath, seeing thou or none can charge me with unpeaceable Living? The Judge
looking angry, said, Sirrah, will you swear? To which G. Fox told him, I am
none of thy Sirrahs; I am a Christian; and for thee, who art an Old Man and a
Judge, to sit there, and give Nicknames to Prisoners, does not become either
thy gray Hairs or thy Office. The Judge being a little more cool, after some
Words to and fro, said, G. Fox, Say, whether thou will take the Oath, Yea, or
Nay? To which he replied, If I could take any Oath at all, I should take this:
For I do not deny some Oaths only, or on some Occasions, but all Oaths,
according to Christ's Doctrine, who said, Swear not at all. Now if thou, or any
of you, or any of your Ministers or Priests here, will prove that ever Christ
or his Apostle, after they had forbidden all Swearing commanded Christians to
swear, then I will swear. None of the Priests offering to speak, the Judge
said, I am a Servant to the King, and the King sent me not to dispute with you,
but to put the Laws in Execution. And therefore I tender the Oath of
Allegiance, G. Fox continuing to refuse Swearing, Is sent back to Prison for
the next Assizes.
was sent again to Prison. Two Days after, being brought again before the
Judge, it was asked him, Whether he would traverse or submit* To which G. Fox
said, He desired he might have Liberty to traverse the Indictment, and try it.
Then Order was given to take him away, and he was kept in Prison till the next
Assizes.

Being Prisoner in Lancaster Castle, What happened to him in Lancaster-Castle.
there was much Talk of the Turks great Progress in Hungary, there being at
that Time a War between the Emperor and the Turks; and many being afraid, he
said to some, That walking once in his Chamber, he saw (...) Power turn against
the Turk, and that he was turning back (...) And within a Month after, News
came that he was defeated. Another Time, as he was walking in the Room, with
his Mind upon the Lord, he saw an extraordinary great Light, and looking up, he
beheld an Angel of the Lord, with a glittering Sword stretched Southward, which
shone so bright, as if the Court had been all on Fire. Or which I have for
Proof what he mentions of it in his Journal, and also another small Book he
gave out with the Title of A Warning to England. Not long after, a War broke
out between England and Holland, and some Time after the Pestilence appeared at
London, (which lies Southerly from Lancaster) and after two Years, that City by
the Fire was turned into Rubbish.

But I return to the Lancaster Assizes. Margaret Fell, who was now a Widow, was
also under Confinement for refusing the Oath of Allegiance. And G. Fox being in
Prison, writ several Papers to the Magistrates, in which he manifested the Evil
of Persecution, and exhorted to Virtue and Piety.

In the Month called August, He is brought before Judge Turner at Lancaster,
next Assizes.
the Assizes were held again at Lancaster, and G. Fox being brought thither,
Judge Turner then sat on the Crown-Bench; and being called to the Bar, the
Judge asked the Justices, Whether they had tendered him the Oath at the
foregoing Sessions? They saying, they had, and having sworn it, the Jury were
sworn too. Then the Judge asked him, Whether he had not refused the Oath at the
last Assizes? To which he answered, I never took Oath in my Life; and Christ
the Savior and Judge of the World, said, Swear not at all. The Judge seeming
not to take Notice of this Answer, asked him, Whether or no he had not refused
to take the Oath at the last Assizes? G. Fox maintaining the Unlawfulness of
swearing, the Judge said, He was not at that Time to dispute whether it was
lawful to swear, but to enquire whether he had refused to take the Oath, or no.
G. Fox then signifying that he did not disapprove the Things mentioned in the
Oath, said, Plotting against the King, and owning the Pope's, or any other
foreign Power, I utterly deny. Well, said the Judge, You say well in that: But
did you deny to take the Oath; what say you? What would thou have me to say?
replied he, I have told thee before what I did say. After some more Words from
both Sides, the Indictment was read. G. Fox having informed himself of the
Errors that were in it, said, He had something to speak to it, for there were
many gross Errors in it. The Judge signified that he would not hear him; but
when he was at the Point of giving Judgment. The Jury going out, soon returned,
and brought him in guilty. He is brought in guilty.
Whereupon he told them, That both the Justices and they too had forsworn
themselves; which caused such Confusion in the Court, that the pronouncing
Judgment was delayed. Margaret Fell being next brought to the Bar, was also
declared guilty: And the next Day she and G Fox were brought up again to
receive Sentence. Her Council pleading many Errors in her Indictment, she was
set by; and G. Fox then being called, showed himself unwilling to let any Man
plead for him; which seemed to make some Stop; yet he was asked by the Judge,
what he had to say why he should not pass Sentence upon him. At which he told
him, I am no Lawyer, but yet I have much to say, if thou will but have Patience
to hear. Hereupon those on the Bench laughed, and said, Come, what have you to
say? Proves the Indictment erroneous in several Instances.
Then he asked the Judge, Whether the Oath was to be tendered to the King's
Subjects, or to the Subjects of foreign Princes. To which the Judge said, To
the Subjects of this Realm. Then said George, Look the Indictment, and ye may
see that ye have left out the Word Subject: And not having named me in the
Indictment as a Subject, ye cannot praemunire me for not taking the Oath. They
then looking to the Statute, and the Indictment, saw that it was as he said,
and the Judge confessed that it was an Error. Next G. F. told him, He had
something else to stop Judgment; and he desired them to look what Day the
Indictment said the Oath was tendered to him at the Sessions there: They
looking, said it was the eleventh of January. Then he asked, What Day of the
Week was that Session held on? On a Tuesday, said they. To which G. F. said,
Look in your Almanacks, and see whether there was any Session held at Lancaster
on the eleventh of January. They looking, found that the eleventh Day was the
Day called Monday, and that the Sessions were on the Day called Tuesday, which
was the twelfth Day of the said Month: Look ye now, said he, ye have indicted
me for refusing the Oath in the Quarter Sessions held at Lancaster on the
eleventh Day of January last, and the Justices have sworn that they tendered me
the Oath in open Sessions here that Day; and the Jury upon their Oath have
found me guilty thereupon; and yet ye see there was no Sessions held at
Lancaster that Day. The Judge, to cover the Matter, asked, Whether the Sessions
did not begin on the eleventh Day? To which some in the Court answered, No; the
Sessions held but one Day, and that was the twelfth. Then the Judge said, This
was a great Mistake, and an Error. Some of the Justices grew to angry at this,
that they seeming ready to have gone off the Bench, stamped, and said, Who has
done this? Some Body has done this on purpose. Then said G.F. Are not the
Justices here that have sworn to this Indictment, forsworn Men? But this is not
all; I have more yet to offer why Sentence should not be given against me. In
what Year of the King was it, that the last Assize, which was in the Month
called March, was holden here? To this the Judge said, It was in the sixteenth
Year of the King. But, said G. F. The Indictment says it was in the fifteenth
Year. This was also acknowledged to be an Error: But both Judge and Justices
were in such a Fret, that they knew not what to say; for it had been sworn
also, that the Oath was tendered to G. F. at the Assize mentioned in the
Indictment, viz. in the fifteenth Year of the King, whereas it was in the
sixteenth; which made G. F. say, Is not the Court here forsworn also, they
having sworn a whole Year false? Some other remarkable Errors he showed, which
I, having no Mind to be tedious, pass by with Silence. G. F. then desiring
Justice, and saying, that he did not look for Mercy, the Judge said, You must
have Justice, and you shall have Law: Which made him ask, The Indictment
quashed.
Am I now free from all that has been done against me in this Matter? Yes,
said the Judge; but then starting up in a Rage, he said, I can put the Oath to
any Man here; and I will tender you the Oath again. G. F. then telling him,
that he had Examples enough of Yesterday's swearing, and false swearing; for I
saw before my Eyes, said he, that both Justices and Jury forswore themselves;
yet the Judge asked him if he would take the Oath: He is acknowledged to be at
Liberty, yet not dismissed.
But he replied, Do me Justice for my false Imprisonment all this while; for he
had been locked up, as was well known, in a wet and cold Room, and therefore he
said, I ought to be set at Liberty. At which the Judge said, You are at
Liberty, The Oath is tendered, and he is indicted again.
but I will put the Oath to you again. G. F. then turning himself about, said
to the People, Take Notice, this is a Snare; but I ought to be set free from
the Jailor, and from this Court. But the Judge, instead of hearkening to that,
cried, Give him the Book. G. F. then taking the Book, and looking in it, said,
I see it is a Bible, and I am glad of it. In the mean while the Jury being
called by Order of the Judge, they stood by; for though they had desired, after
they had brought in their former Verdict, to be dismissed, yet he told them, He
could not dismiss them yet, because he should have Business for them; and
therefore they must attend, and be ready. G. F. perceiving his Intent, look^d
him in the Face, which made him blush: Nevertheless he caused the Oath to be
read, and then asked G. F. Whether he would take the Oath or no? To which he
said, Ye have given me a Book here to kiss, and to swear on; and this Book
says, Kiss the Son; and the Son says in this Book, Swear not at all; and so
says also the Apostle James: Now I say, as the Book says, and yet ye imprison
me, for doing as the Book bids me. How chance ye do not imprison the Book for
saying so? How comes it that the Book is at Liberty amongst you, which bids me
swear not? Why don't ye imprison the Book also? Whilst he was speaking thus, he
held up the Bible open, to show the Place where Christ forbids swearing. But
the Book was taken from him, and the Judge said, No, but we will imprison
George Fox. This Case was so singular, that it was spread over all the Country,
as a Byword, That they gave G. Fox a Book, to swear on, that commanded him,
not to swear at all; and that this Book, viz. the Bible, was at Liberty, and he
in Prison, for doing as the Bible said: B^^ the Judge urged him still to swear;
to which G. F. said, I am a Man of a tender Conscience; consider therefore,
that it is in Obedience to Christ^s Command that I cannot swear: But if any of
you can convince me, that after Christ and the Apostle had commanded not to
swear, they did alter that Command, and commanded Christians to swear, then ye
shall see I will swear. And he seeing there, several Priests, said, If ye
cannot do it, let your Priests do it, But none of the Priests said any Thing;
and the Judge said, All the World cannot convince you. To which he replied, How
is it like the World should convince me? For the whole World lies in
Wickedness: But bring out your spiritual Men, as ye call them, to convince me.
Then the Sheriff and the Judge said, That the Angel swore in the Revelations.
To which G. Fox replied, When God brings in his First-begotten Son into the
World, he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him; and he said, Swear not
at all. Nay, said the Judge, I will not dispute. Then he told the Jury, It was
for Christ's Sake that he could not swear; and therefore he warned them not to
act contrary to that of God in their Consciences, because they must all appear
before his Judgment Seat. After some more Words spoken, the Jailor took him
away. And in the Afternoon, he was brought up again. And brought in guilty.
The Jury having brought him in guilty of what he was charged with in the
Indictment, viz. his not taking the Oath, the Judge asked him, What he had to
say for himself. He then desired the Indictment to be read; since he could not
answer to that which he had not heard. The Clerk reading it, the Judge said,
Take Heed it be not false again. But the Clerk read it in such a Manner, that G
F. could hardly understand what he read. And when he had done, the Judge asked
G. F. What he had to say to the Indictment? To which he said, At once hearing
so large a Writing read, and that at such a Distance, that I could not
distinctly hear all the Parts of it, I cannot well tell what to say to it: But
if you will let me have a Copy of it, and give me Time to consider, I shall
answer it. This put the Court to a little Stand; but at length the Judge asked
him, What Time he would have? And he answered, Till the next Assize. But, said
the Judge, what Plea will you make now? are you guilty, or not guilty? To which
he replied, I am not guilty at all of denying swearing obstinately and
wilfully: And as for those Things mentioned in the Oath, as jesuitical Plots,
and foreign Powers, I utterly deny them in my Heart* And if I could take any
Oath, I should take this; but I never took any Oath in all my Life. To this the
Judge returned, You say well; but the King is sworn, the Parliament is sworn, I
am sworn, the Justices are sworn, and the Law is preserved by Oaths. On which
G. F. told him, They had had sufficient Experience of Men's swearing, and had
seen how the Justices and Jury swore wrong the other Day: And continued he, if
thou have read in the Book of Martyrs, how many of them did refuse to swear,
both within the Time of the ten Persecutions, and in Bishop Bonner's Day, thou
may see that to deny swearing in Obedience to Christ's Command, is no new
Thing. To this the Judge said, He wished the Laws were otherwise. And G. F.
said then, Our Yea is Yea, and our Nay is Nay. And if we transgress our Yea and
our Nay, let us suffer as they do, or should do, that swear falsely. This I have
offered to the King, and the King said, it was reasonable. After some farther
Discourse, G. F. was committed to Prison again, and Colonel Kirby ordered the
Jailor to keep him close, and to suffer no Body to come to him, as one that was
not fit to be discoursed with. He is re-committed, and Colonel Kirby's Cruelty
to him.
The Jailor did not scruple to follow this Order, for he locked him up in a
smoaky Tower, where the Smoke of the other Prisoners came up so thick, that
sometimes one could hardly see a burning Candle; so that there seemed to have
been an Intent to choke him; for the Turnkey could harldly be persuaded to
unlock one of the upper Doors a little to let out the Smoke. Besides this
Hardship, in wet Weather it rained in upon his Bed to that Degree, that his
Shirt grew wet. In this pitiful Condition he lay during a long cold Winter,
which so afflicted him, that his Body swelled, and his Limbs were much
benumbed. Here we will leave him till he was brought again to his Trial, which
was not before the next Year.

But before I part with him, I must mention, that some Time before, he had
written several Papers to the Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain, and also
to the Pope. These Writings were by some Body else turned into Latin, and so
given out in Print. In these he levelled chiefly against Persecution for
Religion's Sake. He reproved the King of Spain more especially, because of the
Inquisition, and the burning of People: And he did not spare the Pope, as being
the Spring of these Evils, saying, Innocent Blood has long cried for Vengeance
to the Lord: The Earth almost swims with innocent Blood; and the Cry of it is
heard. Your frozen, Profession, and your cold Winter-Images being set up in
your Streets, the Lord God of Power and Dread, and of Heaven and Earth will be
avenged on thee, and you all; his Day is approaching. Ye great and rich
Cardinals and Pope, ye have been fed like fat Hogs; and seeing that thou
would not receive the Lord's Messengers, but threw them in Prison, and in
your Inquisition, it may be the Lord may give you a Visit another Way, for his
Dread is gone out, and his Zeal is kindled against you. -- The Fields are
sprinkled with Blood of the Innocent, and ye are the Aceldama, or the Field of
Blood. But the Lord is coming to take Vengeance upon you; his Hand is stretched
over your Heads, and his Power is gone over you; with that he will rule you and
smite you down, and bring you that are lofty from your S^ats, and abase your
Pride, and take the Glory to himself. -- How much Blood, which is unmeasurable,
and cannot be measured here, have ye drank since the Days of the Apostles, and
made your selves drunk with it! But now is the Indignation and Wrath of the
Almighty come and coming upon you; and thou Pope must feel it. -- Tremble
therefore, thou Pope, tremble, fear, and quake thou Pope, tremble ye Cardinals,
tremble ye Jesuits, tremble ye Priors, tremble ye Monks and Friars, of what
Rank soever; for the Army of the Lord God is coming over you, by whom ye shall
be shaken and dashed to Pieces. These are but small Sparkles of that Flame
which G. Fox blew against the Pope, intermixing his Writings with many
Demonstrations, that the Romish Church was the Whore of Babel, and that she it
was that had defiled her self with Idolatry and Superstition, and had bathed
her self in the Blood of the Saints, having furiously attacked them with Sword
and Fire. This he concluded with these Words: The Plagues of God will be thy
Portion, O Pope, who has deceived the Nations: And all ye Jesuits and
Cardinals, howl, for your Misery is coming, the mighty Day of the Lord God upon
you all; the Lord God, who will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, and with
none of your Inventions. Thus G. Fox wrote in that Day to the Pope and his
Counselors; and no Wonder that he paid dear for this sharp Language against
the Head of the Church of Rome; for it may be believed, that a great many of
the Court-party, in those Days, were either concealed Papists, or Favorers of
them: And yet among the national Clergy, and even those of other Persuasions,
many branded the Quakers with the odious Name of secret Papists, thereby to
make them incur the Hatred of the People.

Now I return to Francis Howgil, F. Howgil 's Trial at Appleby, and
Re-commitment.
whom in the foregoing Year we left in Prison at Appleby. It was in the
Forepart of this Year that he was brought to his Trial. Being come into Court
before the Judges sat, he spoke to the Clerk of the Assizes, and told him, He
did not know whether they expected his Appearance then or not: The Clerk said,
You have done well, and that he would acquaint the Judge, and he should only
engage to him to appear the next Assizes, to answer the Indictment against him,
and that he should not appear in Court; Francis bid do what he would. In the
mean Time Sir Philip Musgrave (so called) a great Adversary to the Truth, and
the great and chief Prosecutor of Francis, had informed the Judges against him,
as that he was a dangerous Person, a Ringleader and a Keeper up of Meetings of
dangerous Consequence, and destructive to the Peace of the Nation; so then they
concluded he should appear in Court; and so the Clerk informed him, and told
him about what Time he should be called: So the Court began; Judge Twisden gave
the Charge to the Grand Jury, in which he said, There was a Sort of People, who
under Pretense of Conscience and Religion, who seemed to build upon the King's
Declarations from Breda, and under Color of this, hatched Treasons and
Rebellions, and gave the Jury Charge to enquire and present such, that the
Peace of the Nation might be preserved; so they empannelled the Jury, and
Francis was called to the Bar, and the Judge spoke as follows;

Judge, speaking calmly to him, said, The Face of Things was much altered since
the last Assizes, and made a large Speech to him and the Country, telling him,
That all Sects under Pretense of Conscience did violate the Laws, and hatched
Rebellions, not (says he) that I have any thing to charge you with; but seeing
the Oath of Allegiance was tendered to you the last Assizes, and you refused to
take it, it was looked upon that such Persons were Enemies to the King and
Government; and said, I will not trouble you now to answer to your Indictment,
but I must do that the next Assizes, in the mean Time you must enter into
Recognizance for your good Behavior.

To which F. H. answered, I desire Liberty to speak; which he had without
Interruption, and said as follows;

F. H. Judge Twisden, thou very well know upon how slender an Account, or
none, I was brought before thee the last Assizes, where thou were pleased to
tender me the Oath of Allegiance, though I believe both thee and the rest of the
Court did know it was a received Principle amongst us not to swear at all; many
Reasons I gave thee then, many more I have to add, if I may have Audience; for
it may appear to you an absurd Thing, and Obstinacy in me to refuse it, if I
should not render a Reason; I am (said he) none of those that make Religion a
Cloak of Maliciousness, nor Conscience a Cloak to carry on Plots or
Conspiracies, the Lord has redeemed me and many more out of such Things; and
seeing I am engaged to appear at the next Assizes, I desire no farther Thing
may be required of me.

Judge. You must enter into Bond this dangerous Time, and therefore consider of
it, and tell me now, or before the Assizes end.

The Second Day of the Assizes he was called again.

F. H. Seeing thou art pleased to let me answer to my Indictment, which I am
willing to do, I have been of good Behavior, and shall so continue; but it
seems a hard Thing to me, and full of Severity, that seeing I am obliged to
appear to answer an Indictment of so high a Nature (if prosecuted against me)
which tends to the Loss of my Liberty for Life, and my Estate for ever, I hope
the Court will not envy my Liberty for five Months.

Judge Turner said, We do not desire your Imprisonment, if you will be of good
Behavior.

And F. H. pressed further that they would not put him upon giving Bond to be
of good Behavior, knowing himself to be bound by the Truth, that he could not
mis-behave himself.

One Daniel Flemming, another persecuting Justice, had framed another
Indictment against him for meeting, and stood up (fearing the Snare of giving
Bond would not hold) and said as follows;

D. Flemming, My Lord, he is a great Speaker, it may be the Quakers cannot want
him.

Judge. Let him be what he will if he will enter into Bond.

F. H. Said, he had nothing to accuse himself of, for his Conscience bore him
Witness that he loved Peace, and sought it with all Men.

Judges both spoke, What do you tell of Conscience? we meddle not with it, but
you contemn the Laws, and keep up great Meetings, and go not to Church.

F. H. We are fallen in a sad Age, if meeting together peaceably, without Arms,
or Force, or Intention of Hurt to any Man, but only to worship God in Spirit,
and exhort one another to Righteousness, and to pray together in the Holy
Ghost, as the primitive Christians of old, that this should be reckoned Breach
of Peace and Mis-behaviour.

Judge Twisden. Do you compare these Times with them? They were Heathens that
persecuted, but we are Christian Magistrates.

F. H. It is a Doctrine always held by us, and a received Principle as any
Thing we believe, that Christ^s Kingdom could not be set up with carnal
Weapons, nor the Gospel propagated by Force of Arms, nor the Church of God
built with Violence, but the Prince of Peace was manifested amongst us, and we
could learn War no more, but could love Enemies, and forgive the^ that did Evil
to us.

Philip Musgrave stood up, and said, My Lord, we have been remiss toward this
People, and have striven with them, and put them in Prison again and again, and
fined them, and as soon as they are out, they meet again.

Then stood up John Louther, called a Justice, and said, My Lord, they grow
insolent, notwithstanding all Laws, and the Execution of them, yet they grow
upon us, and their Meetings are dangerous.

Philip Musgrave stood up, and produced a Paper (and Justice Flemming, so
called, seconded him) in great Capital Letters, and gave it the Judge; he told
the Judge, That it happened some Quakers were sent to Prison, and one of them
died at Lancaster, and they carried his Corpse through the Country, and set that
Paper upon his Coffin, This is the Body of such an one, who was persecuted by
Daniel Flemming till Death.

Judge. We have spent much Time with you, I will discourse no more.

F. H. I acknowledge your Moderation toward me, allowing me Liberty to speak,
I shall not trouble you much longer; I shall be willing to appear to answer to
the Indictment at the Assizes, and in the mean Time to live peaceably and
quietly, as I have done, if that will satisfy.

Judge. You must enter into Bond to come at no more Meetings.

F. H. I cannot do that, if I should, I were treacherous to God and my own
Conscience, and the People and you would but judge me a Hypocrite.

They were loath to commit him, yet at last they did.

This was in the latter Part of the Month called March, and he was kept about
five Months as before, in a bad Room, and none suffered to speak with him, but
who got secretly to him without the Jailor's Knowledge.

It was about this Time, that John Audland departed this Life. He and his Bosom
Friend, John Camm (whose Decease was some Years before) had traveled much
together in the Ministry of the Gospel; therefore I will give an uninterrupted
Relation of their latter End, but first that of John Camm.

He was of a very good Parentage, A short Account of the Life and Death of J.
Camm.
born at Camsgil, in the Barony of Kendal in Westmoreland, which Seat had been
possessed by his Ancestors long before him. From his Childhood he was inclined
to be religious, and seeking after the best Things, he joined with those that
were the most strict in performing religious Duties. And having afterward
heard G. Fox, he embraced as Truth the Doctrine he preached, and growing up in
it, he himself became an eminent Minister of the Gospel among those called
Quakers. He and his Bosom-Friend John Audland were the First of that Society
who preached at Bristol; where having been in the Meetings of the Baptists and
Independents, they also had Meetings in several Places without the City; where
there was a great Concourse of People, and many received their Doctrine. Since
that Time, these two Ministers traveled much together, and many were convinced
by their Ministry. But at length John Camm, who did not spare himself, began to
fall under a kind of Consumption, insomuch that through Weakness he was fain to
stay at home; and then he often called his Children and Family together,
exhorting them to Godliness, and praying to the Lord for them. Some Weeks
before his Death, he once expressed himself thus; How great a Benefit do I
enjoy above many, having such a large Time of Preparation for Death, being
daily dying, that (...) for ever with my God, in that Kingdom that is
unspeakably full (...). My outward Man daily wastes and moulders down, and draws
towar^^ (...) ^lace and Center; but my inward Man revives, and mounts upwards
toward ^ts Place and Habitation in the Heavens. The Morning that h^^ ^^arted
this Life, he called his Wife, Children and Family to him, and exhorted them to
fear the Lord, to love his Truth, to walk in it, and to be loving and kind to
one another, telling them, That his Glass was ^un, the Time of his Departure
was come; and he was to enter into everlasting Ease, Joy and Rest: Charging
them all to be patient and content with their parting with him. And so
fainting, he passed into a sweet Sleep; but by the Weeping and Crying of those
about him, he awakened, and desired to be helped up a little in his Bed, and
then spoke to this Effect: My dear Hearts, ye have wronged me and disturbed me,
for I was at sweet Rest; ye should not so passionately sorrow for my Departure;
this House of Earth and Clay must go to its Place; and this Soul and Spirit is
to be gathered up to the Lord, to live with him for ever, where we shall meet
with everlasting Joy. Then taking Leave of his Family, he charged them to be
content with his Departure; and lying down, within a little Time deceased.

His beloved Friend John Audland, As also of John Audland.
(who often bemoaned the Loss of so dear a Companion) died also of a kind of
Consumption: For his ardent Zeal made him strain his Voice beyond what his Body
was well able to bear. In a Meeting which he once had with J. Camm in a Field
without Bristol, where Charles Marshal was one of his Auditors, after J. Camm
had left off speaking, he stood up with an awful and shining Countenance, and
lifting up his Voice as a Trumpet, he said, I proclaim a spritual War with the
Inhabitants of the Earth, who are in the Fall and Separation from God, and I
prophesy to the Four Winds of Heaven. Thus he went on with mighty Power,
exhorting to Repentance; and spoke with such a piercing Authority, that some of
the Auditory fell on the Ground, and cried out under the Sense of their
Transgression. And when at Bristol, he many Times preached in an Orchard to a
great Multitude, he would lift his Voice up exceedingly, in order to be heard
by all. Thus he spent his natural Strength, though he was but a young Man. About
the twentieth Year of his Age he married with one Anne Newby of Kendal, a
virtuous Maid, not only of good Family, but also excelling in Piety, and
therefore she freely gave him up to travel in the Service of the Gospel,
notwithstanding his Company was very dear to her; which made her say, That she
believed few ever enjoyed a greater Blessing in a Husband so kind and
affectionate. And how heartily and tenderly she loved him, may be seen by the
following Letter she writ to him;

Dear Husband,
THOU art dearer to me, than ever: My Love flows out to thee, even the same
Love that I am loved withal of my Father, in that Love Salute me to all my
Friends, for dear you are all unto me, my Life is much refreshed in hearing
from you. I received thy Letters, and all my Soul desires, is, to hear from
thee in the Life. Dear Heart, in Life dwell, there I am with thee out of all
Time, out of all Words, in the pure Power of the Lord, there is my Joy and
Strength: 0! how am I refreshed to hear from thee, to hear of thy Faithfulness
and Boldness in the Work of the Lord. 0! Dear Heart, I cannot utter the Joy I
have concerning thee; thy Presence I have continually in Spirit, therewith am I
filled with Joy, all Glory and Honor be to our God for ever, O! blessed be the
Day in which thou wast born, that thou art found worthy to labor in the Work
of the Word: Surely the Lord has found thee faithful in a little, therefore he
has committed much unto thee; go on in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, from whence all Strength comes, to whom be all Glory and Honor for
ever. O! dear Heart, go on, conquering and to conquer, knowing this, that thy
Crown is sure. So, dear Heart, now is the Time of the Lord's Work, and few are
willing to go forth into it, all the whole World lies in Wickedness, doing
their own Work; but blessed be the Lord for ever who has called us from doing
our own Work into his great Work. O! Mavelous are his Works, and his Ways
past finding out. O! dear Heart, thou know my Heart; thou may read ^^ily
how that I rejoice in nothing more than in thy Prosperity in the Work of the
Lord: Oh! It is past my Utterance to express the Joy I have for thee. I am
full, I am full of Love toward thee, never such Love as this; the mighty Power
of the Lord go along with thee, and keep thee faithful, and valiant, and bold
in his pure Counsel, to stand single out of all the World. Oh! dear Heart, all
my Love to thee is purer than Gold seven Times purified in the Fire: Oh! pure
is he that has loved us, therefore let Purity and Holiness cover us for ever:
A joyful Word it was to me to hear that thou wast moved to go for Bristol: Oh!
my own Heart, my own Life in that which now stands, act and obey, that thou
may stand upon thy alone Guard; so dear Heart, let thy Prayers be for me,
that I may be kept pure, out of all Temptations, singly to dwell in the Life.
So farewell.

Anne Audland,


By this letter it appears, that there was an endeared mutual Love between this
virtuous Couple. He was a Man of great Knowledge, but when his Understanding
came to be opened by the preaching at G. Fox, he would say sometimes, Ah, what
have we been doing! or what avails our great Profession? All our Building
tumbles down; our Profession is high as the Wind; the Day of the Lord is upon
it, and his Word as a Fire consumes it as dry Stubble; and puts an End to all
empty Professions and high Notions, without Life or Substance; to all the
Wisdom of fallen Man. We must forsake the World, and all its Glory; it is all
but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit: It is a Savior that I long for, it is him
that my Soul pants after. O that I may be gathered into his Life, and
overshadowed with his Glory, sanctified through out by his Word, and raised up
by his eternal Power! He continuing in this State of daily Supplication and
inward Travel of Soul, it pleased the Lord at length to furnish him with an
extraordinary Qualification to proclaim his Word, which he did some Years
faithfully and with great Zeal. And though his Wife loved him dearly, and
preferred his Company above what the World could give, yet in Regard of his
Gospel Service, she gave him up freely to be much from home; whereby during a
great Part of the Time of their Marriage, she had not his desirable Company. In
the mean while he labored diligently in the Lord's Harvest, till his bodily
Strength ^ailing, and meeting with hard Imprisonments, he was seized with a
most violent Cough, which was followed by a Fever, so that his Sleep was taken
from him, which made him grow very weak; but he bore his Sickness with great
Patience; and said once, That in those great Meetings in the Orchard at Bristol
he often forgot himself, not considering the Inability of his Body, from a
Desire to be heard by all: But that his Reward was with him, and be content to
be with the Lord, which his Soul valued above all Things. Not long before his
Departure, being visited by some of his Friends, he spoke to comfortably, and
with such Power, as one that was beyond the feeling of his Weakness. To his
Wife, who was big with Child, and nigh her Delivery, and well knowing how
tenderly she loved him, he said, My Will is in true Subjection submitting to
the Will of the Lord, whether Life or Death; and therefore give me up freely to
his disposing. And she, how dear soever he was to her, did so; which gave him
some Ease, seeing her sincere Resignedness; and being sometimes overcome with
Joy, he praised God in his Sickness; nay so ardent was his Zeal, that once,
though very weak, he desired to be helped up in Bed upon his Knees; and thus he
fervently supplicated the Lord in the Behalf of his Churches, That they might
be preserved in the Truth, out of the Evil of the World, and that his Gospel
might spread, and be published to the gathering of all that pertain to Israel.
His Strength now diminishing daily, he sweetly departed at the Age of thirty
four Years, about three Weeks after the Fever first seized him. And his Widow,
who ten Days after his Decease was delivered of a Son, behaved her self
discreetly, and said afterward in a Paper concerning him; The eternal God, who
by his Providence joined us together in Marriage in our young Days, in his
blessed Counsel also caused his Day to spring from on high upon us: In the
mavelous Light, and bright shining whereof, he revealed his Son Christ in us,
and gave us Faith to believe in him the eternal Lord of Life, by which our
Souls came to be quickened and made alive in him; and also in and by the
quickening of his holy Power, we were made one in a spiritual and heavenly
Relation, our Hearts being knit together in the unspeakable Love of Truth,
which was our Life, Joy, and Delight, and made our Days together exceeding
comfortable, as being that whereby all our temporal Enjoyments were sanctified,
and made a Blessing to us -- How hard it was, and how great a Loss, to part
with so dear and tender an Husband as he was to me, as far beyond what I can
express; the Dolor of my Heart, my Tongue or Pen is not able to declare. Yet
on this I contented my self that it was the Will of the Lord, that he was taken
from the Evil; and that my Loss though great, was not to be compared to his
eternal Gain. This Widow, married in Process of Time with Thomas Camm, Son of
John Camm, her former Husband's Bosom Friend. She was indeed a Woman of great
Virtue: But now I part with her, with Intention to say more of her, when I
shall come to the Time of her Decease.

I return again to Francis Howgil, F. Howgil brought again to his Trial.
whom we left in Prison, and who now appeared again at the Assizes, which were
holden at Appleby in the Month called August. And he having got Liberty to
speak with the Clerk of the Assizes, who told him, That he must prepare himself
to come to a Trial, answered, He was prepared, but thought that all be could
say, would little avail, he believing they purposed to persecute him with all
Severity. Which proved so, The Judge it beforehand incensed against him.
as will appear by what follows; for the County-Justices had incensed the
Judges against him beforehand. Yet Howgil endeavored all he could to convince
them of his Innocence; and to that End drew up the Substance of the Oath into
several Heads, which he could subscribe to; to this he joined another Paper to
Judge Turner, showing the Cause of his first Commitment, and the former
Proceedings against him; and how unequal it was to prosecute him upon a Statute
made against Popish Recusants. He also signified in that Paper, that he was a
Man of a tender Spirit, and feared the Lord from a Child, and had never taken
any Oath but once in his Life, which was twenty Years ago; and that his
refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance was not in any evil Intent to the
King^s Person or Government, but merely upon a conscientious Account; and that
he could not swear, being otherwise persuaded of the Lord, seeing it was
against the Command of Christ and the Apostle James's Doctrine. Besides, that
he was able to make it evident to be against the Example of the primitive
Christians for diverse hundred Years, and so no new Opinion. That he did neither
in Wilfulness nor Obstinacy refuse it, being sensible of the Damage that would
come thereby, if they did prosecute him upon that Statute, he having a Wife and
Children, and some small Estate which he knew lay at Stake in the Matter; but
that though it were his Life also, he could not revolt from, or deny that which
he had most certainly believed in: But if any could convince him, either by
Scripture or Reason, he had an Ear to hear. And therefore all those Things
considered, he desired he might be dismissed from his Bonds, and from their
Persecution of him upon that Account. These Papers were delivered to the Judges
and Justices before he appeared in Court; and were read by them. He then being
called to the Bar at the Assizes holden at Appleby Judge Turner said to him,
Here is an Indictment against you for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance;
so you must plead to it either Guilty or Not Guilty.

F. H. With a Heart girded up with Strength and Courage said, Judge Turner, May
I have Liberty to speak, and make my Defense, for I have none to plead my
Cause, but the Lord?

Judge. You may,

F. H. I will lay the true State of my Case before thee, and of the Proceedings
against me, from the first, seeing Judge Twisden is not here, who had Knowledge
of all the Proceedings hitherto. I am a Countryman, born and brought up in this
Country; my Carriage and Conversation is known, how I have walked peaceably
toward all Men, as I hope my Countrymen can testify. About a Year ago being
at my neighboring Market Town about my reasonable and lawful Occasions, I was
sent for by an high Constable out of the Market to the Justices of Peace,
before whom I went; and when I came there, they had nothing to ^ay to my
Charge, but ^ell to ask me Questions to ensnare me about our Meetings; and when
they could find no Occasion, they seemed to tender the Oath of Allegiance to
me, though they never read it to me, neither did I positively deny it, yet they
committed me to Prison; and so I was brought hither to this Assize, and then
the Mittimus by which I was committed, was called for, and the Judge read it,
and said to the Justices, it was insufficient: Nevertheless Judge Twisden
tendered the Oath of Obedience to me; many Things I did allege then, and many
more I have to say now, if Time will permit: From that Time I was under an
Engagement to appear at the next Assize, and so was called, and did appear at
the last Jail-delivery, and a farther Obligation was required o^ me for good
Behavior, which I could not do, lest I should be brought into a farther Snare;
and since that Time I have been committed Prisoner these five Months, some of
which Time I have been kept under great Restraint, my Friends not permitted to
speak to me; and thus briefly I have given thee an Account hitherto. And as to
the Oath, the Substance thereof, with the Representation of my Case, is
presented unto the Court already, unto which I have set my Hand, and also shall
in those Words testify the same in open Court, if required; and seeing it is
the very Substance the Law does require, I desire it may be accepted, and I
cleared from my Imprisonment.

Judge. I am come to execute the Law, and the Law requires an Oath, and I
cannot alter it; do you think the Law must be changed for you, or only for a
few; if this be suffered, the Administration of Justice is hindered, no Action
can be tried, nor Evidence given for the King, nor no other particular Cases
can be tried; and your Principles are altogether inconsistent with the Law and
Government; I pray you show me which Way we shall proceed, show me some Reason,
and give me some Ground.

F. H. said, I shall: In the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Truth is
confirmed; and we never denied to give, and still are ready to give Evidence
for the King wherein we are concerned, and in any other Matter for the ending
of Strife between Man and Man in Truth and Righteousness, and this answers the
Substance of the Law.

Judge. Is this a good Answer, think you? whether to be given with or without
Oath? The Law requires an Oath.

F. H. Still Evidence is and may be given in Truth, according to the Substance
of the Law, so that no Detriment comes unto any Party, seeing that true
Testimony may be born without an Oath; and I did not speak of changing the Law:
Yet seeing we never refused giving Testimony, which answers the Intent and
Substance of the Law, I judged it was reasonable to receive our Testimony, and
not to expose us to such Sufferings, seeing we scrupled an Oath only upon a
conscientious Account, in Tenderness of our Consciences, for Fear of breaking
the Command of Christ, the Savior of the World, which if we do, there is none
of you able to plead our Cause for us with him.

Judge. But why do you not go to Church, but meet in Houses and private
Conventicles, which the Law forbids.

F. H. We meet together only for the Worship of the true God in Spirit and
Truth, having the primitive Christians for our Example, and to no other End,
but that we may be edified, and God glorified, and when two or three are met
together in the Name of Christ, and he in the midst of them, there is a Church.

Judge. That is true: But how long is it since you have been at Church? Or will
you go to the Church the Law does allow of? Give me some Reasons why you do not
go.

F. H. I have many to give thee, if them have Patience to hear me: 1st, God
dwells not in Temples made with Men's Hands, 2dly, The Parish-House has been a
Temple for Idols, to wit, for the Mass and the Rood; and I dare have no
Fellowship with Idols, nor worship in Idols Temples; for what have we to do
with Idols, their Temples, and Worship?

Judge. Were there not Houses called the Houses of God, and Temples?


F. H. Yes, under the Law; but the Christians, who believed in Christ,
separated from these (and the Temple was made and left desola^^) and from the
Gentiles Temples too, and met together in Houses, and broke Bread from House to
House; and the Church was not confined then to one particular Place, neither is
it now; many more Things I have to say: -- The Judge interrupted.

Judge. Will you answer to your Indictment?


F. H. I know not what it is, I never heard it, though I have often desired a
Copy.


Judge. Clerk, read it.

So he read it: How that F. H. had wilfully, obstinately, and contemptuously
denied to swear when the Oath was tendered.


F. H. I deny it.


Judge. What do you deny?


F. H. The Indictment.


Judge. Did you not deny to swear? and the Indictment convicts you that you did
not swear.


F. H. I gave unto the Court the Substance of the Oath, as you all know 2dly, I
told you I did not deny it out of Obstinacy or Wilfulness neither in Contempt
of the King's Law or Government; for my Will would rather choose my Liberty,
than Bonds; and I am sensible it is like to be a great Damage to me; I have a
Wife and Children, and some Estate, which we might subsist upon, and do Good to
others, and I know all this lies at Stake; but if it were my Life also, I durst
not but do as I do, lest I should incur the Displeasure of God; and do you
judge I would lose my Liberty wilfully, and suffer the Spoiling of my Estate,
and the ruining of my Wife and Children in Obstinacy and Wilfulness? Sure nay.


Judge. Jury, You see he denies the Oath, and he will not plead to the
Indictment, only excepts against it because of the Form of Words; but you see
he will not swear, and yet he says he denies the Indictment, and you see upon
what Ground.


And then they called the Jailor to witness and swear, that the last Assizes F.
H. did refuse, etc. which he did; and the Jury, without going from the Bar,
gave in their Verdict, Guilty, and then the Court broke up that Night.

The next Day toward Evening, when they had tried all the Prisoners, Francis
was brought to the Bar to receive his Sentence.

Judge stood up, and said, Come, the Indictment is proved against you, what
have you to say why Sentence shall not be given?

F. H. I have many Things to say, if you will hear them: 1st, As I have said, I
denied not out of Obstinacy or Wilfulness, but was willing to testify the Truth
in this Matter of Obedience, or any other Matter wherein I was concerned:
Secondly, Because Swearing was directly against the Command of Christ. 3dly,
Against the Doctrine of the Apostle. 4thly, Even some of your principal Pillars
of the Church of Engand; as Bishop Usher, some Time Primate of Ireland, he said
in his Works, The Waldenses did deny all swearing in their Age, from that
Command of Christ and the Apostle James, and it was a sufficient Ground; and
Dr. Gauden, late Bishop of Exeter, in a Book of his I lately read, he cited
very many ancient Fathers, to show, that the first three hundred Years
Christians did not swear, so that it is no new Doctrine.


To which the Court seemed to give a little Ear, and said nothing, but talked
one to another, and Francis stood silent, and then the Judge said,

Judge. Sure you mistake.


F. H. I have not the Books here.


Judge. Will you say upon your honest Word they denied all Swearing?


F. H. What I have said is true.


Judge. Why do you not come to Church, and bear Service, and be subject to the
Law, and to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake?


F. H. We are subject, and for that Cause we do pay Taxes, Tribute and Custom,
and give unto Caesar the Things that are his, and unto God the Things that are
his, to wit, Worship, Honor and Obedience; and if thou mean the
Parish-Assembly, I tell thee faithfully, I am persuaded, and upon good Ground,
their Teachers are not the Ministers of Christ, neither their Worship the
Worship of God.


Judge. Why; it may be for some small Things in the Service, you reject it all.


F. H. First, it is manifest they are Time-servers, one while preaching up that
for Divine Service to People that another while they cry down, as Popish,
Superstitious and Idolatrous; and that which they have preached up twenty Years
together, make Shipwreck of all in a Day, and now again call it divine, and
would have all compelled to that themselves once made void.


Judge. Why; never since the King came in.


F. H. Yes, the same Men that preached it down once, now cry it up; so they are
so unstable and wavering, that we cannot believe they are the Ministers of
Christ. Secondly, They teach for Hire, and live by forced Maintenance, and
would force a Faith upon Men, contrary to Christ and the Apostle's Rule, who
would have every one persuaded in their own Minds, and said, Whatsoever is not
of Faith is Sin, and yet they say, Faith is the Gift of God, and we have no
such Faith given; but yet they would force theirs upon us, and because we
cannot receive it, they cry, You are not subject to Authority and the Laws, and
nothing but Confiscations, Imprisonment and Banishment is threatened, and this
is their greatest Plea, I could mention more Particulars. -- Then the Judge
interrupted.


Judge. Well, I see you will not swear, nor conform, nor be subject, and you
think we deal severely with you, but if you would be subject, we should not
need.


F.H. I do so judge indeed, that you deal severely with us for Obedience to the
Commands of Christ; I pray thee, can thou show me how that any of those
People for whom the Act was made, have been proceeded aginst by this Statute,
though I envy no Man's Liberty.


Judge. Oh, Yes, I can instance you many up and down the Country that are
premunired, I have done it my self, pronounced Sentence against diverse.


F.H. What against Papists?


Judge. No.


F. H. What, against the Quakers? so I have heard indeed; so then that Statute
which was made against Papists, thou' let'st them alone, and executest it
against the Quakers.


Judge. Well, You will meet in great Numbers, and do increase, but there is a
new Statute which will make you fewer.


F. H. Well, if we must suffer, it is for Christ's Sake, and for well-doing.


Francis then being silent, the Judge pronounced the Sentence, but spoke so
low, that the Prisoner though near to him, could scarce hear it.

The Sentence was, You are put out of the King's Protection and the Benefit of
the Law, your Lands are confiscate to the King during your Life; and your Goods
and Chattels for ever, and you to be Prisoner during your Life.

F. H. A hard sentence for my Obedience to the Commands of Christ; the Lord
forgive you all.


So he turned from the Bar; but the Judge speaking, he turned again, and many
more Words passed to the same Purpose, as before; at last the judge rose up and
said,

Judge. Well, If you will yet be subject to the Laws, the King will show you
Mercy.


F. H. The Lord has showed Mercy unto me, and I have done nothing against the
King, nor Government, nor any Man, blessed be the Lord, and therein stands my
Peace; for it is for Christ's Sake suffer, and not for Evil-doing. And so the
Court broke up. The People were generally moderate, and many were sorry to see
what was done against him; but Francis signified how contented and glad he was,
that he had any Thing to lose for the Lord's precious Truth, of which he had
publicly born Testimony, and that he was now counted worthy to suffer for it.


This he did cheerfully, He dies in Bonds, after four Years Imprisonment.
and died in Bonds after above four Years Imprisonment, as may be related in
its due Time. He was a Man of Learning, and a great Writer among his
Fellow-Believers; insomuch that during his Confinement he writ not only several
edifying Epistles to exhort them to Constancy and Stedfastness in the Doctrine
of Truth, but also some Books to refute the Opposers of (...)

We have here seen how the Judge said, There is a new Statute which will make
you fewer. This Statute bore the Title of An Act to prevent and suppress
seditious Conventicles. And though the Act made two Years before did extend to
Banishment, yet that Punishment was renewed, and expressed more at large in
this, which was as follows;

WHEREAS an Act made in the Five and thirtieth Year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress
seditious Conventicles.
An Act to retain the Queen's Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience, has
not been put in due Execution by reason of some Doubt of late made, Whether the
said Act be still in Force? although it be very clear and evident, And it is
hereby declared, 35 El. cap. ^. declared to be in force.
That the said Act is still in Force, and ought to be put in due Execution:

II. Further remedy against seditious Sectaries.
For providing therefore of further and more speedy Remedies aginst the growing
and dangerous Practices of seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal Persons, who
under Pretense of tender Consciences, do at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections, as late Experience has showed.

III. Unlawful Conventicles and meetings under pretense of exercise of Religion
forbidden.
Be it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Person of
the Age of Sixteen Years or upwards* being a Subject of this Realm, at any Time
after the first Day of July, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One
Thousand Six Hundred Sixty Hundred and Four, shall be present at any Assembly,
Conventicle, or Meeting, under Color, or Pretense of any Exercise of Religion,
in other Manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of
England, in any Place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed; at which Conventicle, Meeting, or Assembly, there
shall be Five Persons or more assembled together, over and above those of the
same Household; then it shall and may be lawful to, and for any two Justices of
the Peace, of the County, Limit, Division or Liberty, wherein the Offense
aforesaid shall be committed, or for the chief Magistrate of the Place where
such Offense aforesaid shall be committed, (if it be within a Corporation where
there are not two Justices of the Peace) (2) and they are hereby required and
enjoined upon Proof to them or him relatively made of such Offense, either by
Confession of the Party, or Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of the Fact
(which Oath the said Justices of the Peace, and chief Magistrate respectively,
are hereby empowered and required to administer) to make a Record of every such
Offense and Offenses under their Hands and Seals respectively; (3) which Record
so made as aforesaid, shall to all Intents and Purposes be in Law taken and
adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such
Offense: And thereupon the said Justices and chief Magistrate respectively
shall commit every such Offender so convicted, The punishment and manner of
proceeding against them for the first Offense.
as aforesaid, to the Goal or House of Correction, there to remain without Bail
or Mainprize, for any Time not exceeding the Space of three Months, unles such
Offender shall pay down to the said Justices or Chief Magistrate such Sum of
Money not exceeding Five Pounds, as the said Justices or Chief Magistrate (who
are hereby thereunto authorized and required) shall fine the said Offender at,
for his or her said Offense; which Money shall be paid to the Churchwardens
for the Relief of the Poor or the Parish where such Offender did last inhabit.

IV. The Second Offense.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender so
convicted, as aforesaid, shall at any Time again commit the like Offense
contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid convicted, then such
Offender so convict of such second Offense, shall incur the Penalty of
Imprisonment in the Goal or House of Correction, for any Time not exceeding six
Months, without Bail or Mainprize, unless such Offender shall pay down to the
said Justices or chief Magistrate, such Sum of Money, not exceeding Ten Pounds,
as the said Justices or Chief Magistrate, (who are thereunto authorized and
required, as aforesaid) shall fine the said Offender at, for his or her said
second Offense, the said Fine to be disposed in manner aforesaid.

V. The third Offense.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such
Offender so convict of a second Offense, contrary to this Act in manner
aforesaid, shall at any Time again commit the like Offense contrary to this
Act, Then any two Justices of the Peace, and Chief-Magistrate, as aforesaid,
respectively, shall commit every such Offender to the Goal, or House of
Correction, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until the next General
Quarter Sessions, Assizes, Jail-delivery, Great Sessions, or Sitting of any
Commission of Oyer and Terminer in the respective County, Limit, Division or
Liberty which shall first happen; (2) when and where every such Offender shall
be proceeded against by Indictment for such Offense, and shall forthwith be
arraigned upon such Indictment, and shall then plead the General Issue of
Not-Guilty, and give any special Matter in Evidence, or confess the Indictment:
(3) And if such Offender proceeded against, shall be lawfully convict of such
Offense, either by Confession or Verdict, or if such Offender shall refuse to
plead the General-Issue, or to confess the Indictment, then the respective
Justices of the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions, Judges of Assize and
Jail-delivery at the Assizes and Jail-delivery, Justices of the Great Sessions
at the great Sessions, and Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer at their sitting,
are hereby enabled and required to cause Judgment to be entered against such
Offender, That such Offender shall be Transported beyond the Seas to any of his
Majesty's Foreign Plantations, Virginia and New England only excepted) there to
remain seven Years; (4) And shall forthwith under their Hands and Seals make
out Warrants to the Sheriff or Sheriffs of the same County where such
Conviction or Refusal to plead or to confess as aforesaid, shall be, safely to
convey such Offender to some Port or Haven nearest or most commodious to be
appointed by them respectively; and from thence to embarque such Offender to be
safely transported to any of his Majesty's Plantations beyond the Seas, as
shall be also by them respectively appointed, Virginia and New England only
excepted:) (5) Whereupon the said Sheriff shall safely convey and embarque, or
cause to be embarked such Offender, to be transported, as aforesaid, under
Pain of forfeiting for Default of so transporting every such Offender, the Sum
of Forty Pounds of lawful Money, the one Moiety thereof to the King, and the
other Moiety to him or them that shall sue for the same in any of the King's
Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt, or Information; in any of
which no Wager of Law, E^^oign or Protection shall be admitted: (6) And the
said respective Court shall then also make out Warrants to the several
Constables, Headboroughs or Tything men of the respective Places where the
Estate real or personal of such Offender so to be transported shall happen to
be, commanding them thereby to sequester into their Hands the Profits of the
Lands, and to distrain and sell the Goods of the Offender so to be transported,
for the reimbursing of the said Sheriff all such reasonable Charges as he shall
be at, and shall be allowed him by the said respective Court for such conveying
or embarquing of such Offender so to be transported, tendering to the Party, or
his or her Assigns, the Overplus of the same, if any be, unless such Offender,
or some other on the Behalf of such Offender so to be transported, shall give
the Sheriff such Security as he shall approve of, for the paying all the said
Charges unto him.

VI. How seditious Sectaries convicted may be transported.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Default of
defraying such Charges by the Parties to be transported, or some other in their
Behalf; or in Default of Security given to the Sheriffs aforesaid, It shall and
may be lawful for every such Sheriff to contract with any Master of a Ship,
Merchant or other Person, for the transporting of such Offender, at the best
Rate he can: (2) And that in every such Case it shall and may be lawful for
such Persons so contracting with any Sheriff for transporting such Offender as
aforesaid to detain and employ every such Offender so by them transported, as a
Labourer to them or their Assigns, for the Space of five Years, to all Intents
and Purposes, as if he or she were bound by Indentures to such Person for that
Purpose: [3] And that the respective Sheriffs shall be allowed or paid from the
King, upon their respective Accounts in the Exchequer, all such Charges by them
expended, for conveying, Embarquing and Transporting of such Persons, which
shall be allowed by the said respective Courts from whence they received their
respective Warrants, and which shall not have been by any of the Ways
aforementioned paid, secured, or reimbursed unto them, as aforesaid.

VII. How the Offender may be discharged upon Payment of 100 l.
Provided always, and be it further enacted, That in case the Offender so
indicted and convicted for the said third Offense, shall pay into the Hands of
the Register or Clerk of the Court or Sessions where he shall be convicted
(before the said Court or Sessions shall be ended) the Sum of One Hundred
Pounds, That then the said Offender shall be discharged from Imprisonment and
Transportation, and the Judgment for the same.

VIII. And be it further Enacted, That the like Imprisonment, indictment,
Punishment of Offenders after the third Offense.
Arraignment and Proceedings shall be against every such Offender, as often as
he shall again offend after such third Offense; nevertheless is dischargeable
and discharged by the Payment of the like Sum as was paid by such Offender for
his or her said Offense next before committed, together with the additional and
increased Sum of One hundred Pounds more upon, every new Offense committed; (2)
the said respective Sums to be paid, as aforesaid, and to be disposed of as
follows, How the said penalty of 100 l. shall be disposed.
(viz.) The one Moiety for the Repair of the Parish Church or Churches, Chapel
or Chapels of such Parish within which such Conventicle, Assembly or Meeting
shall be held; and the other Moiety to the Repair of the Highways of the said
Parish or Parishes (if Need require) or otherwise for the Amendment of such
Highways as the Justices of Peace at their respective Quarter Sessions shall
direct and appoint. (3) And if any Constable, Headborough or Tythingman shall
neglect to execute any the said Warrants made unto them for Seques^^ing,
Distraining and Selling any of the Goods and Chattels of any Offender against
this Act, for the levying such Sums of Money as shall be imposed for the first
or second Offense, he shall forfeit for every such Neglect the Sum of Five
Pounds of lawful Money of England, the one Moiety thereof to the King, and the
other Moiety to him that will sue for the same in any of the King's Courts of
Record, Persons sued for executing this Act, may plead the General-Issue, and
recover treble Cost.
as is aforesaid. (4) And if any Person be at any Time sued for putting in
Execution any of the Powers contained in this Act, such Person shall and may
plead the General Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence: (5) And if
the Plantiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the Defendant thereupon, or if
the Plantiff discontinue his Action, or if upon Demurrer, Judgment be given for
the Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his or their treble Costs.

IX. Felony to escape after convictions, or to return after Transportation.
And be it further enacted, That if any Person against whom Judgment of
Transportation shall be given in Manner aforesaid, shall make Escape before
Transportation, or being Transported as aforesaid, shall return into this Realm
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, without the
special License of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, in that Behalf first
had and obtained, That the Party so escaping or returning, shall be adjudged a
Felon, and shall suffer Death as in Case of Felony, without Benefit of Clergy,
(2) and shall forfeit and lose to his Majesty all his or her Goods and Chattels
for ever; and shall further lose to his Majesty all his or her Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments for and during the Life only of such Offender, and no longer:
And that the Wife of any such Offender by force of this Act shall not lose her
Dower, nor shall any Corruption of Blood grow or be by reason of any such
Offense mentioned in this Act; but that the Heir of every such Offender by
Force of this Act, shall and may after the Death of such Offender, have and
enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such Offenders, as if this Act
had not been made.

X. Seditious and Tumultuous Meetings and Conventicles.
And for better preventing of the Mischiefs which may grow by such seditious
and tumultuous Meetings under Pretense of religious Worship, (2) Be it further
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants,
or any Commissioned Officers of the Militia, or any other of his Majesty's
Forces, with such Troops or Companies of Horse or Foot; and also the Sheriffs,
and Justices of Peace and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of
them jointly or severally within any the Counties or Places within this Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such other
Assistance as they shall think meet, or can get in Readiness with the soonest,
on Certificate made to them respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one
Justice of the Peace, or chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, of his particular
Information or Knowledge of such unlawful Meetings or Conventicles held or to
be held in their respective Counties or Places, and that he (with such
Assistance as he can get together, is not able to suppress or dissolve the
same) shall and may, and are hereby required and enjoined to repair unto the
Place where they are so held, or to be held, and by the best Means they can to
dissolve and dissipate, or prevent all such unlawful Meetings, and take into
their Custody such of those Persons so unlawfully assembled as they shall judge
to be the Leaders and Seducers of the rest, and such others as they shall think
fit to be proceeded against according to Law for such their Offenses.

XI. The penalty of suffering Conventicles in private Houses.
And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person who shall
wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle, unlawful Assembly or
Meeting aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Out-house, Barn or Room,
Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds, shall incur the same Penalties and
Forfeitures as any other Offender against this Act ought to incur, and be
proceeded against in all Points, in such Manner as any other Offender against
this Act ought to be proceeded against.

XII. Goalers may not let prisoners committed upon this Act, to go at large.
Provided also and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Keeper
of any Goal or House of Correction, shall suffer any Person committed to his
Custody for any Offense against this Act, to go at large, contrary to the
Warrant of his Commitment according to this Act, or shall permit any Person who
is at large, to join with any Person committed to his Custody by Virtue of this
Act, in the Exercise of Religion, differing from the Rites of the Church of
England; then every such Keeper of a Goal or House of Correction shall for
every such Offense forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds, The penalty.
to be levied, raised and disposed by such Persons, and in such manner as the
Penalties for the first and second Offenses against this Act are to be levied,
raised and disposed.

XIII. Within what time Offenders must be prosecuted.
Provided always, That no Person shall be punished for any Offense against this
Act, unless such Offender be prosecuted for the same within three Months after
the Offense committed: (2) And that no Person who shall be punished for any
Offense by Virtue of this Act, shall be punished for the same Offense by Virtue
of any other Act or Law whatsoever.

XIV. Married Women how to be punished.
Provided also, and be it enacted, That Judgment of Transportation shall not be
given against any Feme Covert, unless her Husband be at the same Time under the
like Judgment, and not discharged by the Payment of Money as aforesaid; but
that instead thereof she shall by the respective Court be committed to the Goal
or House of Correction, there to remain without Bail or Main-prize, for any
Time not exceeding twelve Months, unless her Husband shall pay down such Sum,
not exceeding Forty Pounds, to redeem her from Imprisonment, as shall be
imposed by the said Court, the said Sum to be disposed by such Persons, and in
such manner as the Penalties for the first and second Offense against this Act
are to be disposed.

XV. How Justices of the Peace may enter into Houses suspected for Conventicles.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices
of the Peace, and chief Magistrate respectively empowered as aforesaid to put
this Act in Execution, shall and may, with what Aid, Force and Assistance they
shall think fit, for the better Execution of this Act, after Refusal or Denial,
enter into any House, or other Place where they shall be informed any such
Conventicle as aforesaid, is or shall be held.

XVI. Provided, That no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, whilst he or
his Wife shall be there resident, shall be searched by Virtue of this Act, The
houses of Peers.
but by immediate Warrant from his Majesty under his Sign Manual, or in the
Presence of the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieutenants, or two Justices
of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same Country o^ Riding:
(2) Nor shall any other Dwelling House of any Peer or other Person whatsoever,
be entered into with Force by Virtue of this Act, but in the Presence of one
Justice of the Peace, or chief Magistrate respectively, except within the City
of London, where it shall be lawful for any such other Dwelling House to be
entered into as aforesaid, in the Presence of one Justice of the Peace,
Alderman, Deputy-Alderman, or any one Commissioner for the Lieutenancy for the
City of London.

XVII. What Persons may not be committed to House of Correction.
Provided also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
shall by Virtue of this Act be committed to the House of Correction, that shall
satisfy the said Justices of the Peace, or chief Magistrate respectively, That
he or she (and in case of a Fe^^e-Covert, that her Husband) has an Estate of
Freehold, of Copyhold, to the Value of Five Pounds per annum, or Personal
Estate to the Value of Fifty Pounds; Any Thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

XVIII. Persons served with Process refusing to take an Oath. 14 Car. 2.6.1.
And in regard a certain Sect called Quakers, and other Sectaries, are found
not only to offend in the Matters provided against by this Act, but also
obstruct the Proceeding of Justice by their obstinate Refusal to take Oaths
lawfully tendered unto them in the ordinary Course of Law; (2) Therefore be it
further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons being
duly and legally served with Process or other Summons to appear in any Court of
Record, except Court-Leets, as a Witness, or returned to serve of any Jury, or
ordered to be examined upon Interrogatories, or being present in Court, shall
refuse to take any Judicial Oath legally tendered to him by the Judge or Judges
of the same Court, having no legal Plea to justify or excuse the Refusal of the
same Oath; (3) Or if any Person or Persons being duly served with Process, to
answer any Bill exhibited against him or them in any Court of Equity, or any
Suit in any Court Ecclesiastical, shall refuse to answer such Bill or Suit upon
his or their Corporal Oath, in Cases where the Law requires such Answer to be
put in upon Oath; or being summoned to be a Witness in any such Court, or
ordered to be examined upon Interrogatories, shall for any Cause or Reason not
allowed by Law, refuse to take ^^^h Oath as in such Cases is required by Law;
(4) That then, and in such Case, the several and respective Courts wherein such
Refusal shall be made, shall be, and are hereby enabled to Record, Enter, or
Register such Refusal, which Record or Entry shall be, and is hereby made a
Conviction of such Offense; (5) And all and every Person and Persons so as
aforesaid offending, shall for every such Offense incur the Judgment and
Punishment of Transportation in such Manner as is appointed by this Act for
other Offenses.

XIX. How such persons may be acquitted.
Provided always, That if any the Person or Persons aforesaid shall come into
such Court, and take his or their Oath in these Words;

I do swear, that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawful, nor
refuse to take an Oath on that Account.

XX. Which Oath the respective Court or Courts aforesaid, are hereby authorized
and required forthwith to tender, administer and register before the Entry of
the Conviction aforesaid, (2) or shall take such Oath before some Justice of
the Peace, who is hereby authorized and required to administer the same, to be
returned into such Court, (3) such Oath so made shall acquit him or them from
such Punishment; any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

XXI. Provided always, That every Person convicted as aforesaid in any Courts
aforesaid, (other than his Majesty's Court or King's Bench, or before the
Justices of Assize, or General Jail-delivery) shall by Warrant containing a
Certificate of such Conviction under the Hand and Seal of the respective Judge
or Judges before whom such Conviction shall be had, be sent to some one of his
Majesty's Goals in the same County where such Conviction was had, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize until the next Assizes, or General
Jail-delivery, (2) where, if such Person so convicted shall refuse to take the
Oath aforesaid, being tendered unto him by the Justice or Justices of Assize or
Jail-delivery; then such Justice or Justices shall cause Judgment of
Transportation to be executed in such manner as Judgment of Transportation by
this Act is to be executed: But in case such Person shall take the said Oath,
then he shall thereupon be discharged.

XXII. Pe^r^sing, b^^ be pr^^t against.
Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Peer of this Realm shall offend against this Act, he shall pay Ten Pounds for
the first Offense, and Twenty Pounds for the Second Offense, to be levied upon
his Goods and Cha^^l^ by Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate of the Place or Division where such Peer shall dwell; (2) and that
every Peer for the third, and every further Offense against the ^enou^ of this
Act, shall be tried by his Peers, and not otherwise.

XXIII. The Continance of the Act.
Provided also, and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this
Act shall continue in Force for three Years after the End of this present
Session of Parliament; and from thence forward to the End of the next Session
of Parliament after the said Three Years, and no longer.

A learned Man at London, of what Persuasion I know not, put forth a little
Book in Relation to this Act, wherein he showed from the Laws of England, the
Absurdity of it, since all religious Acts exercised by six Persons, not
according to the Formality of the Church of England, were forbidden; and that
at this Rate it might be reckoned a Transgression, if a Woman being in Travel,
and in Danger of Life, one of the Company said a Prayer; or if any one spoke
something to comfort the near Relations of a deceased Person; or prayed for the
Health or Happiness of a young married Couple, etc. by which it might happen,
that some by the Malice of their Enemies, might not only incur Imprisonment for
three Months, but also by Virtue of the Act of Banishment, might be condemned
to Transportation. That this was not without Danger, Sir Orlando Bridgeman's
Advice to a Jury on the Act.
did appear sufficiently by what Judge Orlando Bridgeman said at Hertford to
the Jury, viz. You are not to expect a plain punctual Evidence against them for
any Thing they said or did at their Meeting; for they may speak to one another,
though not with or by auricular Sound, but by a Cast of the Eye, or a Motion of
the Head or Foot, or Gesture of the Body. So that if you find or believe in
your Hearts that they were in the Meeting under Color of Religion in their
Way, though they sat still only and looked upon each other, it was an unlawful
Meeting. At this Rate the Jurymen, who ought to be impartial Judges, or
Mediators, were swayed, so that without Fear they might find the Quakers that
were met together, guilty of transgressing the Law.

Now since at that Time they were resolved to banish the Quakers, so called,
George Whitehead published a little Book, in which he showed the
Unreasonableness of the Persecutors, and also strengthened his Friends with
solid Arguments against the Charge of Sti^neckedness, answering some specious
Objections; among the rest, That the Quakers might keep small Meetings, G.
Whitehead writes against Persecution.
and so not fall under the Lash of the Law; for if they did not meet above five
in Number, they kept without the Reach of the Law; and by keeping private
Meetings, they might also acquit their Consciences before God. But to this G.
Whitehead answered, That it might have been objected to the Prophet Daniel,
that he might have prayed secretly, and not with open Windows and thrice a Day,
after king Darius had signed the Decree, That whosoever should ask a Petition
of any God or Man for thirty Days, save of the King, he should be cast into the
Den of Lions; but that Daniel, notwithstanding this Decree, had continued to
pray to God as before. Since then, said G. Whitehead, our Meetings are kept in
Obedience to the Lord God, and according to the Freedom he has given us, we
may not leave off our Testimony for God in that Case; but we must be faithful
to him, whatever we suffer on that Account. For neither the Threatenings of Men,
nor their Severity or Cruelty acted against us, how far soever it may be
extended, can make us to forsake the Lord in not keeping our Assemblies, or to
be ashamed of Christ before Men, lest hereafter he be ashamed of us before His
Father which is in Heaven. Besides he showed, How unreasonable it was to incite
the Jury on an ill-grounded Suspicion, without leaving them the Liberty of
their own Judgment: And the Judges he showed their Duty from the Law, and Magna
Charta. He also showed how unequal it was, that Soldiers, who abused his
Friends in their Meetings, should be called as Witnesses against them; and that
they should be locked up with Thieves and Felons, since this was contrary to
the Right of a freeborn Englishman. But this Representation of G. Whitehead was
slighted, since they were resolved to go on with banishing of the Quakers, and
to transport them to the West Indies; which however, according to the ancient
Laws, might not be done to a freeborn Englishman against his Mind. As does also
J. Coal.
Josiah Coal about this Time gave forth also a Paper, being a Warning to the
King and both Houses of Parliament, to dissuade them from Persecution. But this
did not avail, for Persecution went on.

In the Month called August, The Trial of 8 Friends at Hertford.
eight of those called Quakers, viz. Francis Prior, Nicholas Lucas, Henry
Feast, Henry Marshal, Jeremy Hern, Thomas Wood, John Blendale, and Samuel
Trahern, were tried at Hertford before Judge Orlando Bridgeman, already
mentioned: The Indictment contained, That they had been at an unlawful Meeting,
under Color and Pretense of Religion: And the Witnesses declared, That they
had met together above the Number of Five, and were taken at such Times, and
such Places; for they must have transgressed thrice before they could be
condemned to Banishment: But the Witnesses declared also, That they neither
heard them speak any Words, nor saw them do any thing at their Meeting, but sit
still. The Indictment having been delivered to the Grand Jury, they could not
agree in their Verdict; for there were some amongst them whose Consciences
would not give them Leave to be accessory to this Work of Persecution; and
therefore they brought in their Verdict Ignoranius. Now though such a Verdict as
this ought not to be rejected, yet Judge Bridgeman standing up, and seeming to
be angry, spoke to the Jury after this Manner: The Judge's partial Speeches and
Behavior.
My Masters, what do you mean to do? Will you make a N^se of Wax of the Law,
and suffer the Law to be baffled? Those that think to deceive the Law, the Law
will deceive them. Why don't ye find the Bill? To which one of the Jury said,
That it concerned them to be wary, and well satisfied in what they did, for
they were upon Men's Lives for ought they knew. No, said the Judge, I desire not
their Lives, but their Reformation: And then he gave the Jury some Directions,
and he so colored the Matter, that they going out again, soon returned, and
found the Bill. Then Four of the Prisoners were called to the Bar, their
Indictment read, and they asked, Guilty, or Not Guilty? To which they answered,
Not guilty, and that they had transgressed no just Law. But, said the Judge, ye
have transgressed this Law, [having the Act in his Hand,] and ye have been
twice convicted already upon Record, and if ye are found guilty by the Jury
this Time, I must pass the Sentence of Transportation upon you. Now therefore
ye shall see that we do not desire to strain the Law to the highest Severity;
neither do I believe that it was the Aim of the Lawmakers, to be severe, but
for conforming. If ye will promise that ye will not go, or be at any more such
Meetings, I will show you this Favor, as to acquit you for what is past: This
Favor ye may receive before the Jury is charged with you; but afterward I
cannot do it. And know also, if the Jury for Want of punctual Evidence, should
not find you guilty, yet if ye are taken again, ye will be in the same Case ye
now are in. What say you? Will ye promise to meet no more? To this the
Prisoners answered, They could promise no such Thing. Then a Jury was called,
and the Indictment read a second Time, containing, That the Prisoners had been
at an unlawful Meeting at such a Time and Place, the first, second, and third
Time. The Witnesses being called, gave the same Evidence as before; and then
the Judge said thus to the Jury, My Masters, the Jury, ye hear what Evidence
the Witnesses give; how they took them at such Times, at such Places, which are
Places they use to meet in; and that they were above the Number of Five,
besides the Persons of the Family where they met; and that they are twice
convicted already upon Record: And this is the third Offense, which incurs the
Sentence of Transportation, if ye find them guilty. Then he spoke those Words
which have been mentioned already, viz. Ye are not to expect a plain punctual
Evidence against them for any Thing they said or did at their Meeting, etc. for
dumb Men may speak to one another, so as they may understand each other by
Signs: And they themselves say, that the Worship of God is inward, in the
Spirit, and that they can discern Spirits, and know one another in Spirit. So
that if ye find or believe in your Hearts that they were in the Meeting, under
Color of Religion in their Way, though they sat still only -- It was an unlawful
Meeting, and their Use and Practice not according to the Liturgy of the Church
of England; for it allows and commands when People meet together in the Church,
that Divine Service shall be read, etc. And ye must find the Bill; for ye must
have Respect to the Meaning and Intent of the Law, which the King and
Parliament have in Wisdom and Policy made, not only against Conventicles, but
the Words Assembly and Meeting were added; for we have had late Experience of
the Danger of such Meetings under Color of Religion: And it is an easy Matter
at such Meetings to conspire and consult Mischief. Therefore the Wisdom and
Policy of the King and Parliament, lest they should be undermined, have made
this Law, which is not a Law against Conscience, for it does not touch
Conscience at all, as I confess some other Laws do, which enjoin coming to
Church, Four of them by the Judges Management are found guilty, and sentenced
to be transported to Barbados.
and some other Things. This and more Judge Bridgeman spoke to the Jury, to
persuade them to bring the Prisoners in guilty. And the Jury being gone out,
and within the Space of an Hour returned, their Foreman said, That Nicholas
Lucas, and the other three were guilty.

What the Judge had said, That they had had late Experience of the Dang^^ of
such Meetings under Color of Religion, was of no Force at all; for ^^ never
had appeared that the Quakers in religious Meetings did any Thing else than the
performing of their Worship, tho there were other Evidences concerning the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men; but it was universally known that the Quakers had no Part
therein, nor joined with them in the least Degree. It was also a very absurd
Saying of the Judge, That this Law did not touch Conscience; for it was merely
for Conscience Sake that the Quakers frequented not the public Service and
Liturgy of the Church of England, and kept religious Meetings by themselves.
But the Jury seemed well satisfied with what the Judge had told them; and he
having thus obtained his Aim, read the Prisoners Names, and said to them, What
can ye say for your selves, that Judgment of Transportation should not pass, or
be given against you? To which they said, We are innocent, and have
transgressed no just Law; if we must have that Sentence, we give up our Bodies
freely into the Hands of the Lord; the Will of the Lord be done. Have ye
nothing more to say? said the Judge. Nothing, but that we are innocent, replied
the Prisoners, we have wronged no Man. Then hearken to your Sentence, said the
Judge, Ye shall be transported beyond the Seas, to the Island of Barbados,
there to remain seven Years.

Then Jeremiah Hern, J. Hern and T. Wood called to the Bar, and were offered
the Delay of their Trial till next Assizes, if they would desire it, which they
did not.
and Thomas Wood were called to the Bar, and their Indictment read, to which
they pleaded, Not guilty, but innocent; and Jeremiah said, He was no such
Person as the Act mentioned, for plotting and contriving Insurrections. Then
the Judge interrupting him, said, You are a forward Man, you have an Estate;
and so he caused him to be set by: And to Thomas Wood, he said, I hear a good
Report of you; ^onsider what you do; I am sorry, seeing you have a good Report
among you^, Neighbors, that you should be found guilty, which I fear you will
if you put your self upon Trial: I am willing to show you Favor; and it may be
one Man may fare the better for another. This reflected on Jeremiah, who, by
the Ma^ice of one John King, had been falsely represented to the Judge. Yet
Jeremiah having shown how he had been wrong^d, the Judge said, They should both
partake of his Favor, if they would but desire it: And this Favor consisted
in this, as he himself said, That he would wave the Proceedings of the Court,
and give than Time till the next Assizes to consider better with themselves.
What say you, (thus he continued) will ye have it deferred till the next
Assizes? For if the Jury find the Bill, you will be sent to Jamaica; ye must
not all go to one Place. To this the Prisoners returned, We have transgressed
no Law of God, nor wronged any Man: We leave it to the Court; we desire it not.
If you will not desire it, replied the Judge, I cannot, nor will do it. Then
three other Prisoners were brought to the Bar, among whom was one John
Reynolds, who, according to the Deposition of the Witnesses, had been within a
Yard of the Door of the Meeting place, with his Face fromwards it. The Judge
then said, God forbid that I should do any thing that is not right and just
against my Conscience; there is that which is written upon the Wall before me,
which puts me in Mind, that I should not judge for Man, but for God. Then
turning to the Jury, he spoke to them almost after the same Manner, as he did
concerning the other four Prisoners; and to induce them to declare Reynolds
(who was taken but not in the Meeting) guilty, he spoke thus, Suppose a Man be
killed in a House, and no body saw him killed, but a Man is met coming out of
the House with a bloody Knife in his Hand, it is a very probable Evidence that
he is guilty of the Murder. So though the Witnesses do not say that they saw and
took him in the Meeting, yet they swore he was within a Yard of the Door with
his Face fromwards the Place where they usually met; and he has been taken
twice already, and convicted upon Record. My Masters, I leave it to you, go
forth. Then a Bailiff was called, and charged to provide the Jury a Room, and
to let none speak with them, nor to let them have either Bread, Drink, or
Candle, till they brought in their Verdict. The Jury being gone out, soon
agreed, and after they were returned, Four of them found guilty, and sentenced
to be transported to Jamaica, but Reynolds acquitted.
said, That four of the five Prisoners were guilty, and that the other who
stood without the Door was not guilty. So he was acquitted; but the other four
being brought to the Bar, the Judge asked them, What they could say why
Judgment of Transportation should not be given against them? Their Answer was,
We are innocent, and have not offended any just Law of God or Man, to deserve
that Sentence; we leave it to the Witness of God in thy or your Consciences.
Then the Judge said, Ye have offended against this Law (having the Act before
him) which is made by the King and Parliament; and executed by us their
subordinate Ministers, if it be not righteous and just, we must answer for
that. One of the Prisoners had said before, If I have transgressed any just
Law, let me suffer; and if not, he that judges for God will not condemn me. To
which the Judge returned, You do well to put me in mind of my Duty; pray think
of your own. And now he asked the Prisoners, Have you any more to say? To which
they answered, Nothing, but that we are innocent. Then he said, Hear your
Sentence; You shall be transported beyond the Seas, to the Island of Jamaica,
being one of his Majesty's foreign Plantations, there to remain seven ^^ars.
Now, I have this one thing to acquaint you with, That if y^^^, and either of
you, will pay down here into the Court, an hundred Pounds before the Court
rises, you and every one of you shall be discharged, and clearly acquitted for
what is past. And I will show you this Favor, as not to discharge the Court at
this present, but shall adjourn it till Afternoon. This was done; and the Court
being met again, the Judge sent to the condemned Prisoners to know if they
would pay down the Hundred Pounds; but they answering No, the Court was then
soon discharged.

Seven of these Prisoners not long after were carried on Shipboard to be
transported to the West Indies; Seven of these Persons put on board to be
transported, and detained two Months by contrary Winds, are set ashore again,
and return Home.
but (which was remarkable) the Ship by contrary Winds and stormy Weather was
hindered going to Sea. Not only the Master, whose Name was Thomas May, but also
his Men grew very uneasy at this: For they believed that Heaven was against
them: Nay, the Sailors threatened to leave the Ship, if the Master would not set
those Prisoners ashore. And he himself considering how after having lain long
in the Downs, and more than once set Sail, they were hindered to go on by
contrary Winds, resolved at length, after having lingered about Two Months, to
let the Banished ashore; and so he did, giving them a Certificate, of which I
have a Copy in my Custody, that they were not run away, but freely put ashore
by him, for which among others he gave these Reasons, That seeing the great
Adversities they had met with, he concluded from thence, that the Hand of God
was against him, and that therefore he durst not go off with these Prisoners,
because he found them to be honest Men, who had not deserved Banishment. And
also that there was a Law extant, that no Englishman might be transported
against his Mind. And that his Men refused to proceed on the Voyage if he would
carry away these People. This Certificate he gave under his Hand, and so let
them go away free; and not long after the Ship set Sail with a fair Wind. I do
not find that the Banished, who returned Home again, were prosecuted on this
Account: For the Sentence against them was executed as far as it could at that
Time, and they had made no Opposition, but had been Sufferers.

Persecution in the mean while did not cease: Persecution continues.
But this did not discourage those called Quakers; they continued valiant, as I
have seen in many Letters sent about that Time to some of my Acquaintance. One
said in the Court of Justice, We are in the Service of the Lord, and may not
leave it; and another who was offered to be freed of Banishment, if he would
pay down an hundred Pounds, said, Though I had an hundred Lives to lose, and
could redeem them all for an hundred Pence, yet I would not do it. But this
could not stop the Violence of the Persecutors; till an heavier Hand reached
them, as may be related hereafter.

In the Months October and December, More condemned to be transported, some of
them being Women.
many were condemned to Transportation, and among these several Women, whose
Trials I shall but cursorily speak of: For if I should relate all Particulars,
my Description would far exceed my Limits; and therefore I will but touch upon
some few Things.

On the 13th of October, 16 more tried at Hicks's-Hall at London, before
Justice Proctor, etc.
sixteen of those called Quakers were tried at Hicks's-Hall, in London for the
third Offense, as they called it. The Grand Jury consulting together about
finding the Bill of Indictment, could not well agree. And the Justices giving
them a Check, one of the Jurymen desired to know, by what Law they ought to
find a Bill against any Persons, without Witnesses to testify the Fact
committed. To which, Answer was made by the Court, That their Records testified
the Crime or Fact, and that such their Record was a sufficient Witness without
the Testimony of any Man. And for Proof of this it was further said, The
Records in Chancery serve as a sufficient Testimony; and if it be so in
Chancery, why not here? The Grand Jury not readily finding a Bill, E. Shelton
the Clerk goes up to help them.
The Jury having being twice upon this Business, was sent up the third Time;
and Edward Shelton the Clerk said he would go up also to help them, and so he
did; it having been threatened, That if the Jurymen did not find the Bill, they
should be fined. Nevertheless, at their Return they answered, No Verdict.
Whereupon the Justices finding the Jurymen not to answer their Ends, took them
apart, and examined them one by one, telling them that the only Thing they were
to look upon was, that they did assemble together above the Number of five in
Company; which, according to what they said, their Records showed. This made
some of the Jury comply; but others stood it out, and signified that in
Conscience they could not consent to what was requied of them. They are
threatened.
But the major Part complying with the Justices, upon their threatening them,
and the others being strongly pres^d, the Bi^^ was by a kind of Force accepted
at length. But how hard a Case this was to some, appeared by the mournful
Confession of one of the Jury, Tho. Leader.
who to ^ase his Conscience published in Print a small Book, with the Title of
The wounded Heart of the Jurymans Offenses, etc. in which he openly disapproved
the Fact, to which he had been induced by human Fear. The Pains had been so
great to persuade the Jury to bring in a Verdict according to the Mind of the
Court, that the Clerk, as was reported, said, He had rather have given twenty
Pounds, than have been so troubled. The next Day the Prisoners were brought to
the Bar, and William Proctor of Gray's Inn, sat as Judge in the Court. The
Questions and Answers I pass by for Brevity sake. Hannah Trigg a Maid of 15,
after Sentence of Banishment dies in Prison.
One Hannah Trigg pleading she was innocent, was asked, How old she was? To
which she saying, She was not sixteen Years old; one of the Justices did not
stick to say, She told a Lie; and that he thought the Quakers would not lie. In
the mean while it appeared, that he only said so by guess to baffle her; for by
a Certificate of some that were present at her Birth (which was divulged in
Print) it was proved that she being the Daughter of Timothy Trigg, was born at
London on the 20th of the Month called August, 1649, and so was but fifteen
Years of Age, and dealt with against the Law; which was the harder, because
this Maid falling sick, died in Prison, after the Sentence of Banishment had
been passed upon her; which Sentence was now pronounced against twelve Persons,
among which were four Maids; and four married Women were condemned to a
Confinement of eleven Months in Bridewell. The Judge in pronouncing of the
Sentences was so Disturbed in his Mind, The Judge pronounces Sentence in great
Confusion.
that ordering some to be transported to Virginia, and others to Barbados, he
condemned some also to be sent to Hispaniola; at which the People were not a
little surprised, for he made it plainly appear, that he did not consider what
he said; since Hispaniola was no Place in the Dominions of the King of England:
But he was so confounded, that he also accused the Prisoners of having
transgressed the Laws of the Commonwealth, forgetting that England was no more
a Commonwealth, as it was before the Restoration of King Charles II.

On the 15th of October above forty of the Prisoners called Quakers were tried
before the Judges Hide and Keeling. Above 40 tried before the Judges Hide and
Keeling, whose Proceedings are very arbitrary, and their Opinions in Law
unaccountable.
To mention all the Exorbitances of this Trial, which were not few, I count
needless: For as to the Questions and Answers, and the passing of Sentence, the
Reader may form to himself an Idea of it from what has been said already of
the Trial at Hertford, etc. A Maid being asked, Guilty or Not Guilty, answered,
I never was taken at any seditions Meeting or Conventicle in my Life. To which
the Judge said, But Woman, were not you taken at the Bull and Mouth the 21st of
August? She answered, I am innocent in the Sight of God and all good People.
That this was true, the Judge did not deny, but said, I believe that, Woman,
but you have transgressed a Law. She replied, As for the Bull and Mouth, I
believe I have been there an hundred times, and if the Lord permit me Life and
Liberty, I do not know, but I may go there an hundred times more. The Judge
then saying, Woman, will you plead, or no, Guilty, or Not guilty? or else I
must pass Sentence upon you. She answered, The Will of the Lord be done, I am
innocent. Yet this could not avail her, though Judge Hide had said a little
before concerning the Prisoners, If they are innocent, then they are not
guilty. But she was set by as mute, or pro confesso, to the Fact charged
against her in the Indictment. Others who complained of the Unreasonableness of
the Proceedings, were hectored as Impudents; and the Jury showing themselves
dissatisfied concerning the Witnesses, Judge Hide said to them, It was no
Untruth if a Man did mistake in the Time, and that his Evidence was good, though
he did not see one in the House: For (said he) if forty Men be in a Room, and
one is brought out of the Room to me, standing at the Door, cannot I swear that
he was in that Room, if I see him come out? You must not make such Scruples.

In the mean while there were some among the Witnesses who did not know the
Prisoners by Face; so that there was Reason enough to disprove their Testimony.
But whatever was objected, the Business must go on: For the one of the
Witnesses declared that the Meeting, from which the Prisoners had been taken,
was peaceable; and though one of the Prisoners said, That the Law was made
against seditious Meetings, and that nothing of Sedition had been proved
against them: Yet Judge Keeling said, The Act was made to prevent such
Meetings, because under Color and Pretense of Religion, Plots and Conspiracies
might be carried on. And when a Prisoner said, that he was at a Peaceable Godly
Meeting, and received much Comfort there; the Judge returned, That is as much
as we desire. You confess you were there; and though it was a peaceable Meeting,
yet it was an unlawful one. Another of the Prisoners, who pleaded that the Law
the Court acted by was contrary to Magna Charta, and the ancient fundamental
Laws of the Land, was answered by Judge Hide, If the King and Parliament should
make a Law that two Justices without a Jury should adjudge a Man to Death for
the third Offense as a Felon, without Benefit of Clergy, it would be a good
Law, and according to Magna Charta, and the Law of the Land; and we should be
bound to execute it. It seems this Judge (who not long after was suddenly
summoned hence to appear before the Divine Assizes) was of Opinion, that since
the Legislative Power resided in the King and Parliament, all that they
resolved and enacted, must pass for good Law. But if I should mention all the
Absurdities I meet with in these Proceedings, when should I come to an End?
True it is, that sometimes a Show was made of Pity: For Judge Keeling said to
two Maids, We are sorry that such young Maids should be thus deluded. But
because they would not promise to go to the public Church, though they declared
themselves ready to assist at Divine Service, they were deemed as guilty.
Another Prisoner being asked by Judge Hide, Whether he would go to Church,
answered, If I have my Liberty, I shall go to Church. But when it appeared that
he did not mean the Established or Public Church, R. Poulton asked to swear to
his Age.
this Promise could not save him. One Richard Poulton, a Lad of fifteen Years
of Age, who by a Certificate showed, that he was not yet sixteen Years old, and
therefore no Transgressor of the Law, was asked, If he would swear he was not
sixteen? Just as if he could have remembered the Time of his Birth, to which, he
answered, That he was not brought up to Swearing; and being asked, Whether he
would promise to go to Church? He answered, He should promise no such thing.
Then he was returned to the rest that were to be sentenced.

This was on the 17th of the aforesaid Month, 19 sentenced to Banishment, and
four to Bridewell, for 12 Months.
when nineteen Persons, among which, some Women were condemned to Banishment,
and four married Women to twelve Months Imprisonment in Bridewell. None of the
Judges it seems had a Mind to pronounce Sentence, and therefore they left this
Business to the City-Recorder. Wild.
He then bidding the Prisoners to hearken to the Judgment of the Court, spoke
so softly, that he could not well be heard, which made one of the Prisoners
say, That he ought to speak louder, for they could not hear him. But he
continuing to speak softly as before, two or three others of the Prisoners told
him, they could not tell what he said. To which he answered, He cared not
whether they did or no; and then said, Hearken to your Sentence: You and every
of you shall be transported beyond the Seas, the Men to Barbados, and the
Women to Jamaica, being two of his Majesty's Plantations, Public Ministers not
condemned to Banishment.
there to remain seven Years. Thus the Persecutors endeavored to be rid of the
Quakers: But though Persecution now was very hot, yet they fainted not, neither
were they in Want of such vigilant Assistants, as both by Example and Words
continually encouraged them to Faithfulness, who yet (which was remarkable)
were not condemned to Banishment, as many others.

Among these was Josiah Coal also, J. Coale's Exhortation to Constancy under
Sufferings, etc.
who about this Time, as I have been told, was in Prison at London, and both by
Writing, and by Word of Mouth, did exhort his Fellow-Believers to Constancy:
For (when under Confinement) he betook himself to his Pen, and recommended to
his Friends, That they would not forsake their Meetings, though they were to
undergo great Sufferings, since it was God^s good Pleasure to let their
Patience be tried. And, said he, that these Afflictions come upon us is by
God's Permission? Who then shall gainsay him, or endeavor to reason with him
about Matters of so great a Concern, since his Way is hid from Man. He also
signified to them, that this was done to try their Faith, and therefore they
ought to continue bold, and persevere valiantly. And though, said he, great
Sufferings and Afflictions attend us, yet my Heart, praised be the Lord, is not
troubled, neither has Fear seized me, because I see the Intent of the Lord in
it. And in one Letter he spoke thus; Friends, this know, that for the Sake of
the Residue of the Seed which is yet ungathered, is my Life freely sacrificed
up into the Hand of the Lord; and ready and willing am I to lay it down for the
Testimony of God's blessed Truth, which he has given me to bear, if thereunto
I am called: For Bonds and Afflictions attend me daily, and I may say, we are
in Jeopardy of our Lives daily: So let your Prayer to God be for me, that I may
be kept unto the End, to finish my Testimony with Joy, and in all things to
bring Glory and Honor to the Name of the Lord, who is over all blessed for
ever. This his Christian Desire he obtained, as will be said in due Place. It
was a Time of Suffering; and those to whose Share it fell, continued valiant,
whilst others did not neglect to exhort the King and Parliament to leave off
Persecution. Among these was William Bailey, who gave forth a very serious
Exhortation and Warning against Persecution to the King and Parliament, etc.
beginning thus;

For the KING and PARLIAMENT, etc.
FRIENDS,
THE God of Heaven has put it into my Heart to write a few Words unto you, in
the Fear and Dread of his Name, and in the Counsel of his own Will, concerning
the Work which ye have taken in hand against him and his People; this is not
the End and Work for which the Lord God has permitted you into the Places of
Government and Rule, in these Nations (nor the Way for you to prosper, nor to
prolong your Days in the Earth) thus to persecute and afflict an innocent and
harmless People, who are peaceable, and walk uprightly (toward God and Man)
therein, endeavoring (in all Things) to keep their Consciences void of
Offense, and who have no Helper in the Earth but the Lord alone; neither is
their Kingdom of this World, but they are verily the Children and Servants of
the Most High God, whom he has gathered from amongst Men, and from the
Kindreds of the Earth, to be the first Fruits unto him, and to the Lamb in this
Age; and we are his, and not our own, he has bought us, and redeemed us unto
himself, and to him alone have we committed our innocent Cause, and he has
undertaken to plead it for us, with all our Adversaries; and No Weapon formed
against us shall ever prosper, but be broken to Pieces.

Therefore Friends, be awakened and open your Eyes, and see what a Stir and ado
here is in this Nation, to hale and drag up and down a Company of tender,
innocent, and harmless People, Men and Women, and Children from their peaceable
Meetings, who meet together in the Fear and tender Love of God, without any
evil or bad Intent toward any, but have Goodwill and Compassion toward all Men,
even to the worst of our Enemies, as the Lord bears us Witness, and these are
them that are driven as Sheep to the Slaughter, and thrown into your noisome
Jails, and Prisons, and Houses of Correction, by rude and brutish People (your
Servants) whom you have set on Work by your Authority, till many of them have
(patiently) suffered till Death, whose innocent Blood will assuredly be
required at your Hands, (though they shall not go free of the Guilt, who have had
the least Hand in it, without speedy Repentance. And thus ye may see and read,
how the Disciples of Christ Jesus are as Sheep and Lambs in the midst of Wolves
in this Age, and as a Lilly among Thorns, and all this is only for obeying his
Commands, and for worshipping the everlasting invisible God in the Spirit, and
in the Truth, according to the Scriptures, the which if ye knew and understood,
you would tremble to think what you have done against them, to cause so many of
the little Ones, which believe in Christ, so grievously to suffer, who said, It
were better a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and be drowned in the Depth
of the Sea, that should offend one of these little Ones, that believe in me;
and as true as Christ Jesus suffered, and rose again, and as God lives, who
raised him from the Dead, We are some of those his little Ones that believe in
him, who (in Derision and Scorn in this Age) are called Quakers, as ye might
call Moses, the Prophets and Apostles (in Days past) who did quake and tremble
at the Presence of the Lord, who is the same now as ever he was, though the
ungodly know him not, nor his Power: And we are of that poor and afflicted
People mentioned, Zeph. iii. 12.
Zeph. iii. 12. Whose Trust is only in the Name of the Lord, who will undo all
their Oppessors at this the Return of their Captivity.

But what shall I say unto you? If ye will not, or cannot believe our faithful
Testimony (or the Testimony of God through us) and the Innocence of our Cause and
Sufferings, neither will ye believe, if one should rise from the Dead, and
declare it unto you; for many tender Visitations, and timely Warnings, and
gentle Reprehensions have you had, from the pure Spirit of the Lord God, both
from his Witness in your own Consciences, and from his faithful Servants and
Messengers, who have written and declared unto you in his Name and Power in
this your Day. And as for my Part who am one of the least of the Thousands of
Israel, I could willingly have been silent as toward you at this Time, but the
Lord (whom I serve in my Spirit) has laid it upon me to warn you once more
(for whose Sakes I have born a Burden) in the true Sight and Sense of your sad
Estate, and of the Day of thick Darkness, Wrath and Distress, which is
hastening upon you from the Almighty.

Wherefore be not proud nor rebellious, but hear, and obey the Word of the
Lord; for thus says the Lord God that made Heaven and Earth, Let my innocent
People alone, and touch them not any more, as ye have done; for they are mine,
and I have called them, and chosen them, and redeemed them, they are my Jewels,
which I am making up, they shall show forth my Glory before Men to the whole
World; I have anointed them, and I will preserve them and deliver them, and
crown them with an everlasting Salvation. I will rebuke Kings and Rulers for
their Sakes, and distress Nations, and disthrone the Mighty from their Seats
that rise up against them, as I have done; and let my everlasting Gospel have a
free Passage in these Nations; end do not reproach and afflict my Servants and
Messengers so any more, whom I have chosen and sent to preach and declare the
Way of Life and Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, but how your Ear and your
Heart unto them and their Testimony, that it may be well with you, and prolong
your Days; for he that blesses them, shall be blessed, and he that curses
them, shall be cursed, and every Hand shall wither that opposes them, as has
been, and shall be, henceforth for ever: I the Lord have spoken it.

But and if you will not hear, but will still persist, and go on, as ye have
done, to oppress my Heritage, and harmless People, and make War and Opposition
against my Power and Truth, and thus set your selves and your Power against me,
the living God; I will bring you down suddenly, to the Astonishment of Nations,
and I Will cut your Day short, and turn your Pleasures into Howling and
Lamentation, and Shame and Contempt shall cover your Memorial as a Garment:
Thus will I work for the Deliverance of my Seed, and none shall let it; for the
Year of my Redeemed is come, and the Day of Vengeance is in my Heart, to plead
its Cause with all Flesh.

Therefore consider your Ways, and see what ye are doing, and what the Effect
of this your Work will be; ye are but Men, and the Children of Men, who were
but as Yesterday; your Breath also is in your Nostrils, and your Life is but a
Vapor, which will soon vanish away: You labor in the very Fire, and bring
forth Wind, which blows up the Flame of that which will consume you, and
deprive you of all Happiness for ever: (O that ye had but Hearts to consider
it! For the more you strive with the Lord, and oppress his People, the more
will they multiply and grow stronger and stronger, and you shall wax weaker and
weaker, and your Works shall be your heavy Burden; for Life and Immortality is
risen, and the Power of God is stirring in the Hearts of Thousands, and Light,
Understanding (the excellent Spirit which was in Dani^^) is breaking forth like
the Lightning (which shines out of the East into the West) in the Sight of many
People, whereby they know it is the Day of the coming of the Son of Man, with
Power and great Glory, that every Eye may see him, and they that have pierced
him shall mourn bitterly: So, your Labor is in vain, and your Works for the
Fire, and your striving with your Maker to no Purpose, as to effect your End
and Aim. And of these Things you have been often forewarned, and the Lord has
been very long-suffering toward you, in sparing you thus long, and suffering
you thus far to act against him and his dear People; and his Mercy and
Forbearance has been evidently showed in a large Measure unto you, in
deferring his heavy Judgments thus long, which must have been confessed to be
just upon you: And will you thus requite the Lord, by increasing your Tasks of
Oppression upon his tender innocent People? O Unwise and ungrateful Generation!
Has not God yet showed you, Micah vi. 8.
that You should do justly, and love Mercy, and walk humbly? But are these your
Fruits and Practices, Fruits of Mercy or Justice? or if there be any Tincture
or Spark of Love or Humility in them, Let God's Witness (the Light) in all your
Consciences, and in People, answer. I tell you plainly, That such Fruits and
Doings among you, that profess your selves Christians, have made the very Name
of Christ and Christianity a Proverb of Reproach through Nations, and have caused
the God of Heaven to be blasphemed: And how could it be otherwise, seeing you
who profess the most Knowledge of God, and have talked of Converting the
Heathen (as some of your Leaders have done) are found the least in the Life and
Fruits thereof? But to what would they convert them? To Pride, and Swearing and
Drunkenness, and Oppression, and all Manner of Excess, and to persecute People
for their good Conscience? They have no Need of That; for, some of them have
said, they did not use (...) swear and be drunk, etc. till they came among the
Christians, and learned of them, they did not do so in their own Country: Ye
are so far from converting them, being out of the Life of what ye profess and
talk of your selves, that the very Heathen or Infidels (as ye call them) do
judge and condemn you (who are making Enquiry) concerning these your
Proceedings against this harmless People, among whom some of them have been
kindly entreated, who visited them at the Lord's Requiring, though contrary in
Opinion and Religion; and this does rise up in Judgment against you.

But, Friends, have not you your selves been under Suffering, and some of you
been driven into strange Countries or Lands, for your Cause (as it was called)?
Nay, did not the King himself once flee for Refuge to a Tree, to save himself
from his Enemies Hands? if not, why are there such Representations made of it,
in so many Places in the Nation? And was not this a great Mercy, and
Deliverance from God, so to obscure and preserve him, from them who pursued him
(and many of you also)? And are these Things forgotten? Can Mercy be loved,
except it be remembered? And do you remember and love his Mercies, by doing
justly, and walking humbly with him, as he does require? Or do you boast in a
vain Glory, as if your own Arm had done it, or your own Strength or Deserts had
delivered you? if so, then God must needs be forgotten, and his Mercies trod
under foot, and his Visitations and Counsels cast behind your Back; Psalm. 1^
and so, all that forgot God, shall be torn in Pieces, and there shall be none
to deliver them, as it is written.

And were these your Sufferings (which you sustained by them ye opposed) Unjust
and Unequal? and if you should say, They were; then I say, it is much more
Unjust and very Unequal (in the Sight of God, and all sober People that fear
him) for you, thus to inflict such cruel Sufferings, as Imprisoning and
Stifling up to Death in your noisome Jails and Holes among Thieves and
Murderers, and to pronounce Sentence of Banishment upon an innocent, harmless,
peaceable People, that do not oppose you in the least with any outward Force,
neither do so much as the Thoughts of it lodge within our Breasts, as the Lord
God knows (who has called us to Peace) but on the contrary, have sought and
do seek your Welfare and Happiness, both in this World and in the World to
come, which in Time shall be mafest to the whole Earth.

And if you say, Your Sufferings were unjust and unequal (though you did oppose
them, and make War against them so long as you could) because they deprived you
of your Rights and Privileges, and just Liberties, and natural Birthrights,
etc. which were your Due to enjoy, as being Freeborn of the Nation: Then how
much more is it unjust, and unequal, and unrighteteous, thus to inflict
Sufferings upon your Friends, and oppress your peaceable Neighbors, who are
freeborn People of the same Nation, and do not oppose you, but are tender
toward you (as aforesaid) and subject to all wholesome just Laws, and tributary
to you, for which Causes we ought to have our just Liberty, and enjoy the
Privilege of our Birthright, which is our Due (so long as we live peaceably
and harmlesly) but if it be not a Privilege to be pleaded for, then are all
your own Grounds and Reasons, and Cause, without a Foundation, and you and the
whole Nation may be swept away by any that are able to do it, without being
charged with Injustice or Oppression, which is contrary to the just Balance
(the Light of Christ) in all Peoples Consciences. And as we are the dearly
beloved People of the Most High God, who does bless us with his Presence, and
manifest his everlasting Love and Good Will toward us daily, and over-shadow
us with his Power and tender Mercies, whom he has gathered out of the evil
Ways and Spirit of this World, and all the Vanities thereof, unto himself, to
walk with him who is invisible, in the upright, blameless, undefiled Life, in
the Midst of a crooked and perverse Generation; I say, considering these
Things, how greatly and unrighteously do our Sufferings appear to all sober
People, whose Eyes are open, and will be more open to discern and savor the
Bitterness of that proud, envious, wrathful Spirit, which thus has acted and
deceived you; and its End is numb^ed by them that have Wisdom from above.

For Friends, set aside the reproachful Name of Quakers, and the other Titles
of Derision and Scorn (which the envious and blood-thirsty Spirit has invented
to render the People of God odious in all Ages) and tell me what ye have justly
to charge against this People, (whom you so furiously pursue to the Dens and
Caves of the Earth, to the Loss of the Lives of so many of them; by which
Children are made Fatherless, and tenderhearted Women, mournful Widows) and
let it come forth to open View, and declare it abroad (as your Articles against
them) to the whole World, and speak the Truth, and nothing but the Truth, as
you use to tell one another) that all People may rightly know and understand
the very Ground and most secret Cause who do enquire of these your present
Proceedings against them; for Notice is taken by many, and ere long it must be
manifest to all Men, as the Folly and Madness of Jannes and Jambres was, that
withstood Moses; for you withstand no less than him of whom Moses wrote, who
said, I am the Light of the World, against whom Saul was once exceedingly mad,
and had Thoughts to do very much against that Way (which was then as well as
now) called Heresy, till the Light of Jesus (whom he persecuted, met with him,
with his Letters (or Wrrrants) to hale Men and Women to Prison (as your
Servants ^^) and smote him to the Ground, and made him tremble, who (from that
Time) became such a Quaker as you now persecute and imprison till Death: But
the Light of Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, will meet with all
Persecutors, and Oppressors about Religion, let them be never so mad, or think
they ought to do much against that Way they c^l^ Heresy, as some of you have
said, who have made a Mock at the Light, even publicly, which many took Notice
of, and even marvelled at such Blasphemy (in an open Court) against the Savior
of the World: And there is no other Name under Heaven by which Men shall be
saved, John vii. 12 and 16.
but him who said, I am the Light of the World, who lights every Man that
comes into the World.

And this is he in whom we have believed, and of whom we have declared, and
must declare and bear Testimony as long as we have a Being; and the World shall
know that our Testimony is true, and for his Name and Truth only, do we thus
patiently suffer the Contradictions of Sinners, as our Brethren did by the
zealous Jews, in Ages past; but you are not so zealous for Christ's Law and
Commandments, as they were of Moses and the Prophets (which Christ ends and
(...)) who thought it was not lawful to do Good on the Sabbath Day, Luke vi.
35, 36
(as to heal the Sick) ^or then would you do to all Men as ye would they should
do to you; for his Law runs thus, and Be you merciful, Mat. v. 34* etc.
etc. and Love you your Enemies: and Swear not at all, etc. as ye may read.

But behold, how both Jews and Gentiles take Notice, and are ashamed and
grieved, to hear and see what a Deal of bad Works you do even on your
Sabbath Day (as some of you call it) and how you profane the Day of your
Worship, with your Cattle and Servants which are within your Gates) what
riding, and running, and toyling, in Rage and Fury, (like Madmen) Sweating,
and Swearing, and Cursing, and dragging, and haling the innocent Members of
Christ^s Body, out of their peaceable Meetings, into your Jails and Holes, on
your Day of Worship. But are your Sacrifices (ye offer at that (...)) accepted?
Have ye Peace, while these Things are acting in your Name, and by your
Authority? If ye have Peace and Pleasure herein, let me tell you, from the
righteous God, You are hardened in your Sins against him, and he will break your
Peace speedily, and turn your Pleasure into Bitterness and Lamentation; and his
innocent Peoples Meetings shall stand, and be increased; and their Way shall
prosper, and the Truth shall spread and prevail, and have Dominion over all
Nations; and their Enemies shall fall, and be confounded, let them strive what
they can against them; for they are o^ God (and not of Man, or the Will of Man)
and they seek his Glory and not their own; and such as abide faithful to him,
shall triumph over all the Principalities, and Powers of the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, and make a Show openly of the Victory over all that do
or may oppose them; for their Life is Immortal, and the Lord of Heaven and
Earth is their Strength, who is with them as a mighty terrible One; therefore
shall their Persecutors fall before them.

And let me tell you again, That by these your unreasonable, and unjust
Dealings, the Understandings of Thousands are the more opened, and the tender
sober Part, or Principle in them, does feel the Weight and Burden of this
Grievousness, which you have prescribed, and do so eagerly pursue, to the
imprisoning to Death so many innocent Persons and freeborn People of this
Nation, besides Hundreds are liable to the same, (which yet remain in your
Prisons;) and your unnatural, cruel Sentence of Banishment, to separate dear
and tender Husbands from their dear and tender Wives and tender Children, and
little innocent Babes; O^! how do ye rend the Bowels of the Meek of the Earth,
whom God has blessed? What is become of all your Promises of Liberty for
tender Consciences! God's CURSE and VENGEANCE will come upon you; and his
PLAGUES will pursue you to Destruction if ye proceed in this Work: And your
Wives shall be Widows, and your Children Fatherless; the Lord has spoken it.
If you had the Hearts of Men, or of Flesh, ye would be afraid and blush at the
very Thoughts hereof; my Heart and Soul melts within me, and I am even bowed
down, with Cries to God, in my Spirit, to think of the Hardness of your Hearts.

God Almighty, cut short thy Work in Righteousness, and shorten the Days of
Oppression and Cruelty for thine Elect's Sake; which cry Night and Day unto
thee; and make known thy Name and Power to the Ends of the Earth; and let the
Heathen hear, and fear, and bow to thy righteous Scepter; and let the Kings of
the Earth lay down their Crowns at the Feet of the Lamb, that through thy
righteous Judgments they may partake of thy tender Mercies, which endure for
ever, that their Eyes may be no longer withheld, nor blinded by the God of
this World (the Power and Prince of Darkness) but that they might come to see
thee, who art invisible, and enjoy the same precious Life of pure unfeigned
Love which abounds in the Hearts of thy hidden Ones, and receive thy peaceable
Wisdom, to be governed, and to govern therein; then would they surely know,
that we are thine, and confess to thy glorious Truth and speak good of thy
Name, and magnify thy Power, and no longer coun^ the Blood of thy everlasting
Covenant (wherewith we are sanctified) as an unholy Thing.

But O thou righteous, holy, pure, eternal God, art unknown unto all them that
sit in Darkness, and dwell in the Spirit of Enmity against thee and thy People,
though thou art come near to Judgment, according to the Promise, Mal. iii. 5. and
thy Way of Life and Salvation is hid from them, therefore they hate us without
a Cause, and thus evilly entreat us in the Darkness of their Minds, and in the
Ignorance and Hardness of their Hearts, for which my Soul does pity them, and
even entreat thee for them, That if possible, their Eyes may be yet opened, and
their Hearts softened, and their Spirit humbled, that they may see what they
are doing in the Dark, and consider the Effect of their Work, which will
assuredly follow: And if thy Warnings and gentle Visitations will not humble
them, then let thy Judgments awaken them, and bring them down, and humble them,
that they may perceive something of what thou art doing (in these latter Days)
and art resolved to do to the Ends of the Earth, though the whole World should
gather and band together to oppose thy Work and People; for thou have began
(and thou will go through and perfect) thy Work; thou will raise thy Seed, and
gather thine Elect from the four Winds, and bring them from the Ends of the
Earth, and scatter the Proud in the vain Imaginations of their Hearts; and thou will break thy Way through all that oppose thee in this the Day of thy mighty
Power, in which thou art arisen (as a Giant to run his Race) to finish
Transgression, and make an End of Sin, and bring in and establish everlasting
Righteousness, that the Kingdoms of this World may become thy Kingdoms, and of
thy Christ, as thou have promised, and art now fulfilling; Glory, and Honor,
and Thanks, and everlasting Praises be to thy glorious Name, World without End,
Amen.

So Friends, ye are and have been warned again and again by the faithful
Messengers and Servants of the Lord, in Love to your Souls; and you are left
without Excuse, if never Words more should be mentioned unto you; by which ye
might perceive, how the Lord does strive with you, that ye might repent, and be
saved from the Wrath to come, though some of you feel little of it in your own
Consciences; but his Spirit will not always strive with you: For, if you will
not believe them, but slight and reject them, and neither make Conscience of
what has proceeded out of your own Mouth, nor regard to perform your own Words
and public Engagements, in that which is just, which the Lord requires of
you, nor remember his bypast and present Mercies, and Long-Suffering toward
you, but trample all under Foot: I say, If it be thus with you, and you are
resolved to go on, you will wholly be given up, and be exceedingly hardened,
and grow desperate in Cruelty and Oppression against God and his Truth and
People, till your whole Earth is filled with Violence; and then (as true as God
lives) will the Flood come upon you, and ye shall fall after the Manner of
Egypt, and the Weight of the dreadful Judgments, due for all your Abominations
and Cruelties, shall sink you down into the Pit that is bottomless, and that
suddenly, as the Lord has spoken,

By his Servant, who is a Lover of the Welfare of all your Souls, and I am thus
far clear of all your Blood, William Bailey.
Written in the 10th Month, 1664. at Hartford.

Again, 12 more condemned to Banishment.
in December, twelve of those called Quakers were condemned to Banishment, for
it was resolved to go on, not regarding what George Bishop gave forth in Print,
and caused to be delivered to the King and the Members of Parliament, being as
follows;

To the King and both Houses of Parliament, thus says the Lord.
MEddle not with my People, G. Bishop's Caution to the King and Parliament.
because of their Conscience to me, and banish them not out of the Nation
because of their Conscience; for if ye do, I will send my Plagues upon you, and
ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Written in Obedience to the Lord by his Servant, George Bishop.
Bristol, the 25th of the 9th Month, 1664.

The fulfilling of this Prediction we shall see; for within a short Time a War
ensued with the Dutch, and the Pestilence appeared at London; but before it
broke out, yet more of the imprisoned Quakers were condemned to Banishment, 32
more Quakers condemned to banishment, with somewhat remarkable of the Judges
opinions.
viz. two and thirty Persons, both Men and Women, who were sentenced by the
Court on the 6th, 14th and 15th of December, for whatever they said in Defense
of themselves, proved ineffectual. One asked, If we meet really to worship God,
must we suffer for that? And Judge Hide answered, Yes, that you must. But Judge
Keeling, to mend the Matter a little, said, You shall not suffer for
worshipping God, but for being at an unlawful Assembly, contrary to the Law.
Another said, I meet to worship the eternal God in Spirit, as he persuades my
Heart and Conscience; and must I be condemned to Banishment for that? Yes, yes,
said Judge Keeling, For the Law is against it. To which Judge Twisden added. He
has confessed that he was there to worship God; and their Worship is contrary
to the Liturgy of the Church of England. Thus we see, if there was but Evidence
that the Prisoners had been at a Meeting, this was counted sufficient to
condemn them. A Woman being asked, what she had to say to the Evidence given,
answered, Be it known unto you all, if I had as many Bodies as Hairs on my
Head, I could lay them all down for the living eternal Truth of the living God.
After all the Prisoners had been called to the Bar, they were at length
sentenced to be transported to Jamaica, and to remain there seven Years.

This Year in September, The Author's Mother dies.
died my Mother Judith Zinspenning at Amsterdam in Holland, where she was born
of religious Parents among the Baptists, into whose Society her Father Conrad
Zinspenning was entered in a singular Manner; Sh^t Account of her Father^
of which, though it may seem somewhat out of my Road, yet because of the
remarkable Steps of Providence appearing therein, I Will give a short Account. He
being of Col^gn in Germany, was bred a Papist; and after he had passed the
Latin Schools, his Father thrust him into a Cloister; (for Papists used to
think it meritorious to offer up one of their Children to the Clergy.) But he
found the monastical Life so much against his Inclination, that his Father
dying before the Probation-Year was expired, he begged his Mother to assist him
in his Intention to leave the Fraternity, since he was not yet bound by Vow.
She comply^d with his Desire, and so he got out, and then was put to a Trade.
After he had served his Time, he resolved to travel and first took a Turn to
Holland, from thence to France, and then to Italy, and the Metropolis Rome, and
so back again Having been a Lay-Friar, he got Letters of Recommendation to such
Monasteries as were of the Order of those Monks he had lived with; that so he
might freely find Lodging there for some Time. And because in Holland there are
no Cloisters, he was recommended to some eminent Papists at Amsterdam; whither
being come, he liked the Place so well, that he resolved to stay there some
Time; which he did, after having found Employment. And thus getting into
Acquaintance, he came in Time to live with a Baptist, who employed him as a
Journeyman. He never till now, met with the New Testament, in which he began to
read so eagerly, that the Lord cooperating by his good Spirit, his
Understanding came to be opened, so that he got a clear Sight of the
Superstition and Errors of the Popish Religion, in which he was trained up; and
then entering into Discourse with his Master, was persuaded to renounce Popery,
and to enter into the Communion of the Baptists. This broke all his Measures
concerning his intended Travels; and then resolving to settle where he was, he
took to Wife one Katherine de M^l, a virtuous Maid, whose Father was one of the
primitive Baptists that arose under the Persecution in Flanders, from whence he
with many more came to settle in Holland.

From these Parents my Mother descended, And of herself.
who was religiously inclined even from her Youth, and became so well versed in
the Holy Scriptures, and was so diligent in writing down so much of the Sermons
she heard, as she could retain by Memory, that her Father said sometimes, It is
pity that this Girl is not a Boy, who then in Time might become an eminent
Instrument in the Church. After she was come to Age, though much inclined to lead
a single Life, yet at length she was married to my Father Jacob Williamson
Sewel, a very religious young Man, whose Father, William Sewel from
Kidderminster in Worcestershire, having been one of those Brownists, that left
England, and settled in Holland, married a Dutch Wife at Vtrecht, where my
Father was born, who being come to Age, endeavored to walk in the narrow Way,
and conversed mostly with the strictest Professors of those Days. And both he
and my Mother came in Time to grow dissatisfied with that Worship to which they
were joined; yet in Clearness of Understanding my Mother exceeded my Father,
nevertheless she continued ^^^atisfied as well as he, with the common Way of
Worship she belonged to; so that oftentimes, when she came form the
Meeting House, she resolved not to go there any more, because she reaped no
real and substantial Benefit by it. But then the first Day of the Week being
come again, she was in Straight, thinking that however it was, yet by the
Apostle we were exhorted not to forsake the Assemblies. In this i^resolute
Condition she continued a long Time; and being encumbered with the Cares of the
Family, she was not so much at Liberty for performing religious Duties ( viz.
Prayers, reading of, and meditating on the Holy Scriptures, visiting the Sick,
and such like pious Exercises) as she was before she was married; which made
her wish sometimes she had never entered into Matrimony, and that she might live
to enjoy again that Peace and Quiet which once she had. But she knew not yet
that it was the Love of the Lord thus working upon her, to draw her off from
transitory Things. In this State she was often seized with Grief and Sorrow, so
that she counted her self the most miserable of Women; for neither Husband, nor
Children, nor any outward Enjoyments, could afford her any Pleasure; but all
her Desire was to attain to an undefi^ed State, in which she might live an
unblameable Life, not only before Men, but also before God: For feeling there
was yet something in her which was evil and polluting, she struggled to
overcome it; but all her Labor proved in vain. This made her cry earnestly to
the Lord as one in great Danger; and her Doubts, whether it was possible to
attain to Perfection, increased. But in this forlorn State it pleased the Lord
to manifest himself to her in some Measure, though she knew not then it was he.
And often she cried out, Lord, what will it avail me to know that thou have
sent thy Son into the World, and that he was crucified and died for the Sins of
the World, if I am not saved by it. Lord, forgive my Sins, and have Mercy upon
me. And once when she was alone, pouring out her Heart before the Lord, he made
himself known to her, and spoke to her Soul, That if she would be perfect, she
must follow the Light in every Respect. Having heard this, she desired to know
what this Light was; and the Lord showed her, That the Life was the Light of
Men. This she understood in some Degree, and so separated herself as much as
ever she could conveniently from Conversation, endeavoring to live retiredly.
And having about this Time heard Dr. Galenus Abrahamsz, an eminent Baptist
Teacher, preach upon the Parable of the Seedsman, that which he spoke
concerning the good Ground, and how the Ground must be fitted by the Lord's
Working, so affected her, that she resolved to rest from all her own Labor;
and so she left frequenting the Baptists Assemblies any more.

In this retired State she continued a good while, and at length came to hear
William Ames preach; and he declaring the Light of Christ as the true Teacher,
this agreed with what had already been told her inwardly by the immediate
Manifestations of the Lord to her. And thus she came fully to be convinced that
this was the Truth she had so long desired to know. Now she saw that it was her
Duty to give up all, and to keep nothing back: For she had already seen, that
if she would be Christ's Disciple, she must forsake all, even her own self. But
a Fear of the Cross was no small Impediment to her; yet now she gave up to
Obedience; and saw that her former Performances had been defective; and now all
came into Remembrance. This caused Sorrow; but she prayed to the Lord both
Night and Day, and then he manifested his Power by which she was led out of the
Darkness and Bondage, wherein she had been held Captive; and her Supplication
was to the Lord, that it might not be with her as formerly, to wit, sometimes
great Zeal, and then Coldness again; but that she might continue in Fervency of
Spirit. After a long Time of Mourning the Lord manifested his Kindness to her,
by which she came to be quickened and refreshed; and by the Judgments of the
Lord all was narrowly searched out; so that nothing could be hid; and a
Separation was made between the precious and the vile, and Death passed over
all. But thus to part with all her own Wisdom, and forsake her great
Seize, was no small Cross; yet she became willing to bear it, although many
violent Tempests rose to draw her off, if possible, from close adhering to the
Beloved of her Soul; yet she was not forward in Imitation: For my Father, who
when he was convinced of the Truth preached by W. Ames, and W. Caton, soon left
off the common Way of Salutation, would sometimes persuade her by Arguments to
do so too: But she told him, if the leaving off of that Custom was a Thing the
Lord required, she believed he would show it her in his own Time, because she
was given up to follow his Requirings. And so the Lord did in due Time; and she
continuing zealously faithful, he was pleased after my Father's Death to give
her a public Testimony, and she became eminently gifted: For her natural
Abilities surpassing the ordinary Qualifications of her Sex, and becoming
sanctified by the Spirit of the Lord, could not but produce good Effects; and
she came to be much visited and sought to by Professors; and the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men applauded her, because of her pathetical Admonitions. But
she was above Flattery, and trampled upon it. Nay, she was so well esteemed,
that I remember, having some Movings to visit the Collegians in their Meeting,
after one of them had left off speaking, she stood up, and said, That she had
something upon her Mind to speak to them by Way of Exhortation. But knowing
that they suffered not Women to speak amongst them, she was not willing bluntly
to intrude her self; but desired their Leave; which they readily granted, and
one of their chief Speakers said ^o her, It is true, Friend, we don't allow
Women to speak in the Church; Yet we bear that Respect to you, that we give you
the Liberty of speaking. And then she cleared her self, having formerly been a
Frequenter of that Assembly. And when she had done speaking, I don't remember
she was contradicted by any; but one of their Speakers concluded the Meeting
with a Prayer.

Before that Time, she writ and published a small Book to those of her former
Society, which she called, A Serious Reproof of the Flemish Baptists; in which
she dealt very plainly with them; and showed how they were apostatized. She
writ also some other Treatises, extant in Print; and was much beloved and well
esteemed by English Friends, as appears by several Letters written to her from
England, and yet extant. Those of her own Nation often resorted to her for
Instruction, she being so well exercised in the Way of the Lord, that she was
able to speak a Word in Season to various Conditions. Many Times she visited
the Meetings at Alkmaar, Harlem, and Rotterdam, and was often invited by her
Friends to come and edify them with her Gift. She writ also many Letters for
Edification and Admonition to particular Persons, and some Epistles also to the
Church. But it pleased the Lord to take her early to himself. When she fell
sick, she soon had a Sense that she was not like to recover, and therefore
spoke much to me in private, and acquainted me with several Things touching my
self, and relating to her outward Estate. And the Night before she departed,
she called me to her Bedside, and exhorted me very fervently to depart from
Evil, and to fear the Lord; which by the Mercy of God in Time made very deep
Impression on my Mind; so that still I find Reason to bless the Name of the
Lord for having been pleased that I was the Son of such an excellent Mother,
who early in the Morning when she felt Death approaching, called me up out of
my Bed, and sent me to her Brother, and to W. Caton, to come and see her, and I
had hardly been returned a Quarter of an Hour before she departed this Life,
and slept in Peace, to my great Grief then; though afterward, when I came to
Years of discerning, I saw Reason to believe that it was not without a singular
Providence that the Lord had taken her away: For one had long continued to be
an importunate Suitor to her, who in Time lost his Integrity. To give a small
Instance of her true Zeal for God, I Will insert here the following Epistle she
writ to her Friends, to stir up the pure Mind in them.

An EPISTLE to the Friends of Truth.
GRACE and Peace be multiplied among you, J. Zinspinning's Epistle to her
Friends.
my dearly and much beloved Friends, you that have received a Blessing from God
the heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, the Lord of Glory, who by his unspeakable
Love, and his unchangeable Light, has drawn you from o^f the imaginary
Worships, and brought you in Measure to know him who was from the Beginning.
Dear Friends, keep in the Light by which ye are enlightened, and in the
Knowledge of God, which every one has received for himself; watching against
the Seducings of Satan, that your Eyes may be kept open, lest Deceit should
prevail in any of you, by which Truth might lose its Splendour, and the
Brightness of the Lord become darkened.

I write these Things to you in true Love; and though but young, yet as one that
takes Care for you; for the Lord knows how often ye are in my Remembrance;
desiring for you, that ye may not only know the Truth, but that ye may be ^ound
to be living Witnesses of it: For I knowing the Preciousness of it, cannot but
desire that others may also participate of the same: Labor therefore for it my
Friends, that so, when the Lord comes and calls to an Account, every one may be
found faithful according to what he has received; For this is the Talent which
the Lord has given, viz. the Knowledge of him who is true, and who rewards
every one according to his Deeds: But the negligent and slothful Servant said,
that his Lord was an hard Man, and that he gathered where he had not strawed,
and this was his Condemnation: For the Lord said, Thou knew that I was an
austere Man: Wherefore then gave not thou my Money into the Bank, that at my
coming I might have required mine own with Usury? Mind these Things, my beloved
Friends, ye that have an Ear to hear, and dig after this Parable in your
selves; for we all have received Talents, some more, and others less. Let
therefore every one be faithful to the Lord, according to what he has
received; for truly some of you, I believe, have received five Talents. Let it
but be duly considered and seen in the Light of the Lord, what Knowledge ye
have had of the eternal God beyond many, even when ye were yet in Darkness: How
often has the Lord appeared, and clearly made manifest himself? And how
abundantly has he made it known in the Heart, that he it was who was worthy to
be feared and served? Certainly this is a great and weighty Talent, and
therefore the Lord may say justly, What could I have done more to my Vineyard?
O my Friends, besides all this, he has caused his eternal Light to shine into
our Hearts, whereby we have seen the corrupted Ways of the World, and the Paths
leading to Death. This, I say, the Lord has showed us by his eternal Light,
Glory and Praises be given to our God for ever.

Dear Friends, go on in that which ye have begun; for I can bear Witness for
the Lord, that his Love has been abundantly shed abroad upon us, without
Respect of Persons, because those that fear him, and work Righteousness, are
acceptable to him: And he makes his Truth manifest among us, and causes his
Peace and Mercy to rest upon us. It is true, that Satan does not rest to
scatter this, and to sow Doubts and Unbelief in our Hearts; but we keeping
close to the Lord, are preserved from his Snares; and happy is he who has
found a Place where he is freed from Tempests: But before this Place be found,
there are many hidden Rocks that may be struck on, not unknown to me. And
therefore I have true Compassion on those who are not passed them all yet; for
Shipwreck may easily be suffered on any of these.

Yet in all this Danger there is something on which we may rely safely, and to
which we may trust, being as a Beacon, viz. the Light shining into our Hearts,
though it be sometimes but as a Spark, and so small, in Regard of the manifold
Seducings, that it can hardly be discern^d. Here then is no small Grief and
Anguish; ^ere all the Mercies of the Lord, which formerly we enjoyed
abundantly, are called in Question, or doubted of; here is Danger, and yet
Certainty; for by not shining, the Beacon is minded, and by relying on a true
Hope to be saved, we are preserved in the Tempest. I w^^^e these Things for the
Information of those that are traveling toward a City that has a Foundation,
and whose Builder and Maker is God; for ^o such my Love is extended, and my
Desire to the Lord for them, is, that they may be kept by his Power, to remain
standing at his coming.

Dear Friends, keep your Meetings in the Fear of the Lord, and have a Care that
your Minds are not drawn out to hear Words outwardly, but stand in the Cross to
that which desires Refreshment from without: And when at any Time ye feel but
little Refreshment, let it not enter into your Hearts, that the Lord is not
mindful of you, but center down into your selves, in the pure Light, and stand
still therein, then it may be, ye will find the Cause why the Presence of the
Lord is departed from you for some Time; and ye putting away the Cause, shall
enjoy the Lord again to your Comfort.

May God Almighty preserve you all by his Power, lest any Strife or Discord be
found among you; and may you grow up in Love, and thereby be obliged to bear
each others Burdens; and let no transitory Things cumber your Hearts, but be
resigned to the Lord; for that to which we are called, is not to be compared to
that which is transitory, or perishing; since it is a Treasure that is
everlasting, and to which the World, and all that is in it, is but as Dung,
because the most glorious Part of it is but Vanity of Vanities. O, my Friends,
let none be stopped by that which is an Impediment to entering into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but strive all to enter the narrow Gate; and search every one of you
your own Hearts, with the Light ye are enlightened with, which shall manifest
your own States to you; and keeping there, it shall multiply your Peace, and
every one shall find therein his own Teacher, as those have experienced who
have sought the Lord with all their Heart. Now the God of all Mercies, who
alone is immortal, keep you and us altogether unto the End, that so in these
dangerous Times we may remain standing, to the Glory of his great Name. O
Friends, keep our Craftiness, and enter not readily into Discourse with those
that are out of the Truth; for they speak in their own Wills, and are crafty,
and knowing no Bridle to their Mind, it produces that by which the Simple and
innocent are ^^ught: But stand ye rather, and keep in that wherein ye see their
Subtilty; for then, though ye may not have a Word to apologize for your selves,
yet ye shall be above them.

This is written from me, a young Plant, in Love to you, according to the Gift
received from the Lord. My Salutation is to you all in the Light of Truth.

Judith Zinspenning.


In the Year 1664, A printed Account of more than 600 of those called Quakers
in Prison.
came forth a small Book in Print, to the King and both Houses of Parliament,
wherein were set forth, not only the violent Persecution almost over all
England, with the Names of Persons, Places, and Cases, which indeed were woeful,
and some bloody; but it was also represented, that there were at that Time in
Prison above six Hundred of those called Quakers, merely for Religion's Sake.
In the Month called January, 1664-5 36 condemned to be sent to Jamaica by Judge
Keeling, Wild, and R. Brown.
in the Year 1664-5, thirty six of that Persuasion, among which were eight
Women, were condemned to be transported to Jamaica. The Jury not being so
forward to declare the Prisoners guilty as the Court desired, were persuaded
however by the Threatenings of Judge Keeling, the Recorder Wild, and the
boisterous Richard Brown, to do what was demanded of them. On the 18th and 22d
of the next Month, 34 more sentenced to Jamaica, and 5 to Bridewel by Judge
Wharton. and Judge Windham.
thirty four of the said People were sentenced to be carried to Jamaica, and
five to Bridewel. The Manner of their Trial I pass by with Silence to avoid
Prolixity. Those that were tried on the 18th were sentenced by Judge Wharton,
and those on the 22d by Judge Windham, who said to Anne Blow, who declared,
that the Fear of the Lord being upon her Heart, she durst not conform to any
Thing that was unrighteous, Anne Blow, I would show you as much Favor as the
Court will allow you, if you will say that you will go no more to that
seditious Meeting, meaning the Bull and Mouth. A. Blow's Answer to Judge
Windham's Offer of Favor.
To which she answered, Would thou have me to sin against that of God in my
own Conscience? If I were set at Liberty to Day, if the Lord required it of me,
I should go to the Bull and Mouth to Morrow. Concerning one John Gibson, the
said Judge spoke to the Jury in this Manner: J. Gibson.
Gentlemen, although it is true, as this Gibson says, that it cannot be proved
that they were doing any Evil at the Bull and Mouth; yet it was an Offense for
them to be met there, because in Process of Time there might be Evil done in
such Meetings; therefore this Law was made to prevent them. By this we may see
with what specious Colors the Persecutors cloak'd their Actions. I find among
my Papers a Letter of John Furly, and Walter Miers, (both of whom I knew well)
mentioning, that some of the Jury, Jurymen fined.
for refusing to give such a Verdict as was required of them, were fined in
great Sums, and put into Prison, there to remain till they should pay the Fine.

Having now said thus much of sentencing, it grows Time to speak of the
Execution thereof.

Some of the Persons ordered for Banishment, fell sick, and died in Prison;
some became Apostates, and some were redeemed by their Relations that were not
Quakers. But yet a considerable Number was, though with great Pains, brought on
Shipboard, to be transported to the West Indies. We have seen already how
those that were sentenced at Hertford by Judge Orlando Bridgeman, having been
put ashore by the Master of the Ship, 3 Friends set on Shore with a
Certificate from the Master, etc. who dared not to carry them away for Fear of
the Displeasure of the Lord.
returned. And it was not long after that three of their Friends, being on
board the Ship the Many-fortune of Bristol, were also set on Shore with a
Certificate from the Master of the Ship, signed by him and seven of his Men,
wherein they complained of their Adversity, and said, that God had said as it
were in their Hearts, Accursed be the Man that separates Husband and Wife; and
he who oppresses the People of God, many Plagues will come upon him.

But the first of those called Quakers, who really tasted Banishment, we^
Edward Brush, and James Harding, who were banished, not only out of London, E.
Brush and Ja. Harding the first that were banished.
where they as Citizens had as much Right to live as the chiefest Magistrates,
but also out of their native Country, contrary to the Right of a freeborn
Englishman: These, with one Robert Hayes, were on the 24th of the Month ^^lled
March, early in the Morning, fetched from Newgate in London, and brought to
Black-Fryars Stairs, where they were put into a Boat, and so carried down to
Gravesend, and there had on board a Ship. R. Hayes put sick on Shipboard,
Hardly any Warning had been given to these Prisoners; and Robert Hayes being
sickly, had taken some Physic, which had not done working, and since it was
very cold that Morning, and he had got nothing to eat before he came to
Gravesend, 1665
he was seized in the Ship with so severe Sickness that he died of it, Dies at
Gravesend, and his Body brought back and buried at London. E. Brush lived to
return. The Pestilence first breaks out at the next House to where Edw. had
lived. No Pass to be given to a West India Man without Promise to carry some
Quakers to Banishment. 7 of them put on Shipboard. Pestilence incr^^ses, and
Judge Hide an active Persecutor dies suddenly.
and then his Corpse was carried to London, and there buried. The other two were
carried to Jamaica, where, by the Providence of God, in Time it fared well with
them, and Edward Brush lived to return into England. It was remarkable, that
not long after these Persons were banished, the Pestilence broke out at London,
first of all in the House of a Meal-man in Bear-binder-Lane, next Door to the
House where the said Edward lived, which by some was thought worthy being taken
Notice of; since that House was the first which was shut because of the
Sickness.

With the other Prisoners they had more Trouble and Pains, because no
Ship-masters could be found that would carry them: Wherefore an Imbargo was
laid on all Merchantmen, with Order that none should go down the River without
having a Pass from the Admiral; and this they would give to no Master going to
the West Indies, unless he made Promise to carry some Quakers along with him to
the Place to which they were banished. Whatever any Masters spoke against this,
intimating that there was a Law, according to which no Englishman might be
carried out of his native Country against his Mind, was in vain. At length by
Force they got one to serve their Turn; and then seven Persons that were
sentenced to Banishment, were, on the 18th of the Month called April, carried
from Newgate to Black-Fryars-Stairs, and so in a Boat to Gravesend. But in the
mean Time the Pestilence increased, and not long after, Judge Hide, who had
been very active in persecuting, was with many others suddenly taken away out
of this Life; for he having been seen in the Morning at Westminster ^n Health,
as to outward Appearance, it was told in the Afternoon, that he was found dead
in his Chamber; being thus summoned to appear and give Account of his Deeds
before a higher Court than ever he presided in. Yet Transportation was not come
to a Stand; first, as has been said, three Persons were brought on Shipboard,
next seven, and on the 16th of the Month called May, 8 more put on board.
eight were carried down the River to Gravesend, and put on Shipboard; but as
the Number of those that were thus carried away was heightened, so also the
Number of those that died of the Pestilence much more increased. But
notwithstanding this Scourge from Heaven, Transportation continued; for a
Master of a Ship was found at length, who had said, as was reported, That he
would not stick to transport even his nearest Relations. And so an Agreement
was made with him, that he should take between fifty and sixty Quakers into his
Ship, and carry them to the West Indies. Of these, eight or ten at a Time were
brought to the Waterside, and so with Boats or Barges carried to the Ship,
which lay at Anchor in the Thames, in Bugbey's- Hole, a little beyond
Greenwich. Many of these Prisoners, among which several Women, not showing
themselves ready to climb into the Ship, lest it should seem as if they were
instrumental to their Transportation, were hoisted up with the Tackle; and the
Sailors being unwilling to do this Work, and saying, That if they were
Merchants Goods, they should not be unwilling to hoist them in, the Officers
took hold of the Tackle, and said, They are the King's Goods. This was on the
20th of the Month called July, and on the 4th of the next Month, when,
according to the Bill of Mortality, three Thousand and forty died in one Week,
the rest of the banished Prisoners were carried with Soldiers to the said Ship,
in which now were fifty five of the banished Quakers, and among these eighteen
Women. 55 Quakers put on board one Ship, where many die of the Pestilence.
But something adversly hindered this Ship from going away, and the Pestilence
also entered into it, which took away many of the Prisoners, and so freed them
from Banishment. But though the Pestilence grew more hot at London, and that a
War was risen between England and Holland, yet the Fire of Persecution
continued hot, and great Rejoicings were made when the Dutch were beaten at
Sea, and their Admiral Obdam was blown up with his Ship. Neither did the
Persecutors leave off to disturb the Meetings of those called Quakers, and
imprison many of them; nay so hardened and unrelenting were some, that when at
London more than four Thousand People died in one Week, they said, That the
only Means to stop the Pestilence, was to send the Quakers out of the Land. A
daring and wicked Saying when more than 4000 dyed in a Week.
But these fainted not, but grew emboldened against Violence. In September,
some Meetings were still disturbed at London, though the Number of the Dead in
one Week was heightened to about seven Thousand, being increased in that Time
nigh two Thousand. Meetings still disturbed though above 7000 die in a Week, and
Grass grew in the Streets.
Now such as intended to have met at the Bull and Mouth, were kept out from
performing Worship there; but yet meeting in the Street, they were not
disturbed; for there seemed to be some Fear of the common People, who grew
discontented because there was little to be earned by Tradesmen; and the City
came to be so emptied, that Grass grew in the Streets that used to be the most
populous, few People being seen by the Way. Thus the City became as a Desert,
and the Misery was so great, that it was believed some died for Want of
Attendance.

It was about this Time that Samuel Fisher, S. Fisher dies.
who first had been Prisoner at London in Newgate, and afterward in Southwark,
since the Beginning of the Year 1663, till now being about a Year and a Half,
died piously. It is reported that the King in the Time of this great Mortality
once asked, Whether any Quakers died of the Plague? And having been told, Yes,
he seemed to slight that Sickness, Because some Quakers died of the Plague, the
King concluded 'twas no Judgment on the Persecutors.
and to conclude, that then it could not be looked upon as a Judgment or Plague
upon their Presecutors. But certainly his Chaplains might well have put him in
Mind of what Solomon says, There is one Event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked: And of this Saying of Job, HE destroys the Perfect and the Wicked: As
also that of the Prophet, That the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to
come.

Now traveling in the Country was stopped, which made some People go with Boats
along the Coast, and so went ashore where they had a Mind. Thus did Stephen
Crisp, S. Crisp comes to York, and A. Parker, and G. Whitehead to London.
who came about this Time to York, where the Duke of York, was then, with many
of the great ones. About this Time Alexander Parker and George Whitehead came
to London, where they had good Service in preaching the Truth. Great Fires were
now kindled in the Streets to purify the contagious Air; but no Relief was
found by it; for in the latter End of September, there died at London above
eight Thousand People in one Week, as I remember to have seen in one of the
Bills of Mortality of that Time.

In the mean while the Ship in which the banished Prisoners were, The Ship with
the condemned Quakers could not go off, the Master being imprisoned for Deb^
could not go off, but continued to lie as a Gazing-stock for those Ships that
passed by; for the Master was imprisoned for Debt.

Now the Prediction of George Bishop was fulfilled, and the Plagues of the Lord
fell so heavily on the Persecutors, that the Eagerness to banish the Quakers,
and send them away, began to abate. This same G. Bishop, about Midsum^er, G.
Bishop then a Prisoner at Bristol, writes a Letter to comfort his Friends under
Apprehension of Banishment.
writ from the Prison at Bristol (where he made Account that he also should
have been banished) a Letter to his Friend to exhort them to Stedfastness,
foretelling them, that if they happened to be banished, God would give them
Grace in the Eyes of those among whom they should be sent, if they continued to
adhere to him; and that when he should have tried them, he should bring them
again into their native Country; and that none should ro^t them out; but they
should be planted and built up there; and that the Lord should visit their
Enemies with the Sword and Pestilence, and strike them with Terror. This is but
a short Hint of what he writ at large.

G. Fox the Younger had also in the Year 1661, given forth a little Book, G. F.
Jun. h^s Lamentations for the Judgments that were assuredly coming.
of which some small mention has been made before, in which he lamented
England, because of the Judgments that were coming upon her Inhabitants for
their Wickedness and Persecution; saying among the rest, that the Lord had
spoken in him concerning the Inhabitants. The People are too many, the People
are too many, I will thin them, I will thin them. Besides, that the Spirit of
the Lord had signified unto him, That an overflowing Scourge, yea even an
exceeding great and terrible Judgment, was to come upon the Land, and that many
in it should fall, and be taken away. And that this Decree of the Lord was so
firm, that though some of the Lord^s Children and Prophets should appear so as to
stand in the Gap, yet should ^ot that alter his Decree. This with much more he
writ very plainly; and though he was deceased long ago, yet this Paper was
reprinted, to show the Inhabitants Low faithfully they had been warned.

What, I. Pennington writes to the King and Parliament to manifest the
Unreasonableness of Persecution.
Isaac Penington, being a Prisoner, writ about this Time to the King and
Parliament, and published in Print, was also very remarkable, being designed
with Christian Meekness, to dissuade them, if possible, from going on with this
mischievous Work of Persecution. In this Paper, containing some Queries, among
many weighty Expressions, I find these also,

After ye have done all ye can, even made Laws as strong as ye can, and put
them in the strictest Course of Execution ye can, one Night from the Lord may
end the Controversy, and show whether we please the Lord in obeying him, or ye
in making Laws against us for our Fidelity and Obedience to him.

And as the Lord is able to overturn you, so if ye mistake your Work,
misinterpreting the Passages of his Providence, and erring in Heart concerning
the Ground of his former Displeasure; and so (through the Error of Judgment) set
your selves in Opposition against him replanting the Plants which he will not
have grow, and plucking up the Plants of his planting; do ye not in this Case
provoke the Lord, even to put forth the Strength which is in him against you?
We are poor Worms. Alas, if ye had only us to deal with, we should be nothing
in your Hands! But if his Strength stand behind us, we shall prove a very
burdensome Stone, and ye will hardly be able to remove us out of the Place
wherein God has set us, and where he pleases to have us disposed of. And
happy were it for you, if instead of persecuting us, ye your selves were drawn
to wait for the same Begettings of God (which we have felt) out of the Earthly
Nature into his Life and Nature, and did learn of him to govern in that; then
might ye be established indeed, and be freed from the Danger of those Shakings
and Overturnings, which God hastening upon the Earth.

Now because ye may be apt to think that I write these Things for my own Sake,
and the Sakes of my Friends and Companions in the Truth of God, that we might
escape the Sufferings and Severity which we are like to undergo from you; and
not so mainly and chiefly for your Sakes, lest you should bring the Wrath of
God and Misery upon your Souls and Bodies: To prevent this Mistake in you, I
shall add what follows. Indeed this is not the Intent of my Heart: For I have
long expected, and do still expect this Cup of outward Affliction and
Persecution from you, and my Heart is quieted and satisfied therein, knowing
that the Lord will bring Glory to his Name, and Good to us out of it: But I am
sure it is not good for you to afflict us for that which the Lord requires of
us, and wherein he accepts us; and ye will find it the bitterest Work that
ever ye went about, and in the End will wish that the Lord had rather never
given you this Day of Prosperity, than that he should suffer you thus to make
Use of it. Now that ye may the more clearly see the Temper of my Spirit, and
how my Heart stands in this Thing, I shall a little open unto you my Faith and
Hope about it in these ensuing Particulars.

First, I am assured in my Heart and Soul, that this despised People (called
Quakers,) is of the Lord's begetting in his own Life and Nature. Indeed had I
not seen the Power of God in them and received from the Lord an unquestionable
Testimony concerning them, I had never looked toward them: For they were
otherwise very despisable in my Eyes. And this I cannot but testify concerning
them, that I have found the Life of God in me owning them, and that which God
has begotten in my Heart, refreshed by the Power of Life in them: And none but
the Lord knows the Beauty and Excellency of Glory, which he has hid under this
Appearance.

Secondly, The Lord has hitherto preserved them against great Oppositions, and
is still able to preserve them. Every Power hitherto has made nothing of
overrunning them; yet they have hitherto stood, by the Care and tender Mercy
of the Lord; and the several Powers which have persecuted them, have fallen one
after another.

Thirdly, I have had Experience my self of the Lord's Goodness and Preservation
of me, in my suffering with them for the Testimony of his Truth, who made my
Bonds pleasant to me, and my noisome Prison (enough to have destroyed my weakly
and tenderly-educated Nature) a Place of Pleasure and Delight, where I was
comforted by my God Night and Day, and filled with Prayers for his People, as
also with Love to, and Prayers for those who had been the Means of outwardly
afflicting me and others upon the Lord's Account.

Fourthly, I have no Doubt in my Heart that the Lord will deliver us. The
Strength of Man, the Resolution of Man is nothing in my Eye in Compare with the
Lord. Whom the Lord loves, he can save at his Pleasure. Has he begun to break
our Bonds and deliver us, and shall we now distrust him? Are we in a worse
Condition than Israel was, when the Sea was before them, the Mountains on each
Side, and the Egyptians behind pursuing them? He indeed that looks with
Man's Eye, can see no Ground of Hope, nor hardly a Possibility of Deliverance;
but (to the Eye of Faith) it is now nearer than when God began at first to
deliver.

Fifthly, It is the Delight of the Lord, and his Glory to deliver his People,
when to the Eye of Sense it seems impossible. Then does the Lord delight to
stretch forth his Arm, when none else can help: And then does it please him to
deal with the Enemies of his Truth and People, when they are lifted up above
the Fear of him, and are ready to say in their Hearts concerning them, They are
now in our Hands, who can deliver them?

Well, were it not in Love to you, and in Pity, (in relation to what will
certainly befall you, if ye go on in this Course) I could say in the Joy of my
Heart, and in the Sense of the Good Will of my God to us, who suffers these
Things to come to pass, Go on, try it out with the Spirit of the Lord, come
forth with your Laws, and Prison, and spoiling of our Goods, and Banishment,
and Death (if the Lord please) and see if ye can carry it: For we come not
forth against you in our own Wills, or in any Enmity against your Persons or
Government, or in any Stubborness or Refractoriness of Spirit; but with the
Lamb-like Nature which the Lord our God has begotten in us, which is taught
and enabled by him, both to do his Will, and to suffer for his Namesake. And
if we cannot thus overcome you (even in Patience of Spirit, and in Love to you)
and if the Lord our God please not to appear for us, we are content to be
overcome by you. So the Will of the Lord be done, says my Soul.

This the Author concludes with a Postscript, containing a serious Exhortation
to forsake Evil. Besides this, he gave forth another Paper, wherein he proposed
this Question to the King and both Houses of Parliament.

Whether Laws made by Man, See his Works, P. 410.
in Equity, ought to extend any farther than there is Power in Man to obey? And
if it was not cruel to require Obedience in such Cases, wherein the Party has
not a Capacity in him of obeying? And to explain this a little farther, he
said, In Things concerning the Worship of God, wherein a Man is limited by God,
both what Worship he shall perform, and what Worship he shall abstain from,
here he is not left at Liberty to obey what Laws shall be made by Man contrary
hereunto. Thus Pennington strove by Writing to show the Persecutors the Evil of
their Doings: But a fierce Party prevailed then; and the Clergy continually
blew the Fire of Persecution; nay, many presumed the Time was now come, totally
to destroy the Quakers; 12 more condemned to be transported.
and that in December twelve more were condemned to Transportation.

Concerning those banished that were now in the Ship which lay in the Thames,
G. F. brought again to his Trial before Judge Twisden. where he shows just
Exceptions, as before, against the Indictment* yet is recorded as premunired,
without passing Sentence against him, and continued Prisoner in Lancaster
Castle.
I^ll yet leave them there, and take again a View of G. Fox, whom in the
foregoing Year we left in a hard Prison at Lancaster. In the Month called
March, in this Year, he was brought again to his Trial before Judge Twisden;
and though Judge Turner had given Charge at the Assize before, to see no such
gross Errors were in the Indictment as before, yet in that Respect this was not
much better than the former, though the Judge examined it himself. The Jury then
being called to be sworn, and three Officers of the Court having deposed, That
the Oath had been tendered to him at the last Assizes, according to the
Indictment, the Judge said, It was not done in a Corner: And then asked him,
What he had to say to it? And, Whether he had taken the Oath at the last
Assizes? G. Fox thereupon gave an Account of what had been done then, and that
he had said, That the Book they gave him to swear on, says, Swear not at all.
And repeating more of what he spoke then, the Judge said, I will not dispute
with you, but in Point of Law. G. Fox offering to speak something to the Jury
concerning the Indictment, he was stopped by the Judge; and then G. Fox asked
him, Whether the Oath was to be tendered to the King's Subjects only, or to the
Subjects of Foreign Princes? The Judge replied, To the Subjects of this Realm.
Well, said he, Look to the Indictment, and thou may see that the Word Subject
is left out of this Indictment also. Several other great Errors as to Time,
etc. he had observed in the Indictment, but no sooner had he spoke concerning
the Errors, but the Judge cried, Take him away, Jailor, take him away. Then he
was hurried away; yet the Pe^^^ thought he should have been called again; but
that was not d^^^. After he was gone, the Judge asked the Jury, Whether they
were agreed* They said, Yes, and found for the King against him. The Reason why
G. Fox was led away so suddenly, seemed to be that they expected he would have
proved the Officers of the Court to have sworn falsely, seeing the Day on which
the Oath had been tendered to him at the Assizes before, was wrong in the
Indictment; and yet they had sworn, that on that Day he had refused to take the
Oath. Before G. Fox was brought before the Judge, he had passed Sentence of
Praemunire against Margaret Fell, for having refused to take the Oath. And though
this Sentence had not been passed against G Fox, yet he was recorded as a
premunired Person; tho it had not been asked him, What he had to say why
Sentence should not be pronounced against him. And thus he continued Prisoner
in Lancaster-Castle.

Whilst he was there, though weak of Body, he writ several Papers. But the
neighboring Justices labored much to get him removed from thence to some
remote Place; for it was pretty well known among the People, how the Court at
the Assizes had dealt with him. So about six Weeks after, they got an Order
from the King and Council to remove him from Lancaster; and they received also
a Letter from the Earl of Anglesey, wherein it was written, That if these
Things which he was charged with were found true against him, he deserved no
clemency or Mercy. And yet the greatest Matter they had against him was his
Refusal of the Oath. His Persecutors now having prepared for his Removal, the
Undersheriff, and the Head-Sheriff's Men, with some Bailiffs, came and fetched
him out of the Castle, when he was so weak, by lying in that cold, wet and
smoaky Prison, that he could hardly go or stand. So they brought him down into
the Jailor's House, where Justice William Kirbey, and several others were.
Justice Kirbey, etc. contrive G. Fox's Removal* though weak, and send him to
Bentham in Yorkshire, but refuse to show their Order.
They called for Wine to give him, but he well knowing their Malice against
him, told them, He would have none of their Wine. Then they cried, Bring out
the Horses. G. Fox therefore desired, That if they intended to remove him, they
would first show him their Order, or a Copy of it. But they would not show him
any, but their Swords. He then told them, There was no Sentence passed upon
him, neither was he premunired, that he knew of; and therefore he was not made
the King's Prisoner, but was the Sheriff's: For they and all the Country knew
that he was not fully heard at the last Assizes, nor suffered to show the
Errors that were in the Indictment, which were sufficient to quash it. And that
they all knew there was no Sentence of Praemunire passed upon him; and therefore
he not being the King's Prisoner, but the Sheriff's, desired to see their
Order. But instead of showing him their Order, they haled him out, and lifted
him upon one of the Sheriff's Horses; for he was so very weak, that he was
hardly able to sit on Horseback. Riding thus along the Street, he was much
gazed upon by the People, and had great Reason to say, that he received neither
Christianity, Civility, nor Humanity; for how ill and weak soever he was, yet
they hurried him away about fourteen Miles, to Bentham, in Yorkshire; and so
wicked was the Jailor, Abusive Behahaviour of one Hunter, a Jailor, who died
soon after.
one Hunter, a young Fellow, that he lasht the Horse on which G. Fox rid, with
his Whip, to make him skip and leap; insomuch that he had much ado to sit him;
and then would this wanton Fellow come, and looking him in the Face, say, How
do you, Mr. Fox? To which he answered, It was not civil in him to do so. Yet
this malicious Fellow seemed little to regard it; but he had not long Time to
delight in this kind of Insolence; for soon after he was cut off by Death. G.
Fox being come down to Bentham, was met by a Marshal and several Troopers; and
many of the Gentry, besides Abundance of People, came thither to stare at him.
Being entered the House, and very much tired, he desired they would let him lie
down on a Bed, which the Soldiers permitted; and the Marshal, to whom he was
delivered, set a Guard upon him. After having staid there a while, they pressed
Horses, and sending for the Bailiff and the Constables, they had him to
Giggleswick that Night. And there they raised the Constables, G. F. removed to
Giggleswick.
who sat drinking all Night in the Room by him, so that he could get but little
Rest. The next Day coming to a Market Town, several of his Friends came to see
him; and at Night he asked the Soldiers, Whither they intended to carry him? To
which some said, Beyond Sea, and others, To Tinmouth Castle. And there was a
Fear amongst them, lest some should rescue him; but there was not the least
Reason for it. The next Night he was brought to York, Thence to York.
where the Marshal put him into a great Chamber, where many of the Troopers
came to him. He then speaking something by Way of Exhortation to the Soldiers,
many of them were very loving to him. A while after, the Lord Frecheville, who
commanded those Horse, came to him, and was civil and loving, and G. F. gave
him an Account of his Imprisonment.

After a Stay of two Days at York, And thence to Scarborough-Castle, where he
is ill used by the Governor, Sir J. Crosland, a Papist.
the Marshal and five Soldiers were sent to convey him to Scarborough-Castle:
These were very civil, and behaved themselves civilly to him. On the Way they
baited at Malton, and permitted his Friends to see him. Afterward being come
to Scarborough, they brought him to an Inn, and gave Notice of it to the
Governor, who sent six Soldiers to guard him that Night. The next Day they had
him into the Castle, and there put him into a Room, with a Sentinel to watch
him. Out of this Room they soon brought him into another, which was so open,
that the Rain came in, and it smoaked exceedingly; which was very offensive to
him. One Day the Governor Sir John Crosland, came into the Castle with one Sir
Francis Cob. G. F. desired the Governor to come into his Room, and see how it
was; and so they did: And G. F. having got a little Fire made in the Room, it
was so filled with Smoke, that they could hardly find the Way out again. And he
being a Papist, G. F. told him, That was his Purgatory which they had put him
into. For it plainly appeared that there was an Intent to vex and distress him:
For after he had been at the Charge of laying out about fifty Shillings, to
keep out the Rain, and somewhat to ease the Smoke, they put him into a worse
Room, which had neither Chimney nor Fire-hearth; and lying much open toward the
Seaside, the Wind so drove in the Rain, that the Water not only ran about the
Room, but also came upon upon his Bed. And he having no Fire to dry his Clothes
when they were wet, his Body was so benumbed with Cold, and his Fingers swelled
to that Degree, that one grew as big as two. And so malicious were his
Persecutors, that they would hardly suffer any of his Friends to come at him,
nay not so much as to bring him a little Food; so that he was forced to hire
somebody to bring him Necessaries. Thus he spent about a Quarter of a Year; and
afterward being put into a Room where a Fire could be made, be hired a Soldier
to fetch him what he wanted. He then eat almost nothing but Bread, and of this
so little, that a Three-penny Loaf commonly served him three Weeks; and most of
his Drink was Water, that had Wormwood steeped in it; and once when the Weather
was very sharp, and he had taken great Cold, he got some Elecampane Beer.

Now though he desired his Friends and Acquaintance might be suffered to come to
him, His Friends desiring it, not permitted to come to him, while many Papists
and others have Liberty, with whom he converses freely.
yet this was refused; but some others were admitted to come and gaze upon him,
especially Papists, of whom a great Company once being come, they affirmed,
That the Pope was infallible, and had been so ever since St. Peter's Time. But
G. F. denied this, and alleged from History, That Marcellinus, one of the
Bishops of Rome, denied the Faith, and sacrificed to Idols; and therefore was
not infallible. And he said also, If the Papists were in the infallible Spirit,
they should not maintain their Religion by Jails, Swords, Gallows, Fires, Racks
and Tortures, etc. nor want such Means to hold it up by: For if they were in
the infallible Spirit, they would preserve Men's Lives, and use none but
spiritual Weapons about Religion. He also told them, how a certain Woman, that
had been a Papist, but afterward entered into the Society of those called
Quakers, having a Tailor at work at her House, and speaking to him concerning
the Falseness of the Popish Religion, was threatened to have been stabbed by
him, for which End he drew his Knife at her: Since it was as the Woman said,
the Principle of the Papists, if any turn from their Religion, to kill them if
they can. This Story he told the Papists, and they did not deny this to be
their Principle, but asked, If he would declare this abroad? And he said, Yes,
such Things ought to be declared abroad, that it may be known how contrary your
Religion is to true Christianity. Whereupon they went away in a great Rage.
Some Time after, another Papist came to discourse with him, and said, That all
the Patriarchs were in Hell, from the Creation till Christ came; and that when
he suffered, he went into Hell, and the Devil said to him, What come thou
hither for; to break open our strong Holds? And Christ said, To fetch them all
out. And so, he said, Christ was three Days and three Nights in Hell, to bring
them all out. On Which G. F. said to him, That was false; for Christ said to
the Thief, This Day thou shall be with me in Paradise. He also said, That Enoch
and Elijah were translated into Heaven; and that Abraham also was in Heaven,
since the Scripture says, that Lazarus was in his Bosom. And Moses and Elias
were with Christ upon the Mount, before he suffered. With these Instances he
stopped his Adversary's Mouth, and put him to a Nonplus.

Another Time there came to him a great Physician called Dr. Witty, Dr. Witty,
a Presbyterian, accompanied with the Lord Falconbridge and other great Men,
discourses with him.
being accompanied with the Lord Falconbridge, the Governor of Tinmouth Castle,
and several Knights; and G. F. being called to them, this Doctor undertook to
discourse with him, and asked, What he was in Prison for? G. F. told him,
Because he would not disobey the Command of Christ, and swear. To which the
Doctor said, He ought to swear his Allegiance to the King. Now G. F. knowing
him to be a great Presbyterian, asked him, Whether he had not sworn against the
King and the House of Lords, and taken the Scotch Covenant? And whether he had
not since sworn to the King? The Doctor having no ready Answer to this, G. F.
asked him, What then was his Swearing good for? telling him farther, My
Allegiance does not consist in Swearing, but in Truth and Faithfulness. After
some further Discourse, G. F. was led away to his Prison again; and afterward
the Doctor boasted, That he had conquered George Fox, which he having heard,
told the Governor, It was a small Boast in him to say he had conquered a
Bondsman.

A while after, this Doctor came again, having many great Persons with him, and
he affirmed before them all, That Christ had not enlightened every Man that
comes into the World; that the Grace of God, which brought Salvation, had not
appeared unto all Men; and that Christ had not died for all Men. G. F. asked
him, What Sort of Men those were, which Christ had not enlightened? and whom his
Grace had not appeared to? To which the Doctor answered, Christ did not die for
Adulterers, and Idolaters, and wicked Men. Then G. F. asked him, Whether
Adulterers and wicked Men were not Sinners? And he said, Yes. Which made G. F.
say, And did not Christ die for Sinners? Did he not come to call Sinners to
Repentance? Yes, said the Doctor. Then, replied G. F. Thou ^^st stopped thy own
Mouth. And so he proved, That the Grace of God had appeared to all Men, though
some turned it into Wantonness, and walked despitefully against it; and that
Christ had enlightened all Men, though some hated the Light. Several of those that
were present confessed, it was true; but the Doctor went away in a Rage, and
came no more to him.

Another Time the Governor came to him, The Governor, with some Parliament Men,
come to talk with him.
with two or three Parliament Men, and they asked him, Whether he owned
Ministers and Bishops? To which he said, Yes, such as Christ sent forth, such
as had freely received, and would freely give and such as were qualified, and
were in the same Power and Spirit, that they were in, in the Apostles Days. But
such Bishops and Teachers as yours are, that will go no farther than they have
a great Benefice, I do not own; for they are not like the Apostles: For Christ
says to his Ministers, Go ye into all Nations, and preach the Gospel. But ye
Parliament Men, that keep your Priests and Bishops in such great fat Benefices,
ye have spioled them all: For do ye think they will go into all Nations to
preach, or will go any further than they have great fat Benefices? Judge your
selves, whether they will or no. To this they could say little; and whatever
was objected to G. Fox, he always had an Answer in Readiness; and because
sometimes it was simple and plain, his Enemies from thence took Occasion to
say, that he was a Fool. But whatever such said, it is certain, that he had a
good Understanding, though he was not educated in humane Learning. This I know by
my own Experience, for I have had familiar Conversation with him.

In this his Prison he was much visited even by People of Note. General
Fairfax's Widow came once to him with a great Company, one of which was a
Priest, who began to quarrel with him, because speaking to one Person he said,
Thou and Thee, and not You; and those that spoke so, the Priest said He counted
but Fools. Which made G. F. ask him, Whether they that translated the
Scriptures, and that made the Grammar and Accidence, were Fools? Seeing they
translated the Scriptures so, and made the Grammar so, Thou to one, and You to
more than one? With these and other Reasons he soon silenced the Priest; and
several of the Company acknowledged the Truth he declared to them, and were
loving to him; and some of them would have given him Money; but he would not
receive it.

Whilst I leave him yet Prisoner, An Account of W. Dundas, his Convincement,
etc.
I Will go to other Matters, and relate the remarkable Case of one William
Dundas, who being a Man of some Repute in Scotland, came over to the Communion
of those called Quakers, in a singular Manner. He was a Man of a strict Life,
and observed the ecclesiastical Institutions there as diligently as any of the
most precise: But in Time he saw, that bodily Exercise profited little, and
that it was true Godliness which the Lord required from Man. In this State
becoming more circumspect than he was accustomed to be, he did not frequent the
public Assemblies so much as formerly. But this was soon taken Notice of; and
being asked the Reason why, he said, That there was a Thing beyond that, which
he looked for. But it was told him, T^^^ was a dangerous Principle. To which
Dundas replied, That he was not to receive the Law from the Mouth of Man. Then
the Minister (so called) said to him, That he tempted God. To which Dundas
returned, That God could not be tempted to Evil. Now that which made him more
averse to the Priests of that Nation, was to see their domineering Pride, and
how they forced some that were not one with them in their Principles, to comply
with their Institutions, sprinkling the Children of Parents even without their
Consent. Add to this, their going from one Benefice to another, being always
ready to go over from a small Church to a great one, under Pretense of more
Service for the Church; whereas it plainly appeared that selfish Interest
generally was the main Cause. This Behavior of the Clergy, and their rigid
Persecution, if any deviated a little from the Church-Ceremonies, and the
common Form, The hard Case of one Wood, a Custom-house Officer.
turned Dundas's Affection from them. An Instance of this Rigidness, was, that
one -- Wood, who had some Charge in the Custom-house of Leith, and approved in
some Respect the Doctrine of those called Quakers, had said, That Christ was
the Word, and that the Letter was not the Word. For this he was cited before
the ecclesiastical Assembly of Lothian, where Dundas was present; and Wood so
well defended his Saying, that none were able to overthrow his Arguments,
chiefly drawn from these Words of John, That the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt
among us. Wood continuing to maintain his Assertion, they began to threaten him
with Excommunication, and would not allow him so much Time as to give his
Answer to the next Assembly. Excommunication there was such a Penalty, that
People under it were very much deprived of Conversation with Men. The Fear of
this made Wood comply in a little Time; and meeting Dundas about three Months
after, in the Street at Edinburgh, he told him, That he had been forced to bow
to the Assembly against his Light; for if he had been excommunicated, he had
lost his Livelihood. Thus Wood bowed through humane Fear, but he hardly outlived
this two Years. The Priests jealous of Dundas, open his Letters at the
Post House, and find he corresponds with G. Lawry.


In the mean while the Priests became more and more jealous of Dundas: For he
not having them in such an Esteem as they wished, they said, That he would
infect the whole Nation: And they did not stick here, but to know with whom he
corresponded in England, they opened (so great was their Power) his Letters at
the Post House, and sometimes kept them: But if they found nothing in them, by
which they could prejudice him, they caused them to be sealed up again, and
delivered to him. By this base Practice they came to know that one Gawen Lawry,
Merchant of London, sent him a Box, with about three Pounds Sterling worth of
Books. Priest Oswald seizes his Books.
This Box, Dundas found afterward, that the Priest John Oswald had taken away:
And whatever he did, he could not get them again, till the English came into
Scotland, but then many of them were wanting. At length he is excommunicated.
Dundas in the mean while unwilling to comply with the Kirk, was at length
excommunicated: But he was generally so well esteemed, that none seemed to
regard that Sentence so as to keep at a Distance from him; which made this Act
the more contemptible. Now though Dundas favored the Doctrine of the Quakers,
yet they were such a despised People, that he, who was a Man of some Account in
the World, could not as yet give up to join with them.

It happened once that he was riding from Edinburgh to his House, Defends a
Quaker assaulted on the Road.
in a Winter-Evening, and hearing a Noise of some Men as if Fighting, he bad
his Man ride up in Haste to see what it was; which he did, and calling out,
said, that there were two Men on Horseback beating of another on Foot. Dundas
riding up to them, saw the two beating the other Man, who said to them, What
did I say to you, but bid you fear God? By this Dundas presently perceived that
the Man thus beaten was a Quaker; and asking his Name, which the other telling,
he knew it, though he did not know the Man by Sight; and then he ^ell a beating
the two with his Rod, and ordered those that were with him, to carry them to
the next Prison: But the said Quaker entreated him to let them go; which he did
after having asked their Names and Dwelling-Places. About a Week after, the
said Quaker told a Relation of Dundas what Kindness he showed him, and how he
had in some Manner been saved by him; Yet, said he, I found the same Spirit in
him that was in the other two Men who beat me. Such a Saying as this would have
offended some Men, but with Dundas it had a contrary Effect; for these Words so
reached him, that some Time after meeting the said Quaker again, he desired,
That as he passed that Way, he would make his House his lodging Place. Which
kind Invitation he seemed not unwilling to accept o^. Dundas had now attained
to so much Experience, that he could discern between the Spirits of Meekness
and Rashness, and sufficiently perceive that the said Quaker by that which he
spoke concerning him had not made himself guilty of the Latter: But yet he
could not bow so low, as to join in Society with the Quakers, though secretly he
endeavored more and more to live up to their Doctrine; and therein he enjoyed
more Peace in his Heart than formerly.

But his outward Condition in the World not being very forward, Goes into
France, and settles at Diep.
he went into France, and settled at Diep. Whilst he dwelt there, a certain
Woman out of England came thither with her Maid, and spread in the Town some
Books of George Fox and William Dewsbury translated into French; and she her
self having written some Papers, got them turned into French by Dundas, and so
distributed them. But the Message she chiefly came for, she hid from him, and
that not without Reason; for what she acted there, was so singular, that if it
had been known before, it is probable she would not have been able to perform
it. Though I do not find what her Intent was in the Thing, yet it seems likely to
me, that she not knowing the Language there spoken, would by a Sign testify
against their Pride in Apparel and Dress, Strange Action of an English Woman at
the Protestants Place of Worship there.
and that on this wise: On the first Day of the Week she came to the
Meeting House of the Protestants there, where some Thousands of People were
met, and having set her self in the most conspicuous Place, just over against
him that preached, before the Service was finished, she stood up with the Maid
that was with her, who taking off a Mantle and Hood she was covered with, she
appeared clothed in Sackcloth, and her Hair hanging down sprinkled with Ashes.
Thus she turned her self round several Times, that all the People might see
her. This Sight struck both Preacher and Auditory with no small Consternation;
and the Preacher's Wife afterward telling somebody how this Sight had affected
her, said, This is of deeper Reach than I can comprehend. The said Women having
stood thus a while, fell both down upon their Knees and prayed, and then went
out of the Meeting, many following them, and distributed some Books. Then they
came to their Lodging, which was in a Scotchman's House; but he refusing them
Entrance, they came to Dundas's Lodging, who knew nothing of all this. They
therefore told him, that the Work they came for in that Nation was now done;
and he asking what they had done, they told him; and signified that they wanted
Lodging till they went away. Then he went abroad to see if he could find
Lodging for them; but in vain; he then offered them his Bed, being willing to
shift for himself some where else, but they refused to accept of his Offer; and
his Landlady not being willing to let them sit up that Night in any of her
Rooms, they were fain to stay that Night in an Out-House.

Now this Business had made such a Stir in Town, that one of the King's
Officers coming the next Day to Dundas, told him, That he had transgressed the
Laws of the Nation, by receiving Persons of another Religion to his Lodging;
for the King tolerated only two Religions, viz. Papists and Protestants. To
this Dundas said, That he had not transgressed the Law of Hospitality, and he
had been forced to do so, since he could not let them lie in the Street, where
they would have been in Danger of their Lives by the rude Multitude. Then the
Women were taken away, and sent to Prison; and they not being provided with
Food, Dundas took Care of that. Some Time after, an Order being come from the
Parliament at Roan, it was read to them, viz. That they should be transported
forthwith back to England, with the first Passage-boat, and all their Papers
and Books to be burnt in the Market, and themselves also, if ever they should
come to that Nation again. In Pursuance of this, they were put into a
Passage-boat in the Nightime, and so sent to England. Afterward the People
at Diep intended to pursue Dundas, as one of their Judgment; but he was
unwilling to be looked upon as such, though the Protestants had informed against
him, That he did not come to their Meeting: But of this no Crime could be made;
and Dundas told them, If they persecuted him, being a Merchant, and trafficking
there, they might expect the like to be done to their Merchants in England. And
when the Judge affirmed, that Dundas was of the Judgment of those Women, he
told him, That they were better than he; but that their Way was too strait for
him to walk in. There fell out two Things which Dundas took singular Notice of;
the one was, that the Scotchman who shut out the Women, died within twelve
Months after; and the other, that the House of his Landlady, who refused them a
Chamber to ^it in, was burnt within the said Time, without its being known
whence the Fire came, no Houses being burnt besides, though it was in the Middle
of the Town.

In the mean while Dundas continued in an unquiet Condition; for by Reason of
Human Fear, he found himself too weak to profess publicly before Men what he
believed to be Truth.

Then he went to Roan, Dundas comes to Roan, and thence spreads many Books
written by Friends.
but could get no Rest there, being somewhat indisposed in Body, and having
from England gotten a great many Books treating of the Doctrine of those called
Quakers, he sent some of them to the Judge Criminal at Diep, and some to the
Jesuits College there, and at Paris. Afterward he spread some Books also at
Caen, where many Protestants lived. But since those Books spoke against the
Papists, and the Calvinists were in Fear that thereby they might be brought to
Sufferings, they complained to the Lieutenant General of the Town, Then goes to
Alencon, where the Judge Criminal is kind to him, but the Jesuits much offended.
of Dundas, as one that did not come to their Meeting. By this he was forced to
leave that Place, and went to Alencon, where staying a while, the Judge
Criminal sent for him; and after a long Discourse, he and Dundas agreed so
well, that he invited him to come and see him oftener, and that if he would, he
might have an Opportunity to discourse with some of the Jesuits. But Dundas
told him, That he was not willing to dispute with any; yet he should not be
afraid to maintain his Principles against all the Jesuits of the Nation. This
being told the Jesuits, it so exasperated them against him, that being once out
of Town, they caused his Chamber Door to be broken up, to search his Lodging.
He complaining of this to the Judge Criminal, the Judge told him, He knew
nothing of it, and if there was any Thing, it did proceed from the Jesuits,
because of his Confidence against them. This seemed not improbable, for he
found his Letters opened at the Post House several Times, and when he
challenged the Postmaster, he received for an Answer, That they came so to him.

Some Time after he returned to Caen, Returns to Caen and Diep, and so goes to
England, where he frequents Friends Meetings, and at last becomes one with them.
where he was not long, but his Correspondent at Alencon sent him Word, That
the Day after he went from thence, the Governor of the Town had been at his
Lodging to seek for him.

In the next Year, when a War arose between England and France, he came again
to Diep, in Order to return to England, having got Passage in Company of the
Lord Hollis Ambassador from England, where being arrived, he frequented the
Meetings of those called Quakers, yet he was not bold enough to own the Name of
Quaker, but continued in the common Way of Salutations, etc. Yet at length the
Truth they professed had such Power over him, that not being able to enjoy
Peace without yielding Obedience to the inward Convictions upon his Mind, he at
length gave up, and so entered into their Society, and obtained true Peace with
the Lord, which he had long reasoned himself out of. In Process of Time he
published a Book in Print, from which I have drawn this Relation, which he
concluded with a Poem, in which he thanked God for his singular Dealings and
Mercies bestowed upon him, wishing that others might reap Benefit by it.

Thus parting with William Dundas, The Death of W. Caton, with a short
Character of him.
I am now to say that in this Year 1665, in December, William Caton died at
Amsterdam. He was a Man not only of Literature, and zealous for Religion, but
of a courteous and affable Temper and Conversation, by which he was in good
Esteem among those he was acquainted with: And as to the Respect he had there,
this may serve as an Instance. Holland at this Time being in War with England,
there were several English Prisoners of War in the Prison of the Court of
Admiralty at Amsterdam, who now and then were visited by Caton, and supplied
with some Sustenance: But in this he was hindered by an Officer of that Court,
who seemed offended because Caton did not give him Hat-honour. This gave
Occasion to Caton to complain of it to a Burgo-master of the City, I think the
Lord Cornelius Van Vlooswyh, who at that Time was one of the Lords of the
Admiralty; he bid Caton come to his House at such a Time as he was to go to the
Court; which he did, and went with the said Burgomaster toward the Court;
where being come, and Entrance denied him by the said Officer, the Burgomaster
charged him, not to hinder Caton from visiting the Prisoners.

About this Time a Law was made in England, called, An Act for restraining
Non-Conformists from inhabiting in Corporations.

WHereas diverse Parsons, An Act for restraining Non conformists from inhabiting
in Corporations.
Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and other Persons in Holy Orders, have not
declared their unfeigned Assent and Consent to the Use of all Things contained
and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the Use
of the Church of England, or have not subscribed to the Declaration or
Acknowledgment contained in a certain Act of Parliament made in the fourteenth
Year of his Majesty's Reign, and entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of Public
Prayers, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, and
for the Establishing the Form of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons in the Church of England, according to the said Act, or any
other subsequent Act. And whereas they or some of them, and diverse other Person
and Persons not ordained according to the Form of the Church of England, and as
have since the Act of Oblivion taken upon them to preach in unlawful
Assemblies, Conventicles or Meetings, under Color or Pretense of Exercise of
Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, have settled
themselves in diverse Corporations in England, sometimes Three or more of them
in a Place, thereby taking an Opportunity to distill the poisonous Principles of
Schism and Rebellion to the Hearts of his Majesty's Subjects, to the great
Danger of the Church and Kingdom:

II. Be it therefore enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
said Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and other Persons in holy Orders, or
pretended holy Orders, or pretending to holy Orders, and all Stipendaries, and
other Persons who have been possessed of any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
Promotion, and every of them, who have not declared their unfeigned Assent and
Consent as aforesaid, and subscribed the Declaration aforesaid, and shall not
take and subscribe the Oath following;

(2.) I A. B. Do swear, That it is not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever, to
take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
commissioned by him, in Pursuance of such Commissions; and that I will not at
any Time endeavor any Alteration of Government, either in Church or State.

Now though this Act was chiefly made against the Presbyterians and Independents,
who formerly had been employed in the public Church, yet they suffered but
little by it; but it was cunningly made Use of to vex the Quakers, who because
for Conscience Sake they could not swear, were on this Law prosecuted and
imprisoned, etc.

Now since the Pestilence had been so fierce this Year at London, that about an
hundred Thousand People were swept away by it and otherwise, and also many of
those called Quakers, there must be consequently many poor Widows and
Fatherless Children among those of that Society: The Rise of Women's monthly
Meetings.
And because the Men, who at Times kept Meetings to take Care for the Poor,
found that this Burden grew too heavy for them, they offered Part of this
Service and Care to the most grave and solid Women of their Church, who for
this Service met once a Week at London, and this in Time gave Rise to the
Women's Monthly Meetings in other Places in England.

Now I return to the Ship with the banished Prisoners, which I left lying in
the Thames: The Ship with the banished Prisoners comes into the Downs, one half
of them being dead. 1665-6.
But the Owners having put in another Master, whose Name was Peter Love, the
Ship after long lingering, left the River, and came into the Downs. In the Month
called January of the Year ensuing, Luke Howard writ from Dover, that of fifty
four banished Persons, who almost half a Year ago had been brought on
Shipboard, but twenty seven remained, the rest being dead. By this long Stay
the Ship several Times wanted a fresh Supply of Provision, and the Ship's Crew
grew so uneasy, that two of them having gone ashore with the Boat, ran away,
leaving the Boat floating, by which it was staved to Pieces. The rest ill
provided, reach the Lands-End, where the Ship is taken by a Dutch Privateer,
and carried to Horn, in N. Holland, and the Banished set at Liberty, who in
Time return to England.
At length the Master, though he had but few, and those mostly raw Sailors, and
was ill provided with Victuals, yet resolved to set Sail. And so they weighed
Anchor, and went down the Channel as far as Plymouth, where after some Stay,
they set Sail again, which was on the 23d of the Month called February: But the
next Day being advanced as far as the Land's-end, a Dutch Privateer came and
took the Ship; and to avoid being retaken, went about the Backside of Ireland
and Scotland, and so after three Weeks came with some of the Banished to Horn
in North-Holland; and some Days after, the Prize, with the rest of them entered
also into that Port. Here they were kept some Time in Prison; but the
Commissioners of the Admiralty having understood, that there was no Likelihood
to get the banished Quakers exchanged for Dutch Prisoners of War in England,
resolved to set them at Liberty, and gave them a Letter of Passport, and a
Certificate, 'That they had not made an Escape, but were sent back by them.'
They coming to Amsterdam, were by their Friends there provided with Lodging and
Clothes; for their own had been taken from them by the Privateers Crew; and in
Process of Time they all returned to England, except one, who not being an
Englishman, stayed in Holland. Thus those banished were delivered, and the
Design of their Persecutors was brought to naught by an Almighty Hand.

In the mean while, G. Fox continued Prisoner in Scarborough Castle, where the
Access of his Friends was denied him, though People of other Persuasions were
admitted. G. F. in Scarborough Castle has a Conference with Dr. Cradock, etc.
Once came to him one Doctor Cradock with three Priests, accompanied with the
Governor, and his Wife, and many besides. Cradock asked him, What he was in
Prison for? He answered, For obeying the Command of Christ and the Apostle in
not swearing: But if he, being both a Doctor and a Justice of Peace, could
convince him, that after Christ and the Apostle had forbidden swearing, they
commanded Christians to swear, then he would swear. Here Is a Bible, continued
he, show me any such Command if thou can. To this Cradock said, It is
written, ye shall swear in Truth and Righteousness. Ay, said G. F. it was
written so in Jeremiah's Time, but that was many Ages before Christ commanded
Not to swear at all: But where is it written so since Christ forbad all
Swearing? I could bring as many Instances out of the Old Testament for swearing
as thou, and it may be, more too, but of what Force are they to prove Swearing
lawful in the New Testament, since Christ and the Apostle forbad it? Besides,
where it is written, Ye shall swear, was this said to the Gentiles, or to the
Jews? To this Cradock would not answer; but one of the Priests said, It was to
the Jews. Very well, said G. F. but where did God ever give a Command to the
Gentiles to swear? For thou know that we are Gentiles by Nature. Indeed,
said Cradock, in the Gospel-time every thing was to be established out of the
Mouths of two or three Witnesses, and there was to be no swearing then. Why
then, returned G. F. do thou force Oaths upon Christians, contrary to thine
own Knowledge in the Gospel Times? And why do thou excommunicate my Friends?
Cradock answered, For not coming to Church. Why, said G. F. ye left us above
twenty Years ago, 1666
when we were but young, to the Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists, many
of whom made Spoil of our Goods, and persecuted us because we would not follow
them: Now we being but young, knew little then of your Principles, and those
that knew them should not have fled from us, but ye should have sent us your
Epistles or Homilies; for Paul writ Epistles to the Saints, though he was in
Prison: But we might have turned Turks or Jews for ought we had from you for
Instruction. And now ye have excommunicated us, that is, ye have put us out of
your Church, before ye have got us into it, and before ye have brought us to
know your Principles. Is not this Madness in you to put us out, before we were
brought in? But what do thou call the Church, continued he. That which you,
replied Cradock, call the Steeple-house. Then G. F. asked him, Whether Christ's
Blood was shed for the Steeple-house, and purified and sanctified it with his
Blood? And seeing (thus continued he) the Church is Christ's Bride and Wife,
and that he is the Head of the Church, do thou think the Steeple-house is
Christ's Wife and Bride? And that he is the Head of that old House, or of his
People? No, said Cradock, Christ is the Head of the People, and they are the
Church. But, replied G. F. ye have given that Title to an old House, which
belongs to the People, and ye have taught People to believe so. He asked him
also, Why he persecuted his Friends for not paying Tithes? And whether God did
ever give a Command to the Gentiles, that they should pay Tithes? And whether
Christ had not ended Tithes, when he ended the Levitical- Priesthood that took
Tithes? And whether Christ, when he sent forth his Disciples to preach, had not
commanded them to preach freely, as he had given them freely? And whether all
the Ministers of Christ were not bound to observe this Command of Christ?
Cradock said, He would not dispute that: And being unwilling to stay on this
Subject, he turned to another Matter; but finding G. F. never to be at a Loss
for Answer, and that he could get no Advantage on him, he at length went away
with his Company. With such kind of People G. F. was often troubled while he
was Prisoner there; for most that came to the Castle would speak with him, and
many Disputes he had with them. But as to his Friends, he was as a Man buried
alive, for very few of them were suffered to come to him. Josiah Cole once
desiring Admittance, the Governor told him, You are an understanding Man, but
G. Fox is a mere Fool. Now though the Governor dealt hardly with him, yet in
Time he altered, for having sent out a Privateer to Sea, they took some Ships
that were not their Enemies, which brought him into some Trouble; after that,
he grew somewhat more friendly to G. F. to whom the Deputy Governor said once,
That the King knowing that he had a great Interest in the People, had sent him
thither, that if there should be any stirring in the Nation, they should hang
him over the Wall. And among the Papists, who were numerous in those Parts,
there was much Talk then of hanging G. F. But he told them, If that was it they
desired, and it was permitted them, he was ready, for he never feared Death nor
Sufferings in his Life; but was known to be an innocent peaceable Man, free
from all Stirrings and Plottings, and one that sought the Good of all Men. But
the Governor now growing kinder, G. F. spoke to him when he was to go to the
Parliament at London, and desired him to speak with Esquire Marsh, Sir Francis Cob,
and some others, and to tell them, how long he had lain in Prison, and for
what. This the Governor did, and at his coming back told him, Esquire Marsh's
extraordinary Respect for G. F.
that Esquire Marsh said, He knew G. Fox so well, that he would go an hundred Miles
barefoot for his Liberty; and that several others at Court had spoken well of
him.

After he had been Prisoner in the Castle there above a Year, G. F. writes to
the King for his Liberty.
he sent a Letter to the King, in which he gave an Account of his Imprisonment,
and the bad Usage he had met with, and also that he was informed, that no Man
could deliver him but the King. Esquire Marsh, who was a Gentleman of the King's
Bedchamber, did whatever he could to procure his Liberty, and at length
obtained an Order from the King for his Release; The King's Order for his
Release.
the Substance of which Order was, That the King being certainly informed that
G. Fox was a Man principled against plotting and fighting, and had been ready
at all Times to discover Plots, rather than to make any, etc. that therefore
his Royal Pleasure was, that he should be discharged from his Imprisonment,
etc. This Order being obtained, was not long after brought to Scarborough, and
delivered to the Governor, who upon the Receipt thereof, discharged him, and
gave him the following Passport.

The Governor's Passport to him.
PErmit the Bearer hereof, George Fox, late a Prisoner here, and now discharged
by his Majesty's Order, quietly to pass about his lawful Occasions, without any
Molestation.

Given under my Hand at Scarborough-Castle, this first Day of September, 1666.
Jordan Croslands, Governor of Scarborough Castle.

G. F. being thus released, The Governors Kindness afterward.
would have given the Governor something for the Civility and Kindness he had
of late showed him; but he would not receive any Thing; and said, Whatever Good
he could do for him and his Friends, he would do it, and never do them any
Hurt: And so he continued loving to his Dying-Day; nay, if at any Time the
Mayor of the Town sent to him for Soldiers, to disperse the Meetings of those
called Quakers, if he sent any, he privately charged them, Not to meddle with
the Meeting.

The very next Day after G. F. was released, The Fire breaks out at London.
the Fire broke out at London, and the Report of it came quickly down into the
Country, how that City was turned into Rubbish and Ashes, (insomuch that after
an incessant Fire which lasted near four Days, but little of old London, was
left standing) there being about thirteen thousand and two hundred Houses
burnt; the Account whereof has been so circumstantially described by others,
that I need not treat of it at large; but I cannot omit to say, that Thomas
Briggs, some Years before passing through the Streets of London, preached
Repentance to the Inhabitants; and coming through Cheapside, he cried out, That
unless London repented, as Nineveh did, God would destroy it.

Now I may relate another remarkable Prediction.

Thomas Ibbit of Huntingtonshire came to London a few Days before the burning
of that City, Its Destruction foretold by T Briggs.
and (as has been related by Eyewitnesses) did upon his coming thither,
alight from his Horse, and unbutton his Clothes in so loose a Manner, as if
they had been put on in haste just out of Bed.

In this Manner he went about the City on the 6th (being the Day he came
thither) and also on the 7th Day of the Week, pronouncing a Judgment by Fire
which should lay Waste the City. On the Evening of these Days some of his
Friends had Meetings with him, to enquire concerning his Message and Call to
pronounce that impending Judgment: In his Account whereof he was not more
particular and clear, than that he said he for some Time had the Vision
thereof, but had delayed to come and declare it as commanded, until he felt (as
he expressed it) the Fire in his own Bosom: Which Message or Vision was very
suddenly proved to be sadly true, as the foregoing brief Account does in Part
declare. The Fire began on the 2d of September, 1666, on the first Day of the
Week, which did immediately follow those two Days the said Thomas Ibbit had
gone about the City declaring that Judgment.

Having gone up and down the City, as has been said, when afterward he saw
the Fire break out, and beheld the fulfilling of his Prediction, a spiritual
Pride seized on him, which, if others had not been wiser than he, might have
tended to his utter Destruction: For the Fire being come as far as the East End
of Cheapside, he placed himself before the Flame, and spread his Arms forth, as
if to stay the Progress of it; and if one Thomas Matthews, with others had not
pulled him (who seemed now altogether distracted) from thence, it was like he
might have perished by the Fire. Yet in Process of Time, as I have been told,
he came to some Recovery, and confessed this Error; an evident Proof of human
Weakness, and a notorious Instance of our Frailty, when we assume to our selves
the doing of any Thing, to which Heaven alone can enable us. I cannot well pass
by without taking Notice of it, that about three Weeks before the said Fire,
the English landed in the Island Schelling in Holland, under the Conduct of
Captain Holmes, and setting the Town on Fire, there were above three hundred
Houses burnt down, belonging mostly to Baptists that did not bear Arms. It may
be farther observed, that the English were beaten at Sea this Summer by the
Dutch, under the Conduct of Admiral De Ruiter, in a Fight which lasted four
Days; so that they had Occasion to call to Mind how often the Judgments of God
had been foretold them, which now came over their Country, viz. Pestilence, War
and Fire.

G. Fox being at Liberty, did not omit to visit his Friends, and in their
Meetings to edify them with his Exhortations, whereby others also sometimes
came to be convinced. G. F. comes to Whitby, and visits a Priest who had
threatened his Life.
And coming to Whitby, he went to a Priest's House, who fourteen Years before
had said, That if ever he met G. Fox again, he would have his Life, or he
should have his. But now his Wife was not only become one of G. Fox's Friends,
but this Priest himself favored the Doctrine professed by his Wife, and was
very kind to G. F. who passed from thence to York, Then goes to York, and pays
a Visit to Justice Robinson.
where he had a large Meeting, and visited also Justice Robinson, who had been
loving to him from the Beginning. At this Time there was a Priest with him, who
told G. F. It is said of you that ye love none but your selves. But he showed
him his Mistake, and gave him so much Satisfaction, that they parted friendly.

In this County G. F. had many Meetings, and one not far from Colonel Kirby's
Abode, who had been the chief Means of his Imprisonment at Lancaster and
Scarborough Castles; and when he h^ard of his Release, Col. Kirby hearing of G.
F's Release, resolves to have him taken again, b^t is himself by the Gout
confined to his Bed.
said, he would have him taken again: But now when G F. came so near him, he
himself was caught by the Gout, which had seized him so that he was fain to
keep his Bed; and afterward he met with Adversities, as did most of the
Justices and others who had had been the Cause of the Imprisonment of G. F. who
now coming to Sinderhill-Green, had a large Meeting there, where the Priest
sent the Constable to the Justices for a Warrant; but the Notice being short,
the Way long, and having spent Time in searching for G. F. in another House,
before the Officers came where the Meeting was, it was ended, though they had
almost spoiled their Horses by hard riding.

G. F. passing from thence through Nottinghamshire, G. F. comes to
Sinderhill-Green, and thence passing through Nottinghamshire, etc. gets, though
weak, to London.
Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire, and visiting his Friends in
all Places where he came, and edifying them in their Meetings, came at length
to London: But he was so weak, by lying almost three Years in hard and cold
Imprisonments, and his Joints and Body were so stiff and benumbed, that he
could hardly get on Horseback.

Being now at London, here he beheld the Ruins of the City, and saw the
fulfilling of what had been shown him some Years before. Notwithstanding this
Stroke on London, Persecution did not cease, which gave Occasion to Josiah
Coal to write these Lines to the King;

King CHARLES,
SET the People of God at Liberty, J. Coal writes a Warning to the King
against Imprisonment for Conscience Sake.
who suffer Imprisonments for the Exercise of their Conscience toward him, and
give Liberty of Conscience to them to worship and serve him as he requires,
and leads them by his Spirit; or else his Judgments shall not depart from thy
Kingdom, until thereby he has wrought the Liberty of his People, and removed
their Oppressions. And remember thou art once more warned

By a Servant of the Lord, JOSIAH COAL.
London, Dec. 2. 1666.

About this Time, or it may be in the next Month, Stephen Crisp gave forth an
Epistle, containing an Exhortation to his Friends, and also a Prediction
concerning succeeding Times, which is as follows;

Friends,
I AM the more drawn forth at this Time to visit you with an Epistle, Part of
Step. Cri^p's Epistle to Friends concerning the present and succeeding Times.
because the Lord has given me some Sight of his great and dreadful Day, and
Workings in it, which is at Hand, and greatly hastens, of which I have
something to say unto you, that ye may be prepared to stand in his Day, and may
behold his wondrous Working among his Enemies, and have Fellowship with his
Power therein, and may not be dismayed nor driven away in the Tempest, which
will be great.

And as concerning those succeeding Times, the Spirit of the Lord has
signified, that they will be Times of Horror and Amazement to all that have,
and yet do reject his Counsel: For as the Days of his Forbearance, Warning and
Inviting, have been long, so shall his Appearance amongst those that have
withstood him, be fierce and terrible; even so terrible, as who shall abide his
Coming? For the Lord will work both secretly and openly, and his Arm shall be
manifest to his Children in both.

Secretly he shall raise up a continual fretting Anguish among his Enemies, one
against another, so that being vexed and tormented inwardly, they shall seek to
make each other miserable, and delight therein for a little Season; and then
the Prevailer must be prevailed over, and the Digger of the Pi^ must fall
therein; and the Confidence that Men have had one in another shall fail, and
they will beguile and betray one another, both by Counsel and Strength; and as
they have banded themselves to break you, whom God has gathered, so shall they
band themselves one against another, to break, to spoil and destroy one
another; and through the Multitude of their Treacheries, all Credit or Belief,
upon the Account of their solemn Engagement, shall fail; so that few Men shall
count themselves, or what is theirs, safe in the Hand of his Friend, who has
not chosen his Safety and Friendship in the pure Light of the unchangeable
Truth of God; and all the secret Counsels of the Ungodly shall be brought to
naught, sometimes by the Means of some of themselves, and sometimes by
Impossibilities lying in their Way, which shall make their Hearts fail of ever
accomplishing what they have determined; and in this State shall Men fret
themselves for a Season, and shall not be able to see the Hand that turns
against them, but shall turn to fight against one Thing, and another, and a
third Thing, and shall stagger and reel in Counsel and Judgment, as drunken Men
that kn^w not where to find the Way to Rest; and when they do yet stir
themselves up against the holy People, and against the holy Covenant of Light,
and them that walk in it, they shall but the more be confounded; for they shall
be helped with a little Help, which all the Ungodly shall not hinder them of,
to wit, the secret Arm of the Lord, maintaining their Cause, and raising up a
Witness in the very Hearts of their Adversaries to plead their Innocence, and
this shall make them yet the more to vex themselves, and to go thorough
hard-bestead; for when they shall look upward to their Religion, to their
Power, Policy, or Preferments, or Friendships, or whatsoever else they had
trusted in, and relied upon, they shall have cause to curse it; and when they
look downwards to the Effects produced by all those Things, behold then
Trouble, and Horror, and Vexation takes hold on them, and drives them to
Darkness; and having no Help but what is Earthly, and being out of the
Knowledge of the mighty overturning Power of the Lord God Almighty, they shall
despair and wear out their Days with Anguish; and besides all this, the
terrible Hand of the Lord is, and shall be openly manifested against this
ungodly Generation, by bringing grievous and terrible Judgments and Plagues
upon them, tumbling down all Things in which their Pride and Glory stood, and
overturning, overturning even the Foundations of their Strength; yea, the Lord
will lay waste the Mountain of the Ungodly, and the Strength of the fenced City
shall fail, and when Men shall say, We will take Refuge in them, Nah. iii. 12,
13. they shall become but a Snare, and there shall the Sword devour: And when
they shall say, We will go into the Field, and put Trust in the Number and
Courage of our Soldiers, they shall both be taken away; and this Evil also will
come of the Lord, and his Hand will be stretched out still, and shall bring
Confusion, Ruin upon Ruin, and War upon War; and the Hearts of Men shall be
stirred in them, and the Nations shall be as Waters, into which a Tempest, a
swift Whirlwind is entered, and even as Waves swell up to the Dissolution one of
another, and breaking one of another, so shall the Swellings of People be: And
because of the Hardship and Sorrow of those Days, many shall seek and desire
Death rather than Life.

Ah! My Heart relents, and is moved within me in the Sense of these Things, and
much more than I can write or declare, which the Lord will do in the Earth, and
will also make haste to accomplish among the Sons of Men, that they may know
and confess, That the Most High does rule in the Kingdoms of Men, and pulls
down and sets up according to his own Will: And this shall Men do before
seven Times pass over them, and shall be content to give their Glory unto him
that sits in Heaven.

But, Oh Friends! while all these Things are working and bringing to pass,
repose ye your selves in the Munition of that Rock that all these Shakings
shall not move, even in the Knowledge and Feeling of the eternal Power of God,
keeping you subjectly given up to his heavenly Will, and feel it daily to kill
and mortify that which remains in any of you, which is of this World; for the
worldly Part in any, is the changeable Part, and that is up and down, full and
empty, joyful and sorrowful, as Things go well or ill in the World: For as the
Truth is but one, and many are made Partakers of its Spirit; so the World is
but one, and many are Partakers of the Spirit of it; and so many as do partake
of it, so many will be straightened and perplexed with it; but they who are single
to the Truth, waiting daily to feel the Life and Virtue of it in their Hearts,
these shall rejoice in the Midst of Adversity; these shall not have their
Hearts moved with Fear, nor tossed with anguish because of evil Tidings, Psalm.
cxii. 7, 8 because that which fixes them remains with them: These shall know
their Entrance with the Bridegroom, and so be kept from Sorrow, though his Coming
be with a Noise; and when a Midnight is come upon Man's Glory, yet they being
ready and prepared, it will be well with them, and having a true Sense of the
Power working in themselves, they cannot but have Unity and Fellowship with the
Works of it in the Earth, and will not at all murmur against what is, nor wish
nor will what is not to be; these will be at rest till the Indignation passes
over, and these having no Design to carry on, nor no Party to promote in the
Earth, cannot possibly be defeated, nor disappointed in their Undertakings.

And when you see Divisions, and Parties, and Rendings in the Bowels of
Nations, and Rumors and Tempests in the Minds of People, then take heed of
being moved to this Party, or to that Party, or giving your Strength to this or
that, or counselling this Way or that Way, but stand single to the Truth of
God, in which neither War, Rent, nor Division is; and take heed of that Part in
any of you, which trusts and relies upon any Sort of the Men of this World, in
the Day of their Prosperity; for the same Party will bring you to suffer with
them in the Time of their Adversity, which will not be long after; for
Stability in that Ground there will be none: But when they shall say, Come join
with us in this or that, remember you are joined to the Lord by his pure
Spirit, to walk with him in Peace and in Righteousness, and you feeling this,
this gathers out of all Bustlings, and Noises, and Parties, and Tumults, and
leads you to exalt the Standard of Truth and Righteousness, in an innocent
Conversation, to see who will flow unto that; and this shall be a Refuge for
many of the weary, tossed, and afflicted Ones in those Days, and a Shelter for
many whose Day is not yet over.

So dearly beloved Friends and Brethren, who have believed and known the
blessed Appearance of the Truth, let not your Hearts be troubled at any of
these Things: Oh, let not the Things that are at present, nor Things that are
yet to come, move you from Stedfastness, but rather double your Diligence,
Zeal, and Faithfulness to the Cause of God: For they that know the Work wrought
in themselves, they shall rest in the Day of Trouble: Yea, though the Fig Tree
fail, and the Vine brings not forth, and the Labor of the Olive Tree cease,
and the Fields yield no Meat, and Sheep be cut off from the Fold, and there be
no Bullocks in the Stall, yet then may thou rejoice in the Lord, and sing
Praises to the God of thy Salvation, Hab. iii. 16, 17.

And how near these Days are to this poor Nation, few know, and therefore the
Cry of the Lord is very loud unto its Inhabitants, through his Servants and
Messengers, that they would prize their Time while they have it, lest they be
overturned, wasted, and laid desolate before they are aware; and before
Destruction come upon them, and there be no Remedy, as it has already done
upon many.

Oh London! London! That thou and thy Rulers would have considered, and
hearkened and heard, in the Day of thy Warnings and Invitations, and not have
persisted in thy Rebellion, till the Lord was moved against thee, to cut off
the Thousands and Multitudes from thy Streets, and the pressing and thronging
of People from thy Gates, and then to destroy and ruin thy Streets also, and
lay desolate thy Gates, when thou thoughtest to have replenished them again.

And, Oh! says my Soul, that thy Inhabitants would yet be warned, and
persuaded to repent and turn to the Lord, by putting away every one the Evil
that is in their Hearts, against the Truth in your selves, and against those
that walk in it, before a greater Desolation and Destruction overtake you.

Oh, What shall I say to prevail with London, and with its Inhatants! The Lord
has called aloud, he has roared out of Sion unto them, but many of them have
not hearkened at all, nor considered at all.

Well, O my Friends, (and thou, O my Soul) return to your Rest, dwell in the
Pavillion of the House of your God, and my God, and shelter your selves under
the Shadow of his Wings, where ye shall be Witnesses of his Doings, and see his
strange Act brought to pass, and shall not be hurt therewith, nor dismayed.

Oh, my Friends, in the Bowels of dear and tender Love, have I signified these
Things unto you, that you might stand armed with the whole Armor of God,
clothed in Righteousness, and your Feet shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace; and freely given up in all Things to the disposing of the
Lord, who will deliver us, not by Might, nor by Sword, nor Spear, but by his
own eternal, invisible Arm, will he yet save us and deliver us, and get himself
a Name by preserving of us; and we shall yet live to praise him who is worthy
of Glory, of Honor and Renown, from the rising of the Sun, to the Setting of
the same, now and for ever, Amen, Amen, says my Soul.


In the Year 1667, 1667
a Book came forth in Print at London, with this Title, A short Account of the
arbitrary and violent Proceedings of Justice Armorer at Reading, etc. In
particular against Tho. Curtis and Family.
Persecution appearing with its open Face in William Armorer. This was written
by some of the Prisoners called Quakers, and contained a Relation of the
impetuous Carriage of the said Armorer, who being a Knight and Justice of
Peace, had made it his Business many Years one after another, to persecute the
Quakers, and from Time to Time to disturb their Religious Meetings. From a
Multitude of Cases I meet with in the said Book, I'II pick out but a few. The
aforesaid Armorer came very often to the House of Thomas Curtis, at Reading, to
disturb the Meeting, taking many Persons Prisoners from thence, particularly
once thirty four, both Men and Women, at a time. And when they were brought to
their Trial, the Oath was tendered them as the most ready Means to ensnare and
to keep them in Prison. Among the Prisoners taken out of the Meeting was one
Henry Pizing, H. Pizing, no Quaker, brought among others before Judge T. Holt.
who coming to the Bar with his Hat in his Hand, Judge Thomas Holt said, Here Is
a Man that has some Manners, and asked him, If he would take the Oath of
Allegiance? To which Pizing answered, He had taken it twice already. But said
the Judge, You were no Quaker then. To which the said Henry replied, Neither am
I now; but have been many Weeks among them, and I never met with any H^rt by
them, but found them to be honest and civil People. Upon which William Armorer,
who had taken him Prisoner, said, Why did not you tell me so before? To which
Henry returned, Your Worship was so wrathful, that you would not hear me. Then
the Judge said, (...) must take the Oath again. The Oath being read, he took
it, upon which they let him go free without paying any Fees. But they required
of him, to go out at a Backdoor, and to come no more among the Quakers. But
Pizing told them, He hoped now he was freed, he might go out at which Door he
would.

Thomas Curtis afterward being called, Tho. Curtis examined.
the Judge asked him, If he would take the Oath of Allegiance? To which he
answered, That he did not refuse the Oath upon the account of not ^earing
Allegiance to the King, but because Christ had Commanded not to swear at all:
For he was persuaded that he had manifested himself to be as good a Subject to
the King as most in the County, since he came into it, and that if he could
take any Oath, either to save his Estate or Life, he professed he would begin
with that Oath. Then he desired, That the Court would be pleased to let some of
their Ministers show him by the Scriptures, how he might take it, and not break
the Command of Christ. Priest Worrel called to satisfy T. Curtis how ^e might
to ^e the ^at^ without Breach of Christ's Command.
And the Judge called to one Worrel a Priest, that was near him, and desired
him, to satisfy Curtis in that Particular. But the Priest putting off his Hat,
ana bowing to the Court, desired to be excused, saying, He had bad to do with
some of them already, but they were an obstinate People, and would not be
satisfied. Ay, said Curtis, This is commonly the Answer we have from these Men,
when they are desired to answer us a Question according to the Scripture; for
when we make it appear that they give no satisfactory Answer to the Question,
they use to say, We are obstinate. Curtis (whole Wire Anne was a Daughter of a
Sheriff of Bristol, that had been hanged near his own Door, for endeavoring to
bring in the King) was released after some small Time; but quickly taken
Prisoner again by Armorer, who perceiving that he intended to have gone to
Bristol-Fair, caused him to be brought to an Inn, where he told him, You are
going to Bristol- Fair, but I will stop your Journey. And then commanding the
Constable to carry him to Prison, he was compelled thither without a Mittimus.

About this Time Curtis's imprisoned Friends writ a Paper, and it is like he
had a Hand in it, to show tho Hurt and Mischief proceeding from Swearing. This
Paper being sent by him to one of the Magistrates, and Leave being given given
him to read it in the Council Chamger, at the reading of these Words, Because
of swearing the Land mourns, Alderman Johnson said, That was very true.

Sometime after, Bold Extravagancies of Justice Armorer at and in the House of
T. Curtis, etc
it happened that T. curtis, his Wife, and Manservant being all Prisoners,
Armorer sent his Man to enquire if there were any in the House more than the
Family, to which the Maid having answered No, a little after, Armorer came
himself, and knocked at the Door; but the Maid being in Fear, did not open it.
Armorer then pulling an Instrument out of his Pocket, picked the Lock, entered
the House, and searching from Room to Room, came at length where he found one
Joseph Coal, who dwelt in the House, and was not well at that Time; and
Armorer taking him by the Arm, and pulling him down Stairs, said to him, Will
you take the Oath of Allegiance? Which he refusing, was sent to the House of
Correcton, whither the Day before, seven Women, taken from a Meeting, had also
been brought. This bold Act of picking the Lock he did at other Times also, and
once when the Maid was gone out to carry some Victuals to her Master and
Mistress in Prison. In the mean while he searched the Warehouse, where was much
Cloth; and to a Woman that was there, and spoke against his picking of the
Locks, he said, What have you do with it? And where is that Where? meaning the
Maidservant. The Women answered him, She had to do with it; for she was so
that no body did s^eal any Thing out of the House. Besides, Armorer continually
made it his Business to disturb the Meeting, which commonly was twice Week; and
then he used to curse, and to strike those he found there with a great Cane,
always sending some to Prison. Having once (...) three Women to be brought
before him from the House of Correction, he would have them pay a Fine for
having been at a Meeting; to which one Anne Harrison said, His illegal
Treatment of A. Harrison.
Thou have got our House already that we built, and have taken away our Means;
and would thou have me pay more Money when I have broken no Law? We were but
four above the Age of sixteen Years, and the Act says, it must be above Four.
To which Armorer said, His Man told him they were six; and two of them ran
away. It is false, said Anne, there was Frances Kent, but she being a Midwife,
was fetched out of Town; and as for the Sixth, she was not there. But Armorer
not regarding whatever Anne said spoke in a rude Manner, I (...) have Mrs.
Kent, and then let the best Lady in the Land (...) her; she (...) not go, (...)
the King (...) send for her.

If I should mention all the Enormities of Armorer's violent Behavior, this
Relation must needs be very large, and therefore I pass by the most Cases, and
touch but on some few. More than once it happened, when the Prisoners, being
brought to their Trial, reproved Armorer because of his Injustice, and put him
in mind, That once he must give an Account for his bad Deeds; His Profaneness.
He in a most impudent Manner, said, You shall see at the Day of Judgment,
whose Arse will be blackest, yours or mine. And when a Prisoner told him, It
was an uncivil thing for one called a Justice, to speak such Words. He replied,
Why Sirrah, what Incivility is it? Is not your Nose your Nose, and your Arse
your Arse? Other Absurdities the Prisoners met with in the Court, I pass by, as
also how from Time to Time they were treated when they refused the Oath. From
what has been said already in more than one Place concerning the like Cases,
one may easily guess how matt^rs were transacted here, which sometimes was so
grossly, that the Spectators showed their Dislike. When once the Jury, for want
of good Witnesses, could not agree to find the Bill, Armorer rose off the
Bench, and appeared as a Witness. But notwithstanding the Jury returning the
second Time brought it in Ignoramus. Farther Instances of his arbitrary Doings.
Upon which the other Justice said to them, That Sir William Armorer, an
honorable Gentleman had taken his Oath also, To which the Jury returned, 'Twas
true, Sir William Armorer was an honorable Gentleman, but was a Man Subject to
Passion. And they continuing, unwilling to bring in the Prisoners guilty, the
two Justices Proctor and Armorer, (for there were then no more on the Bench)
for all that would not discharge the Prisoners, but sent them to Jail again, as
seditious Persons; for Proctor had told the Jury the Day before, That if they
did not bring in the Prisoners guilty, they would make W. Armorer and the C^rk
perjured Persons. Anne the Wife of T. Curtis being called to the (...), and
asked if she would take the Oath, said, I look on it as a very hard Thing, that
I should be required to take this Oath, being under Covert, and my Husband
being here a present Sufferer for the very same thing; for there is no other
Woman in England, that I have heard of, under Covert, that is required to take
that Oath, and kept in Prison on that Account. But Armorer full of Passion,
cried, His Malice in particular against Anne Curtis.
Hold your Tongue, Nan, and turn your Back. And so she, with another Woman,
that had also been required to take the Oath, was sent back to Jail, as
dangerous and suspected Persons. At length some Justices procured her Liberty;
but this so displeased Armorer, that he did not rest before he had her in
Prison again: But others, it seems, so eagerly desired her Liberty, that she
was discharged a second Time, though her Husband's Goods and Money were seized.
How a Prisoner, who spoke something in his own Defense, was threatened to be
gagged, how Girls were sent to the House of Correction, and how Armorer coming
in Wintertime into the Meeting, and having got a Bucket of Water into the
Room, he himself threw it with a nasty Bowl in the Faces of some young Maidens,
I cursorily skip over. He seemed exceedingly offended at Anne Curtis, who being
a witty Woman, did not omit, when Occasion was offered, to tell of his uncivil
Behavior; and therefore he soon had her in Jail again; and when it was
proposed in the Summertime to discharge some of the Prisoners, because of the
extreme hot Weather, provided they gave Security, No, said Armorer, Mrs. Curtis
shall not go out, though she would give Security; but she shall lie in Jail till
she rot. But how wicked soever he was, yet he could not prevent that all his
exorbit^nt Carriage against the Quakers was published in Print.

But such Behavior was at that Time no rare or uncommon Thing; for since
Persecution was continually cloak'd with a Pretense of Rebellion and Sedition,
all over the Country, such were found, who to their utmost Power did persecute
the Quakers so called; 1667
as among others, one Henry Marshal, Priest at Crosthwa^t in Westmorland, who
being also a Prebendary, A presumptuous Expression of H. Marshal a persecuting
Priest from the Pulpit.
and having several Benefices, yet how great soever his Revenues were, kept
poor People of that Persuasion in Prison for ^ot paying Tithes to him; and once
he said very presumptuously from the Pulpit, That not one Quaker should be left
alive in England. But this his Teme^ity he did not outlive long: For as he was
going half undrest to his Chamber to Bed, he fell down Stairs, as was concluded
from the Circumstances; for he was found lying on the Floor, with his Skull
broken, wrestling with Death, without being able to speak one Word; and being
taken up he died, leaving his Wife and Children in such a Condition, that by
reason of Debts, they fell into Poverty.

About this Time a certain Popish Author, A Popish Author answered by J. Coal.
who expressed his Name no further than with the Letters A. S, gave forth a
Book called, The Reconciler of Religions; or, A Decider of all Controversies in
Matters of Faith. Josiah Coal, who was very zealous for Religion, and well saw
what this Author aimed at, answered him by a Book that appeared in Print, with
the Title of The WHORE unveiled, or, (...) Mystery of the Deceit of the Church
of Rome revealed. Now although the said A. S. chiefly struck at the Quakers, as
the worst of Heretics, falsely perverting their Doctrine, as importing, That
the same Spirit that reproved Judas of Sin, did also induce him to Desperation,
and to hang himself; yet he omitted not to encounter the Doctrine of other
Protestant Societies; and the Roman Church he stated as the true Church, from
which they were unjustly departed, and to which they must all return again: For
the Roman, said he, was the true Church, and not any other; she was the holy
Catholic and Apostolical Church, that was infallible, and could not err; and
had the Power to work Miracles. He also asserted, that she was one in Matters
of Faith, that she was governed by one invisible Head, Christ, and by a visible
Head, the Pope; and that therefore she was the true Church. Now forasmuch as he
held forth at large these and several other Positions, so Josiah Coal did not
omit to answer all these Pretenses distinctly and emphatically; for he was an
undaunted and zealous Disputant. Besides, the Superstition, Idolatry, and cruel
Persecution of the Roman Church which had taken away the Lives of many
thousands of honest and pious People, supplied abundant Matter to Josiah Coal,
to show the Papal Errors, and clearly to prove her to be the false Church. For
though he did not deny that the true Church was Catholic, or universal, yet he
denied that the Universality of the Church of Rome was a sufficient Argument to
prove her to be the true Church. What Church (thus he queried) is more
universal than the great Whore, Rev. xvii. ^. and 15.
the false Church, who had a Name written, Mystery Babylon the Great, the
Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth? Rev. xiii. 3. Chap. xviii. 7.
and xvii. 4.
Who sits upon the Waters, which are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and
Tongues? And did not the whole World wonder after the Beast that carried the
Whore? Did she not sit as a Queen over them all, Ch xviii. 3^ and xvii. 2.
with her fair Profession, or Golden Cup in her Hand, full of Abominations, and
Filthiness of her Fornication? And did not all the Inhabitants of the Earth,
and the Kings of the Earth drink of the Wine of her Fornication, Chapter xviii. 7.
and xvii. 18.
and commit Fornication with her? Mark, how universal was this great Whore, the
false Church; and how confident she was: For she said in her Heart that she
should see no Sorrow; and she glorified her self, and reigned over the Kings of
the Earth. Is not this the very State of the Church of Rome at this Day? Does
she not reign over the Kings of the Earth? And has she not done so long, even
for many Ages? The Case of the Emperor Frederick with resect to Pope Adrian.
Rev. xvii. 6.
And how she has exercised Authority over Kings, may appear from the Case of
the Emperor Frederick, who was fain to hold the Pope's Stirrup while he got on
Horseback. And did not the great Whore, which John saw, drink the Blood of the
Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. Surely the Histories of many Generations past
testify this? And was she not to have Blood given her to drink? as may appear
not obscurely from Rev. xvii. 6. At this Rate Josiah Coal encountered the
masked A. S. but in a more copious Way; and thus he answered his Assertions. To
that, That the Church of Rome should always remain to the End of the World; and
that therefore she was infallible; J. Coal said, that the bare Affirmation of
A.S. was no Proof, except he would produce that Saying of the Mother of
Harlets, I sit as a Queen, Rev. xviii. 7.
and am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow. But indeed that would be a very
pitiful Argument to prove the Church of Rome infallible, unless she was first
proved to be the true Church. And as J. Coal answered these and other
Objections at large, so he showed also the Vanity of the Boast of Miracles, of
which the Church of Rome gloried, and he refuted all the Falsities which that
Anonymous Author had belched out against the Quakers, as a People that might be
wronged without incurring any Danger. But I omit to recite all J. Coale's
Answers for Brevity-sake; yet may make Mention of a Poem which he writ some
Time before, when he was Prisoner at (...) in Cornwall, to which the Reader is
referred, being to be found in Josiah Coale's Works, at Page III.

Thus zealously J. Coal writ against Popery; and yet such has been the Malice
of many, that they represented the Quakers as Favorers of the Church of Rome,
though on many Occasions they had effectually shown the contrary. But their
Enemies endeavored to brand them many Ways, and they left no Stone unturned to
blacken them; to which sometimes false Brethren gave Occasion: For about this
Time there were yet many of the Adherents of John Perrot, who often ill
treated, and spoke evil of those who did not approve their Absurdities. This
befell Richard Farnsworth, one of the first Preachers among those called
Quakers, The Death of R. Farnsworth, with some of his dying Words.
though he was a Man of a notable Gift, and on his dying Bed he gave Evidences of
a firm and steadfast Trust in God; for it was not long before this Time that he
fell sick and deceased at London. Among the many Expressions which signified
his good Frame of Mind, and the divine Consolation he felt, were also these
Words, that were taken in Writing from his Mouth:

Friends,
GOD has been mightily with me, and has stood by me at this Time; and his
Power and Presence has accompanied me all along, though some think that I am
under a Cloud for something. But God has appeared for the owning of our
Testimony, and has broken in upon me as a Flood, and I am filled with his Love
more than I am able to express; and God is really appeared for us, etc.


This he spoke but a short Time before his Departure; and exhorted his Friends
to Faithfulness and Stedfastness and that nothing might be suffered to creep in
of another Nature than the Truth they professed, to intermix therewith, Lev.
^ix. 19.
saying, No Linsey-woolsy Garment must be (...). Some more consolatory Words he
spoke, and his last Testimony was (...) a Seal unto all the former Testimonies
he had given for the Lord. And after having ^ain yet an Hour or two, he slept
in Peace with the Lord, and l^ft a good Repute behind with those who truly were
acquainted with him, and knew how zealously he labored in the Ministry of the
Gospel for many Years.

Now I return again to G. Fox, G. F. in Wales and at Shrewsbury, etc.
who was this Year not only in Wales, but in several other Places, without
being imprisoned, though at Shrewsbury, where he had a great Meeting, the
Officers consulted what to do against him, being called together by the Mayor,
since it was said, The great Quaker of England was come to Town. But they could
not ag^^^ among themselves, some being for imprisoning him, and others for
letting him alone: And they being thus divided, he escaped their Hands.

As several eminent Men among those called Quakers were taken away by Death,
The Descent Education, and Character of R. Barclay.
so others came in who filled their Places; and among these and none of the
least, was Robert Barclay, Son of Colonel David Barclay, descended of the
ancient and famous Family of the Barclays, and of Katharine Gordon from the
House of the Dukes of Gordon. This his Son Robert being born at Edinborough in
the Year 1648, was educated in France, and trained up in Literature, having
lived some Years with his Uncle at Paris, where the Papists were very active,
to bring him over to their Religion. But though in that tender Age he seemed a
little to hearken to them, yet growing up in Years, and so advancing in
Knowledge, he soon got a clear Sight of their Errors. During his Stay in
France, he not only became Master of the French, but also of the Latin Tongue.
And after he had been instructed in the Languages of the Learned, and other
Parts of humane Literature, he returned to Scotland; Whose Father embraces the
Doctrine of the Quakers.
but during his Absence, his Father had received the Doctrine of the Quakers,
and showed by his pious Behavior, that he had not therein acted
inconsiderately. Robert Barclay having attained the Age of Nineteen Years, and
being come to a good Maturity of Understanding, found so much Satisfaction in
the Religion which his Father made Profession of, that he also embraced it, and
openly showed before all the World that the despised Name of Quakers could not
hinder him from maintaining boldly that which now he apprehended to be Truth.
And so does he about the Age of ^9* and becomes a Publisher thereof.
Nay he grew ^o zealous and valiant in the Doctrine he now professed, that he
became a public Promulgator of it; and often engaged in Disputes with the
Scholars, not only verbally but also by writing; for he was so skilful in
School-Learning, that he was able to encounter the Learned with their own
Weapons, and of such quick Apprehension as not to be inferior to the refined
Wits; his Meekness also was eminent; and these Qualifications were accompanied
with so taking a Carriage as rendered him very acceptable to others. And though
his natural Abilities were great enough to have made him surpass others in
human Learning, and so to have beco^e famous among Men, yet he so little valued
that Knowledge, that he in no wise endeavored to be distinguished on that
Account. But his chief Aim was to advance in real Godliness, as the
Conversation I had with him has undoubtedly assured me: For I was well
acquainted with him.

As also with Roger Haydock of Lancashire, J. Haydock having received the
Doctrine of Truth among the Quakers, is instrumental in his Brother Roger's
convincement, and both bec^me public Preachers.
a learned and intelligent Man, who about this Time also came to enter into
Society with those called Quakers, whose Doctrine his eldest Brother John
Haydock had received before him: But it so happened, that Roger coming once to
his Father's House, was by his Mother put on to discourse with his Brother
John, in Hopes that thereby he might have been drawn off from the Way of the
Quakers. But John gave such weighty Reasons for what he asserted to be Truth,
that he quickly put Roger to Silence, which so displeased his Mother, who was
inclined to the Presbyterian Way, that she blamed him for not having held it
out longer against his Brother: But he told her, It Is Truth, I dare not say
against it. Being thus convinced, he also became a public Professor of the
Doctrine of the Quakers, and in Time a zealous Preacher of it too. And he being
a Man of great Parts, well read, and full of Matter, many Times engaged in
Disputes with the Priests, sometimes making Use of his Pen also to that End;
for he was an unwearied Labourer, and suffered the spoiling of his Goods, and
several Imprisonments; and though he was attended with bodily Weaknesses, yet he
did not use to spare himself, but traveled much to visit the Churches of
England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, etc. and he continued steadfast to the End
of his Days; nor only for which, but also because of a special Affection he
bore me, his Remembrance is dear to me still.

I must now make some Mention again of Miles Halhead, A Return to M. Halhead,
who coming into Devonshire, is brought before the Magistrates and dismissed.
sveral Times named in this History, who this Year coming into Devonshire, and
being brought before the Magistrates, it was asked him, What Business he (who
dwelt in Westmorland) had in Devonshire? To which he answered, That he was come
there to see his Old Friends, whom formerly about ten Years ago he had
Acquaintance with. One of the Magistrates asked him, What were the Names of
those Friends he meant? To which he returned, One Sir John Coplestone, who was
then High Sheriff of Devonshire, John Page, who was Mayor of Plymouth, one
Justice Howel, who was then the Judge of the Sessions of Exeter, and one
Colonel Buffet, who was also a Justice at that Time. One of the Magistrates
then said to the others, Truly, Gentlemen, though this Man calls these Men his
Friends, yet they have been his Persecutors. Another of the Magistrates then
gave him an Account into what pitiful Condition those Men were fallen, The
dismal Fate of Persecut^rs.
and how they lost their Estates; nay, Buffet had been committed to Prison for
High Treason, and was escaped out of Jail, and not to be seen in his own
Country. And further he said to Halhead, Thus I have given you a true Account
of your old Friends; if these Men were your Persecutors, you may be sure they
will trouble you no more: For if they that trouble you and persecute you, have
no better Fortune than these Men, I wish that neither I, nor any of my Friends,
may have any Hand in persecuting of you. And thus these discreet Magistrates
suffered him to go his Ways, without meddling with him. Neither was Persecution
now generally so hot in England, as it had been before, yet the Presbyterians
and some others durst not keep public Meetings, lest they should be fined; The
Artifice of Presbyterians, and some others, to escape Persecution.
but at Times when they have met for Worship, they have had Tobacco-Pipes,
Bread and Cheese, and cold Meat on the Table, having agreed beforehand, that
if the Officers came in upon them, they should leave their Preaching and
Praying, and fall to their Meat. This made G. Fox once say to one Pocock, whose
Wife was one of his Friends, G. Fox's Return upon such on that Occasion.
Is not this a Shame to you who persecuted and imprisoned us, and spoiled our
Goods, because we would not follow you, and be of your Religion, and called us
House-Creepers? Why, said Pocock, we must be wise as Serpents. To which G. F.
returned, This is the Serpent's Wisdom indeed. Who would ever have thought,
that you Presbyterians and Independants, who persecuted and imprisoned others,
for not following your Religion, now should flinch away your selves, and not
stand to, and own your own Religion.

G. Fox traveled this Year through England, He travels through England.
and visited his Friends in their Meetings. But I pass by his Occurrences.

This Year also came forth the Perpetual Edict, The perpetual Edict published
in Holland.
so called, in Holland, made as the Title recites, For the Maintenance of
Liberty, and for Preservation of the Unity, and the common Quiet of the Country
of Holland and West-Friesland. By this Edict the chief Command of the military
Forces of the States, and the Stadholdership, [or Deputy-ship] were separated.
This was on Purpose to prevent the Prince of Orange's becoming too potent: For
hereupon followed the Suppression of the Stadholdership. But how strong soever
this Law was made and confirmed by Oaths, yet afterward it was broke by the
Instigation of the Rabble, as will be seen in its due Time. This Year also a
Peace was concluded between England and Holland, not long after the Dutch had
burnt some of the King's Ships in the Thames.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The NINTH BOOK.
IN the Beginning of the Year 1668, William Penn, Son of Admiral Sir William
Penn, Some Account of W. Penn's Education and Convincement.
began to show himself openly an Adherer to, and Assertor of the Doctrine of
those called Quakers. He had been trained up in the University of Oxford, and
was afterward by his Father sent into France, where for some Time he lived (as
himself once told me) with the famous Preacher Moses Amyraut. After a
considerable Stay in that Kingdom, being returned and come into Ireland, he
once went to a Meeting of those called Quakers, which being disturbed, he, though
finely clothed as a young Gentleman, and wearing a great Perriwig, was with
others carried from thence to Prison, where by his Fellow Prisoners he was more
confirmed in that Doctrine which he already apprehended to be Truth. But when
it came to be known that he was the Son of Admiral Penn, he was soon released.
Yet this Change did not a little grieve his Father, who intended to have
trained him up for the Court; but now saw his eldest Son in the early Part
(being about the 22d Year) of his Age, entered into the Society of the despised
Quakers. Several Means were used, nay even his Necessaries were withheld from
him, to draw him off, if possible, and bring him to other Resolutions. Much
conversant with J. Coal.
But all Devices and Wiles proved in vain: For he continued steadfast, and
conversed much with Josiah Coal, who likewise in his young Years came over to
the Quakers.

This Summer Stephen Crisp was Prisoner at Ipswich, S. Crisp, a Prisoner at
Ipswich.
where the Number of Friends was considerably increased by his Ministry. I with
some other Friends of Holland visited him there in Prison, and we found him in
a cheerful Condition, as well contented as if he had been at Liberty: For he
suffered for the Ministry of the Gospel; and continued to preach in Prison,
when his Friends came to visit him.

The Journey which G. Fox made this Year through England and Wales I pass by.
Grace Church Street Meeting House built, at the opening whereof G. F. and the
Author were present, among others.
The latter Part of the Summer he returned to London, where with great
Satisfaction I heard him preach several Times before a numerous Auditory: For
about that Time the Meetings of Dissente^s were not disturbed at London; but
all was so quiet, that the Quakers so called were suffered to build a large
Meeting Place in Grace Church Street, where the first Time a Meeting was kept,
I was present, and saw G. Fox, and heard him preach there, besides some others.

Whilst he was at London, G. F. visits Marsh, Esquire where he has Discourse ab^ut
christening Children.
he gave a Visit to Esquire Marsh, who now was a Justice of the Peace in
Middlesex; and it so happened that he was at Dinner, when G. F. came to his
House, which so pleased him, that he kindly invited him to sit down with him to
Dinner; but G. F. courteously excused himself. There were at that Time several
great Persons at Table with Justice Marsh, who said to one of them, (a Papist)
Here is a Quaker you have not seen before. From this the said Papist took
Occasion to ask G. F. Whether he did own the Christening of Children? To which
G. F. answered, There was no Scripture for any such Practice. What! said he,
not for Christening Children? Nay, returned G. F. The (...) Baptism by the one
Spirit into one Body, we own; but to throw a little Water on a Child's Face,
and to call that bapti^ing and christening it, there is no Scripture for that.
Then the Roman Catholic asked him, Whether he did own the Catholic Faith? The
Catholic Faith.
Yes, said G. F. but he added, That neither the Pope, nor the Papists were in
that Catholic Faith; since the true Faith worked by Love, and purified the
Heart; and if they were in that Faith which gives Victory, by which they might
have Access to God, they would not talk to the People of a Purgatory after
Death; neither would they ever use Prisons, Racks, or Fines, to force others to
their Religion; because that was not the Practice of the Apostles and Primitive
Christians; but it was the Practice of the faithles^ Jews and Heathens, to use
such forcing Means. But continued G. F. Seeing thou art a great and leading Man
among the Papists, and say, There is no Salvation, but in your Church, I
desire to know of thee, what it is that brings Salvation in your Church. To
this the Roman Catholic answered, What brings Salvation.
A good Life. And nothing else? said G. F. Yes, replied the other, Good Works.
Is this your Doctrine and Principle, said G. F. Yes, said he. Then G. F.
replied, Neither Thou, nor the Pope, nor any of the Papists know, what it is
that brings Salvation. Then the Roman Catholic asked him, What brings
Salvation into your Church? G. F. answered, That which brought Salvation to the
Church in the Apostles Days; namely the Grace of God, which the Scripture says
brings Salvation, and has appeared to all Men; and teaches us to deny
Ungodliness and Worldly Lu^^^, and to live godly, righteously and soberly in
this present World. By this it appears, it is not the good Wor^^s, nor the good
Life, that brings the Salvation, but the Grace. Universality of Grace.
What! said the Roman Catholic, does this Grace, that brings Salvation, appear
unto all Men! Yes, said G. F. I deny that, returned the other. All that deny
that, replied G. F. are Sect-makers, and are not in the universal Faith, Grace,
and Truth, wihch the Apostles were in. Then the Roman Catholic began to speak
about the Mother Church; And about Mother Church.
which gave Occasion to much Discourse; and G. F. asserted, That if any outward
Place had Claim to be the Mother Church, above all other Churches, then
Jerusalem had much more Right to it than Rome. But in Conclusion he said, That
there was no other Mother Church but Jerusalem, which is above, and is free,
and which is the Mother of us all, See the Discourse more at large in G. Fox's
Journal page 323, 324.
as says the Apostle. Upon this Subject G. F. did so paraphrase, that Esquire
Marsh said at length to the Roman Catholic, O do you not know this Man. If he
would but come to Church nor and then, he would be a brave Man.

After some other Discourse together, G. F. got an Opportunity to go aside with
the said Marsh into another Room, and to desire that he who had much of the
Management of Affairs, would prevent the Persecution of his Friends as much as
possibly he could. Marsh showed himself not averse to this, but said, He was in
a Straight how to act between the Quakers, and some other Dissenters. For, said
he, You say, ye cannot swear, and the Independents, Baptists, and
Fifth-Monarchy People say, also, they cannot swear. The Difference between
those of other Persuasions and the Quakers, with respect to (...).
To this G. F. said, I will show thee, how to distinguish: The Members of those
Societies thou spakest of do swear in some Cases, but we cannot swear in any
Case. If any one should steal their Cows or Horses, and thou should ask them
whether they would swear they were theirs? Many of them would readily do it.
But if thou triest our Friends, they cannot swear for their own Goods.
Therefore when thou put the Oath of Allegiance to any of them, (...) them,
Whether they can swear in any other Case; as for their Cow or Horse* Which, if
they be really of us, they cannot do, though they can bear witness to the Truth.
Then G. F. gave him a Re^^tion of a Trial in Berkshire, Instanced in a
remarkable Case on a Trial in Berkshire, where the Prosecutor is premunired,
viz. A Thief having stolen two Beasts from one of these called Quakers, was
imprisoned: But somebody having informed the Judge that the Man that prosecuted
was a Quaker, and he (the Judge) perceiving that he would not swear, would not
hear what the Man could say, but tendered him the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, which the said Quaker refusing, the Judge premunired him, and let
the Thief go free. Esquire Marsh having heard this Relation, and the Thief let
go.
said, That Judge was wicked Man. And by what G. F. had told him, he
sufficiently perceived how he might distinguish between the Quakers and other
People. True it is, the Baptists in those Days made some Profession of the
Unlawfulness of Swearing; but when they came to be tried on that Account, they
soon desisted from that Part of their Profession, as will be shown more at
large in the Sequel. But they and the Independents, etc. were very loath to take
the Oath of Allegiance, because of a Grudge they had to the Government; and
this was well known to those that were at the Helm. But the innocent Quakers
were continually exposed to the Malice of their Persecutors, and bore the
hardest Shock of the Laws made against Dissenters. Justice Marsh's
extraordinary Kindness and Service to Friends.
But now Justice Marsh did not omit to free the Quakers from Persecution as
much as was in his Power: For he kept several from being premunired in those
Parts where he was a Justice. And when sometimes he could not avoid sending
those that were brought before him to Prison, he sent some only for a few
Hours, or for a Night. And even this was such hard Work to him, that at length
he told the King, He had sent some of the Quakers to Prison contrary to his
Conscience, and that he could not do so any more. He also advised the King to
give Liberty of Conscience; and he was so serviceable to stop the Violence of
Persecution, that about this Time, little was heard about disturbing of
Meetings.

About the Forepart of this Year, (if I mistake not) there happened ^ Case at
or nigh Ipswich, A very remarkable passage of a young Woman who murdered her
bastard Child, and being afterward convinced in Prison by J. C. died in a
sense of the Forgive-of her Sins.
which I cannot well pass by in Silence, viz. A certain young Woman being
delivered of a Bastard-Child, destroyed it, and was therefore committed to
Prison. Whilst she was in Jail, John Crook came to her, and entering into
Discourse, he asked her, Whether ^^ring the Course of her Life she had not many
times transgressed against her Conscience? And whether she had not often
thereupon felt secret Checks and inward Reproofs, and been troubled in her Mind
because of the Evil committed? And this he did in such a convincing Way, that
she not only assented to what he said before her, but his Discourse so reached
her Heart, that she came clearly to see, that if she had not been so stubborn
and disobedient to those inward Reproofs, in all Probability she would not have
come to such a miserable Fall as now she had: For Man not desiring the
Knowledge of God's Ways, and depa^ting from him, is left helpless, and cannot
keep himself from Evil, though it may be such as formerly he would have abhorred
in the highest Degree, and have said with Hazael, 2 Kings viii. 13.
What! Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great Thing? J. Crook thus
opening Matters to her, did by his wholesome Admonition so work upon her Mind,
that she who never had conversed with the Quakers, and was altogether ignorant
of their Doctrine, now came to apprehend that it was the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, which she so often had withstood; and that this Grace had not
yet quite forsaken her, but now made her sensible of the Greatness of her
Transgression. This Consideration wrought so powerfully, that from a most
grievous Sinner now she became a true Penitent, and with hearty Sorrow she
cried to the Lord, that it might please him not to hide his Countenance. And
continuing in this State of Humiliation, and sincere Repentance, and
persevering in Supplication, she felt in Time some Ease; and giving heed to the
Exhortations of J. Crook, she attained at length to a sure Hope of Forgiveness
by the precious Blood of the immaculate Lamb, who died for the Sins of the
World. Of this she gave manifest Proofs at her Trial before judge Matthew Hale,
who having heard how penitent she was, would fain have spared her, having on
purpose caused to be inserted in the Indictment, that she had committed the
Fact wilfully and designedly. But she being asked according to the Form,
Guilty, or Not Guilty? readily answered, Guilty. This astonished the Judge, who
purposely had got the Words wilfully and designedly inserted in the Indictment,
that from hence she might find Occasion to deny the Charge, and so to quash the
Indictment; and therefore he told her, That she seemed not duly to consider
what she said; since it could not well be believed that such a one as she, who
it may be inconsiderately had roughly handled her Child, should have killed it
wilfully and designedly. Here the Judge opened a Backdoor for her to avoid the
Penalty of Death. But now the Fear of God had got so much Room in her Heart,
that no tampering would do; no Fig Leaves could serve her for a Cover; for she
knew now that this would have been adding Sin to Sin, and to cover herself with
a Covering, but not of God's Spirit; and therefore she plainly signified to the
Court, That indeed she had committed the mischievous Fact intendedly, thereby
to hide her Shame; and that she having sinned thus grievously, and being
affected now with true Repentance, she could by no means excuse her self, but
was willing to undergo the Punishment the Law required; and therefore she could
not but acknowledge her self guilty, since otherwise how could she expect
Forgiveness from the Lord? This undisguised and free Confession being spoken
with a serious Countenance, did so affect the Judge, that Tears trickling down
his Face, he sorrowfully said, Woman, such a Case as this I never met with
before; perhaps you, who are but young, and speak so piously, as being struck
to the Heart with Repentance, might yet do much Good in the World; but now you
force me, that ex officio I must pronounce Sentence of Death against you, since
you will admit of no Excuse. Standing to what she had said, the Judge
pronounced Sentence of Death. And when afterward she came to the Place of
Execution, she made a pathetical Speech to the People, exhorting the
Spectators, especially those that were young, To have the Fear of God before
their Eyes, to give heed to his secret Reproofs for Evil, and so not to grieve
and resist the good Spirit of the Lord; which she her self not having timely
minded, it had made her run on in (...); and thus going on from Wickedness to
Wickedness, it had brought her to this dismal Exit. But since she firmly
trusted to God's infinite Mercy, nay surely believed her Sins, though of a bloody
Dye, to be washed off by the pure Blood of Christ, she could contentedly depart
this Life. Thus she preached at the Gallows the Doctrine of the Quakers so
called, and gave Heart-melting Proofs, that her immortal Soul was to enter into
Paradise, as well as anciently that of the Thief on the Cross. I have been
credibly informed by a Person who had it from the Mouths of such as were
present at the Execution, that in her Request to God she prayed, that it might
please him to give a visible Sign, that she was received into his Favor. And
that though it was then a cloudy Day, yet immediately after she was turned off,
the Clouds broke a little, and the Sun for a few Moments shined upon her Face,
and presently after ceased shining, and the Sky continued overcast. She thus in
a serious Frame of Mind suffered Death, which her Crime justly deserved.

This Year at London died Thmas Lo, The dying Words of T. Lo to W. Penn.
a Man of an excellent Gift, who zealously had labored in the Ministry of the
Gospel in Ireland, and by his preaching had brought many over into the Society
of his Friends, and among others also, William Penn, to whom on his Deathbed
he spoke thus, Bear thy Cross, and stand faithful to God; then he will give
thee an everlasting Crown of Glory that shall not be taken from thee. There is
no other Way which shall prosper, than that which the holy Men of old have
walked in. God has brought Immortality to Light, and Life immortal is felt.
Glory, Glory to him, for he is worthy of it. His Love overcomes my Heart, nay
my Cup runs over: Glory be to his Name for ever. No Wonder that this Speech of
one that was at the Point of entering into Eternity, 1668
confirmed William Penn exceedingly in that Doctrine, which he had now embraced
as Truth. To his Friends.
At another Time, Thomas Lo said to his Friends that stood at his Bedside, Be
not troubled, the Love of God overcomes my Heart. And to George Whitehead and
others he said, The Lord is good to me; And to G. Whitehead, etc.
this Day he has covered me with his Glory. I am weak, but am refreshed to see
you. The Lord is good to me. Another Friend asking, how it was with him, he
answered, I am near leaving you, I think; but am as well in my Spirit as I can
desire: I bless the Lord: I never saw more of the Glory of God than I have done
this Day. And when it was thought that he was departing, he began to sing
Praises to the Lord, saying, Glory, glory to thee for ever! Which did not a
little affect the Standers by, thus to hear a dying Man sing. And in this
glorious State he departed this Life the 5th of October.

Now since Persecution was at a Stand this Year at London, Persecution ceasin^
other Dissenters inveigh against the Quakers.
those of other Persuasions sometimes bitterly inveighed from the Pulpit
against the Quakers, and would challenge them also to a Dispute. William Burnet
and Jeremy Ives, eminent Baptist Teachers, had encountered George Whitehead
this Summer at Chertsey and Horn in Surry, about the Resurrection, and Christ's
Body in Heaven, endeavoring to blacken the Quakers in respect of those Points,
W. Burnet and J. Ives engage G. Whitehead, about the Resurrection and Christ
Body.
because they kept to Scripture-Words, from which the others departing,
advanced very gross Absurdities.

One Thomas Vincent, a Presbyterian Teacher, was much disturbed because some of
his Auditory were gone over to the Society of the Quakers; and to render them
odious, he and his Fellow-Teachers accused them of erroneous Doctrine
concerning the Trinity; T. Vincent angry at losing some of his Hearers, ^harges
the Quakers with false Doctrine about the Trinity, and thereupon a Dispute
ensued.
and this was chiefly because they did not approve of such Expressions as were
not to be ^ound in the Holy Scriptures, as that of Three Persons. On this
Subject a Dispute was held in the Presbyterian Meeting House at London, between
the said Vincent on one Side, and George Whitehead on the other. That which
Vincent and his Brethren advanced first, was an Accusation, That the Quakers
held damnable Doctrine. George Whitehead denying this, would have given the
People an Information of the Principles of his Friends; but Vincent instead
thereof, stated this Question, Do you own one Godhead, subsisting in three
distinct and separate Persons? Whitehead and those with him denying this as an
unscriptural Doctrine, Vincent framed this Syllogism.

There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three are one.

These are either three Manifestations, three Operations, three Substances, or
three Somethings else besides Subsistences.

But they are not three Manifestations, three Operations, three Substances, nor
three any things else besides Subsistences.

Ergo, Three Subsistences.

G. Whitehead rejected these Terms, as not to be found in Scripture, nor
deduceable from I John v. 7. the Place Vincent instanced. And therefore he
desired an Explanation of those Terms, insomuch as God did not use to wrap up
his Truths in heathenish Metaphysics, but in plain Language. But whatever was
said, no better Explanation could be obtained than Person, or the Mode of a
Substance. G. Whitehead and William Penn, who also was there, alleged several
Places from Scripture, proving God's complete Unity: And they queried How God
was to be understood, if in an abstracted Sense from his Substance? But instead
of answering the Question, they concluded it a Point more fit for Admiration
than Disputation. Then W. Penn denied the Minor Proposition of Vincent's
Syllogism; for said he, No one Substance can have three distinct Subsistences,
and preserve its own Unity: For every Subsistence will have its own Substance;
so that three distinct Subsistences, or Manners of Beings will require three
distinct Substances or Beings; consequently three Gods: For if the infinite
Godhead subsists in three separate Manners or Forms, then is not any one of
them a perfect and complete Subsistence without the other two: So Parts, and
something finite it in God; or if infinite, then three distinct infinite
Subsistences; and what is this, but to assert three Gods, since none is
infinite but God? On the contrary, there being an Inseparability betwixt the
Substance and its Subsistence, the Unity of Substance will not admit a Trinity
of incommunicable or distinct Subsistences. After several Words on both Sides,
G. Whitehead, to bring this strange Doctrine nearer to the Capacity of the
People, comparing their three Persons to three Apostles, said, He did not
understand, how Paul, Peter, and John could be three Persons and one Apostle.
At which one Maddocks, one of Vincent's Assistants, framed this odd Syllogism,
He that scornfully and reproachfully compares our Doctrine of the blessed
Trinity of Father, Son, and Spirit, one in Essence, but three in Persons, to
three finite Men, as Paul, Peter, and John, is a Blasphemer. But you G.
Whitehead have done so. Ergo. A rash Conclusion; but how firm, let the
judicious Reader determine. I have no Mind to enter farther into this Quarrel,
since the Parties on both Sides went away unsatisfied: For Vincent had not been
able to prove the Doctrines of the Quakers damnable, as he had asserted. But
his Passion had transported him, as well as when he said from the Pulpit to
those of his Society, That he had as lief they should go to a Bawdy House, as
to frequent the Quakers Meetings, because of their erroneous and damnable
Doctrines. And pointing to the Window, he farther said, If there should stand a
Cup of Poison, I would rather drink it, than suck in their damnable Doctrines.
But this untimely Zeal did not profit him; for it gave Occasion to some of his
Hearers to enquire into the Doctrines of the Quakers; and thus some came to be
convinced of the Truth thereof.

Now since the foresaid Dispute made a great Noise at London, On this Occasion
W. Penn publishes a Book called the Sandy-Foundation shaken.
William Penn published a Book with this Title, The Sandy Foundation shaken, in
which he explained the Points controverted, and defended his Posit^tions with
good Reason and the Holy Scripture. But yet this Book, which he himself spread,
caused such a Stir, that it was evil spoken of, and not long after he was
committed to the Tower, and some of thought it was not without his Father's
being acquainted with it, For which he is sent to the Tower.
perhaps to prevent a worse Treatment.

This was at the latter End of the Year, The Character of J. Coal, with some
of his dying Words.
about which Time Josiah Coal fell into a Sickness, which took him off the
Stage of this Life: He had languished long, and yet did not at all spare his
Voice, but was used both in preaching and praying so to raise it, that he spent
his natural Strength exceedingly, though he was yet as in a flourishing Age; nay,
it was his Life and Joy to declare the Gospel, and to proclaim the Word of God,
for which he had an excellent Ability: And when he spoke to the ungodly World,
an awful Gravity appeared in his Countenance, and his Words were like a Hammer
and a sharp Sword. But though he was as a Son of Thunder, yet his agreeable
Speech flowed from his Mouth like a pleasant Stream, to the Consolation and
Comfort of pious Souls. Oh! how pathetically have I heard him pray, when he, as
transported and ravished, humbly beseeched God, that it might please him to
reach to the hard-hearted, to support the Godly, and to preserve them
steadfast: Nay, with what a charming and melodious Voice did he sound forth the
PraiseS of the Most High in his public Prayers! But his Work was now done, he
had finished his Course, and a Time of Rest from his Labors was rome. Although
he grew weak, yet his manly Spirit and great Courage bore him up for some Time;
but his Disease, which soem'd to be a kind of Consumption, at length so
increased, that he was fain to keep within Doors for several Weeks; then
mending a little, he went abroad again, and came into a Meeting in London,
where I beheld his Countenance much unlike what it used to be, for it clearly
manifested his bodily Indisposition: Nevertheless he preached with a godly
Zeal, and his salutary Exhortations flowed like a Stream from his Lips, which
seemed to be touched with a Coal from the Altar of Heaven, whilst he was
preaching the Gospel, to the Edification of his Heare^s. Now he began to lift
up his Voice again to that Degree, that judging from thence, one would have
supposed him to have been pretty well restored: But the Ground of his Distemper
not being taken away, he was soon necessitated to keep at home again; and his
natural Strength wasted away so fast, and he so declined, that his Death began
to be expected, which not very long after fell out accordingly. A little before
he died, G. Fox being come to see him, asked him, Whether any thing lay upon
him to write to the Friends in England? But he signified that he had nothing to
write, only desired that his Love might be remembered to them, and desired G.
Fox to pray to God, that he might have an easy Passage, for he felt his End
approaching. He having complied with his Desire, and seeing him begin to be
heavy, bid him go and lie on the Bed; which J. Coal did; but finding this, as
it seems, more uneasy, with the Help of his Friends he rose again, and sat on
the Side of the Bed; and his Friends sitting about him, he felt himself so
lively and powerfully raised, that he spoke to them after this manner;

Well Friends, be faithful to God, and a have single Eye to his Glory, and seek
nothing for self, or your own Glory, and if any Thing of that arise, judge it
down by the Power of the Lord God, that so ye may be clear in his Sight, and
answer his witness in all People; then will ye have the Reward of Life. For my
Part, I have walked in Faithfulness with the Lord; and I have thus far finished
my Testimony, and have Peace with the Lord: His Majesty is with me, and his
Crown of Life is upon me. So mind my Love to all Friends. Then he ceased
speaking; and a little Time after he said to Stephen Crisp, Dear Heart, keep
low in the holy Seed of God, and that will be thy Crown for ever. After a (...)
Pause, he said, A Minister of Christ must walk as he walked. A little
afterward ^ain^ing, His Death on the y^th of the 11th Month called January,
1668.9.
and being stayed by his Friends, he departed away in their Arms, without the
least Sigh or Groan, but as one falling into a sweet Sleep; and being filled
with heavenly Consolations, he passed from this mortal Life to that which is
immortal, having attained the Age of thirty five Years, and two Months, and
preached the Gospel about twelve Years. He had traveled much in the
West Indies, sustained great Hardships, and labored in the Ministry at his own
Charge, being freely given up to spend his Substance in the Service of the
Lord. And though he went through many Persecutions, Imprisonments, and other
Adversities, yet he was always valiant, and not afraid of Danger; and continued
in an unmarried State, that so he might the more freely labor in the heavenly
Harvest, and many were converted by his Ministry. He lived to see the Desire of
his Heart accomplished: for when first he was raised up to true Godliness,
being under the sense of his former Transgression, he cried to the Lord for
Deliverance, and said with David, If thou, Psalm xl. 13^
O God, wilt help thoroughly, then will I teach Transgressors thy Ways, and
Sinners shall be converted unto thee. He had been long in a mournful State,
though naturally of a cheerful Temper; and having himself passed through a Path of
Sorrow, he was the more able to comfort the Mourners of Zion. The Church was
very sensible of this great Loss: and I have Reason to think his Corpse was
attended to the Grave by more than a Thousand of his Friends, among whom I was
then one; and his Burial being very public and well known, drew the Eyes of
many Spectators toward it. Let none think it strange that I have here
expatiated somewhat largely, seeing he was indeed dear to me, and I have his
kind Usage yet in fresh Remembrance; for the Piety of my Mother, whom he had
seen in England, caused him to give me Marks of the Esteem he bore to her
Memory: And his excellent Endowments so affected me, that I was eager to go to
that Meeting where I heard he was likely to be; nay, I imagined I saw something
in him so extraordinary valuable, that I bore a very reverent Respect to him,
and the more because Differen^^ of Age deprived me of a familiar Conversation
with him.

On the 20th of then 11th Month called January, 1668-9, Account of the Death of
F. Howgil. 1668-9.
Francis Howgil, after a Sickness of nine Days, died in the Prison at Appleby,
where he had been kept about five Years. During his Sickness he was in perfect
good Understanding, and often very fervent in Prayer, uttering many comfortable
Expressions, to the great Refreshment of those about him. He was often heard to
say, That he was content to die, and praised God for the many sweet Enjoyments
and Refreshments he had received in that his Prison-house-bed, whereon he lay,
freely forgiving all who had a Hand in his Restraint. And said he, This was the
Place of my first Imprisonment for the Truth, here at this Town; and if it be
the Place of my laying down the Body, I am content. Several Persons of Note,
Inhabitants of Appleby, as the Mayor, and others, came to visit him; and some
of these praying that God might speak Peace to his Soul, he returned, He has
done it. About ^wo Days before his Departure, being attended by his Wife, and
several of his Friends, he said to them, Friends, as to Matter of Words ye must
not expect much more from me, neither is there any great Need of it, as to
speak of Matters of Faith to you who are satisfied: Only that ye remember my
dear Love to all Friends who enquire of me; for I ever loved Friends well, or
any in whom Truth appeared. Truly God will own his People, as he has ever
hitherto done, and as we have daily witnessed; for no sooner had they made that
Act of Banishment, to the great Suffering of many good Friends, but the Lord
stirred up Enemies against them, whereby the Violence of their Hands was taken
off. I say again, God will own his People, even all those that are faithful.
And its for (...), I am well and content to die. I am not at all afraid of
Death; but one Thing was of late in my Heart, and that I intended to have
written to George Fox and others, even that which I have observed, viz. That
this Generation passes fast away: We see many good and precious Friends within
these few Years (...) been taken from us; and therefore Friends had need to
watch, and be very faithful, so that we may leave a good, and not a bad Savor
to the next succeeding Generation; for we see that it is but a little Time that
any of us have to stay here, A few Hours before he departed, some Friends from
other Places being come to visit him, he enquired about their Welfare, and
prayed fervently, with many heavenly Expressions, That the Lord by his mighty
Power might preserve them out of all such things as would spot and defile. His
Voice then by Reason of his great Weakness failed him, and a little after he
recovering some Strength, said, I have sought the Way of the Lord from a Child,
and lived innocently as among Men; and if any enquire concerning my latter End,
let them know that I die in the Faith in which I lived, and suffered for. After
these; Words he spoke some others in Prayer to God, and so sweetly finished his
Days in Peace with the Lord, in the Fiftieth Year of his Age.

He left a good Name behind him amongst all who knew him. -- Some Time before
his Sickness, considering this mutable State, and finding in himself some decay
of Nature, he made his Will, in which, as his Love was very dear to his
Brethren, with whom he had labored in the Ministry, so he gave to each of them
a Remembrance of his Love; he left also a Legacy to his poor Friends in those
Parts were he lived.

For although his moveable Goods were forfeited to the King for ever, yet the
Confiscation of his real Estate was only for Life; so that from thence having
something left, he could dispose of it by his Will.

During his Imprisonment he neglected not to comfort and strengthen his
Brethren by writing, 1669
Effecting that by his Pen, which he could not by Word of Mouth: Writes a
Treatise called, Oaths no Gospel Ordinance. And Advice as his last Will to his
Daughter.
He also defended his Doctrine against these who opposed the same; and among
others he writ a large Treatise against Oaths, contradicting the Opinion of
those who Account it lawful to swear under the Gospel.

About two Years before his Decease, he writ an Epistle of Advice and Counsel
as his last Will and Testament to his Daughter Abigail, a Child whom he much
loved, who was born in a Time of deep Exercises and Trouble, which nevertheless
by the Lord's Goodness he was patiently brought through; wherefore he named this
Child Abigail, signifying, The Father's Joy: In this Testament he gave her
Instructions for the future Conduct of her Life, the Beginning whereof is thus;

Daughter Abigail, this is for thee to observe and keep, and take heed unto all
the Days of thy Life, for the regulating thy Life and Conversation in this
World, that thy Life may be happy, and thy End blessed, and God glorified by
thee in thy Generation. I was not born to great Possessions, or did inherit
great Matters in this World; but the Lord has always endowed me with
Sufficiency and Enough, and has been as a tender Father unto me, because my
Heart trusted in him, and did love the Way of Righteousness from a Child. -- My
Counsel unto thee is, that thou remember thy Creator in the Days of the Youth,
and fear the Lord in thy Youth, and learn to know him and serve him all thy
Days: First seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof; it is not far
from thee; it is within thee; it consists in Life and Power, and it stands in
Righteousness, Truth and Equity, Justice, Mercy, Long-suffering, Patience,
Love, Light, and Holiness, this is the Being and Center thereof; therefore seek
not Lo here, or Lo there without thee, in this or that outward Observation, for
many seek there and never find it; but seek and thou shall find, wait and thou
shall receive. If thou enquire, In what must I seek, and what must I wait in?
And how must I seek? I inform thee, that thou must silence all thy own
Thoughts, and thou must turn thy Mind to that which is pure, and holy, and good
within thy self, and seek and wait in that in the Light of Jesus Christ,
wherewith thou art enlightened, which shows thee when thou do Evil, and checks
and reproves; take Heed unto that, and it will show the evil Motions and
Thoughts; and as thou love it, it will subdue them, and preserve thee for the
time to come out of Evil: For though thou be born into the World a reasonable
Creature, yet thou must be born again, and be made a (...) Creature, or else
thou can not enter into God's Kingdom; thou must know the Seed of the Kingdom
in thy self, of which thou must be born and formed (...) into God's Image. I
have told thee God has sown it in thee, a Grain of it, a Measure of it, a
Portion of if, a Measure of Light and Truth, of Righteousness and Holiness;
keep in thy Mind to that, and love it, and thou will feel the heavenly Father
working in thee, and begetting thee to Life through Jesus Christ that has
enlightened thee, and thou will feel the Power of the Lord strengthening thee in
thy Little, and making thee to grow in the immortal Seed of his Kingdom, and
outgrow and overgrow all Evil, so that thou will daily die to that, and have no
Pleasure in it, but in the Lord, and in his Goodness and Virtue shed abroad in
thy Heart, which thou will taste and feel within, and have Joy and Comfort
therein: Love the Lord with thy Heart and Soul, even him that made thee, and
gave thee a Being, and all Things in Heaven and Earth; and still wait for the
Knowledge of him in thy self, he is not far from thee, but near unto thee, and
unto all that call upon him in an upright Heart; and do thou enquire of thy
dear Mother, she will inform thee, she knows him and the Way to Life and Peace,
and hearken to her Instructions: God is a Spirit, of Light, and Life, and
Power: He that searches the Heart, and shows thee when thou do, or think,
or speak Evil, and shows unto Man and Woman their Thoughts: That which shows
the Evil is good, and that which shows a Lie is Truth; this is within, take
Heed to it; this is called God's Spirit in the Scripture; believe in it, love
it, and it will quicken thy Heart to Good, and it will subject the Evil: Here
is thy Teacher near thee, love it; and if thou act contrary, it will condemn
thee; therefore take Heed unto this Spirit of Truth, and it will enlighten and
enliven thee, and it will open thy Understanding, and give thee to know what
God is, and to do that which is good and acceptable in his Sight; this Spirit
never errs, but leads out of all Error into all Truth. Be sober minded in thy
Youth, and wait on the Lord within, hearken unto him. God is Light immortal,
Life immortal, Truth immortal, an everlasting eternal Spirit: He speaks
spiritually and invisibly within the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women;
hear what he speaks, and obey his Voice, and thy Soul shall live; fear to
offend him, or sin against him, for the Wages of Sin are Death; therefore prize
his Love in thy young and tender Years, and do thou read the Scriptures, and
Friends Books, and take Heed to what thou read to obey it, as far as thou
understandest, and pray often unto the Lord, that he will give thee his
Knowledge, and open thy Understanding in the things of his Kingdom; search thy
Heart often with the Light of Christ in thee, manifest and bring thy Deeds to
it, that they may be tried; and examine thy self, how the Case stands betwixt
the Lord and thee; and if thou see thy self wrong, humble thy self, and ^e
sorry, and turn unto him, and he will show thee Mercy, and take Heed for the
Time to come, that thou run not into the same Evil again; keep thy Heart clean,
watch against the Evil in thy self, in that which shows it; therein there is
Power, and thereby thou have Power to overcome all Evil. And, dear Child, mind
not the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Moment, and the End is Misery;
but keep under and cross thy Will and Affection, so thy Mind will have no
Pleasure in the Evil but in Good, and thou will feel the immortal Seed
springing up in thee, which God's Peace and Love is to. Oh Child, these are
great and weighty Things, not to be slighted. Accompany thy self always with
them that fear the Lord, and fear and worship him in Spirit and Truth, and lead
a holy and blameless Life and Conversation; deny them not, but love them, and
suffer with them. Take heed that thou follow not the Hireling Teachers, who
preach for Gain and Lucre, and abide not in Christ's Doctrine; believe them
not, heed them not, they do People no Good; but thou will see them thy self,
they have an Outside Show of Godliness sometimes, but deny the Power of God and
true Holiness; remember I have told thee, who have had perfect Knowledge of
them. But be sure that thou let nothing separate thy Love from God and his
People; those are his People that keep his Law, and obey Christ's Voice, and
lead a holy Life, and they were ever hated, and belied, and persecuted, and
evi1-spoken on always by had and evil loose People; these are God's People, and
his Love, and Peace, and Blessing is with them; do thou grow as a natural
Branch (up among them) of the living Vine, and continue all thy Days in
Obedience unto God's Will, and thou will feel Joy and Love in thy Heart, which
above all things covet after, and thou shall attain and obtain everlasting
Peace, which the Lord grant unto thee, according to the Riches of his Mercy and
Love, which endure for ever and ever. Amen.

And now Abigail, concerning thy well-being in this Life, this is my Advice and
Counsel unto thee: Love thy dear Mother, and ever obey her and honor her, and
see thou grieve her not; be not stubborn nor wilful, but submit unto her, and
be as an obedient Child unto her, whose Love and Care has been too great ever
thee and thy Sisters, which has brought too much Trouble upon her self; learn
in thy Youth to read and write, and sew, and knit, and all Points of good
Labor that belong to a Maid; and flee Idleness and Sloth, that nourishes Sin;
and as thou growest up in Years, labor in the Affairs of the Country, and
beware of Pride, and Riotousness, and Curiosity, but he well content with such
Apparel as thy Mother will permit thee, and as thou may be a good Example
unto others. Be not wanton, nor wild, nor light, but temperate, moderate, and
chaste, and not forward in Words nor Speech, but swift to hear, slow to speak;
and do thou always live with thy Mother, and be a Help unto her, and cherish
her in her old Age and latter Years, that she may be comforted in thee, and her
Soul may bless thee. Love thy Sisters, and be always courteous to them and thy
Brother, encourage one another in Good: And if thou live to be a Woman of
perfect Years, keep thy self unspotted, and let not thy Mind out after Sports
n^ Pastimes, the End (...) all those is Sorrow, neither of young Men; if thou
have a Desire to marry, do not thou seek a Husband, but let a Husband seek
thee* and if thou live in God's Fear, and an honest Life and virtuous, them
that fear God will seek unto thee; let not thy Affections out unto every one
that profers Love, but be considerate, and above all things choose one (if thou
do marry) that loves and fears the Lord, whose Conversation thou know, and
Manner and Course of Life well before thou give Consent* be discreet and wise,
hide nothing from thy Mother, and she will advise thee, no Doubt, for thy Good;
and if she be living, marry not without her Consent; and if thou join to a
Husband, be sure thou love him in thy Heart, and be obedient unto him, and
honor him among all, so will his Heart be more to thee, and his Love increase;
grieve him not, but be gentle, and ^asy to be entreated, and mind thy own
Business; and if the Lord give thee Children, bring them up in God's Fear, and
good Exercise, and keep them in Subjection unto thee, and be an Example of
Virtue and Holiness unto them, that the Lord's Blessing thou may feel in
Youth and in Age, and all thy Life long. O Abigail, remember these things, keep
in Mind these Things, read often this Writing over, get it copied over, and lay
up my Words in thy Heart, and do them, so will thou be happy in this Life, and
in the Life to come; these things I give thee in Change to observe, as my Mind,
and Will, and Counsel unalterable unto thee, as Witness hereof I have set my
Hand,

Thy dear Father, Francis Howgil.
The 26th of the 5th Month, 1666.

In the Beginning of this Year, A Yearly Meeting at London.
the Members of this Society held a General Yearly Meeting at London, which
since that Time has been used to be held there annually in the Week called
Whitson-Week, because at that Time of the Year it is commonly best traveling,
etc. Several are deputed from all Places to this Meeting, and what concerns the
Church in general is there treated on.

Persecution for Religion seemed now to be at a Stand, which displeased some of
the most rigid Sort of Churchmen, which we not only have already, but may again
in due Place demonstrate.

About this Time (as I take it) a certain Bishop said occasionally, That the
Quakers, by their unlimited Freedom, increased much, and therefore it was very
needful to take Care of them, seeing they often had much greater Assemblies
than the national Church; for, said he, at such a Time I preached my self, and
there were but a few Hearers, when at the same Time the Quakers Meeting just by
was crowded full; and thereupon he desired them to consider whether it was not
high Time to stop these Sectaries. After he had set forth his Matter at large,
another Lord then present among others, said, That indeed it seemed that the
Lord Bishop had spoken what was very reasonable, that the Sectaries had often
more Hearers than the national Church-Preachers, and that it was not strange to
him that it displeased him, since he took so much upon himself; for, said he,
his Lordship observed, That he preached himself; A witty Turn upon a Bishop,
and the professed Quakers, who had such great Assemblies, preached Christ
Jesus, and therefore are no Wonder they had the more Hearers. -- This was such
a witty Turn upon the Bishop, as no Doubt made him so sensible as not to think
fit to enter upon the Debate in ^ doubtful Dispute; for it is observable, this
Lord's Turn upon the Bishop was chiefly to stop him from promoting Persecution.

This Spring G. F. traveling to York, G. F. travels in the North of England,
thence to Leverpool, and so into Ireland with Tho. Briggs, etc.
went through several other Places in the North of England, and although he came
near to his old Enemy, Col. Kirby, who had a Fit of the Gout, and had threatened
him, yet he passed on unmolested. So he went to Leverpool, whence he, with some
of his Friends, passed over for Ireland: Among others were Thomas Briggs and
John Stubbs; and being arrived at Dublin, he was kindly received by his
Friends; and journeying into the Country, he met with no small Opposition from
the Papists, (of whom there are many there.) Being come to a certain Place,
Where he is opposed by the Papists, and challenges the Jesuits, etc. to prove
their Wafer God.
he challenged the Jesuits, Priests and Monks to try whether their God which
they make of a Wafer be an immortal God, but they could not be brought to it;
wherefore he said they were worse than Baal's Priests, for Baal's Priests tried
their God. Then he went to Cork, where they had Knowledge of his coming, and
intended to take him Prisoner; for the Quakers in Ireland were many Years
sharply persecuted, Then he goes to Cork.
as their Brethren were in England, of which to mention all Circumstances, it
would make a very large Treatise. At this Time there were many Prisoners at
Cork, Where Sam. Thornton, and near 80 more are severely treated by the Mayor
M. Dean.
among whom was Samuel Thornton, with whom I was well acquainted, who being met
with his Friends in a Chamber, one First Day, the Officer Quinnal came and shut
the Door of the Room, and locked them in, to the Number of eighty Persons, and
carried the Key to the Mayor Matthew Dean, who gave Order that there should
neither Victuals nor Drink be carried to them, and they could only get what was
pulled up with Ropes through the Grate, or thrown in through a Hole: Under this
Chamber the Soldiers were ordered to keep Guard, that none might get away, and
they made so great a Smoke, that many of the Prisoners were sick, among whom
were some weakly old People, and some Women with Child, and Nurses, who were
almost stifled; and Complaint thereof being made to the Mayor, he answered in a
scoffing Manner, They are all Brethren and Sisters, let them lie upon one
another; and if they are stifled it is their own Fault. Thus they were kept 24
Hours, and afterward some of them made Prisoners.

Solomon Eccles, A Relation of some bold and zealous Attempts of S. Eccles.
whom I also knew very well, was this Year in Prison at Galloway in Ireland,
where he was put by a strange Accident. He was an extraordinary zealous Man,
and what he judged Evil he warmly opposed, even to the Hazard of his Life. This
Zeal led him to perform a strange Action in a Chapel of the Papists without
the Town; for he went naked above his Waste, with a C^a^ingdish of Coals and
burning Brimstone on his Head, and entered the Chapel when all the People were
on their Knees to pray to their Idol, and spoke as follows, W^ to these
idolatrous Worshippers! God has sent me this Day to warn you, and to show you
what will be your Portion except you repent: Which when he had done, he went
away to the Town, where he was presently made a Prisoner. What the Benefit of
this strange Action might be, I leave.

Amongst the Martyrs of the Reformed, W. Gardener of Lisbon Martyr.
we find some instances of Persons zealous to a strange Degree, as of William
Gardener at Lisbon, and Bertrand le Blas at Tournay, whose Actions were not
less remarkable; for this last's snatching the Host from the Priest in their
Church as they were at Mass, A bold Attempt of Bertrand le Blas of Tournay.
was certainly a bold Attempt, and not Praiseworthy, if it was only an Act of
human Contrivance; but I shall leave the Judgment thereof unto God, as I
account it safest, and the rather, because under the sharpest Punishment they
could inflict, they seemed not to shrink, but rather to be strongthened.
However so sharp a Trial did not fall to Eccles's Portion, and I think it safer
not to judge hastily of this uncommon Performance. He was, to my Knowledge, a
bold and undaunted Man; and before this Action in the Chapel, as above, he did
something of a like Nature at London at the Fa^^-time, amongst the Plays; where
he suffered much by the Coachmens whipping him grievously on his naked ^ack;
but that could not allay his fervent Zeal, which was kindled, not only against
the immodest and ungo^ly Carriage of the pretended Fools, but also against
those other Vanities there used. To what Height his Zeal carried him, the
following Instance will show: He who had been a Member of the Church of
England, and then went to the Presbyterians, and afterward among the
Independents, and after that was a Baptist, had been an eminent Musician, so
that by his Art he could get near 150 ^. a Year; but at last being a Quaker^ he
could not follow for Conscience Sake what he now called his Babylonish Trade of
Music; wherefore he learned to make Clothes to get his Living by, and ^old his
musical Books and Instruments: But (as he declared) he had no Peace in his
Conscience; for observing them to be Instruments of Vanity, he judged they
ought to be destroyed, and therefore bought them again, although they were worth
above 20 l. and carried them, viz Virginals, Fiddles, etc. to Tower Hill, where
laying them together, he set Fire to them, but when some who were by,
endeavored to hinder him, and to get one of the Virginals away, he stamped upon
it with his Foot, and would not rest until he had destroyed it; and after that
he said he found Peace in his Conscience, having made an Offering of that which
he once entirely loved, and in the Use of which he was educated; for not only
his Father and Grandfather, but his Grandfather's Father had been Musicians,
and he himself had the Name of an eminent Musick-Master.

Another Account we have of his strange Zeal: When he saw how the Quakers were
belied by William Burnet, Jeremy Ives, and Matthew Kaffin, Teacher^ amongst the
Baptists, as if they believed not in Christ, nor the Resurrection, he
challenged all the Teachers, and Priests, and Jesuits openly in a Book which he
printed, to come to a Proof with him who were the true Worshipers; first, to
fast seven Days and seven Nights, and neither to eat nor drink; and then the
Next seven Days not to sleep Day nor Night; but we may well think that none
were to be found to enter the Lists with him, nor to put themselves on such a
Test; and although some reckoned him out of his Wits, yet he was not; for I
remember the Time very well, and had many an Opportunity both to see and to
hear him speak.

I now return to G. F. at Cork in Ireland, G. F. passes unmolested through Cork,
travels through many other Places in Ireland, and returns to England.
where they intended to take him, nevertheless they let him go unmolested,
although he rid through the Market, by the Mayor's Door, who not only saw him but
said, There goes G. F. and yet let him pass quietly. After he had traveled
through many Places in Ireland, he came again to Dublin, from whence he returned
to England, and coming into Glocestershire, he heard at Nailsworth of a Report
which had been spread abroad in the Country, that he was turned Presbyterian,
and that they had prepared a Pulpit for him in an open Yard, A diver^ive Story
of G. F. being turned Presbyterian.
where he was to preach. G. F. hearing this, thought it very strange, whereupon
he went to the Place spoken of, where he indeed found a Pulpit; but the Case
was this. A certain Presbyterian Preacher, named John Fox, who went preaching
about the Country, was to preach there, and it seems some had changed his Name
from John to George, whereupon it was reported that he was turned from being a
Quaker to be a Presbyterian: This begat so great a Curiosity in the People,
that many went thither to hear this Quaker turned Presbyterian: so this John
Fox came to have a great Auditory, (of several Hundreds) who would not have
went a Foot to have heard him, had they known it. Now some Hundreds of them
hearing afterward that the real G. F. was not far off at a Meeting, they went
thither and were sober and attentive; where they were by him directed to the
Grace of God in themselves, which would teach them and bring them Salvation.
And when the Meeting was over, some of the People said, they liked G. F. the
Quaker's Preaching, better than G. F. the Presbyterian. Not long after this,
John Fox was complained of in the House of Commons, for having a tumultuous
Meeting, in which treasonable Words were spoken. This John Fox had formerly
been Priest of Marshfield in Gloucestershire and being put out of that Place,
was afterward permitted by a Common Prayer Priest to preach sometimes in his
Steeple-house; at length this Presbyterian Priest, presuming too far upon the
Parish-Priest's former Grant, began to be more bold than welcome, and would
have preached there whether the Parish Priest would or not; which caused a
great Bustle and Contest between the two Priests, and their Hearers on either
Sides, in which the Common Prayer Book was cut to Pieces, and it is said some
treasonable Words were then spoken by some of the Followers of this John Fox;
which Case was quickly put into the Newspapers, and some malicious
Presbyterians caused it to be so worded as if it had proceeded from G. F. the
Quaker; but some Members of the House of Commons certified it under their
Hands, than it was John Fox formerly Priest of Marshfield, who was complained
of to be the Ringleader of that unlawful Assembly.

After this G. F. traveled to Bristol, where he met with Margaret Fell, then a
Widow, who came thither to visit her Daughter Yeomans. He had before this,
intimated to her his Affection, and proposed taking her in Marriage at a
suitable Time; but though he had a Sense in himself, it was of the Lord, yet he
did not at first find a Freedom to accomplish the same; but all Obstructions
being now removed, he so proposed the Matter, that if she was willing to give
her Consen^, that the same should be accomplished, she might first send for her
Children; who being come, he asked both her Daughters and their Husbands,
Whether they had any thing against his taking their Mother to be his Wife? and
they all severally expressed their Satisfaction therein. Then he asked
Margaret, Whether she had performed her Husband's Will? and the Children,
Whether, if their Mother married, they should lose by it? The Children said,
She had answered it to them, G. Fox's Proceedings and Marriage with M. Fell at
Bristol.
and desired him to speak no more of that. So observing they were all well
satisfied, he proceeded in his Marriage, and took Margaret Fell to Wife in a
public Meeting of Friends in Bristol. She was a Woman of a noble Endowment,
and this I know not only by her Writings; but I have aiso heard her preach an
Hour together, delivering her Matter compactly and orderly.

G. F. being married, he stayed with his Wife about a Week in Bristol, and then
they went together to Oldstone, and there taking Leave of each other, they
parted; she went homeward into the North, and he traveled through Wiltshire,
Soon after she goes homeward and he travels through Wiltshire, Berkshire, etc. to
London, taking care of the Churches and Poor.
Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Bucks, and so to London: For although now he had a Wife,
yet he did not neglect his Care toward the Churches, all the Nation over, in
the Gift which he had received of God, both in Word and Writing to their
Edification, and amongst the rest he had a special Regard, that the Poor might
be taken Care of, to which End he writ an Epistle in London, to this Effect,
that poor Children should be put forth Apprentices to Trades, whereby in Time,
they might help their aged Parents, and enable them to bring up their Families,
and maintain themselves handsomely.

G. Fox stayed not long in London; M. Fox haled to Lancaster-Prison on an old
Praemunire, from which she had been discharged.
but the Year 1670 being now come, he traveled through Hortfordshire,
Cambridgeshire, Huntingtonshire and Leicestershire, where he expected to have
met with his Wife; for he had writ her Word (if she found it convenient) to
meet him there, but instead thereof he understood she was haled out of her
House, and carried to Lancaster-Prison, upon the old Praemunire, which was
executed upon her five Years before, from which she was discharged by Order of
the King and Coun^l the last Year. Wherefore, after he had visited Friends in
those Counties, he returned to London where he found two of his Wife's
Daughters, But upon his Daughter's Application to the King, he gives Order for
her Discharge.
whom he hastened to go to the King, to acquaint him how their Mother was dealt
with, which they did, but met with much Difficulty; yet they diligently
attended the same, as it behaved them for their Mother, who was a Mother or
Overseer of the Church also, and therefore of the greater Concern. But at last
through assiduous Application, they got to the Speech of the King, to whom one of
them said, That instead of their waiting upon him to return him Thanks for the
Discharge of their Mother, they were now necessitated to make Complaint of
their Mother's being cast into Prison a second Time. Whereupon the King gave
Command to Sir John O^way, to write to the Sheriff of Lancashire, to set her at
Liberty, which Letter G. F. accordingly hastened his Daughters with into the
Country.

The Parliament now sitting, made a Law, entitled, An Act to prevent and
suppress seditious Conventicles, which is as follows:

FOR providing further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and
dangerous Practices of seditious Sectaries, Act against seditious Conventicles.
The Preamble 16 Car. 2. cap. 4.
and other ^isloyal Persons, who under Pretense of tender Consciences, have or
may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections (as late Experience has shown)
(2) Be it enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, That if any Person of the
Age of Sixteen Years or upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any Time
after the Tenth Day of May next, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle
or Meeting, under Color or Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other
manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, in
any Place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, Conventicles etc.
forbidden after May 10. 1670.
or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which Conventicle, Meeting or Assembly,
there shall be five Persons or more assembled together, over and besides those
of the same Household, if it be in a House where there is a Family inhabiting;
or if it be in a House, Field or Place where there is no Family inhabiting;
then where any five Persons or more, are so assemlled, as aforesaid, it shall
and may be lawful to and for any one or more Justices of the Peace, How the
Offenders must be convicted.
of the County, Limit, Division, Corporation or Liberty wherein the Offense
aforesaid shall be committed, or for the Chief Magistrate of the Place where
the Offense aforesaid shall be committed; And he and they are hereby required
and enjoined upon Proof to him or them respetively made of such Offense either
by Confession of the Party, or Oath of two Witnesses: (3) (which Oath the said
Justice and Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate respectively, are
hereby empowered and required to administer) or by notorious Evidence and
Circumstance of the Fact, to make a Record of every such Offense under his or
their Hands and Seals respectively; which Record so made, as aforesaid, shall
to all Intents and Purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and
perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such Offense; and thereupon the
said Justice, Justices and Chief Magistrate respectively, The Penalty for the
first Offense. The Record and Conviction to be returned to the next Quarter
Sessions.
shall impose on every such Offender so convict, as aforesaid, a Fine of Five
Shillings for such first Offense; which Record and Conviction shall be
certified by the said Justice, Justices or Chief Magistrate, at the next
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, for the County or Place where the Offense was
committed.

II. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such
Offender so convicted, as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like
Offense or Offenses, contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid
convicted, then such Offender so convict of such like Offense or Offenses,
shall for every such Offense incur the Penalty of Ten Shillings; The Penalties
for the second Offense.
(2) which Fine and Fines, for the first and every other Offense shall be
levied by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods and Chattels, or in Case of
the Poverty of such Offender, upon the Goods and Chattels of any other Person
or Persons who shall be then convicted in Manner aforesaid of the like Offense
at the same Conventicle, at the Discretion of the said Justice, Justices or
Chief Magistrate respectively, so as the Sum to be levied on any one Person in
Case of the Poverty of other Offenders, The Penalty how to be levied.
amount not in the whole to above the Sum of Ten Pounds, upon Occasion of any
one Meeting, as aforesaid; (3) and every Constable, Headborough, Tythingman,
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor respectively, Constables, etc. to levy
the same, and pay it to the Justice immediately. How the Penalties are to be
divided.
are hereby authorized and required to levy the same accordingly, having first
received a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the said Justice, Justices or
Chief Magistrate respectively so to do; (4) the said Moneys so to be levied, to
be forthwith delivered to the same Justice, Justices, or Chief Magistrate, and
by him or them to be distributed, the one third Part thereof to the Use of the
King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to be paid to the High Sheriff of the
County for the Time being, in manner following; that is to say, the Justice or
Justices of Peace shall pay the same into the Court of the respective
Quarter Sessions, which said Court shall deliver the same to the Sheriff, and
make a Memorial on Record of the payment and delivery thereof, which said
Memorial shall be a sufficient and final Discharge to the said Justice and
Justices, and a Charge to the Sheriff, which said Discharge and Charge shall be
certified into the Exchequer together, Certificate into the Exchequer.
and not one without the other: And no Justice shall or may be questioned or
accountable for the same in the Exchequer or elsewhere, than in
Quarter Sessions: Another third part thereof to and for the Use of the Poor of
the Parish where such Offense shall be committed; and the other third part
thereof to the Informer and Informers, and to such Person and Persons as the
said Justice, Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively shall appoint, having
Regard to their Diligence and Industry in the Discovery, dispersing and
punishing of the said Conventicles.

III. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Penalty of such
as preach or teach in a Conventicle. How to be levied and disposed.
That every Person who shall take upon him to preach or teach in any such
Meeting, Assembly or Conventicle, and shall thereof be convicted, as aforesaid,
shall forfeit for every such first Offense the Sum of Twenty Pounds, to be
levied in manner aforesaid upon his Goods and Chattels; (2) And if the said
Preacher or Teacher so convicted, be a Stranger, and his Name and Habitation
not known, or is fled, and cannot be found, or in the Judgment of the Justice,
Justices or Chief Magistrate before whom he shall be convicted, shall be
thought unable to pay the same, the said Justice, Justices or Chief Magistrate
respectively, are hereby empowered and required to levy the same by Warrant, as
aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels of any such Persons who shall be present
at the same Conventicle; any thing in this or any other Act, Law, or Statute to
the contrary notwithstanding; and the Money so levied to be disposed of in
manner aforesaid: (3) And if such Offender so convicted, as aforesaid, shall at
any Time again commit the like Offense or Offenses, contrary to this Act, and
be thereof convicted in Manner aforesaid, then such Offender so convicted of
such like Offense, or Offenses, shall for every such Offense, incur the penalty
of Forty Pounds, to be levied and disposed, as aforesaid.

IV. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The For^eiture of
such as suffer Conventicles in their Houses.
That every Person who shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such
Conventicle, Meeting, or unlawful Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her
House, Out-house, Barn, Yard, or Backside, and be convicted thereof in manner
aforesaid, shall forfeit the Sum of twenty Pounds, to be levied in manner
aforesaid, upon his or her Goods and Chattels; or in case of his or her poverty
or Inability, as aforesaid, upon the Goods, and Chattels of such Persons who
shall be convicted in manner aforesaid, of being present at the same
Conventicle; and the Money so levied, to be disposed of in manner aforesaid.

V. Provided always, Proviso.
and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall by any
Clause of this Act be liable to pay above Ten Pounds for any one Meeting, in
regard of the poverty of any other person or persons.

VI. Provided also, and be it further enacted, Appeals may be, and to whom, and
in what cases.
That in all Cases of this Act, where the Penalty or Sum charged upon any
Offender exceeds the Sum of Ten Shillings, and such Offender shall find himself
aggrieved, it shall and may be lawful for him within one Week after the said
Penalty or Money charged shall be paid or levied, to appeal in Writing from the
Person or Persons convicting, to the Judgment or the Justices of the Peace in
their next Quarter Sessions, (2) to whom the Justice or Justices of the Peace,
Chief Magistrate or Alderman, that first convicted such Offender, shall return
the Money levied upon the Appellant, and shall certify under his and their
Hands and Seals, the Evidence upon which the Conviction past, with the whole
Record thereof, and the said Appeal: (3) Whereupon such Offender may plead and
make Defense, and have his Trial by a Jury thereupon: (4) And in Case such
Appellant shall not prosecute with Effect, or if upon such Trial he shall not
be acquitted, or Judgment pass not for him upon his said Appeal, the said
Justices at the Sessions shall give treble Costs against such Offender for his
unjust Appeal: (5) And no other Court whatsoever shall intermeddle with any
Cause or Causes of Appeal upon this Act, but they shall be finally determined
in the Quarter Sessions only.

VII. Provided always, Appellant to enter into a Recognizance.
and be it further enacted, That upon the Delivery of such Appeal, as
aforesaid, the Person or Persons Appellant shall enter before the Person or
Persons convicting, into a Recognizance, to prosecute the said Appeal with
Effect: (2) Which said Recognizance the Person or Persons so convicting is
hereby empowered to take, and required to certify the same to the next
Quarter Sessions: (3) And in Case no such Recognizance be entered into, the said
Appeal to be null and void.

VIII. Provided always, That every such Appeal shall be left with the Person or
Persons so convicting, as aforesaid, at the Time of the making thereof.

IX. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Justices of Peace,
Constables, etc. upon refusal, may break open Doors.
That the Justice, Justices of the Peace and Chief Magistrate respectively, or
the respective Constables, Headboroughs and Tythingmen, by Warrant from the
said Justice, Justices or Chief Magistrate respectively, shall and may with
what Aid, Force and Assistance they shall think fit, for the better Execution
of this Act, after Refusal or Denial to enter, break open, and enter into any
House or other Place, where they shall be informed any such Conventicle, as
aforesaid, is or shall be held, as well within Liberties as without; (2) and
take into their Custody the Persons there unlawfully assembled, to the Intent
they may be proceeded against according to this Act: (3) And that the
Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and
Commisiona^ed Officers of the Militia, must disperse Conventicles either with
House or Foot.
or any commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of his Majesty's
Forces, with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot; and also the Sheriffs,
and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of them, jointly or
severally, within any the Counties or Places within this Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such other Assistance as
they shall think meet, or can get in Readiness with the soonest, on Certificate
made to them respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the
Peace or Chief Magistrate, of his particular Information or Knowledge of such
unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held in their respective
Counties or Places, and that he with such Assistance as he can get together, is
not able to suppress and dissolve the same, shall and may, and are hereby
required and enjoined to repair unto the Place where they are so held, or to be
held, and by the best Means they can to dissolve, dissipate or prevent all such
unlawful Meetings, and take into their Custody such and so many of the said
Persons so unlawfully assembled as they shall think fit, to the Intent they may
be proceeded against according to this Act. Proviso (...) Peers of the Realm.
The Penalty of all Justices of Peace, Constables, and other Officers, Civil and
Military, that omit their Duty in performing this Act.


X. Provided always, That no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, where he
or his Wife shall then be resident, shall be searched by Virtue of this Act,
but by immediate Warrant from his Majesty, under his Sign Manual, or in the
presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy-Lieutenant, or two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of the same County or Riding.

XI. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor, who
shall know, or be credibly informed of any such Meetings or Conventicles held
within his Precincts, Parishes or Limits, and shall not give Information
thereof to some Justice of the Peace, or the Chief Magistrate, and endeavor
the Conviction of the Parties according to his Duty; but such Constable,
Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden, Overseers of the Poor, or any Person
lawfully called in Aid of the Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, shall
wilfully and wittingly omit the Performance of his Duty, in the Execution of
this Act, and be thereof convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for
every such Off^nce, the Sum of Five Pounds, to be levied upon his Goods and
Chattels, and disposed in manner aforesaid: (2) And that if any Justice of the
Peace, or Chief Magistrate, shall wilfully and wittingly omit the Performance
of his Duty in the Execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the Sum of One
hundred Pounds, the one Moiety to the Use of the Informer, to be recovered by
Action, Suit, Bill or Plaint, in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
wherein no F^oign, Protection or Wage^ of Law shall lie.

XII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, All Persons
indemni^e that put this Act in Execution.
That if any Person be at any Time Sued for putting in Execution any of the
Powers contained in this Act, otherwise than upon Appeal allowed by this Act,
such Person shall and may plead the General-Issue, and give the special Matter
in Evidence; (2) and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the
Defendant, or if the Plaintiff discontinue his Action, or if upon Demurrer
Judgment be given for the Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his full
treble Costs.

XIII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, This Act to be
interpreted most beneficially for the suppress;ing Conventicles.
That this Act, and all Clauses therein contained, shall be construed most
largely and beneficially for the suppressing of Conventicles, and for the
Justification and Encouragement of all Persons to be employed in the Execution
thereof; (2) And that no Record, Warran^ or Mittimus to be made by Virtue of
this Act, or any proceedings thereupon, shall be reversed, avoided, or any way
impeached by reason of any default in form. (3) And in case any Person
offending against this Act, shall be an Inhabitant in any other County or
Corporation, or fly into any other County or Corporation after the Offense
committed, the Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate before whom he shall be
convicted, as aforesaid, shall certify the same under his Hand and Seal, to
any Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate of such other County or Corporation
wherein the said Person or Persons are Inhabitants, or are fled into; (4) which
said Justice or Chief Magistrate respectively, is hereby authorized and
required to levy the penalty or penalties in this Act mentioned, upon the Goods
and Chattels of such Person or Persons, as fully as the said other Justice of
Peace might have done, in case he or they had been Inhabitants in the Place
where the Offense was committed.

XIV. Provided also, Offenders to be prosecuted within three Months after the
Offense.
that no Person shall be punished for any Offense against this Act, unless such
Offender be prosecuted for the same within three Months after the Offense
committed. (2) And that no Person who shall he punished for any Offense by
Virtue of this Act, shall be punished for the same Offense by Virtue of any
other Act or Law whatsoever.

XV. Provided, and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Alderman of London for the Time being, Aldermen within London have the same
Power there as Justices of Pe^ce elsewhere.
within the City of London, and the Liberties thereof, shall have (and they and
every of them are hereby empowered and required to execute) the same Power and
Authority within London, and the Liberties thereof, for the examining,
convicting and punishing of all Offenses within this Act, committed within
London, and the Liberties thereof, which any Justice of Peace has by this Act
in any County of England, and shall be subject to the same Penalties and
Punishments, for not doing that which by this Act is directed to be done by any
Justice of Peace in any County of England.

XVI. Provided, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
Person offending, Feme-covert.
and convicted as aforesaid, be a Feme-covert, cohabiting with her Husband, the
Penalties of Five Shillings, and Ten Shillings, so as aforesaid incurred, shall
be levied by Warrant, as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Husband
of such Feme-covert.

XVII. Provided also, Peers of the Realm.
That no Peer of this Realm shall be attached or imprisoned by Virtue or Force
of this Act, any Thing, Matter or Clause therein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

XVIII. Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained,
shall extend to invalidate or make void his Majesty's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs: (2) But that his Majesty, and his Heirs and Successors,
Proviso for the King's Supremacy.
may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, exercise and enjoy all
Powers and Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as fully and as amply as
himself or any of his Predecessors have or might have done the same; any thing
in this Act notwithstanding.

By this very Law many an honest Family was Impoverished; for the Quakers did
not leave off meeting together publicly, but the most sincere amongst them
were the more zealous, and they were the more winnowed from the Chaff, which in
Time at Ease gets in amongst religious Professors; and none need, wonder at it,
since the Quakers having gained the Repute of an upright hearted People, some
for By-ends might creep in amongst them.

At London as well as at other Places, The Baseness and Cruelty of Informers,
and of some Justices.
many were spoiled of their Goods very unmercifully, and many times People of
good Substance brought to mere Poverty, seeing not only the Shop goods of some,
but also their Houshold-goods have been seized, insomuch that the very Sick
have had their Beds taken from under them, and they themselves laid upon the
Floor; nay they have been so cruel, as to leave them nothing; insomuch that
when the Child's Pap has stood in a Pannikin, they have thrown one the Pap to
take the Pannikin away.

Should I sum up all the Particulars I have received, and the Account I could
give, it would make a Volume of it self; for the Informers were generally poor,
and sometimes also the Justices, so that they knew how to part their Booty
belonging to the King, as well as to the Poor; and thus the King and the Poor
got but little of their Plunder. Nevertheless it so happened sometimes, that
those who were fineable, were freed by the Justices; Honest Justices
discouraged those Practices.
for they knew very well, that those Informers, who were also Witnesses, were
cunning Sharkers, who were only concerned to get their Thirds of the Booty, and
therefore found out a Way by which they showed that they were knavish and
unjust in their Office, therefore not fit to give Evidence; so that it has
sometimes fallen out, that an honest Justice has cleared those informed
against, when the Informer mi^^ed in his Evidence, either in the Day of the
Month, or the like, in the Complaint.

At London there once appeared before the Lord Mayor sitting at a Court Of
Aldermen, Through the Lord Mayor's Discouragement an impudent Informer (...) in
Prison.
an impudent Informer, having such a Quantity of Informations for Fines as
would have wronged the Parties to the Value of 1500 l. but the Mayor
abominating such a Practice, adjourned the Court, and went away. But this hardy
Informer was not content to let the Matter fall thus, but appeared before the
Court from Time to Time, to make a Booty of honest People's Goods; but they
still put him off, until at last he was himself arrested for Debt, and carried
to Prison, where he ended his Days.

Although now the Law against Seditious Conventicles had passed upon a
Supposition that the Presbyterians were ready to rise, considering the Bustle
and Tumult Occasioned by John Fox in Gloucestershire, which was much taken
Notice of, as I have mentioned before, yet nevertheless the Quakers Meetings
became the chief Object in the Execution of this Law. G. F. written against the
Injustice of this Law. And an Epistle to encourage his Friends.
Whereupon G. Fox being in London, set forth in Print the Injustice of this
Law, in Order, if possible, to moderate the Government not to put the same in
Execution. Nevertheless being also sensible that a great Storm hung over the
Heads of Friends, he also writ an Epistle to them, to exhort them to
Faithfulness, and to encourage them to stand fast in their Testimony, and bear
with Christian Patience the Suffering that was come upon them. Now the first
First Day that this Law took Place, he went to the Meeting of Friends at
Grace Church Street, in London; but being come to the Place, G. F. goes to
Grace Church Street Meeting House when this Law first took place, and preaching
^oere, is taken into Custody with others.
he found the Street full of People, and a Guard to keep them out of their
Meeting House; whereupon he went to Lombard Street, (out of which there was
also a Passage to the Meeting House) and there he also found a Guard; but there
being a Court before the Door, which was full of People, one of the Quakers
Ministers was there preaching to the People, and when he had ended, G. Fox
stood up, and said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to
kick against the Pricks. Which Words he thus explained; That it was Readiness
Nature that persecuted; and that they persecuting Christ in his Members, were
k^cking against the Pricks; and that it was the Birth of the Flesh that
persecuted the Birth of the Spirit; and that it was the Nature of Dogs to tear
and devour the Sheep, but that they suffered like Sheep, who did not bite
again; but were a peaceable People, who loved even their Persecutors. While G.
Fox was thus Preaching, there came a Constable and an Informer, with Soldiers,
who pulled him down from the P^ace he stood on. Then, said he, Blessed are the
Peacemakers; But the Commander of the Soldiers ordered them to secure him:
For, said he, you are the Man I looked for, Wherefore he, with two more of his
Friends, John Burn^t and another, were had before the Lord Mayor; and as they
were going, the Informer said, It will never be a good World, until all People
come to the good old Religion that was two hundred Years ago. G. F. hearing
this, said, Art thou a Papist? What befell a Popish Informer against G. F.
What! A Papist Informer? For two hundred Years ago there was no other public
Profession of Religion but that of the Papists in this Nation. It vexed the
Informer, that G. F. heard him speak thus; for he now saw he was ensnared in
his own Talk. When he came into the Court before the Lord Mayor's House, some
People who were there, asked G. F. Why he was brought thither Prisoner? Pray,
said he, ask that Informer, and ask him his Name; but he would not tell his
Name. Then one of the Mayor's Officers looking out at a Window, told him, He
should tell his Name before he went away: For, said he, the Lord Mayor will
know by what Authority you have intruded your self with Soldiers into the
Execution of those Laws which it belongs to the Civil Magistrate to execute,
and not the Military. The Informer understanding this, got away, but not
without some Difficulty, because they would not then let him out of the Court;
but he forceably pulling open the Door, and being got into the Street, the
People gave a great Shout, crying out, A Papist Informer! A Papist Informer!
And he would have come off but badly, had not G. F. advised the Constable and
Soldiers to keep him out of the Hands of the Common People. Whereupon he went
into a House and changed his Perriwig and so got away.

When the Lord Mayor came home, and G. F. was brought before him, he said, Mr.
Fox, You are an eminent Man among those of your own Profession, pray will you
be instrumental to persuade them from meeting in such great Numbers; For, said
he, seeing Christ has promised, when two or three are met in his Name, he will
be in the midst of them; and the King and Parliament are graciously pleased to
allow of Four to meet together to worship God, why will not you be content to
partake both of Christ's Promise to two or three, and the King's Indulgence to
Four? To which G. F. answered, That Christ's Promise was not to discourage many
from meeting together in his Name; but to encourage the Few, that the fewest
might not forbear to meet, because of their Fewness. But if Christ has
promised to manifest his Presence in the midst of so small an Assembly, where
but Two or Three were gathered in his Name; how much more would his Presence
abound where two or three Hundred are gathered in his Name. I wished him to
consider, Whether this Act would not have taken hold of Christ, with his twelve
Apostles and 70 Disciples, 1670
(if it had been in their Time) who used to meet often together; and that with
great Numbers? However I told him, this Act did not concern us; for it was made
against seditious Meetings, of such as met under Pretense and Color of
Religion, to contrive Insurrections, as (the Act says) late Experience had
shown; but we had been sufficiently tried and proved, and always found
peaceable: And therefore he should do well to put a Difference between the
Innocent and the Guilty. He said, The Act was made against Meetings, and a
Worship not according to the Liturgy. I told him, [according to] was not the
very same Thing; and I asked him, Whether the Liturgy was according to the
Scriptures? And whether we might not read Scriptures, and speak Scriptures? He
said, Yes. I told him, That this Act took hold only of such as meet to plot and
contrive Insurrections, as late Experience had shown; but they had never
experienced that by us. Because Thieves are sometimes on the Road, must not
honest Men travel therefore? And because Plotters and Contrivers have met to do
Mischief, must not an honest and peaceable People meet to do Good? If we had
been a People that did meet to plot and contrive Insurrections, etc. we might
have drawn our selves into Pours: For Four might do more Mischief in Plotting,
than if there were four Hundred; because Four might speak out their Minds more
freely one to another, than four Hundred could. Therefore we being innocent,
and not the People this Act concerns, we keep our Meetings as we used to do;
and I said, I believed, that he knew in his Conscience, we were innocent.

After this and more Discourse, The Informer being run away Sir S. Starling
Mayor discharges G. F. and the (...).
the Lord Mayor, whose Name was Samuel Starling, let them go, seeing the
Informer was gone before, and now no body accused them. The Treatment this
Infomer met with made others scrupulous, yet several of their Meetings in
London were disturbed, and some or their Preachers cast into Prison; but though
the Baptists and others Dissenters ceased their public Meetings, yet the
Quakers continued to keep theirs, as they used to do, whereby it happened that
some of their Meeting Houses were pulled down, Ratcliff Meeting House pulled
down.
and amongst others that at Ratcliff, which was a substantial Building, almost
new.

After some Time the Heat of Persecution in the City began to abate, but in
other Places it raged more fiercely; this engaged G. F. to leave the City, and
travel about the Country in diverse Places to visit his Friends.

This Year G. F. had a very great Fit of Sickness, G. F. so ill, that his Life
is in great Danger: but he recovers.
to such a Degree, that he became both blind and deaf, insomuch that his
Recovery was despaired of by some; but after a Time he grew better.

In the mean while Persecution in many Places grew very dismal; for many of the
Friends were beaten with Swords, and Pikes, and Muskets, Great Cruelty.
to that Degree, that their Blood ran along the Ground, and the Informers were
so very eager to hunt after their Prey, that they informed of Meetings when
there was none. Amongst others this following was an Instance. At Droitwich,
John Cartwright came to a Friend's House there, An Informer at Droitwich in
Pursuit of his Wickedness falls off his Horse and dies.
who sitting down to Supper, he prayed before they eat, which being heard by an
Informer, the Room being next to the Street, he thereupon went immediately and
informed that there was a Meeting in the House, and so got a Warrant to
distrain the Goods; and when he came riding with them in the Evening, he fell
from his Horse, and brake his Neck, thereby getting his Death instead of his
Prey which he hunted after.

Now although Persecution was not so hot in London, as in other Places in the
Country, yet sometimes even there it was very severe, as may be seen by the
Instance of William Penn and William Mead, who were taken from a Meeting and
imprisoned, and tried for the same in the Month of September.

The Indictment contained, That William Penn and William Mead, The famous Trial
of W. Penn and W. Mead at the Old Baily at London.
with diverse other Persons, to the Number of three Hundred, at
Grace Church Street in London, the 15th of August, with Force and Arms, and
tumultnously assembled together, and that William Penn, by Agreement between
him and William Mead, had preached there in the public Street, whereby was
caused a great Concourse and Turnult of People, etc. That there was a public
Meeting in the Street, proceeded from Necessity; because a Guard was placed in
the Passage to hinder Friends from going into their Meeting House; but it was a
great Untruth that they met with Force and Arms, which was never used by the
Quakers. This Indictment being read before the Court, the Prisoners were
demanded, according to Custom, whether they were guilty, or Not guilty?
Whereupon W. Penn said, It is impossible that we should be able to remember the
Indictment verbatim, and therefore we desire a Copy of it, as is customary on
the like Occasions. The Recorder John Howel said hereupon, You must first plead
to the Indictment, before you can have a Copy of it. Then W. Penn said, That he
first desired, That no Advantage might be taken against him, nor he deprived or
any Benefit, which he might otherwise receive, and that the Court would promise
him a fair Hearing, and Liberty of making his Defense. Upon which the Court
said, That no Advantage should be taken against him, and that he should have
Liberty, and should be heard. W. Penn then said, That he pleaded not guilty in
Manner and Form. Then W. Mead was demanded, Whether he was guilty or not
guilty, and he answered the same as W. Penn. The Court then proceeded with the
Business of trying Thieves and Murderers, making the Prisoners stay waiting
five Hours, and then returned them to Prison; and after two Days brought them
again before the Court. And then the Officers of the Court having taken off the
Prisoners Hats, the Lord Mayor, Samuel Starling, showed himself displeased with
it, and ordered the Officers to put on their Hats again; which being done, the
Recorder, John Howell, who upon all Occasions showed his F^erceness, accused
them that they showed no Respects to the Court, and condemned them for it in a
Fine of Forty Marks each, because they had not taken off their Hats. Thereupon
W. Penn said, That he desired it might be observed, that they came into the
Court with their Hats off, (that is, taken off) and if they have been put on
since, it is by Order from the Bench, and therefore not the Prisoners but the
Bench should be fined. The Jury then being sworn, and the Indictment read
again, the Witnesses were called, who declared, That they saw W. Penn speaking
to the People, who were assembled in a great (...) in Grace Church Street, but
they could not hear what he said.

The Recorder then asked William Mead, Whether he was there? who answered, That
it is a Maxim in your own Law, Nemo tenetur accusare seipsum, which if it be not
true Latin, I am sure it is good English, That no Man is bound to accuse
himself; why then do thou offer to ensnare me with such a Question? Hereupon
the Recorder showed himself so displeased, that he said, Sir, hold your Tongue,
I did not go about to ensnare you. Then William Penn said, We confess our
selves to be so far from ^ecanting or declining to vindicate the assembling of
our selves, to preach, pray, or worship the eternal, holy, just God, that we
declare to all the World, that we do believe it to be our indispensable Duty,
to meet incessantly upon so good an Account; nor shall all the Powers upon
Earth be able to divert us from reverencing and adoring our God, who made us.
The Sheriff Richard Brown said, You are not here for worshipping God, but for
breaking the Law. You do your selves a great deal of Wrong in going on in that
Discourse. Hereupon W. Penn answered, I affirm I have broken no Law, nor am I
guilty of the Indictment that is laid to my Charge: And to the End, the Bench,
the Jury and my self, with these that hear us, may have a more direct
Understanding of this Proceedure, I desire you would let me know by what Law it
is you prosecute me, and upon what Law you ground my Indictment? The Recorder
answered, Upon the common Law. Where is, asked W.Penn, that common Law? You
must not think, said the Recorder, That I am able to run up so many Years, and
over so many adjudged Cases, which we call Common Law, to answer your
Curiosity. This Answer, replied W. Penn, I am sure is very short of my
Question, for if it be common, it should not be so hard to produce. The
Recorder replied, Sir, will you plead to your Indictment? Shall I, answered W.
Penn, plead to an Indictment, that has no Foundation in Law? If it contain
that Law you say I have broken, why should you decline to produce that Law,
since it will be impossible for the Jury to determine, or agree to bring in
their Verdict, who have not the Law produced, by which they should measure the
Truth of this Indictment, and the Guilt or contrary of my Fact. The Recorder
being angry, said, You are a saucy Fellow, speak to the Indictment. W. Penn
replied, I say, it is my Place to speak to Matter of Law; I am arraigned a
Prisoner, my Liberty, which is next to Life it self, is now concerned, etc. And
at this Time several upon the Bench urged hard upon the Prisoner to bear him
down. W. Penn said, You are many Mouths and Ears against me, and if I must not
be allowed to make the best of my Cause, it is hard; I say again, unless you
show me and the People the Law you ground your Indictment upon. I shall take it
for granted, your Proceedings are merely arbitrary. The Recorder then replying,
said. The Question is Whether you are guilty of this Indictment. The Question,
said W. Penn, is not whether I am guilty of this Indictment, but whether this
Indictment be Legal: It is too general and imperfect an Answer, to say it is
the common Law, unless we know both where, and what it is; for where there
(...) no Law, there is no Transgression; and that Law which is not in Being, is
so far from being Common, that it is no Law at all. The Recorder snapped him
hereupon with, You are an impertinent Fellow, will you teach the Court what Law
is? It Is Lex non scripta, that which many have studied thirty or forty Years to
know, and would you have me tell you in a Moment? Certainly, replied W. Penn,
if the Common Law be so hard to be understood, it is far from being very
common; but if the Lord Coke in his Institutes be of any Consideration, he
tells us, that common Law is common Right, and that common Right is the great
Charter Privileges, confirmed 9 Hen 3.29 25 Edw. 1.1. 2 Edw. 3.8. Coke's
Institutes, 2. p. 56. The Recorder taking no Pleasure in that Speech, said,
Sir, You are a trouble some Fellow, and it is not for the Honor of the Court
to suffer you to go on. I have, replied W. Penn, asked but one Question, and
you have not answered me, though the Rights and Privileges of every Englishman
be concerned in it. Well, said the Recorder, if I should suffer you to ask
Questions till to morrow Morning you would be never the wiser. That is, said W.
Penn, according as the Answers are. But says the Recorder, We must not stand to
hear you talk all Night. Whereupon W. Penn replied, I desire no Affront to the
Court, but to be heard in my just Plea^; and I must plainly tell you, that if
you deny me the Oyer of that Law, which you suggest I have broken, you do at
once deny me an acknowledged Right, and evidence to the whole World your
Resolution to sacrifice the Privileges of Englishmen to your sinister and
arbitrary Designs. This so enraged the Recorder, that he called to the
Officers, Take him away. And to the Lord Mayor he said, My Lord, if you take
not some Course with this pestilent Fellow, to stop his Mouth, we shall not be
able to do any Thing to Night. Then the Lord Mayor cried, Take him away, take
him away, turn him into the Bale-dock. W. Penn seeing how Force and Violence
prevailed, said, These are but so many vain Exclamations. Is this Justice or
true Judgment? Must I therefore be taken away because I plead for the
fundamental Laws of England. Then addressing himself to the Jury, he said,
However, this I leave upon your Consciences, who are of the Jury, and my sole
Judges, that if these ancient fundamental Laws which relate to Liberty and
Property, and are not limited to particular Persuasions in Matters of Religion,
must not be indispensably maintained and observed, who can say he has Right to
the Coat upon his Br^^k? Certainly our Liberties are openly to be invaded, our
Wives to be ravished, our Children enslaved, our Families ruined, and our
Estates led away in Triumph

He being now haled into the Bale-dock, it was W. Mead's Turn (...) plead, who
spoke thus: Ye Men of the Jury, I now stand here to answer to an Indictment
against me, which is a Bundle of Stuff full of Lies and Falsehoods; for therein
I am accused, that I met vi and armis, illicite and tumultuose. Time was when I
had Freedom to use a carnal Weapon, and then I thought I feared no Man: But now
I fear the living God, and dare not make use thereof, nor hurt any Man, nor do
I know I demeaned my self as a tumultuous Person. I say I am a peaceable Man;
therefore it is a very proper Question what W. Penn demanded in this Case, an
Oyer of the Law, on which our Indictment is grounded. To this the Recorder
said, I have made an Answer to that already. W. Mead then turning his Face to
the Jury, said, Ye Men of the Jury, who are my Judges, if the Recorder will not
tell you what makes a Riot, a Rout, or unlawful Assembly, Cook, he that once
they called the Lord Cook, tells us what makes a Riot, a Rout, or unlawful
Assembly. -- A Riot is when three or more are met together to beat a Man, or to
enter forcibly into another Man's Land, to cut down his Grass, his Wood, or
break down his Pales. The Recorder interrupting him, and scornfully pulling off
his Hat said, I thank you Sir, that you will tell me what the Law is: And
Richard Brown, that inveterate Enemy of the Quakers, said, He talks at Random,
one while an Independent, another while of some other Religion, and now a
Quaker, and next a Papist. Mead, not being minded openly to affront this
Alderman, told him this well known Latin Verse,

Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

For Brown himself formerly had been an Independent, though now he belonged to
the Church of England, and was of the Court Party. But the Lord Mayor, who it
seems was a great Friend of Brown's, said to Mead, You deserve to have your
Tongue cut out. And, added the Recorder, If you discourse on this Manner, I
shall take Occasion against you. To which Mead returned, Thou did promise me
I should have fair Liberty to be heard. Why may I not have the Privilege of an
English Man, and you might be ashamed of this Dealing. At this the envious
Recorder said, I look upon you to be an Enemy to the Laws of England, which
ought to be observed and kept; nor are you worthy of such Privileges as others
have. Mead well seeing that Force and Violence prevailed, and that his speaking
could not avail him, said, with a composed Mind, The Lord be Judge between me
and thee in this Matter.

Upon which he was taken away into the Bale-dock, and the Recorder gave the
Jury the following Charge; You have heard what the Indictment is; it is for
preaching to the People, and drawing a tumultuous Company after them; and Mr.
Penn was speaking. If they should not be disturbed, you see they will go on;
there are Three or Four Witnesses, that have proved this that he did preach
there; that Mr. Mead did allow of it; after this, you have heard by substantial
Witnesses what is said against them. Now we are upon the Matter of Fact, which
you are to keep to, and observe, as what has been fully sworn, at your Peril.
That the Recorder spoke thus to the Jury in the Absence of the Prisoners, was
indeed irregular; wherefore W. Penn, who heard this from a far, spoke with a
very raised Voice, that so, he might be heard by those on the Bench, after this
Manner, I appeal to the Jury, who are my Judges, and to this great Assembly,
whether the Proceedings of the Court are not most arbitrary, and void of all
Law, in offering to give the Jury their Charge in the Absence of the Prisoners.
I say it is directly opposite to, and destructive of the undoubted Right of
every English Prisoner, as Cook in the 2 Inst. on the Chapter of Magna Charta
speaks. The Recorder being thus unexpectedly lasht for his extra-judicial
Procedure, said with a disdainful Smile, Why, ye are present; you do hear, do
you not? To which Penn returned, No Thanks to the Court, that commanded me into
the Bale-dock: And you of the Jury take Notice, that I have not been heard,
neither can you legally depart the Court, before I have been fully heard,
having at least ten or twelve material Points to offer, in Order to invalidate
their Indictment. This plain Speaking of W. Penn so enraged the Recorder, that
he cried, Pull that Fellow down, pull him down: For Penn, it seems, to be heard
the better, was clamber'd up a little by the Rails of the Bale-dock. Then W.
Mead said, Are these according to the Rights and Privileges of Englishmen, that
we should not be heard, but turned into the Bale-dock, for making our Defense;
and the Jury to have their Charge given them in our Absence? I say, these are
barbarous and unjust Proceedings. The Recorder yet more incensed, cried, Take
them away into the Hole: To hear them talk all Nights, as they would, that I
think does not become the Honor of the Court.

The Prisoners then being kept in a stinking Hole, the Jury were commanded up,
to agree upon their Verdict: And after an Hour and half's Time eight came down
agreed, but four remained above: The Court then sent an Officer for them, and
they accordingly came down. And then the Court used many indecent Threats to
the four that dissented; and after much menacing Language, and a very imperious
Behavior against the Jury, the Prisoners being brought to the Bar, the Foreman
was asked, How say you? Is William Penn guilty of the Matter whereof he stands
indicted in Manner and Form, or not guilty? Foreman; Guilty of speaking in
Grace Church Street. The next Question was, Is that all? Foreman; That is all I
have in Commission. This Answer so displeased the Recorder, that he said, You
had as good say nothing. And the Lord Mayor Starling said, Was it not an
unlawful Assembly? You mean he was speaking to a Tumult of People there? To
which the Foreman returned, My Lord, This was all I had in Commission. Some of
the Jury seemed now to buckle to the Questions of the Court: but others opposed
themselves, and said, They allowed of no such Word as an unlawful Assembly in
their Verdict: At which some on the Bench took Occasion to vilify them with
opprobrious Language. And because the Court would not dismiss the Jury before
they gave a more satisfactory Verdict, they called for Pen, Ink, and Paper, and
so went up again: And after half an Hour returning, delivered the following
Verdict in Writing.

We the Jurors hereafter named, do find William Penn to be guilty of speaking
or preaching to an Assembly met together in Grace Church Street the 14th of
August last, 1670, and that William Mead is not guilty of the said Indictment.

Foreman Thomas Veer, Henry Michel, John Baily, Edward Bushel, John Brightman,
William Lever, John Hammond, Charles Milson, James Damask, Henry Henly, Gregory
Walklet, William Plumsted.
This Verdict the Mayor and Recorder resented at so high a Rate, that they
exceeded the Bounds of all Moderation and Civility; and the Recorder said,
Gentlemen, you shall not be dismissed till we have a Verdict, that the Court
will accept; and you shall be locked up, without Meat, Drink, Fire and Tobacco:
You shall not think thus to abuse the Court: We will have a Verdict by the Help
of God, or you shall starve for it.

Now though the Jury had given in their Verdict, and signified that they could
give no other, yet all was in rain; and W. Penn seeing how they were treated
against all Reason, said, My Jury, who are my Judges, ought not to be thus
menaced; their Verdict should be free, and not compelled; the Bench ought to
wait upon them, but not forestal them. I do desire that Justice may be done me,
and that the arbitrary Resolves of the Bench may not be made the Measure of my
Jury's Verdict. This modest Speech so incensed the Recorder, that he cried,
Stop that prating Fellow's Mouth, or put him out of the Court. And the Lord
Mayor said to the Jury, You have heard that he preached, that he gathered a
Company of tumultuous People, and that they do not only disobey the martial
Power, but the civil also. To which W. Penn returned, That Is a great Mistake;
we did not make the Tumult, but they that interrupted in. The Jury cannot be so
ignorant, as to think, that we met there with a Design to disturb the Civil
Peace, since (First,) we were by Force of Arms kept out of our lawful House,
and met as near it in the Street as the Soldiers would give Leave. And
(Secondly,) because it was no new Thing, nor with the Circumstances expressed
in the Indictment, but what was usual and customary with us. It Is very well
known that we are a peaceable People, and cannot offer Violence to any Man.

The Court now being resolved to send the Prisoners to their Jail, and the Jury
to their Chamber, Penn spoke as follows, The Agreement of twelve Men is a
Verdict in Law, and such an one being given by the Jury, I require the Clerk of
the Peace to record it, as he will answer it at his Peril. And if the Jury
bring in another Verdict, contradictory to this, I affirm they are perjured Men
in Law. And looking upon the Jury, said, You are Englishmen, mind your
Privilege; give not away your Right. To which E. Bushel, one of them, returned,
Nor will we ever do it. Another of the Jurymen pleaded Indisposition of Body,
and therefore desired to be dismissed; but the Lord Mayor said, You are as
strong as any of them; starve them, and hold your Principles. To which the
Recorder added, Gentlemen, you must be content with your hard Fate; let your
Patience overcome it; for the Court is resolved to have a Verdict, and that
before you can be dismissed. And though the Jurymen said, We are agreed, we are
agreed, we are agreed, yet the Court swore several Persons, to keep the Jury
all Night, without Meat, Drink, Fire, or any other Accommodation; nay, they had
not so much as a Chamber Pot, though desired. Thus Force and Violence prevailed.
The next Day, though it was the first of the Week, vulgarly called Sunday, the
Court sat again; and the Prisoners being brought to the Bar, the Jury were
called in, and their Foreman was asked, Is William Penn guilty of the Matter
whereof he stands indicted, in Manner and Form aforesaid, or not guilty? To
which he answered as before, William Penn is guilty of speaking in
Grace Church Street. The Lord Mayor then asking, To an unlawful Assembly?
Edward Bushel answered, No, my Lord, we give no other Verdict than what we gave
last Night; we have no other Verdict to give. You are, returned the Lord Mayor,
a factious Fellow: I Will take a Course with you. I have, said Bushel, done
according to my, Conscience. This so displeased the Mayor, that he said, That
Conscience of yours would cut my Throat; but I will cut yours so soon as I can.
To which the Recorder added, He has inspired the Jury; he has the Spirit of
Divination; methinks I feel him: I will have a positive Verdict, or you shall
starve for it.

Then W. Penn said, I desire to ask the Recorder one Question: Do you allow of
the Verdict given of W. Mead? To which the Recorder answered, It cannot be a
Verdict, because you are indicted for a Conspiracy; and one bring found Not
guilty, and not the other, it cannot be a Verdict. This made Penn say, If Not
guilty be not a Verdict, then you make of the Jury and Magna Charta but a mere
Nose of Wax. How! asked William Mead then, Is Not guilty, no Verdict? No, said
the Recorder, it is no Verdict. To which Penn replied, I affirm that the
Consent of a Jury is a Verdict in Law; and if W. Mead he not guilty, it
consequently follows, that I am clear, since you have indicted us of
Conspiracy, and I could not possibly conspire alone. After this, the Court
spoke to the Jury, and caused them to go up again, if possible to extort
another Verdict from them. Then the Jury being called, and asked by the Clerk,
What say you? Is William Penn guilty of the Matter whereof he stands indicted,
in Manner and Form aforesaid, or not guilty? The Foreman answered, Guilty of
speaking in Grace Church Street. To which the Recorder returned, What is this
to the Purpose (...) say I will have a Verdict. And speaking to E. Bushel,
said, You are a factious Fellow, I will set a Mark upon you; am whilst I have
any thing to do in the City, I will have an Eye upon you. To this the Mayor
added, Have you no more Wit than to be led by such a pitiful Fellow? I will cut
his Nose^ Thus the Court endeavored to baffle the Jury; and therefore it was
not without very good Reason that William Penn said, It is intolerable that my
Jury should be thus menaced: Is this according to the Fundamental Laws? Are not
they my proper Judges by the Great Charter of England? What hope is there of
ever having Justice done, when Juries are threatened, and their Verdict is
rejected? I am concerned to speak, and grieved to see such arbitrary
Proceedings. Did not the Lieutenant of the Tower render one of them worse than
a Felon? And do you not plainly seek to condemn such for factious Fellows who
answer not your Ends! Unhappy are those Juries, who are threatened be fined,
and starved, and ruined, if they give not in their Verdicts contrary to their
Consciences. These plain Expressions so troubled the Recorder, that he said to
the Lord Mayor, My Lord, you must take a Course with this Fellow. And then the
Mayor cried, Stop his Mouth; Jailor bring Fetters, and stake him to the Ground.
To which W. Penn said, Do your Pleasure; I matter not your Fetters. The
Recorder commend^the Policy and Prudence of the Spanish Inquisition, and wants
to have it introduced have, and threatens with a new Law.
The Recorder then ventured to say, Till now I never understood the Reason of
the Policy and Prudence of the Spaniards, in suffering the Inquisition among
them. And certainly it will never be well with us, till something like the
Spanish Inquisition be in England. The Jury being required to find another
Verdict, and they saying they could give no other, the Recorder grew so angry,
that he said, Gentlemen, we shall not be at this pass always with you; you will
find the next Session of Parliament there will be a Law made, that those that
will not conform, shall not have the Protection of the Law. -- Your Verdict is
nothing, you play upon the Court. I say, you shall go together, and bring in
another Verdict, or you shall starve, and I willl have you ca^ted about the
City, as in Edward the Third's Time.

The Jury refusing to give in another Verdict, Barbarous Usage of the Jury.
since they had all agreed to that which they had given, and showing themselves
unwilling to go up again, the Lord Mayor bid the Sheriff to make them go. The
Sheriff then coming off his Seat, said, Come, Gentlemen, you must go up; you
see I am commanded to make you go. Upon which the Jury went up, and several
were sworn to keep them without any Accommodation as aforesaid, till they
brought in their Verdict. And the Prisoners were remanded to Newgate, where
they remaining till next Morning, then were brought to the Court again. And
being set to the Bar, and the Jury called, and asked, Is William Penn guilty of
the Matter whereof he stands indicted in Manner and Form, etc, or not guilty?
The Foreman answered, You have there read in Writing already our Verdict, and
our Hands subscribed. Now the Clerk, who had that Paper, was by the Recorder
stopped from reading it; and it was said by the Court, That Paper was no Verdict.
Then the Clerk asked, How say you? Is William Penn guilty, etc. or not guilty?
To which the Foreman Answered, Not Guility. The same Question being put
concerning W. Mead, the Foreman answered likewise, Not guilty. The Jury then
being asked by the Clerk, whether they said so all, they answered, We do so.
The Bench still unsatisfied, commanded that every Person should distinctly
answer to their Names, and give in their Verdict, The Jurry fined 40 Marks a
Men, and to be imprisoned till paid.
which they unamimously did, in saying, Not guilty. The Recorder, who could not
bear this, said, I am sorry, Gentlemen, you have followed your own Judgments
and Opinions, rather than the good and wholesome Advice which was given you: God
keep my Life out of your Hands: But for this the Court fines you forty Marks a
Man, and Imprisonment till paid.

W. Penn then stepping up toward the (...), said (...) my Liberty, being freed
by the Jury. No, said the Lord Mayor, you are in for your Fines. Fines?
returned Penn, for what? For Contempt of the Court, said the Lord Mayor. I ask,
replied Penn, if it be according to the Fundamental Laws of England, that any
Englishman should be fined or amerced, but by the Judgment of his Peers or
Jury? Since it expressly contradicts the 14th and 29th Chapter of the Great
Charter of England, which say, No Freeman ought to be amer^ed, but by the Oath
of good and lawful Men of the Vicinage. Instead of answering to this Question,
the Recorder cried, Take him away, take him away; Take him out of the Court. On
which W. Penn said, I can never urge the Fundamental Laws of England, but you
cry, Take him away, Take him away. But it is no Wonder, since the Spanish
Inquisition has so great a Place in the Recorder's Heart. God Almighty, who is
just, will judge you all for these Things. W. Penn was not suffered to speak
any more, but he and W. Mead were haled to the Bale-dock, and from thence sent
to Newgate, and so were their Jury. How they came at length to be freed, I do
not know.

This Trial To which the Reader is referred, as well worthy his Perusal.
was afterward published in Print more at large than is set down here, and an
Appendix subjoyned to it; in which are showed not only the Invalidity of the
Evidence, but also the Absurdity of the Indictment, and the illegal Proceedings
of the Court; and from the Great Charter, In the Case of the Lord Chief Justice
Keeling, the Practice of fining Juries for their Verdicts declared illegal.
that they had been dealt with contrary to Law. The Case of the Lord Chief
Justice Keeling is also mentioned, who having put Restraints upon Juries, a
Commitee of the Parliament the 11th of December 1667, came to this Resolution,
That his Proceedings were Innovations, in the Trial of Men for their Lives and
Liberties; and that he had used an arbitrary and illegal Power, which was of
dangerous Consequence to the Lives and Liberties of the People of England, and
tended to the introducing an arbitrary Government. Moreover, That in the Place
of Judicature he had undervalued, vilified and condemned Magna Charta. And
therefore, That he should be brought to Trial, in order to condign Punishment,
in such Manner as the House should judge most fit and requisite. Two Days
after, viz. Die Veneris, the 13th of December, it was resolved, That the
Precedents and Practice of fining or imprisoning Jurors for Verdicts, is
illegal. The Book containing the forementioned Trial of W. Penn and W. Mead was
reprinted I think more than once; for it came to be much in Request, because
the Liberties of the People were therein well defended, and arbitrary Power
controlled. The Title of it was, The People's Ancient and Just Liberties
asserted; and underneath was added this well known Verse or Juvenal,

Sic volo, sic jubeo; stat pro ratione voluntas. This Matter was more
circumstantially treated of in a Book in Print, A farther Account of these
Proceedings published by T. Rudyard, who for defending the Oppressed is himself
violently prosecuted.
by Thomas Rudyard a Lawyer, who showed therein at large the Right of Juries,
and the Unlawfulness of the Proceedings then in Vogue; which he made appear
plainly, both from Law and by Citations from the Books of eminent Lawyers. And
having sometimes vigorously pleaded the Cause of the Oppressed, he also became
the Object of persecuting Fury, which could not endure his faithful defending
of the Innocent. And therefore this Summer the Magistrates of London issued out
a Warrant to break open his House in the Dead of the Night, in Order to
apprehend him; and this Warrant was executed by the Soldiers of one Captain
Holford; and the next Day he was sent to Newgate by a Mittimus under the Hands
and Seals of the Lord Mayor Samuel Starling, William Peak, Robert Hanson, and
several others, under Pretense, That he stirred up Persons to Disobedience of
the Laws, and abetted and encouraged such as met in unlawful and seditious
Conventicles, contrarry to the late Act. But his Case being brought before the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster by an Habeas Corpus, that
Court, after solemn Debate, gave their Judgment, That Thomas Rudyard was
unjustly imprisoned, and unlawfully detained. And so he was set at Liberty. But
the Lord Mayor S. Starling fretting at his Discharge, But removing his Cause to
the Common Pleas is acquitted.
found out new Stratagems to compass his Ends upon him. For an Indictment was
formed against him for having hindered due Course of Law against one Samuel
Allingbridge. But Rudyard so well defended himself, that he was acquitted;
which so incensed the Lord Mayor, that not long after he was again committed to
Newgate, on a religious Account, And again, in another Prosecution. He is again
preceeded against for being at a Meeting; an Account of which he printed.
viz. for having been in the Meeting at White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street. The Proceedings against him and others on that Account
were no less arbitrary than those against W. Penn and W. Mead already
mentioned, and therefore Rudyard exposed his and their Trials in Print; and
seeing he understood the Law, he was the more able to show the Unjustness of
these Proceedings, and how inconsistent such Prosecutions were with the Laws of
the Land.

But to avoid Prolixity, I shall relate but little of them, since many Things
occur therein, which have been mentioned already in other Cases. How the
Recorder Howel was inclined in respect to Religion, may be deduced from what
has been said already of his Panegyric upon the Spanish Inquisition. And to
Rudyard and his Fellow Prisoners he gave no obscure Evidence what Religion he
preferred; A Touch at the Religion of Howel the Recorder.
for they saying, That they were always quiet and peaceable in their
Assemblies, and that the Laws against Riots were never intended against them,
but Popish, or such like Disturbers of the Peace. The Recorder returned, That
the Papists were better Subjects to the King, than they were; and that they
were a stubborn and dangerous People, and must either be brought under, or
there was no safe living by them. The Prisoners offering to vindicate
themselves from these odious and soul Aspersions, were not suffered to say any
Thing in their own Defense; but instead of hearing them, they were by Order of
the Lord Mayor and the Recorder thrust into the Bale-dock, and treated almost
at the same Rate as W. Penn and W. Mead had been before.

But Violence prevailed now; and the Recorder, because of his outrageous
Behavior against the Quakers, was so much in Favor of the Court of Justice,
that Alderman Jo. Robinson did not stick to tell them, That the Recorder
deserved an hundred Pounds for his Service done at the Old Baily the last
Sessions. To whom 100 l. is ordered to be paid for his good Service, by the
Chamberlain of London, as had 200 l. before.
And his Proposal so took, that the Court consented to pay him for the said
Service an hundred Pounds by the Chamberlain of London. And since this was very
well known to T. Rudyard, insomuch that in a Book he published, he named the
Date of the said Order, viz. the Eighth of October, 1670; and that, other
Orders that had been given for two Hundred Pounds more to him, within eight
Months last past; he, to reprehend such Doings in a Satirical Way, called them,
An excellent Way to ease the Treasury of being overburthened with
Orphans-Money, by which sinister Ends, and cursed Dispositions of its Cash, the
Chamber was so deeply in Debt, that it was almost incredible.

Now since Rudyard as a Lawyer, had a more full Knowledge of these unlawful
Proceedings against him and his Friends, than many others, he composed a
Treatise of those Prosecutions, which he called, The Second Part of the Peoples
Ancient and Just Liberties, asserted. And true Lovers of their Country were
pleased with it: For that Party, which countenanced Popery, and therefore
endeavored to violate the People's Rights, strove to get the upper Hand.

Persecution was now very hot and fierce all over the Country, Wicked Fellows
encouraged to become Informers against Dissenters.
because a Door was opened for all base and wicked Fellows to get Booty by
informing; for by the Act against Meetings (which, though religious, were branded
with the Name of Seditious) the Informer was to have a third Part of the
imposed Fine. This set on many vile Persons, and among these sometimes Thieves
and infamous Fellows, to render any Comings together of Quakers, though it was
but a Visit, or a Burial, the Name of a Meeting, and to swear that a Meeting
had been kept there. Nay, sometimes they swore only by guess, that in such a
Place a Meeting had been kept, though the Witnesses had not seen it, as was
requisite by Law. And this informing came so much in Vogue, that some
Magistrates themselves turned Informers.

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames! Virgil Aen. 3.

I might write a large Volume of these abominable Deeds, if I could find
Leisure for it; yet now and then I Will mention a few Instances, by which the
Reader may make a Conjecture of the rest.

This Year at Alford in Somersetshire, Persons fined for having been at a
Burial.
in the Month called August, the Corpse of one Samuel Clothier was buried, and
though in the Burying-Place all were silent, yet the Justice Robert Hunt fined
some that had been at the Burial, for having assisted at this pretended Meeting.

In Nottingham it happened in the latter End of this Year, The Extravagancy of
Justice Whaley against the Quakers at Nottingham asserting (...) Eliz. was not
made against Papists.
that the Justice, Penniston Whaley, who had fined many of those called
Quakers, for frequenting their religious Meetings, encouraged the People at the
Sessions to persecute the Quakers without any Pity, saying to them, Harden your
Hearts against them: For the Act of the 35th of Queen Elizabeth is not made
against the Papists; since the Church of Rome is a true Church, as well as any
other Church; but these Quakers are erroneous and seditious Persons. By these
Words one may easily judge to what Religion this Justice of Peace was inclined;
but such D^semblers feigned to be Protestants, that so they might bear
honorable Offices. I pass by unmentioned many Persons, who by beating,
pushing, and trampling, were grievously abused in their Meetings, to that
Degree that some not long survived the Violence committed against them, and
felt the Painfulness or Smart of it till Death.

This Year about Midsummer, The pious Death of Tho. Bud.
Thomas Bud deceased at Ivolchester in Somersetshire, after having been
Prisoner about eight Years and a hall, because for Conscience Sake he could not
swear. Some Hours before his Death, he was heard to say, That he had renewed
his Covenant with God, and was well satisfied in it; and that he believed God
would sustain him by the Right Hand of his Justice; and that he rejoiced and
thanked God that all his Children walked in the Way of the Lord.

At Warbor^on in Oxfordshire those called Quakers were also most grievously
abused in their religious Meetings, Cruelties at Warborrow in Oxon.
and even aged Women not spared, which often caused the Cry of innocent
Children to go up to Heaven, when they saw their Mothers thus ill treated. For
Magistrates themselves to break their Canes to pieces on those that were met
together, was but an ordinary Thing; and then sometimes other Sticks were made
Use of: Often also Women were stripped of their upper Garments; and this
accompanied with the Spoil of Goods. That the Persecutors were thus enraged,
was not strange, when we consider that some were sti^r'd up to it by their
Teachers; an Instance of which was given by Robert Priest of the same Place,
Profane Words of their Teacher Robert Priest.
who once said his Sermon, That the King's Laws, though they were contrary to the
Law of God, yet ought to be obeyed. Quite otherwise was the Doctrine of the
Apostles Peter and John, when they said to the Jewish Council, Judge ye whether
it be right in the Sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God.

In Northamptonshire, where Persecution was also very hot, the Bishop of
Peterborough said publicly in the Steeple-house, after he had commanded the
Officers to put in Execution the last Act against seditious Meetings, A cruel
Saying of the Bishop of Peterborough in Northamptonshire.
Against all Phanaticks it has done its Business, except the Quakers: But when
the Parliament sits again, a stronger Law will be made, not only to take away
their Lands and Goods, but also to sell them for Bondslaves. Thus the
Churchmen blew the Fire of Persecution.

At York the spoiling of Goods was also fiercely driven on by Alderman
Richardson; and even Boys and Girls, Alderman Richardson's Proceedings at York.
that were under sixteeen Years of Age, and therefore not subject to the
Penalty of the Law, were also fined; and when the Constables showed themselves
unwilling to assist in the Robbery, they were snarl'd at, and one prosecuted
for not performing his Duty, because he had refused to take away a Man's Cloak.
But if I should mention the ill Usage committed in all Counties and Places,
when should I come to a Conclusion!

Thomas Green, Tho. Green being taken in Prayer at a Meeting in Hertfordsh. is
fined 20 l. for which 50 l. worth in Goods is taken.
a grave Man, with whom I have been very familiarly acquainted, being in Prayer
at a Meeting at Sawbridgenorth in Hertfordshire, was pulled off his Knees, and
dragged out; and being brought before the Justices Robert Joslin and Humphry
Gore, they fined him 20 l. for speaking or preaching at the said Meeting; and
granted a Warrant to John Smith and Paul Tomson, Constables, to distrain; upon
which they went into the said Thomas Green's Shop in Royston, and took away as
much Goods as were worth 50 l. But this did not quench his Zeal; for like a
true and faithful Pastor he continued to feed the Flock, and to edify the
Church with his Gift, in which he was very serviceable.

At another Time the Justices Peter Soams and Thomas Mead gave a Warrant to
distrain 20 l. worth of Goods from the said Thomas Green, As another Time they
seize all his Shop Goods.
for preaching at a Meeting at Vpper-Chissel in Essex. And the Officers going
to Thomas Green's Shop, took all they could get, leaving nothing in the Shop
but a Skein of Thread, which was fallen on the Ground, and not observed by them.

Theophilus Green suffered also great Spoil of Goods: Tho. Green set in the
Stocks at Kingston, and fined 20 l. for preaching.
For having preached in a Meeting at Kingston upon Thames, he was put into the
Stocks for some Hours, and fined twenty Pounds. And having preached the three
next First-days of the Week at Wansworth, was for each fined at the same Rate.

The Week following, he being at Vxbridge, and visiting some poor Children of
his Friends, whose Father and Mother died shortly one after another, he took
two of them as his own, and looked after the disposing of the rest. And staying
there till the First Day of the Week, he went to the Meeting, and exhorted his
Friends, To keep their Meetings in the Name of Jesus; at the speaking of which
Words the Constable and Informer came in, and carried him away to Justice Ralph
Hawtrey, who fined him 20 l. and sent him Prisoner to Newgate in London, with a
Mittimus; A strange Warrant against him by Justice Hawtrey.
wherein he charged him, That he had exhorted the People to keep their Meetings
in the Name of Jesus, notwithstanding the Laws of Men to the contrary. Warrants
being issued forth to make Distress for the above mentioned Fines, which
amounted to 100 l. 5 s. they came and opened his Doors, Farther very serve
Proceedings against him.
and took away all his Goods they found, leaving him neither Bed nor Stool. And
after he had been kept Prisoner three Months, he with seven more was brought to
the Sessions House at Hicks's-Hall, and the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
were tendered to them. To which his Plea was, As an Englishman I ought either
to be acquitted or condemned, for the Cause for which I was committed, before I
should answer to any other Matter or Cause. Besides, I look upon my self to be
illegally committed, as being fined and committed for the same Fact. But they
told him, He must answer whether he would swear or no, and then he should be
heard. But continuing to refuse Swearing, he was remanded to Prison with the
rest; and afterward being sent for again, and still unwilling to break
Christ's Command, Not to swear at all, the Sentence of Praemunire was read
against him and his Fellow Prisoners, and so they continued in Jail above two
Years, till they were discharged by an Act of Grace from the King.

The Meetings of those called Quakers were miserably disturbed in Horslydo
(...) County of Surrey, On the 25th of September, several Musketeers come into
the Meeting House, and haling those that were met together ^^to the Street, A
(...) the Violence exercised by the Soldiers at Ho^^lydown Meeting in Southwark.
the Troopers came riding amongst them, a (...) and (...) violently, pushing
them with their Carabin^s, which the others did with the butt-ends of their
Muskets, to that Degree, that above twenty Persons were wounded and soroly
bruised; nay, so desperately wicked were these mischievous Fellows, that a
Party of Horse sought to ride over these harmless People; but the Horses, more
merciful than their Riders, and not going forward, they turned them, and by
curbing and reining them backward, strove to do what Mischief they could. On
the 2d of October these peaceable People being kept out of their Meeting Place,
there came a Party of Foot, and a Party of Horse, and abused them no less
violently than the Week before; insomuch that with beating and knocking they
broke several of their Muskets and Pikes, and one Carabine, and above thirty
Persons were so sorely wounded and bruised, that their Blood was spilt in the
Streets.

On the 9th of the said Month the Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, came again to
the Meeting at the aforesaid Place, and one of them having a Snovel, threw the
Dirt and Mire from the Channels on both Men and Women; and after him the Horse
and Foot came, and fell upon them, striking and knocking down, without respect
to Age or Sex, un^^ (...) Blood from many; and when some of the Inhabitants
(...) Pity took them into their Houses, to save their Lives, the Soldiers
forced open the Doors, and haled them into the Street again, and plucked on
their Hats, that they might strike on their bare heads; insomuch that many had
their Heads grievously broken. Some Troopers also tore the Women's Clothes off
their Backs, and haled them through the Mire by their Horse-sides; and some of
the Foot-Soldiers put their Hands in a most shameful Manner under the Women's
Coats: Nay, a Soldier twice struck a Woman, that was big with Child, with his
Musket on the Belly, and once on the Breast, wh^s another hung Dirt in her Face:
So that she miscarried. And above (...) Persons were this Day sorely wounded
and bruised. The 16th on the said Month these conscientious People Meeting
again to perform their Worship to God, a great Party of Horse and Foot came,
and ^ell to beating them so violently, as if they would have ki^l'd all on the
Spot; so that he Blood ran down about the Ears of many; and one of the
Constables endeavoring to stop the wicked Crew from shedding more Blood, they
fell upon him also and broke his Head; and when they were rebuked for their
cruel Dealing, some said, If you knew what Orders no have, you would say, we
dealt mercifully with you. And being asked, How can you deal thus with a People
that make no Resistance nor Opposition? They answered, We had rather, and it
would be better for us, if you did resist and oppose. From which it appeared
plainly, that this Mischief was done to provoke Opposition, that so they might
have imbrued their Hands in the Blood of these Sufferers, and so have had their
Lives and Goods for a Prey. It was therefore thought convenient to acquaint the
King and his Council with this barbarous Cruelty; which had such Effect, that
some Stop was made to these excessive Cruelties, though their Abuses did not
altogether cease.

About this Time it happened that Solomon Eccles came to Cork in Ireland, In
the Cathedral at Cork in Ireland, S. Eccles exposes B.(...) a Turn C^^^ Priest
for which he is whilt through the Street.
and went into the Cathedral, where the Priest Benjamin Cross preached in a
Surplice, and having formerly been a Presbyterian Preacher in Dor^^shire in
England, had there said, That he had rather go to a Stake and be burned, than
to put on a Surplice, This Priest (now become a Turn-coat for Gain) having
finished his Sermon, and concluded with a Prayer, Solomon Eccles said, That the
Prayer of the Wicked was an Abomination to the Lord. And knowing the
Deceitfulness of the said Priest, and his being an Apostate, and turned out of
Town.
he added, What shall be done to the Man that makes Shipwreck of a good
Conscience? For this he was taken, and by the Mayo^ committed to Prison, where
being kept ten Days, he was accused as a Vagabond, and without any Examination,
whipped along the Streets of Cork, from North-Gate to South-Gate, and receiv^d
about ninety Stripes, and then was expelled. We have seen heretofore Instances
of his great Zeal; and though in some respect he might by it have been
transported a little too far, yet he gave Proofs of a sincere Heart; for having
said some Years after to one John Story, (who launched out into great
Haughtiness and Arrogance) That it was the Word of the Lord that he should die
that Year (which by some body to set a Gloss upon it, A Token of S. Eccles's
Sincerity.
was interpreted to be meant of the Spiritual Death,) yet Eccles himself said
afterward, both at London, and Bristol, and elsewhere, That he had not spoken
this according to the Counsel of the Lord; but that it had been in his own
Will, and from a forward Mind; and that he had felt the Anger of the Lord,
because he had called these his own Words, the Word of the Lord; which he
really repented of.

In the Beginning of the Year 1671, 1671
G. Fox was at London, and though by reason of a heavy Sickness, of which he
began to recover, he continued still weak, yet he did not omit Preaching; and
about this Time he made the following Prayer to the Lord, which he put in
Writing:

O Lord God Almighty! G. Fox's Prayer.
Prosper Truth, and preserve Justice and Equity in the Land, and bring down all
Injustice and Iniquity, Oppression and Falsehood, and Cruelty, and
Unmercifulness in the Land, that Mercy and Righteousness may flourish!

And, O Lord God! Establish and set up Verity, and preserve it in the Land: And
bring down in the Land all Deba^chery, and Vice, and Whoredoms, and
Fornication, and this raping Spirit, which causes and leads People to have
no Esteem of thee, O God! nor their own Souls or Bodies, nor of Christianity,
Modesty, of Humanity.

And, O Lord! Put it in the Magistrates Hearts, to bring down all this
Ungodliness, and Violence, and Cruelty, Profaneness, Cursing and Swearing; and
to put down all these Whore-houses and Play Houses, which do corrupt Youth and
People, and lead them from the Kingdom of God, where no unclean thing can ^ter,
neither shall come: But such Works lead People to Hell. And the Lord (...)
Mercy bring down all these things in the Nation, to stop thy Wrath, 0 God! from
coming on the Land.

G. F.
This Prayer was writ the 17th Day at Night of the 2d Month, 1671.
G. Fox thinking his Wife now at Liberty, G. Fox's Wife being still detained in
Prison be obtains the Royal Order for her Discharge.
understood that her Enemies, notwithstanding the King's Order to release her,
had found Means to hold her still in Prison. Therefore he did not give himself
Rest, till by the Help of others he obtained from the King a Discharge under
the Great Seal, to clear both her and her Estate, after she had been ten Years
a Prisoner and premunired. This Royal Order he sent forthwith down to her, and
thus she was set at Liberty.

Now since the Heat of Persecution began to cool, Concludes on a Voyage for
America. and sets Sail.
he felt himself in^^ to make a Voyage to America, to visit his Friends there;
of this his Intention he gave Notice to his Wife by a Letter, and desired her
to come up to London; which she did accordingly. And he having taken Leave of
her, set Sail in the latter Part of the Summer toward America, with several of
his Friends that accompanied him.

Now whilst I leave him on Shipboard, A very witty and easy and ingenious Way
Paper printed.
I cannot forbear to mention, that this Year at London came forth a witty
Pamphlet with this Title, An easy Way to get Marry, (...), without Fear or
^amber, Printed for the Society of Informers. for the Society of Informers.
This Book contained a Satirical Rebuke to the Informers, and began thus, To
all you that can work, and will not; and to all those that through other Ways of
Extravagancy have brought your selves into Debt, Necessity, or other Wants,(for
your speedy Supply and future Support) there is an Opportunity put into your
Hands that (...) both safe, profitable, and honorable. It is to be Informers.

Next the Author said, That it was an casie Way, since it was no more than to
seek out where there were (...) Barn, Stable, or Backside, five Persons besides
those of the (...), though they spoke never a Word. If you do but swear it (thus
he continued) to be a Conventicle, then it is a Conventicle. It is no Matter if
there were never a Thought in their Hearts as to Plotting or contriving
Insurrections (for which the Law was made) they being there, it is sufficient
to have them fined Five Shillings a-piece the first Time, and twenty Pounds for
the House; and for the second Time ten Shillings a-piece; and if the Justices
be not well advised, it may be, for the second Time for the House you may get
twenty Pounds more, although the Act does not grant it. And of all this it is
said the Thirds is yours: This you may easily have; for the Justices are afraid
of your Power, since you have them under your Lee; so they will not much
question you, left they be counted Fanatics; and they know that if they do not
please your Wills, your Power is such, that you may recover Fifty Pounds for
your Parts, by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plea (...) any of his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall lie. Can
your Hearts desire more? Who will not be Informers? that must have all Clauses
construed most largely and beneficially to their Justification and
Encouragement!

As to the Profitableness, the Author said, Besides the twenty Pounds and ten
Shillings a-piece for meeting, if you can but tempt any by your Questions, or
other Provocations, to speak but a Word to answer you, it will serve to make
him a Preacher, and then for the first Time here is twenty Pounds, and for the
second forty Pounds: It Is no Matter what is spoke, or to what Concern; if you
swear you did hear such an one speak, it is enough to make him a Preacher. And
as to the inability, there is no Danger that you should fall short of your
Salary; for you can by your Power make void that old Proves, Where it is not
to be had, the King must lose his Right. But your Prerogative is such, that if
the Offender has it not, you can command your Servants to levy it on any other
that is not an Offender in that Nature, provided he be there, otherwise an
Appeal will be granted. At this Rate the Author treated the Matter, taking out
of the Way all Difficulties and Scruples which any might have objected; and tho
he did this mostly in a bur^esque Way, yet what he said was to firm and
strenuous, that he gave Proofs of being a Man of Understanding, and of a great
Wit; for though in an ingenious Way he showed the Abominableness of this
informing Trade, yet he proposed it safe every Way; and if any might tell them
they were Knights of the Post; yet however the Thing fell out, it was never
attended with Loss, but always with a certain Gain; since in the Prosecution
nothing could be objected, but what might easily be quasht, and the Opposers
thus frustrated. And when to all these infallible Profits was added the
Honourableness of the Office, what could one desire more? For was it not
honorable indeed, to command both Magistrates and military Officers, to follow
the Informers where they will? And to obtain this Office, one needed not to be
at great Cost to purchase it, nor to break his Pate with studying; since at the
very first Conventicle they entered, they might commence Doctors. But of what
Religion or Profession these Informers should be, the Author himself seemed not
to know: They must be no Jews, said he; for these were not to covet their
Neighbors Ox, nor Ass, nor any thing that was their Neighbors: Neither should
they be Gentiles, for they had Conscience accusing, and did by Nature the
Things contained in the Law, having the Law writ in their Hearts. And
Christians they could be by no Means, for they say they forsake the Devil and
all his Works, and all the Lusts of the Flesh, and not (...) hurt any by Word
nor Deed, which in less than by swearing, [the common Fact of the Informers.]
-- To conclude, the Author said, For any into whose Hands this may come, if
they fear any Danger in it, they ought not to conceal it, but to bring it
before some Justice, or the Chief Magistrate of the Place, with an Account how
they came by it, and then they are innocent: Then if it cannot clear it self,
let it lie in Prison till it perish,

Now I return to George Fox, whom we left in the Ship going to America. During
his Voyage he suffered much in his Body; for the many Hurts and Bruises he had
formerly received, and the Griefs and Infirmities he had contracted in England
by Cold, and Hardships, and long Imprisonments, returned upon him now he came
to Sea, and caused great Pain. And after having been seven Weeks and some odd
Days at Sea, he, G. F. etc arrive safe at Barbados.
with his Fellow-travellers, came safe to the Island of Barbados. His
Occurrences there he has described at large in his Journal. Many of the
Great-Ones, especially the Governor, showed him much Kindness. And after he had
edified his Friends there on many Occasions, and exhorted them to the
maintaining of good Order, both in Things relating in the Church, and in the
governing of their Blacks, he now being restored to Health again, departed the
Island after a Stay of three Months, and set Said for Jamaica, Afterward sail
to Jamaica. where E. Hooton d^es.
where he had not been long, but Elizabeth H^^^on several Times mentioned in
this Work, departed this Life, having been well the Day before she died; and
thus she finished her Days in a good Frame of Mind. After he had been there
about seven Weeks, he performed his Service to his Satisfaction.

In the Beginning of the Year 1672, 1672
he took Shipping for Maryland, Then take Shipping for Maryland. and so travel
to New England, Maryland again Virginia, and Carolina.
where being come, he with those with him traveled through Woods and
Wildernesses, over Bogs and great Rivers, to New England. By the Way, he had
sometimes Opportunity to speak to the Indians and their Kings and at other
Times he met with singular Cases, all which, for Brevity's Sake, I pass by in
Silence. He went also to the Town called Newcastle; upon Delaware. Here he
lodged at the Governor's House, and had also a Meeting there. From thence he
returned again to Maryland, and came also into Virginia, and Carolina, and thus
spent above a Year traveling to and from in America.

Whilst he was there, England and France at War with Holland.
England and France were entered into War against Holland. Now though I have yet
in fresh Remembrance those sad Times, and in what a wonderful Manner it pleased
the Lord to save our Country from being quite overrun and subdued, yet I shall
not mention those Things, since they are at large set down by other Writers.
Ye: transiently I Will give a Touch of the remarkable Exaltation of William III.
Prince of Orange, and afterward King of Great Britain.

I have already said in its due Place, The Manner of the Disslut^on of the
perpetual Edict against the Prince of Orange.
how it was endeavored to exclude him by the Perpetual Edict from ever being
Stadtholder, or Deputy. But how strong soever this Edict was sworn to, yet
Heaven brought it to naught, and broke the Ties of it by the Refuse of the
Nation: For Women, and many others of the Mob, forced the^ Magistrates, when
the French were come into the Province of Vtrecht, and all seemed to run into
Confusion, to break their Oaths, and to restore that young and magnanimous
Prince to the Honor and Dignity of his renowned Ancestors. And the miserable
Fate (...) and C.de Wit.
The miserable Fate of the two Brethren, John and Cornelius Wit, who had been
chief Instruments in making the said perpetual Edict, and were killed and
butchered in a most abominable Manner by the Inhabitants of the Hague, was not
without good Reason disapproved by many grave and serious People. It Is true, it
was a great Mistake that they acted so, that they seemed to set Limits to the
Almighty; though I do not believe their Intent was such, but rather that what
they did in making void the Stadholdership, they judged conducive to the
Benefit of their Country. After they were murdered, the Widow of Cornelius
(...) Wit seemed to have a firm Belief that they were entered into everlasting
Glory: For though for some Time after their Death she was under a great Concern,
considering how on a sudden, and at unawares, they were hurried out of this
Life; yet at length, early in the Morning, either in a Dream or in a Vision,
The Vision of C. de. Wit's Widow
she beheld them both in a Cloud in a glorious Form, with Hands lifted up, and
clothed with pure white Raiment. By this Sight all her former Solicitude and
Fear was taken from her, and she was fully satisfied concerning their eternal
Well-being. I have this Relation from several credible Persons, who said they
had it from her own Mouth, 2nd they all agreed in the material Circumstances.

In England, Execution of the penal Laws for Religion suspended.
where it was observed that Persecution for Religion, during the War, could not
but be prejudicial to the Public, the King gave forth a Declaration, whereby
the Execution of the penal Laws was suspended. But since the Papists, against
whom the most of these Laws had been made, thus got Liberty to enter into
Offices of Trust, many of the People grew jealous on this Account; insomuch
that the Parliament, in the Year 1673, showed their Dislike of this to the
King, telling him, That the penal Statutes about ecclesiastical Matters could
not be suspended but by an Act of Parliament. The King wanting Money to
continue the War, yielded somewhat to the Parliament, in respect to the Popish
Priests and Jesuits, consenting that the Laws against them should continue in
Force.

This Summer G. F. returned to England, ^urns (...)
and arrived at Bristol, of which he gave Notice to his Wife by a Letter; and
she delayed not to go to him; with her came also her Son-in-Law Thomas Lower,
and two of her Daughters: Her other Son-in-Law John Rouse, accompanied by
William Fenn, etc. came also from London; and since at that Time there was a
Fair at Bristol, many of his Friends came thither from other Parts of the
Country, and so were at a great Meeting he had there, in which he preached
concerning the three chief Teachers, viz. That God was the first Teacher of Man
and Woman in Paradise; and that as long as they kept to God's teaching, they
kept in the Image of God, and in Righteousness, Holiness, and Dominion over all
that God has made: But when they hearkened to the false Teaching of the
Serpent, who was out of Truth, and so disobeyed God, they lost the Image of
God, to wit, Righteousness, and Holiness; and so coming ^^der the Power of
Satan, were turned out of Paradise. That this Serpent was the second Teacher,
and that Man following his Teaching, came into Misery, and into the Fall. And
that Christ Jesus was the third Teacher, of whom God said, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him: And that this Son himself said,
Learn of me: That he was the true Gospel-Teacher that never fell, (...) came to
London. Baptists and Socinians over the Quakers are no Christians; but their
Books are answered.
and therefore was to be heard in all Things, since he was the Savior and the
Redeemer, and having laid down his Life, had bought his Sheep with his precious
Blood. Of this he treated at large in the said Meeting; and after some Stay at
Bristol, he went to Glocestershire; and going from thence to Oxfordshire, he
came at length to London, where Persecution being not so hot now as formerly,
the Baptists and Socinians were very active in blackening the Quakers, by
publishing several Books against them, in which they averred that the Quakers
were no Christians. But these malicious Books were not left unanswered, nor the
Falsehoods contained in them.

After G. F. had been some Time at London, he went with his Wife and Thomas
Lower to Worcester, G. F. has some foresight of his Imprisonment, which (...)
after follows, being with T. Lower taken and sent to Worcester Jail.
and when he signified to her that it was like a Prison would be his Share, she
seemed not without Reason grieved at it. And not long after having had a
Meeting at A^mscot in Tredington Parish, after the Meeting was ended, he, with
T. Lower sitting in the Parlour, and discoursing with some Friends, they both,
under Pretense of having kept great Meetings that might be prejudicial to the
public Peace, were taken by Henry Parker Justice, and sent to Worcester-Jail
on the 17th of December, and his Wife with her Daughter returned into the
North; and by that Time he thought she could be got home, he writ a short
Letter to her, and exhorted her to be content with the Will of the Lord. He
also writ a Letter to the Lord Windsor, who was Lieutenant of Worcestershire,
and other Magistrates, wherein he informed them of his Imprisonment, and that
he had not been taken in a Meeting, but in a House where he had some Business.
He also signified, that he intended to have visited his Mother, from which he
had now been stopped. But he could not thus obtain his Liberty; yet Thomas Lower
might have got free if he would; for his Brother Dr. Lower, being one of the
King's Physicians, had procured Henry Savil, a Gentleman of the King's
Bedchamber, A manifest Taken of T. Lower's great Love to G. F.
to write to the said Lord Windsor to release Thomas Lower: But his Love to his
Father-in-Law G. F. was such, that he kept the said Letter by him unsent; and
so they were both continued Prisoners.

Now whilst I leave them in Prison, M. Halhead moved to pay a Visit to the ^ate
General Lambert, who after (...) plain Dealing parts with him in Love.
I return once more to Miles Halhead, of whom Mention has been often made
already. He being at Plymouth in this Year, felt himself stirred up to go see
John Lambert, who having formerly been a General, was now, as has been said in
due Place, confined to perpetual Imprisonment, in a little Island not far from
Plymouth. To this Island Halhead passed over; and though he found there a strong
Guard of Soldiers, yet he got Leave to see Lambert; and being come to him, he
said, Friend, is thy Name John Lambert? To which Lambert answered, Yea: Which
made Miles say, Then I pray thee, Friend, hear what the Servant of the Lord
has to say to thee: And he continued thus, Friend, the Lord God made Use of
thee and others for the Deliverance of his People; and when you cried to him,
he delivered you in your Distresses, as at Dunbar and other Places, and gave an
Opportunity into your Hands to do Good; and you promised what great Things you
would do for the Lord's People: But truly John Lambert, ye soon forgot your
Promises ye made to the Lord in that Day and Time of your great Distress, and
turned the Edge of your Sword against the Lord's Servants and Handmaids, whom
he sent forth to declare his eternal Truth; and made Laws, and consented to
Laws, and suffered and permitted Laws to ^e made against God's People. To this
Lambert said, Friend, I would have (...) know, that some of us never made Laws,
nor consented to Laws to persecute (...) or any of your Friends; for
Persecution we ever were against. To w^^ Miles returned, It may be so; but the
Scripture of Truth is fulfilled by the (...) of you: For although thou and some
others have not given your Consent to m^ Laws against the Lord's People; yet ye
suffered and permitted it to be m^^ and done; and when Power and Authority was
in your Hands, ye might have spoken the Word, and the Servants and Handmaids of
the Lord might have been delivered out of the Devourer's Hands; but none was
found amongst you, that would be seen to plead the Cause of the Innocent; so
the Lord God of Life was griev^^ with you, because ye slighted the Lord and his
Servants, and began to set up your Self-Interest, and to lay Field to Field,
and House to House, and make your Names great in the Earth. Then the Lord took
away your Power and Authority, your Manhood and your Boldness, and caused you
to flee before your Enemies, and your Hearts fainted with Fear, and some ended
their Days in Grief and Sorrow, and some lie in Holes and Caves to this Day. So
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will give a just Reward to every one according
to his Works. So, my dear Friend, prize the great Love of God to thee who has
not given thy Life into the Hands of the Devourers, but has given thee thy
Life for a Prey, and Time to prepare thy self, that thou may end thy Days in
Peace. And truly the Lord is good to all them that fear him, and believe in his
Name. For though all the Powers of the Earth rise up against a poor innocent
People, yet the Lord God of Life and Love was with them, and pleaded their
Cause, although all Men slighted them: And tr^y, the best was but as a Brier, and
the most upright among them as a Thorn-b^dge. If the Lord had not pleaded our
Innocence, we had not had a Being in the Land of our Nativity, Glory to his
Name for ever, who has not suffered or permitted more of the Wrath of Man, nor
Laws, nor Decrees of Men, to come against his People, that believe in his Name,
than has been for his Honor, and for his Glory, and for the eternal Good of
all his Sons and Daughters, and Servants; and the Remainder the Lord God of
Life and Love has restrained to this Day: Glory, and Honor, and living
eternal Praises be given and returned to the Lord God, and the Lamb for ever!
Thus Halhead ended his Speech, and Lambert, who had heard him with good
Satisfaction, desired him to sit down, which Halhead did; and then Lambert
called for Beer, and gave him to drink; after which he said to him, Friend, I
do believe thou speak to me in Love, and so I take it. And then he asked
him, if be^n as at Dunbar Fight? To which Halhead having answered, No; he
further asked, How do you know what great Danger we were in at that Time? Upon
which Halhead gave him to understand, That he coming that Way a little Time
after the Fight, and having viewed the Town of Dunbar, and the Ground about it
where the English Army lay, how the Sea was on the one Hand of them, and Hills
and Mountains on the other, and the great Scotch Army before and behind them,
he then took into serious Consideration the great Danger the English had been
in, and thought how greatly the Englishmen were engaged to the Lord for their
Deliverance to serve him in Truth and Vprightness of Heart all the Days of
their Life. Truly John, said Halhead then to Lambert, I never saw thy Face
before to know thee, although I have been brought before many of our English
Commanders in the Time of Oliver Cromwell. Lambert then asking, Who they were?
Halhead named the Generals Fleetwood and Desborough, Major Blackmore, and
Colonel Fenwick, before whom he had been when he was Governor of Edinburgh.
Lambert then said, He knew the most of those Men to have been very moderate,
and that they ever were against Persecution. To which Miles replied, Indeed
they were very moderate, and would not be much seen to persecute, or be severe
with the Lord's People; but truly they permitted others to do it, and took
little Notice of the Sufferings of the People of God; so that none were found
to plead our Cause, but the Lord God. To this Lambert said, Although you and your
Friends suffered Persecution, and some Hardships in that Time, your Cause
therein is never the worse for that. That is very true, returned Miles, but let
me tell th^e in the Plainness of my Heart, that is no Thanks to you, but Glory
to the Lord for ever. About two Hours Miles discoursed with Lambert and his
Wife and two Daughters, and after he had cleared himself, he took Leave of
them, and so parted in Love.

Now before I leave Halhead, I Will insert here a Copy of a Letter he writ in the
Year 1674, to G. F. who was then Prisoner in Worcester-Jail. The said Letter
was thus;

George Fox,
THou dear and well-beloved of the Lord, M. Halhead's Letter to G. F.
whom he sent, out of his eternal Love, to me, and many more, who were in
Darkness and in Blindness seeking the Living among the Dead, to show and direct
us the Way that leads out of Sin and Evil up to God eternal blessed for
evermore. The living eternal God of Life and Love, 1674
that sent thee into the North, keep and preserve me by his eternal Arm and
Power, and all my dear Friends and Brethren, truly sensible of his eternal
Love, which I bear Record has been exceeding great, since the Day the Lord
made his precious Truth known amongst us. Therefore, dear George Fox, pray for
me, for I am old, and infirm of Body, and the Sight of my Eyes grows exceeding
weak, that I may be kept faithful and upright to the Lord, in my Measure I have
received of the Lord, in this Day of his eternal Love; that I may give my
Account with Joy and Rejoicing, and Gladness of Heart, and be presented with
thee, and all my Brethren, blameless to the Lord, that I may go to my Grave in
Peace, and rest for evermore, Amen.

My dear Love to my good old Friends, Margaret Fox, and Thomas Lower; their
dear and tender Love and Care of me in Months past, by me cannot be forgotten,
as I dwell and abide faithful to him, who is my Light and Life, my Joy and
Peace, God over all, blessed for evermore, Amen.

Miles Halhead.


In the Month called January, G. F. and T. Lower brought before Court at their
Sessions at Worcester.
1673-4, G. F. and Thomas Lower, were brought to their Trial in the Court at
Worcester, it being the last Day of the Sessions; and when they came in, those
on the Bench were struck with Paleness in their Faces, and continued a while
speechless, insomuch that a Butcher in the Hall said, What! are they afraid?
Dare not the Justices speak to them? At length Justice Parker, by whose Order
G. F and T. Lower had been committed, made a long Speech, much to the same
Effect as the Contents of the Mittimus, and added, That he thought it a milder
Course to send them two to Jail, than to put his Neighbors to the Loss of two
hundred Pounds, which they must have suffered, if he had put the Law in
Execution against Conventicles. But this was a very poor Shift, and silly
Evasion; for there being no Meeting when he came, nor any to inform, he had no
Evidence to convict them, or his Neighbors by. When Parker had ended his
Speech, the Justices spoke to the Prisoners, and began with Lower, whom they
examined why he came into that Country. And examined.
And when they had done with him, they asked of G. F. an Account of his Travel,
which he gave them, and showed them clearly, that he and his Friends, of whom
so great a Noise had been made by Justice Parker, as if many had come together
from several Parts, were in a Manner all but one Family. When he had ended
speaking, the Chairman Simpson said, Your Relation or Account is very innocent.
Then he and Parker having whispered a while together, the said Chairman stood
up and said, You Mr. Fox are a famous Man; and all this may be true which you
have said; but that we may be the better satisfied, will you take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy? Now, though G. F. answered to this, That they had said
they would not ensnare him, and that this was a plain Snare, since they knew he
and his Friends would not take any Oath; all was in vain, and they caused the
Oath to be read; which being done, he told them, I never took Oath in my Life,
but I have always been true to the Government. I was cast into the Dungeon at
Darby, and kept Prisoner six Months there, because I would not take up Arms
against King Charles at Worcester-Fight: And for going to Meetings, I was
carried out of Leicester, and brought before Oliver Cromwell, as a Plotter to
bring in King Charles: And ye know in your own Consciences, that we, the People
called Quakers, cannot take an Oath, or swear in any Case, because Christ has
forbidden it. But as to the Matter or Substance contained in the Oaths, this I
can say and do, that I do own and acknowledge the King of England to be lawful
Heir and Successor to the Realm of England; and do abhor all Plots and
Plotters, and Contrivances against him; and I have nothing in my Heart but Love
and good Will to him and all Men, and desire his and their Prosperity; the Lord
knows it, before whom I stand an innocent Man. And as to the Oath of Supremacy,
I deny the Pope and his Power, and abhor it with my Heart. Whilst he was yet
speaking, they cried, Give him the Book, viz. the Bible. The book, says G. F
says, Swear not at all: And he going on to declare his Mind farther, they
cried, Take him away Jailor; who not showing himself very forward, they cried
again, Take him away: We shall have a Meeting here; why do you not take him
away? And one of the Bench said, That Fellow, meaning the Jailor, loves to hear
him preach. G. Fox recommitted for refusing to swear. But T. Lower set at
Liberty.
The Jailor then taking him away, as he was turning from them, he said, The
Lord forgive you who cast me into Prison for obeying the Doctrine of Christ.
After G. F. was led away, the Justices told T. Lower, He was at Liberty; for
they did not think it safe to deal with him at the same Rate as they did with
G. F. because they thought he had some Protection at Court. And then pleads
earnestly to obtain his Father-in-law's also
Lower asked then, Why his Father-in-law might not be set at Liberty, as well
as he, since they were both taken together, and their Case was alike? But they
telling him, they would not hear him, said, You may be gone about your
Business, for we have nothing more to say to you, seeing you are discharged.

This was all he could get from them; therefore after the Court was risen, he
went to speak with them at their Chamber, desiring to know what Cause they had
to detain his Father, seeing they had discharged him; and wishing them to
consider, whether this was not Partiality, Upon this Simpson said, If you be
not content, we will tender you the Oath also, and send you to your Father. To
which Lower replied, Ye may do that, if ye think fit; but whether ye send me or
no, I intend to go, and wait upon my Father in Prison; for that is now my
Business in this Country. Then Justice Parker said to him, Do you think, Mr.
Lower, that I had no Cause to send your Father and you to Prison, when you had
such a great Meeting; insomuch that the Parson of the Parish complained to me,
that he had lost the greatest Part of his Parishioners; so that when he comes
amongst them, he has scarce any Auditors left? To this Lower returned, T.
Lower unwillingly gives a smart Reprimand to the Pa^^n Dr. Crowder to the great
Diversion of the Justices
I have heard that the Priest of that Parish comes so seldom to visit his
Flock, but once it may be, or twice in a year, to gather up his Tithes, that it
was but Charity in my Father, to visit such a forlorn and forsaken Flock. And
therefore thou had no Cause to send my Father to Prison for visiting them, or
for teaching, instructing and directing them to Christ their true Teacher, who
had so little Comfort or Benefit from their pretended Pastor, who comes amongst
them only to seek for his Gain from his Quarter. Upon this the Justices fell a
laughing; for Dr. Crowder, the Priest spoken of, was then in the Room, sitting
among them; though Lower did not know him, and he had the Wit to hold his Tongue,
and not to vindicate himself. But after Lower was gone away, the Justices so
jested on Crowder, that he grew ashamed, and was so nettled with it, that he
threatened to sue T. Lower in the Bishop's Court, upon an Action of Defamation;
which Lower having heard of, sent him Word, That he might begin if he would;
and that he would answer him and bring his whole Parish in Evidence against
him. And he told him the same afterward to his Face; which so cooled the
Priest's Eagerness, that he thought it more safe for him to let him alone.

Soon after the Sessions were over, an Habeas Corpus was sent down to
Worcester, G. F. under the Charge of his Son Lower brought up to the King's
Bench Bar, where the Judges (...) him with moderation
for the Sheriff, to bring up G. Fox to the King's Bench Bar. Whereupon his
Son-in-Law Lower conducted him; For the under Sheriff had made Lower his Deputy
to convey G. F. to London. Who being arrived there, appeared before the Court
of King's Bench, where he found the Judges moderate; and they patiently heard
him, when he gave them an Account how he had been stopped in his Journey, and
committed to Jail; and how at his Trial the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy
had been tendered to him; and also what he had offered to the Justices as a
Declaration, that he was willing to sign, instead of the said Oaths. To this it
was told him by the Chief Justice, that they would consider farther of it.
Being then delivered to the Keeper of the King's Bench, he was suffered to go
and lodge at the House of one of his Friends; for though he continued a Prisoner,
yet they were sufficiently persuaded that he would not run away. But through the
Insinuations of Justice Parker, as it was said, and superior Application, he is
remitted to the next Assizes
But after this, Justice Parker, as it was said, moved the Court, that G. F.
might be sent back to Worcester, that his Cause might be tried there; for
Parker saw clearly chat if G. F. had been acquitted here, this would have
tended to his Shame, for having committed him unjustly.

A Day then being appointed for another Hearing, and G. F. appearing again at
the King's Bench, and hearing that it was under Deliberation to send him back
to Worcester, signified that This was only to ensnare him, by putting the Oath
to him, that so they might praemunire him, who never took Oath in his Life. And
he farther told them, If he broke his Yea or Nay, he was content to suffer the
same Penalty as those that break their Oaths. Now seeing Parker had spread a
Report at London, and it had been said in the Parliament House, That when he
took G. F. there were many substantial Men with him, out of several Parts of
the Nation, and that they had a Design or Plot in Hand. G. F. did not omit to
show the Fallacy of that malicious Story. And since he thus said open Parker's
Shame, it was not strange that by his Friends at Court he procured that the
King's Judges complied with his Desire that G. F. should be remanded to
Worcester-Jail; insomuch that whatever he said, he could not prevent it; only
this Favor was granted him, that he might go his own Way, and at his Leisure,
provided he would be there without Fail by the Assizes, which were to begin on
the second Day of the Month called April.

G. F. then after some Stay went down leisurely; Where he appears accordingly
before Judge Turner, who though seeming inclinable to more Kindness, at last
refers him to the next Sessions.
and being come to Worcester, he was on the second Day of the aforesaid Month
brought from the Jail to an Inn, near the Sessions-Hall; but not being called
that Day, the Jailor came to him at Night, and told him he might go home,
meaning to the Jail; whereupon he walked thither, being accompanied by one of
his Friends. Next Day being brought up again, a Boy of about eleven Years old
was set to be his Keeper. Having in my Relation of the Proceedings before the
King's Bench passed by most Part of the the pleading, so I shall do here
likewise, to avoid Repetitions of what has been several Times related already
concerning such Kind of Trials; yet I cannot pass by in Silence, that after he
had given an Account of his Journey before he was taken, he added, That since
his Imprisonment, he had understood, that his Mother, who was an ancient and
weak Woman, and had desired to see him before she died, hearing that he was
stopped and imprisoned in his Journey, so that he was not likely to come and see
her, it struck her so that she died soon after; which had been very hard to
him. Judge Turner, who formerly had been severe to him, seemed now (as some
thought) inclined to have him set at Liberty, since he saw they had nothing
justly against him; but Parker, who had committed him, endeavored to incense
the Judge against him; for if he had been released, then he himself must have
born the Blame of having committed G. F. unjustly; and therefore he told the
Judge, That G. F. was a Ringleader, that many of the Nation followed him; and
one knew not what it might come to. Yet the Judge gave but little ear to all
this, being willing to be easy; but he could not resolve to do this, by setting
G. F. at Liberty, lest he should displease others; and thus in Conclusion, G.
F. and his Cause were referred to the Sessions again, and he continued
Prisoner, but with this Proviso, that he should have the Liberty of the Town;
which accordingly he had, and by this he got Opportunity to speak with many
Persons, and sometimes with Priests too, one of which asked him, Whether he was
grown up to Perfection? A Priest puts several Questions to G. F. which he
answers.
To which he answered, What he was, he was by the Grace of God. This is replied
the Priest, a modest and civil Answer. But, continued he in the Words of the
Apostle John, If we say that we have no Sin we deceive our selves, and the
Truth is not in us. And asking, What he said to that? G. F. returned with the
Words of the same Apostle, If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a
Liar, and his Word is not in us. Moreover he said, Christ came to destroy Sin,
and to take away Sin. There is a Time for People to see that they have sinned,
and there is a Time for them to confess their Sin, and to forsake it, and to
know the Blood of Christ to cleanse from all Sin. After some more reasoning,
the Priest said, We must always be striving: To which G. F. returned, That it
was a sad and comfortless Sort of striving, to strive with a Belief that we
should never overcome: And he told him also, That Paul, who once cried out
because of the Body of Death, did also thank God, who gave him the Victory; and
that he said, There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: So
that there was a Time of crying out for Want of Victory, and a Time praising
God for the Victory. But, said the Priest, Job was not perfect. To which G. F.
returned that God has signified in Scripture, That Job was perfect and
upright, and that he eschewed Evil; and that the Devil himself was forced to
confess, that God had set an Hedge about him; which was not an outward Hedge,
but the invisible heavenly Power. Yet said Job, replied the Priest, He charge
his Angels with Folly, and the Heavens are not clean in his Sight. That Is a
Mistake, said G. F. for it was not Job said so, but Eliphaz who contended
against Job. Well but, said the Priest, What say you to that Scripture, The
justest Man that is, sins seven Times a Day? There is answered G. F. no such
Scripture. So the Priest was silent, and this Conference broken off, of which I
have related thus much, to show that G. F. was not such a simple Person, as
some from mere Envy have represented him; for he was never at a Loss for an
Answer, but had it always in Readiness.

Now the Time of the Sessions being come again, G. F. appears again at the
Sessions.
where the Justice, who was Chairman, was one Street. G. F. was called there
before the Justices, and then the said Justice exceedingly misrepresented the
Case, by telling the People, That G. F. had a Meeting at Tredington from all
Parts of the Nation, to the terrifying of the King's Subjects; for which he had
been committed, and that for the Trial of his Fidelity, the Oaths had been
tendered to him. And then turning to G. F. he asked him, Since he had time to
consider of it, whether he would now take the Oaths? G. F. having obtained
Liberty to speak for himself, gave a Relation of his Journey, and showed that
he and his Friends had in no wise kept a Meeting that occasioned Terror to any
of the King's Subjects; and as to the Oaths, he showed why he could not take
them, and what he could declare instead thereof. But notwithstanding all this,
the Oaths were read to him again; and he persisting in his Refusal to take
them, the Indictment was read also; and afterward the Chairman asked him. If
he was guilty? G. F. answered, No, since the Indictment was a Bundle of Lies,
which he proved in several Particulars, asking him, If he did not know in his
Conscience that they were Lies? To which he said, It was their Form: Whereupon
G. F. returned, It was not a true Form. Then the Chairman told the Jury, what
they should do in this Case; and before they gave in their Verdict, G. F. said
to them, That it was for Christ's-Sake, and in Obedience to his and his
Apostle's Command that he could not swear: And therefore (said he) take heed
what ye do; for before his Judgment Seat ye shall all ^e brought. The Chairman
then said, This is canting. Why said G. F. If to confess Christ our Lord and
Savior, and to obey his Command, he called canting by a Judge of a Court, it
is to little purpose for me to say more among you. Yet ye shall see that I am a
Christian, and shall show forth Christianity; and my Innocence shall be
manifest. By this his speaking, the People generally were affected; but the
Jury however found the Bill against him: Bill found against him which be
traverses, refuses to put in Bail, and warns his Friends not to be bound for
him.
which G. F. nevertheless traversed. Thus the Matter could not he finished now,
and therefore he was asked to put in Bail, till the next Sessions; this he
refused, and warned his Friends, that seemed willing to be bound for him, not
to meddle with that, since there was a Snare in Yet he told the Justices, that
he would promise to appear, if the Lord (...) him Health and Strength, and he
were at Liberty. Some of the Justices showed themselves loving, and endeavored
to stop the rest from Indicting him, or putting the Oath to him. But the
Chairman said, He must go according to Law. Yet Liberty was given G. F. to go
at large till text Quarter Sessions.

He then went up to London; And comes up to London on the approach of the
Yearly Meeting.
where the Time of the Yearly Meeting approached; but at the Instance of some
of his Friends, he appeared again before the Judges of the King's Bench, and
delivered to them the following Declaration, setting forth what he was ready to
promise instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

THIS I do in the Truth, A Declaration on proposed by G. F. instead of the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
and in the Presence of God declare, that King Charles the second is lawful
King of this Realm, and of all other his Dominions; and that he was brought in,
and set up King over this Realm by the Power of God: and I have nothing, but
Love and Good Will to him and all his Subjects, and desire his Prosperity and
eternal Good. And I do utterly abhor and deny the Pope's Power and Supremacy,
and all his Superstitions and Idolatrous Inventions; and do affirm, that he
has no Power to absolve Sin: And I do abhor and detest his Murdering of
Princes, or other People, by Plots or Contrivances. And likewise I do deny all
Plots and Contrivances, and Plotters and Contrivers against the King and his
Subjects; knowing them to be Works of Darkness, and the Fruits of an evil
Spirit, and against the Peace of the Kingdom, and not from the Spirit of God,
the Fruit of which is Love. I dare not take an Oath, because it is forbidden by
Christ and the Apostle; but if I break my Yea or Nay, then let me suffer the
same Penalty, as they that break their Oaths.

G. F.

This Declaration being the Substance of what the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy contain, G. Fox presented to the Judges of the King's Bench; but the
Procedings having gone on at Worcester, they were unwilling to meddle with the
Business, but referred it to the next Quarter Sessions at Worcester.

The Yearly Meeting at London, G. F. appears again at Worcester Sessions, and
for Refusal of the Oath is found guilty
at which he was, being over, he returned again to Worcester, where the
Sessions being held in the Month called July, and he called to the Bar, and the
Indictment read, Justice Street caused the Oaths to be read also, and tendered
to him again. G. F. then said, That he was come to traverse his Indictment. But
when he began to show the Errors that were in the Indictment, viz. such as were
sufficient to quash it, he was soon stopped, and the Oath required of him; and he
persisting in the Refusal, was by the Jury found guilty. The Chairman, how
active soever he had been against G. F. yet was now troubled, and told him of a
sad Sentence he had to speak against him. To which G. F. returned, That he had
many and more Errors to assign in the Indictment, besides those he had already
mentioned. Whereupon the Chairman told him, He was going to show him the Danger
of a Praemunire, which was the Loss of his Liberty, and all his Goods and
Chatttels, and to endure Imprisonment during Life. But, (added he,) I do not
deliver this as the Sentence of the Court, (...) the (...) him.
but as an Admonition to you. Then the Jailor was bid to take him away; and G.
F. afterward understood concerning this pretended Admonition, that the
Chairman had said to the Clerk of the Peace, That what he had spoken should
stand for Sentence.

Now whilst G. F. was in Prison, (...) of Salisbury's Son very loving to G. F.
there came to him amongst others, the Earl of Salisbury's Son, who was very
loving, and much concerned, that they had dealt so with him; and he himself
took a Copy in Writing of the Errors that were in the Indictment. And G. F.
afterward got the State of his Case drawn up in Writing delivered to Judge
Wild. G. F. writes to the King.
He also writ a Letter to the King, wherein he gave an Account of the Sentiment
of those called Quakers concerning Swearing; and how they abhorred all
Plottings and Contrivances against the King. Not long after he fell into such a
Sickness, that some began to doubt of his Recovery; and then one of his Friends
went to Justice Parker, by whose Order he had been first committed to Prison,
and desired him to give Order to the Jailor, that he might have Liberty to go
out of the Jail into the City. Whereupon Parker wrote the following Letter to
the Jailor.

Mr. Harris,
I Have been much importuned by some Friends to George Fox, Justice Parker's
Letter to the Jailor on Behalf of G. F's. being sick.
to write to you. I am informed by them, that he is in a very weak Condition,
and very much indisposed. What lawful Favor you can do for the Benefit of the
Air, for his Health, pray show him. I suppose the next Term they will make
Application to the King. I am,

SIR, Your Loving Friend, HENRY PARKER.
Evesham the 8th of October 1674.

This Letter was sufficient Warrant for the Jailor to permit G. Fox to be
brought from Prison to the House of one of his Friends. M. Fox acquaints the
King with her Husband's Condition, and he refers her to Chancellor Finch.
His Wife was come to him before that Time, and after having been with him
about seventeen Weeks, and no Discharge like to be obtained for him, she went
up to London, and being come to Whitehall, and meeting with the King there, she
gave him an Account of her Husband's long Imprisonment, and how weak he was,
and not without Danger of his Life. To which the King said, He could do nothing
in it, but she must go to the Chancellor. And so she went to the Lord Finch,
who was then Chancellor, and having given him an Account of the Matter, she
told him, That the King had left it wholly to him; and if he did not show Pity,
and release her Husband out of Prison, she feared he would end his Days there.
But the Chancellor said to her, G. F. not free to accept of a Pardon.
That the King could not release him otherwise than by a Pardon. Now G. F.
could not resolve to be freed thus, as well knowing he had done no Evil; and
therefore he would rather have lain in Prison all his Days, than to be thus set
at Liberty; otherwise he needed not to have lain so long, since the King had
been willing long before to have given him a Pardon, and also had said to one
Thomas More, That G. F. needed not scruple being released by a Pardon; for many
a Man, that was as innocent as a Child, had had a Pardon granted him. G. F.
unwilling to have a Pardon, but desiring to have the Validity of his Indictment
tried before the Judges, the Lord Chancellor, who showed himself a discreet
Man, procured that an Habeas Corpus was granted to bring G. F. to London, once
more to appear before the King's Bench. The Lord Chancellor procures G. F. an
Habeas Corpus in order to try the Validity of his Indictment.
The Habeas Corpus was with the first Opportunity sent down by his Wife to
Worcester; but there they would not part with him at first, (being now
recovered a little of his Sickness) under a Pretense that he was premunired,
and was not to go out in that Manner. Thus it became necessary to send to
London again; and another Order was got and sent down to bring up G. F. before
the King's Bench. Being still weak, he was carried up to London in a Coach, the
Undersheriff and the Clerk of the Peace accompanying him. A second Order sent
to bring him up. Whereupon he is brought before the Judges of the King's Bench
and Counselor Corbet pleads his Cause so, that the Judges grant his Liberty.
Being come to Town, he was brought before the Four Judges at the King's Bench,
where Counselor Thomas Corbet pleaded his Cause, and acquitted himself
exceeding well; for he started a new Plea, and told the Judges, That by Law
they could not imprison any Man upon a Praemunire. The Judges then saying they
must have Time to look in their Books, and to consult the Statutes, the Hearing
was put off till the next Day. And since it appeared that Corbet was in the
right, they chose to let their Plea fall, perhaps for Fear of worse
Consequence. And thus they began to examine the Errors of the Indictment, which
proved to be so many and so gross, that all the Judges were of Opinion, That
the Indictment was quashed and void, and that G. F. ought to have his Liberty.
The same Day several Lords and other Great Men had the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy tendered to them in open Court; and some of G. Fox's Adversaries
moved the Judges, that the Oaths might be tendered to him again, saying, He was
a dangerous Man to be at Liberty. Sir M. Hale (...) ^^^^saries, (...) ^hews
Fa^^^
But Judge Matthew Hale, who was then Lord Chief Justice of England, and really
an excellent and pious Man, as has been hinted already here before, said, He
had indeed heard some such Reports of G. F. but he had also heard more good
Reports of him. This Saying was serviceable; and Hale and the other Judges
ordered G. F. to be freed by Proclamation. Thus he was set at Liberty in an
honorable Way, and his Counselor Corbet, Counselor Corbet gets great
Reputation by his Defense of G. F's Cause. The Baptists provoked by losing some
of their best Members, endeavor in Print to represent the Quakers no
Christians; and their Arguments being still answered, the Quakers gain more of
them.
who had pleaded for him, got great Fame by it; for many other Lawyers told
him, He had brought that to Light, which had not been known before. And after
the Trial, one of the Judges said to him, You have obtained a great deal of
Honor by your Way of pleading G. F 's* Cause in Court.

The Year was now come to an End. But before I go over to the next, I am to
mention that the Baptists in England losing from Time to Time some of their
best Members, writ therefore very fiercely against the Quakers, endeavoring
thereby to render them no Christians. But those Writings were continually
answered, and that with so many convincing Reasons, that the Quakers got more
Adherents by it. The Consequence of this was, that a public Dispute was
appointed to be held between the Baptists and the Quakers, in the Meeting House
of the Baptists at London. For the Quakers there spoke by Turns; George
Whitehead, Stephen Crisp, William Penn, and George Keith; and the Opponents
were Jeremy Ives, William Kiffin, Thomas Plant, Tho. Hicks, and Robert Ferguson
a Presbyterian, afterward eminently known in Holland, by the fierce
Declaration drawn up by him in the Name of the Duke of Monmouth, This gave
Occasion to the Dispute at Barbican. R. Ferguson the Penman of the Duke of
Monmouth's Declaration
when that unhappy Prince went over to England with Forces, to dispute the
Throne against King James.

Jeremy Ives was an eminent Teacher among the Baptists, that had been in Prison
at London, Fourteen Years before on a religious Account, and chiefly because
for Conscience Sake he refused to take the Oath.

Not long after he writ a smart Letter from the Prison to two of his Society
(who having been imprisoned with him for the same Cause, had taken the Oath,
thereby to obtain their Liberty) wherein he reproved them for their falling
away, J. Ives ^riartly reproves two of his Brethren
and signified that thus they had increased the Burden of their faithful
Brethren, from the bearing of which they had withdrawn themselves. But what a
changeable Creature is Man, if he does not continue watchful, for complying and
taking the Oaths, and soon after does the like, and writes in Defense thereof.
and keep close to the divine Grace, continually ^aying hold thereon! For
scarce five Days passed, but this inconstant ^^^emy grew weary of Imprisonment,
and took the Oath also to get out of Prison. Neither did he stop here; for it is
plain that he was now departed from his Profession. To temporize therefore, and
to find out Excuses for what he had done, he put forth a Book in Print, wherein
he asserted the Lawfulness of Swearing. It was asked of him, Whether he was
that same Jeremy Ives, that once had been of such a tender Conscience that he
durst not take an Oath, and had afterward publicly defended Swearing, as
lawful? And he did not deny the Fact, for it was notoriously known: But he went
about to disguise the Matter, and said, I am that Jeremy who took the Oath of
Allegiance, and writ a Book to prove that some Oaths were lawful, though not all.
Neither did he deny the forementioned Letter, for it was extant, and written
as follows:

Brother Pitman, and Brother Shewel,
I Am at this Time surprised with a holy Passion; and though Jonah could not say
concerning the Gourd, J. Ives's Letter to two of his Brethren.
that he did well to be angry; yet (if my Experience in the Word of the Lord
does not deceive) I can truly say, I do well to be angry with you, whom I have
had a Godly Jealousy of all along, viz. That you would be as easily persuaded
to part with, -- as unwilling to suffer for, your Spiritual Liberties: O my
Brethren! where is your First Love? How unlike the Christians in former Times
are you! whose Zeal was so hot for God, that their Eyes prevented the Morning,
that thereby they might prevent the Rage of the Adversary, who (as it is now)
Commanded them no more to worship in the Name of the Lord -- I always did
conclude, That those that would -- quit the Cause of Righteousness -- would
quit the Ways of Holiness, as Yesterday sad Experience has taught, to the
perpetual Joy of your Adversaries, and the Saddening the Hearts, and adding
Afflictions to the Bonds of the Prisoners of the Lord: I do therefore conjure
you, as you will answer the Great God another Day, to consider, That now is the
Time for you to look to your Ministry, and to the Flock over which the Lord
has made you Overseers, that you may be able through Grace to say, You are clear
from the Blood of all Men; and observe, that God is now come to prove you, to
see whether you will keep his Commandments or not. Remember when that
Apostate's Case was debated, you had no Zeal nor Indignation against him, but
you smothered all with this, If it were in a Matter of Faith and Worship that
he had fallen from, you would have been as one Man against it: Well, behold the
Lord is come Home to you; the Matter now is purely for worshipping God; now God
is proving you to see whether you will obey him or no; and did not Yesterday's
Work witness, that you were willing to prefer the Fear of a Man, that must die,
before the Fear of the Great God; and the Fear of them that can kill the Body,
before the Fear of the Lord, that can cast Body and Soul into Hell? I have no
more to say but this, That your cowardly temporizing and complying with the
Precepts of Men, makes me jealous, that your Fear toward the Lord, is taught
by the Precepts of Men: I would not be too censorious, but my Grounds are
great; and my BONDS are my CROWN, but your cowardly Spirit is my GREAT CROSS;
you little think what a Scandal it is amongst (...) to hear it affirmed that
one of you should say, You had rather a given Fifty Pounds than have sworn, and
yet swear that you swear willingly. Oh! for the Lord's Sake do somewhat that
may roll away this Reproach; which, that you may, is the Prayers of your
Brother, who could be contented to write himself,

Your Companion in Tribulation, Jer. Ives.
Jan. 14. 1660. Brother Ward my Fellow Prisoner desires to present his Love to
you, and so do some others.




Thus zealously Jer. Ives wrote to his Fellow-Teachers, who for humane Fear,
and to avoid Sufferings, had against their Profession, and the Conviction of
their Consciences, taken the Oath. But who could have imagined on Sight of such
a Letter, that he himself within so short a Space of Time should have done that
which he reproved so severely in others. Jer. xvii. 9
Certainly in this Case the Saying of the Prophet Jeremy seems to be very
applicable, The Heart is deceitful above all Things, and desperately wicked;
who can know it? Let therefore him who stands, be cautious lest he fall.
Happy had this Man been, if he had been so sensible of his Transgression as one
Edward Chilton, The different Case of Edw* Chilton, a Quaker by Profession.
who, though by Profession a Quaker, yet when it came to a Trial either to take
the Oath of Allegiance, o^ to be premunired, he wavered and fainted; yet not
so, that he fell away totally: For he became so penitent for the Evil he had
committed, that he found himself constrained to give Proof thereof by a Letter
he writ to his Friends, who remained Prisoners, because for Conscience Sake
they could not swear; whereas he, to be released from Imprisonment, had taken
the Oath that was demanded of him. But of what a bitter Relish this became to
him, and what Terror and Horror he was seized with, the following Letter will
show.

My Dear Friends,
I Desire to lay before you this my Condition in this my Fall, that my Fall may
be no Cause for you to stumble, but that you by it may be the more encouraged
to stand; for I have yielded to the Betrayer, and so betrayed the innocent Seed
in me; for I forsook the Counsel of the Lord, and consulted with Flesh and
Blood, and so I fell into the Snare of the World, and yielded to the Covenant;
and so I rested satisfied in what I had done, for some certain Hours; but when
the Lord in his Power looked back upon me, then I remembered what I had done;
then I remembered that I had denied Truth, which once I had professed, though once
I thought I should have stood when others fell. So the Terrors of the Lord have
taken hold on me, and I lie under the Judgments of the Lord.

And now I feel the Truth of the Words that were spoke by Christ, That he that
fails in one Tittle, is guilty of all; and now I feel the Truth of that, That
it is better to forsake Wife and Children, and all a Man has, even Life it
self, for Christ and the Truth-sake, than to break one Tittle of the Law of God
written in the Heart. So I hope that by Mercy and Judgment the Lord will redeem
me to himself again. The Lord may suffer some to fall, that the standing of
them that stand faithful may seem to be the more glorious, and for them to take
heed lest they fall.

Now I know and feel, that it is better to part with any Thing of this World,
though it be as dear to one as the Right Hand, or the Eye, than to break our
Peace with God.

Pray for me; for my Bonds are greater than yours.

Edward Chilton.
Windsor, the 22d of the 11th Month, 1660.

It is remarkable, An instructive Digression on this Occasion.
that this Chilton in the Conclusion of his Letter says, That His Bonds were
greater than those of his Friends, who neither feared a Praemunire, nor Loss of
their Liberty, when they must pay so dear for it, as the taking of an Oath. For
when any one truly abides in the Fear of God, he dares not against the
Convictions of his Conscience transgress the Divine Commandments, and seek
Evasions to avoid the Stress thereof: For certainly God will not be mocked.
Could our Savior have spoken in more plain and express Terms than he did, when
he said, Matt. v. 34.
Swear not at all? And yet what cunning Devices have been invented by those who
boast of the Name of Christians, to enervate the Force of these express Words.
It is not a proper Place here to refute their Reasons; but yet I cannot think it
unsuitable to show briefly how dangerous it is to act against the express
Commandments of Sacred Writ, and against the Conviction of one's Conscience,
thereby to avoid Persecution. James ii. 10.
For not only the Apostle James says, Whosoever shall offend in one Point, he
is guilty of all; but our supreme Lawgiver Christ himself says, Matt. x. 33.
Whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in Heaven. Mark viii. 38.
And whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, of him also shall the
Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. And to encourage us to Faithfulness, Matt. x. 28.
he has also said, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill
the Soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in
Hell. Which Words indeed are so emphatical, that it ought not to displease any
that I repeat them, as they have been left on Record by the Evangelist Luke,
Luke xii. 4, 5.
viz. thus, I say unto you my Friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the
Body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you
whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he has killed, has Power to cast
into Hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him. Can it be otherwise, but that such
Words must needs make a powerful Impression on a real Christian; And the more
when we consider, that nothing in the World can retrieve or restore a perishing
Soul, as may appear from these Words of our blessed Savior, What is a Man
profited if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall
a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? A clear Proof that the whole World, and
all that is contained therein, is not able to save one Soul, or to afford any
Thing that can redeem it. If I here thought it requisite, a godly Zeal at
present would make me say more on this Subject; but not to exspatiate too far
beyond the Limits of this Historical Tract, I shall not pursue this Digression
any farther, but return to my Relation from whence I thus stepped aside.

To take up again then the broken Thread of my Discourse, I once more come to
Jeremy Ives, who, to avoid Persecution, had taken the Oath contrary to his
Understanding; T. Rudyard's Reproof to J. Ives, with his Answer.
and it was Thomas Rudyard, mentioned here before, who objected this to him:
And he feeling himself pinched by it, endeavored to break the Stress thereof
by saying, That the Reason why in a Letter he had blamed a Friend, was for his
saying he had rather have given fifty Pounds than have took the Oath of
Allegiance, and yet swore he took it freely and willingly. But who sees not
what a poor Shift this was?

Now to come to the Dispute; I already mentioned, it was asserted, That the
Quakers were no Christians; and to maintain this, Thomas Hicks said, They that
deny the Lord's Christ, A summary Account of the Dispute at Ba^bican with the
Baptists.
are no Christians: But the Quakers deny the Lord's Christ, etc. To this W.
Penn said I deny the Minor, viz. That the Quakers deny the Lord's Christ. And
T. Hicks returned, They that deny Christ to be a distinct Person without them,
deny the Lord's Christ: But the Quakers deny Christ to be a distinct Person
without them: Therefore, etc. W. Penn then desired that T. Hicks would explain
what he meant by the Term Person. And T. Hicks answered, I mean the Man Christ
Jesus. To which W. Penn replied, Then I deny the Minor, viz. That we deny the
Man Christ Jesus. To which Hicks returned, I prove ye deny the Man Christ
Jesus: One of your own Writers says, That Christ was never seen with carnal
Eyes, nor heard with carnal Ears, etc. To this J. Ives added: He that denies
that Christ was ever seen with carnal Eyes, etc. denies the Man Christ: But the
Quakers deny that Christ was ever seen with carnal Eyes, etc. George Keith then
said, I answer by distinguishing: Christ as God was never seen with carnal
Eyes; but as Man he was seen with carnal Eyes. To this J. Ives returned: But he
was Christ as he was Man: How then was not Christ seen with carnal Eyes? This
Question G. Keith answered thus: We are to consider that the Terms or Names
Jesus Christ, are sometimes applied to him as God, and sometimes to him as Man;
yea sometimes to the very Body of Jesus: But the Question is, whether do those
Names more properly, immediately, and originally belong to him as God, or as he
was before he took the Manhood upon him, or to the Manhood? We affirm, those
Names are given to him most properly and eminently as God; and less properly,
yet truly, as Man; and least properly to his Body, yea to his dead Body. Then
J. Ives asked, Where do you read that the Carcass was called the Christ? This
irreverend Expression so displeased many, that some; cried out, Where did
thou ever read that Christ's dead Body was called a Carcass? From this Disgust
W. Penn said, I beseech you for the Lord's-sake, that we may treat of these
Things as becomes Christians. G. Keith then resuming the Discourse, answered J.
Ives's Question thus: I prove that the dead Body of Jesus was called Christ
from the Words of Mary, Joh. xx. 15. Matt. xxviii. 6.
Where have ye laid him? For she had just before called the Body her Lord:
Likewise the Angel said to her, See the Place where the Lord lay: And that he
was Jesus Christ before he took Flesh, I prove from the Saying of the Apostle,
Ephesians. iii. 9.
Who created all Things by Jesus Christ. Then T. Hicks said, I will prove the
Quakers to be no Christians: And J. Ives aded, They that say Christ cannot be
seen with carnal Eyes, and was never visible to wicked Men, do deny the Lord's
Christ; for he was seen with carnal Eyes, and by wicked Men. To this W. Penn
said, I distinguish upon the Word seen; wicked Men might see him in that bodily
Appearance, and yet not see him to be the Christ of God; they saw his Manhood,
but not his Christship: This I will prove from Christ's Words to Peter, when he
confessed him to be Christ, the Son of the living God, Matthew. xvi. 16, 17.
viz. Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is
in Heaven: Therefore Peter with a carnal Eye could not have seen the Lord's
Christ, much less wicked Men. My second Proof is from the Apostle's Words, 1
Cor. ii. 8.
Whom none of the Princes of this World knew; for had they known him, they
would not have crucified him. W. Penn enlarging a little more on this Subject,
said also, That seeing and knowing in Scripture are sometimes equivalent. And
G. Keith added, Christ said, He that has seen me, has seen the Father: But no
wicked Man has seen the Father, therefore no wicked Man has seen Christ, as
such. Ives and his Companions scoft at this Distinction: But the Quakers
averred, That all who saw Jesus as the Carpenter's Son, did not see him as the
Christ of God. Then Ives asked, Is the Manhood a Part of the Lord's Christ? To
which W. Penn returned, Is this to prove the Charge of our denying the Lord's
Christ? It seems we must be here to be catechized, and ye will not answer us
one Question, yet I shall answer J. Ives his Question, if he will promise to
answer mine. Ives then saying that he would answer it, W. Penn returned, I here
declare that we do faithfully believe that holy Manhood to be a Member of the
Christ of God: And directing his Question to Ives, he said, Was he the Christ
of God before he was manifest in the Flesh? He was, answered Ives, the Son of
God. But, replied W. Penn, was be the Lord's Christ? I will prove him to have
been the Lord's Christ as well before as after: First from the Apostle Paul 's
Words to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. x. 4.
That Rock was Christ: Next from Jude, where some Greek Copies have it thus,
That Jesus brought the People of Israel out of Egypt. But to this Ives gave no
Answer, how often soever he was called upon for it. And this was no great
Wonder, since it was well known that there were such among the Baptists who
favored the Socinian Principles. But Ives, that he might not appear altogether
mute, came on again with a Question, viz. Do ye believe that Christ in his
human Nature is in Heaven? This made G. Whitehead say to the Auditory, Ye have
heard the Charge against us, and the Distinction that has been made between
Seeing and Seeing of Christ, as namely between the spiritual saving Sight of
the Lord's Christ, and the Seeing of his outward Man, Person, or Body. In this
last Sense it could never be intended that it was not visible to the outward
Eye; but it was the spiritual Rock which all Israel drank of, and as he was
before Abraham was, and as glorified with the Father before the World began;
and as Christ himself said to Philip, He that sees me, sees my Father also:
And only Saints, or Children of Light, could truly say, We have seen his Glory
as the only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. In all which
Considerations, or Senses of Seeing, the Lord's Christ was only seen
spiritually, and not with carnal Eyes. This Ives granted that so it might be
left: Yet presently after, instead of proving the Quakers no Christians, he
asked again, Do ye believe or own that Christ is in Heaven with his humane
Nature? To which W. Penn answered, We do believe the Man Christ Jesus to be
glorified in Heaven. Which Answer Ives refusing to accept, because it was not
in the Terms of his Question, Penn asked, What Difference do thou make between
the Manhood and humane Nature of Christ? None, returned Ives, if you mean
heartily. To which Penn replied, I do mean and speak heartily; we do believe
that holy Manhood to be in heavenly Glory. Now since it began to grow dark, the
Baptists desired to leave off, and to resume the Matter at another Time; as was
done also: But the Parties did not agree for all that; for though the Baptists
continued to assert that the Quakers were no Christians, yet these had
abundance of Reasons to maintain the contrary; and this they did so
effectually, that those of the other Party, under a Pretense of the
Meeting-Place's being overcharged with People, and that the Gallery gave Way,
broke up the Meeting, without a final Conclusion.

Persecution in this Year was not very sharp at London, Persecution continues.
but for all that, active in other Places, so that I do not want Matter to make
a Relation of it: But to shun Prolixity, I Will mention but one Case.

One Robert Tillet, in Buckingham, sick of a Consumption, and believing his
Death to be nigh at Hand, A Visit of some Friends to R. Tillet in Buckingham
near his Death recorded as a seditious Meeting, and Fines levied accordingly.
desired some of his Friends to visit him. At this Invitation some came to his
House, yet not above the Number of Fourteen Persons; and two Informers went and
acquainted a Justice of the Peace thereof, who recorded this small Assembly as
a seditious Meeting, and fined tne sick Man twenty Pounds for this pretended
Transgression; and so his Goods were seized, and six Cows taken from him. And
one Robert Smith, being overheard by the Informers to have spoken five or six
Words, was fined also twenty Pounds as a Preacher; which Fine was afterward
extorted from some oaths then present there.

The Peace between England and Holland was concluded this Year at the Instance
of Spain, Peace with Holland.
but the War between Holland and France continued still.

I pass over now to the Year 1675. 1675
About the Beginning thereof G. Fox came to London, Parliament advise the King
to suppress the Growth of Popery.
whilst the Parliament was sitting, who advised the King to the suppressing of
the Growth of Popery; but in the mean while the Quakers bore the chiefest Shock
of this; for their religious Meetings were styled seditious Conventicles.

After G. F. had been at the Yearly Meeting of his Friends at London, After
yearly Meeting G. F. goes to Swarthmore, where he rests himself about two Years.
he left the City, and went to Lancaster, and from thence to Swarthmore; where
having a Dewlling Place of his own, he staid about two Years to rest himself,
having contracted Distempers by Hardships and Imprisonments, which had much
weakened his Body. Being there, he understood that four young Students at
Aberdeen were convinced at a Dispute held by Robert Barclay and George Keith,
with some of the Scholars of that University. Four young Students of Aberdeen
convinced.
And being visited by some of the Neighborhood, among others came also to him
Colonel Kirby, his old Persecutor, who now carried himself very lovingly, and
bid him welcome into the Country. Yet notwithstanding this Appearance of
Kindness, some Time afterward he ordered the Constables of Vlverstone to tell
G. F. That they must have no more Meetings at Swarthmore, for if they had, they
were commanded by him to break them up; and they were to come the next Sunday
after. But this Threatening did not make G. F. afraid; for he, with his Friends,
had a Meeting on that First Day of the Week, and none came to disturb them.
During his Abode at home, when he did not travel to and fro in the Country, as
he used to do, to edify his Friends by his Ministry, he supplied this with his
Pen, and exhorted them by Writing, where he could not do it by Word of Mouth:
Besides he writ other serviceable Treatises, for he was a diligent Man.

In the mean while Persecution for the Worship of God did not cease altogether:
The Act against seditious Conventicles gave Opportunity to the Malicious to
disturb the religious Meetings of the Quakers, who never met in a clandestine
Manner, but always publicly; and on this Account Fines were extorted from
them; to which may be added, that oftentimes they were still very ill treated,
and most grievously abused, as among the rest at Long Claxton in
Leicestershire, Cruelties exercised at Long Claxton in Leicestershire.
where some Women were dragged by the Neck along the Street; and among these a
Widow, the Skin of whose Neck was rubbed off by this Rudeness; and an ancient
Woman, above seventy, was violently cast down to the Ground: Some of the Men
were dragged by the Hair, and others by their Legs, besides the many Blows
given them, and some were trodden upon till the Blood gu^h^d out of their Mouth
and Nose. Yet all this they bore patiently, without making any Resistance;
whereby it happened sometimes that some who had not the Gift of Preaching,
teached others by their patient Suffering, showing by their meek Behavior,
that their Works did agree with their Christian Profession: And though many were
robbed of all they had, even Clothes and Beds not excepted, yet they continued
steadfast, without fainting; though often it was called a Meeting when some were
come together, not properly to perform religious Worship, as has been related
already, and also happened:

At Kirby Muckloe, J. Dixon Priest at Kirby Muckloe, informs against some met
about the Care of the Poor, on which severe Fines ^^recovered.
where some were come to the House of John Penford, to provide for their Poor,
the Priest of the Parish, called John Dixon, informed against them by Letter to
Wenlock Stanly of Branston, who sent three of his Servants to take Inspection
of the said Meeting; and though these looking into the Book in which the
charitable Distributions were entered, found that this Meeting had been only to
consider of the Necessities of the Poor, yet several were fined, and Penford
himself twenty Pounds for his House, and ten Pounds for the Preacher, when
there was never an one there; but they having heard him speak, this was counted
sufficient to make him pass for a Preacher. Now though he and Richard Woodland
appealed for Justice, yet the Court positively denied their Appeal, unless they
would first take the Oath of Allegiance. This was the old Snare, so that the
Hearing of the Matter was denied, and treble Damage given against them.

At Jews in Sussex, W. Snat Priest at Jews gives false Information, so his
Kinsman J. Clark takes up the Trade.
the Priest William Snat became himself an Informer, and went several Times to
the Quakers Meeting there, and from thence to the Justice Henry Shully, to whom
he declared on Oath in whose House the Meeting had been, and who had preached;
and this was so gross, that once he gave a false Information, with respect to
the House; but the Gain proceeding from this Work, how abominable soever, did
shine so alluringly, that his Kinsman James Clark entered upon this Informer's
Office, which any one could easily do, without making Suit for it.

In Norfolk the Rage of the Persecutors was such, In Norfolk some bereaved of
all, in particular J. Harrison. And a dead Body taken up again and exposed in
the Marketplace
that some having been bereaved of all, were obliged, even in Wintertime (as
amongst the rest Joseph Harrison, with his Wife and Children) to lie on Straw;
and yet they unwearied did not leave frequenting their religious Meeting: Nay,
even the Dead were not suffered to rest; for outrageous Barbarity came to that
Patch, that Mary the Wife of Francis Larder, being dead and buried, was, by
Order of one Thomas Bretland, dugg up again, whereby the Coffin was broken,
which they tied together, and carrying it away, exposed the Corpse in the Market
place. Thus this deceased Woman was no more suffered to lie quiet in her Grave
than in her sick Bed, where the Day before her Death she had been threatened, by
Order of one Christopher Bedingfield, to have her Be^ taken from under her
while living. Now the Reason of this taking up of the Corpse was, that though her
Husband was one of those called Quakers, yet she not being properly a Member of
that Society, it was taken ill that she had been buried in a plain Way, without
paying to the Priest his pretended Due for the ordinary Service over the Dead.

In Somersetshire thirty two Persons were fined for having been at a Burial:
The like happened in the County of Derby, In Somersetshire (...) for being at a
Burial. And in (...) by ^hire S. Roe fined 20 l. for Friends meeting in his
House to g^t the Burial of his Wife. Priest Wilson being the Informer.
where Samuel Roe (his Wife being deceased) was fined twenty Pounds, because
his Friends met in his House to conduct the Corpse to the Grave. Of this the
Priest John Wilson was Informer to the Justice of Peace John Lo, and out of
the House of the said Samuel Roe was taken the Value of thirty Pounds; so that
the Share of the Informer was no less than ten Pounds, since according to Law
his Due was a Third of the Spoil. I could here relate several Instances of
great Adversities and and sad Mischiefs that befell cruel Persecutors: But not
to exspatiate too far, I have silently passed by many remarkable Cases.

Yet in general Terms I may say, Sad Stai^ of Persecutors.
that many of the Persecutors, both Justices, Informers, and others, came to a
miserable End, some being by sudden or unnatural Death, and others by lingering
Sicknesses or Distempers, or by foul and stinking Diseases taken out of this
Life: wh^^st some, who by Spoil had scraped much together, ^ell to great
Poverty and Beggary, whole Names I could let down, and mention also Time and
Place, and among these some rapacious Ecclesiastics, who came to a sad End;
but I studiously omit particularizing such Instances, to avoid the Appearance
of Grudging and Envy. Some of those that had been so active in Spoil, signified
themselves the terrible Remo^^e of Conscience they felt, because of their
having persecuted the Quakers: insomuch, that they roared out their gnawing
Grief, mixed with Despair, under the grievous Pains they suffered in their Body.
And it was Judged by many a very remarkable Case, Priest Ch^^ Glin a
Persecutor, str^ck blind in the Pulpit.
that one Christopher Glin, Priest at Butford, who had acted with very
indiscreet Zeal against the Quakers, having about the Year 1663, read his Text
in the Pulpit, and then intending to read his Sermon, was on a sudden struck
with Blindness, and continued blind till he died. But none of the Persecutors
seemed to take Notice, or to regard such Instances; for they let their Rage
loose against the Quakers, who for all that continued in Patience, though they
did not think it unlawful to give Notice of the grievous Oppression their
Friends suffered, to those that were in Authority, lest they might have excused
themselves as ignorant of these violent Proceedings. Therefore it was not
omitted to give forth in public Print, many of those crying Instances that
have been related here, and to present them to the King and Parliament, with
humble Addresses to that Purpose. But all this found but small Entrance. The
Glory of re^^ning from Persecution reserved to K. William III.
King Charles it seems was not to be the Man that should take off this Yoke of
Oppression; this Work was reserved for others. His Brother James that succeeded
him, made a Beginning thereof, with what Intention Heaven knows; and William
III. that excellent Prince, brought it to Perfection, as far as it was in his
Power.

This Year deceased at Sea William Bailey, Account of the Death of W. Bailey,
formerly a Baptist Teacher^ and a great Reader of Jacob Behmen.
coming from the West Indies in the Ship called the Samuel of London, in the
Latitude of 46 Degrees and 36 Minutes: He had been a Teacher among the
Baptists, and had read much in the Books of Jacob Behmen, but could not find
thereby true Satisfaction to his Soul. And being afterward entered into
Society with the Quakers, so called, he became a zealous Preacher among them.
When in this his last Voyage he was grown sick, and felt Death approaching, he
bid John Clark, Master of the said Vessel, remember him to his dear Wife and
little Ones, and also to G. Fox, G. Whitehead, and others; and being filled
with Joy, began to sing, saying, The creating Word of the Lord endures for
ever. He took several that were about him by the Hand, and exhorted them to
fear the Lord, and not to fear Death: Death, said he, is nothing in it self;
for the Sting of Death is Sin. Tell the Friends at London, that would have been
glad to have seen my Face, I go to my Father and their Father, to my God and
their God. Remember my Love to my dear Wife; she will be a sorrowful Widow: But
let her not mourn too much, for it is well with me. And having spoken something
concerning his outward Business to the Master, he said in Regard of his Wife
and Children, I have left them no Portions, but my Endeavor has been to make
God their Father. Shall I lay down my Head upon the Waters? Well, God is the
God of the whole Universe; and tho, my Body sink, I shall swim a top of the
Waters. Then taking his Leave of the Company, he said, I see not one of you,
but I wish you all well. And one asking, How it was with him? He answered, I am
perfectly well. After having spoken many more sensible Words, about four in the
Morning he departed quietly, as if he had fallen asleep. His Wife Mary, the
same that had formerly been at Adrianople, and spoken with the Emperor of the
Turks, gave an excellent Testimony in Writing concerning him; and John Crook in
a Preface to William Bayly's Works, said of him, (the Truth of which I know by
my own Experience) As he was bold and zealous in his Preaching, being willing
to improve his Time, as if he had known it was not to be long amongst us; so
was he as valiant in suffering for his Testimony, when called thereunto. --
Methinks I see how once I saw him stand at the Bar to plead his innocent Cause,
like holy Stephen in the Senate House, when the Threats of his Persecutors
resembled the Showers of Stones (falling upon that blessed Martyr) crying out
with a hideous Noise, Take him away Jailer, etc. and yet all this while he
changed not his Countenance, except by the additional Ornaments of some
innocent Smiles. Sometimes by cruel Persecutors he has been thrown down, and
dragged upon the Ground by the Hair of his Head, and his Mouth and Jaws
endeavored to be rent and broke asunder, so that the Ground whereon he lay was
smeared with his Blood: Yet, as if this butchering had not been enough to make
him a fit Sacrifice for the Shambles of their Cruelty, a heavy gross Bodied
Persecutor stamped upon his Breast with his Feet, endeavoring to beat the
Breath out of his Body: And when this Persecutor had done his Pleasure, he
commanded the Jailor to take him away, and put him in some nasty Hole for his
Entertainment and Cure. And had not the God of Israel been his Physician there,
he had been taken from us long 'ere this. Thus far John Crook.

At the Beginning of the Year 1676, 1676
died at London, The penitent Behavior and Death of M. Hide, an eminent
Opposer of the Quakers for about 20 Years.
Matthew Hide, who had made it his Business, during the Space of about twenty
Years, publicly to contradict the Quakers in their Meetings, and to disturb
them in their Worship of God, thinking, from a blind Zeal, that he did God an
acceptable Piece of Service, by zealously opposing what he judged to be Heresy.
Now how much soever this Man was bent against them, yet he showed this
Moderation, that in his gainsaying he did not behave himself furiously, but
appeared to be well-meaning, although he erred exceedingly, and often hindered the
Preaching of Ministers among the Quakers; which induced W. Penn sometimes to
pray to God very earnestly for him, and to tell him in the Presence of many
Auditors, That God would plead with him by his righteous Judgments; and that
the Time would come he should be forced to confess to the Sufficiency of that
Light he then opposed, and to acknowledge that God was with those called
Quakers. This same Hide being by Sickness brought to the Brink of Death,
desired that G. Whitehead, and some of his Friends, might be sent for: And to
one Cotton Oa^e, who asked him, if he had any Thing to say to clear himself
concerning his having so often opposed the Friends called Quakers, in their
Declarations and Prayers, he said, That he was sorry for what he had done, for,
added he, they are the People of God. G. Whitehead then, though it was late in
the Evening, being come to him with some others, said, I am come in Love and
Tenderness to see thee. To which Hide returned, I am glad to see you: And
Whitehead again, If thou have any Thing on thy Conscience to speak, I would
have thee to clear thy Conscience. To this Hide replied, What I have to say, I
speak in the Presence of God: As Paul was a Persecutor of the People of the
Lord have I been a Persecutor of you his People, as the World is who persecute
the Children of God. More he spoke, but being very weak, his Words could not be
well understood. Then G. Whitehead resumed, Thy Understanding being darkened,
when Darkness was over thee, thou have gainsaid the Truth and People of the
Lord; and I knew that that Light which thou opposed'st would rise up in
Judgment against thee. I have often with others labored with thee, to bring
thee to a right Understanding. To which Hide said, This I declare in the
Presence of God, and of you here, I have done Evil in persecuting you who are
the Children of God, and I am sorry for it: The Lord Jesus Christ show Mercy
unto me, and the Lord increase your Number, and be with you. After some Pause
G. Whitehead said to him, I would have thee, if thou art able to speak, to ^ase
thy Conscience as fully as thou can. My Soul is affected to hear thee thus
confess thy Evil, as the Lord has given thee a Sense of it: In Repentance
there is Mercy and Forgiveness; in confessing and forsaking Sin, there is Mercy
to be found with the Lord, who in the midst of Judgment remembers Mercy, that
he may be ^^ared. Hide being in great Anguish, and striving for Breath, said,
^^^^le after, I have done Evil in opposing you in your Prayers; the Lord be
merciful unto me; and as I have been an Instrument to turn many from God, the
Lord raise up many Instruments to turn many to him. G. Whitehead resumed, I
desire thou may find Mercy and Forgiveness at the Hand of the Lord. How is
it with thy Soul? Do nor thou find some Ease? I hope I do, answered Hide, and
if the Lord should lengthen my Days, I should be willing to bear a Testimony
for you as publicly as I have appeared against you. His Wife then said, It Is
enough; what can be desired more? If, queried Whitehead, the Lord should not
lengthen out thy Days, do thou desire what thou say should be signified to
others? Yes, answered Hide I do, you may; I have said as much as I can say.
After some Silence, he being much straightened for Breath, Whitehead said, If this
Company be wear^some unto thee, we may withdraw. To which he returned, You may
use your Freedom. G. Whitehead then taking Leave of him, said, I shall leave
thee to the Lord, desiring he may show Mercy and Forgiveness unto thee, as I
hope he will. Upon which Hide replied, The Lord be with your Spirits. All this
was spoken to G. Whitehead, and his Friends, in the Presence of Hide's Wife,
and some others of his Acquaintance, about two Hours before his Death: And thus
he gave manifest Proofs of a sincere Repentance; for Elizabeth his Wife, having
perceived him to be much troubled in his Mind, had asked him, if he would speak
with some of the Quakers? And he smiting his Hand on his Breast, said, With all
my Soul. And after G. Whitehead and his Friends were gone, it being the seventh
Day of the Week, he desired several Times, that he might live till Morning, and
might bear, on that Day, (viz. the first Day of the Week,) a Testimony for the
Truth he had, on that Day so often opposed; yet he signified, that he had found
some Ease to his Spirit. He also exhorted his Wife, who conversed much with
People that were great in the World, to use the plain Language of the Quakers.
And after some more Words to this Purpose spoken by him, with good
Understanding, he stretched himself out, and died Very quietly. An evident
Token of God's unspeakable Mercy, who wills not the Death of a Sinner, but that
he should repent and live; and who entirely knowing the real Disposition of
Man's Heart, forgives Sin by mere Grace, without any Merit in Man, but for his
own Sake, as he has said himself, I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions
for mine own Sake, Isa. xliii. 25.
and will not remember thy Sins; The Truth of which Saying very plainly
appeared in the converted Th^ef on the Cross, though his impenitent
Fellow-Sufferer hardened his Heart against it.

In this Year, while G. F. was at Swarthmore, Death of Priest Lampit.
died William Lampit, the Priest of Vlverstone, who formerly had been a great
Friend to Margaret now the Wife of G. F. but grew so envious against the
Friends she was in Society with, that he said in the Year 1652, A rash Saying
of his formerly.
He would wage his Life upon it, that the Quakers would all vanish, and come to
naught within half a Year. But on his Deathbed he said to one of his Hearers
who came to visit him, I have been a Preacher a long Time, and thought I had
lived well; but I did not think it had been so hard a Thing to die.

At Norwich now great Spoil was made upon the Quakers for their Religious
Assemblies. Barbarous Usage by E. Cooper at the House of A. Alexander ^ Norwich.
One Erasmus Cooper coming once into the House of Anthony Alexander, said to
his Wife, who was big with Child, He came to seize all she had. All, said she,
and that for seven Pounds Fine, that is hard* But he slighted what she said,
replied, He would not leave her a Bed to lie on. And then began to break the
Doors with a Pick-ax; he and his Companions behaving themselves so desperately,
that it drew Tears from some of the Neighbors who beheld it; and the warranted
Spoylers forced Alexander's Man to help them; which made Alexander say, That it
was a most unreasonable Thing, to require a Servant to assist in the taking his
Master's Goods: For which the Warden Robert Clerk sn^rled at him saying, The
said Cooper with Tennison an Informer, etc seize 43 l's worth of Goods at S.
Duncon's.
They are our Goods. To the House of Samuel Duncon the aforesaid Officers came
also, and with them the Informer Charles Tennison and the Hangman; here they
stayed several Days and Nights, and kept Samuel's Wife, who was big with Child,
as a Prisoner in her own House, not suffering her to speak with any, so much as
at the Door, nor any to come to her. And after they had broke up all the locked
Doors, they took away to the Value of about forty three Pounds in Goods; and so
insolent the Informers were, that one did not stick to say, Insolence of
Informers.
I Will make the Mayor wait upon me as often as I will, at my Pleasure. Nay this
wicked Crew was become so powerful that none durst oppose them, for Fear of
falling into Disgrace with the Court, since they were encouraged by such as
were in high Stations, and probably at the Instance of Papists, or popishly
affected. The Constable William Pool coming this Summer into the Meeting at
Norwich with an Informer, Hard Case of W. Pool, a Constable.
who made him come, and hearing efficacious Preaching there, he cried with
Tears in his Eyes, What shall I do! I know the Power of God is among you. And
told the Informer, That if there were a Curse hung over any People upon the
Earth, it was over the Informers. And Tennison the Informer, who had assisted
in taking away Samuel Duncon's Goods, being afterward committed to Prison for
Debt, confessed he never prospered, And Confession of Tennison, in Distress.
since he took in Hand that Work; and said, if he were at Liberty, he would
never meddle with it more.

In Nottinghamshire also great Spoil and Havoc was made, The Actions of
Justice Thoroton a Persecutor in Nottinghamshire.
to which the Justice, Robert Thoroton, was greatly instrumental; for at Sutton
he gave forth a Warrant to seize the Goods of two Persons, one of which was a
Woman, who having in a Meeting spoken five or six Words, which, according to
the Testimony of some Officers that were present, were not at all like
preaching, was however informed against as a Preacher, and so by the said
Thoroton fined twenty Pounds; and she being unable to pay, the one half of the
Fine was charged upon her, Sufferers J. Fulwood. W Day.
and the other half upon John Fulwood. At another Time Thoroton gave Order to
seize the Goods of William Day, a Miller^ because he having been at a Meeting,
at Sutton in the Street, the Fine of a pretended Preacher, that was unable, was
charged upon him; though Day proved, and the Officers who kept the Friends out of
their Meeting Place, declared also that those Words, which were called
Preaching, were no more than an Answer to what another had spoken. But for all
that, Thoroton, to protect and to gratify the Informer, said, Though but one Word
were spoken, it is sufficient. A poor Woman at South-Collingham.
A poor Woman at South-Collingham, who was already bereaved of almost all that
she possessed, and since by her Friends provided with a Bed and other
Necessaries, was also deprived of this little, because she continued to
frequent Meetings. M. Hartly in Distress.
Matthew Hartly, a poor Man, who lived by Spinning Wool, was likewise for
frequenting the Meeting there, bereaved of what he had; and so it was with many
others, whose Names and Sirnames I could mention, if I had a Mind to enlarge.
And if their Friends had not taken Care of them, and other impoverished
Families, who had lost all by Spoil, many might have perished.

In the Town of Hereford the Meetings were also disturbed from Time to Time, At
Hereford great Mischief ^^ns chiefly by rude Boys encouraged by the Mayor. A.
Seward, the College Priests, two Justices, a Prebend, etc.
chiefly by Boys, who threw among those that were met, not only Stones, and
Excrements, but burning Squibbs; and used all Manner of Insolency and Mischief
they could think of, against these harmless People, either by breaking the
Glass-windows, or the Forms and Seats. One of the Leaders of this turbulent
Company was the Son of one Abraham Seward, who about this Time was elected
Mayor; but when Complaints were made to him of the outrageous Actions of the
said wicked Crew, he pretended to be ignorant of his Son's Doings, and for all
that threatened those that came to him, with the Execution of the Law upon them,
if they did not leave off to keep Meetings. And as it was well known that the
chief Master of the Town-School was displeased at the extravagant Insolency of
some of his Scholars, so it was reported also that he was forbidden to correct
them for it; and that the College Priests had set them on, and said they would
bear them out in what they did: For some of those brutish Boys were Choristers.
Two Friends went to the Justices, Robert Simons and Thomas Simons, to acquaint
them with the excessive Abuses they met with. But the Justices not at all
regarding their Complaint, the said Robert endeavored to draw some Confession
of a Meeting from one of them, intending, as he himself said, immediately to
have fined him, if he had confessed; but he was wary. Now since the Insolency
of the Boys was thus encouraged by Authority, it was no Wonder it continued
there a whole Year. At length eight Men were taken from the Meeting, by the
aforesaid Mayor Abraham Seward, and carried to the Town Hall; and in their
Passage along he said, They should never meet there more. To which a Friend
going with him, said, We are a People gathered by the Power of the Lord; and
therefore the Power of Man cannot scatter us. Being come to the Town Hall, the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were tendered to them; on which they said, We
are Christians, therefore cannot break the Command of Christ, which forbids to
swear at all; but to render just and lawful Allegiance to the King, we do not
deny, nor refuse. And they persisting in their Refusal to swear, were committed
to Prison. The next Day after, one Walter Rogers, a Prebend, walking by the
Meeting House, and observing how it was broken, said to some, That they were
very good Boys, and had done their Work better than he thought they had.

A^ one of the Quarter Sessions in Nottingham, J. Sayton of Nottingham fined 20
l. brings an Appeal to the Quarter Sessions, and on Trial is acquitted, which
much inrages Justice Whaley.
one John Sayton appeared, who being fined twenty Pounds for suffering a
Conventicle at his House in the Parish of Blyth, came to appeal for Justice.
The Witness produced against him, said, I was there on that Day, and there were
several People met, but were all silent, and no Words spoken amongst them; but
I did not see John Sayton there. And that the said John Sayton was above sixty
Mile from home the same Day, (for which he was fined 20 l.) was made appear in
open Court by substantial Evidence. Then the Council for the Appellant said, In
the first Place, forasmuch as there was neither Preachings, Praying, nor
Reading, as their own Witness does testify, therefore it was no Conventicle.
Secondly, Being they cannot prove he was there, therefore how can it be judged,
that he did either wittingly or willingly consent to that Meeting, if they
could make it a Conventicle? To this the Informer's Council objected, That
although there was neither Preaching, Praying, nor Reading, yet it was evident
enough that they met under a Pretense of Religious Exercise; and seeing there
were more than five, and not of John Sayton 's Family; therefore it must needs
be a Conventicle. And as to the Second, seeing they cannot prove he was there,
we must leave it to the Consciences of the Jury, whether he did willingly
consent to that Meeting or no. After the Council had spoken on both Sides,
Peniston Whaley, one of the Justices who sat in the Chair as Judge of the
Court, stood up and said to the Jury, Although there was no visible Exercise that
can be proved, yet the Quakers say, they worship God in Spirit and Truth; and
we know their Manner is to sit sighing and groaning, etc. The Jury returning,
and being asked by the Court, Do you find it for the King, or for the
Appellant? answered, For the Appellant. This so displeased the said Justice
Whaley, that he bid them, Go forth again. But one of the Jurymen saying, They
were agreed, and they had considered the Thing very well; he thereupon fell
into such a Rage, that he said, You deserve all to be hanged; for you are as
ill as Highwaymen. Perhaps he himself was either an Informer, or a special
Friend to such, and therefore was sorry that the Jury deprived him of the
Booty, or a Share of it.

Persecution in Merionethsh.
There was now great Persecution in all Parts of England; neither did it go
better in the Principality of Wales. Nine Persons being taken Prisoners, and
brought this Summer to the Assizes held for the County of Merioneth, in the
Town Bala, upon an Indictment for not resorting to their Parish-Churches, the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were tendered to them, Kemick Eyton and
Thomas Walcot being Judges; and upon their Refusal of taking these Oaths, the
said Judges declared it as their Opinion in open Court, The barbarous Opinion
of K. Eyton and T. Walcot, Welsh Judges.
That in case the Prisoners would refuse the Oaths the second Time, they should
be prosecuted as Traitors, the Men to be hanged and quartered, and the Women to
be burnt. But this Threat could not make them afraid: For at the next Assizes
the Oaths being tendered them again, they continued in refusing, though they
solemnly acknowledged Allegiance to the King as Supreme Magistrate; and
thereupon were remanded to close Imprisonment, E. Rees kept from Fire in the
height of Frost, dies of Cold.
where Edward Rees, one of them, being above sixty Years of Age, and not able
to bear the Cold, died about the Height of the Frost, not having been allowed
the Use of Fire.

Some Time before it happened within the Corporation of Pool in
Montgomeryshire, that the Justice David Maurice coming into a House where a
small Number of People were peaceably met, and all silent, required them to
depart. T. Lloyd speaking a few Words to Justice Maurice fined 20 1.
Hereupon Thomas Lloyd, one of the Company began to speak a few Words, by way
of defining true Religion, and what true Worship was; and what he said was so
reasonable, that the said Justice approved of it, as sound and according to the
Doctrine of the Church of England; yet notwithstanding he fined the said Tho.
Lloyd in 20 l. for Preaching.

J. Sage near ten Years a Prisoner at Ivelchester, dies there.
This Year died in Prison John Sage, being about eighty Years of Age, after
having been in Prison at Ivelchester in Somersetshire almost ten Years, for not
paying of Tithes. And it appeared, that since the Restoration of King Charles,
above two hundred of the People called Quakers died in Prisons in England,
Above 200 Quakers died in Prison since the Restoration.
where they had been confined because of their Religion. I could mention
abundance of Occurrences this Year, if I had a mind to extend my Work, but I
study Brevity: Yet I cannot omit to mention, that in this Year in the Island of
Barbados in the West Indies, a Law was made to prevent Negroes coming into
the Meetings of the Quakers which was of this Tenor. A Law made at Barbados to
prevent Negroes ^^^ing to Quakers Meetings.


WHereas of late many Negroes have been suffered to remain at the Meetings of
the Quakers, as Hearers of their Doctrine, and taught in their Principles,
whereby the Safety of the Island may be much hazarded: Be it enacted, That it
at any Time after Publication hereof any Negro or Negroes be found with the
People called Quakers at any of their Meetings, as Hearers of their Preaching,
he or they shall be forfeited, one half to such as shall seize or sue for him
or them, it belonging to any of the Quakers; and the other Moiety to the
public Use of the Island; provided that if he or they be seized, such as seize
shall bring their Actions upon this Statute, within three Months, against the
Owner of the Negro or Negroes. Wherein the Defendant having ten Days Summons,
shall appear, plead, and come to Trial at the first Court after Summons, or
Judgment to be given by Nihil dicit, and Execution immediately to issue. And if
such Negro or Negroes do not belong to any of the Persons present at the same
Meeting, any Person or Persons may bring an Action upon this Statute against
any of the Persons present at the said Meeting at the Election of the Informer,
and so recover Ten Pounds for every Negro or Negroes present at the said
Meeting as aforesaid, to be divided as aforesaid, and in such Actions,
Proceedings to be as aforesaid. And no Person whatsoever shall keep any School
to instruct any Child in any Learning, unless within one Month after the
Publication hereof he first take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before
some Justice of Peace of the Parish where the Party lives, and have a
Certificate thereof, or have a special License from the Governor, on Pain of
three Months Imprisonment, and Forfeiture of 3000 lb. of Moscovado Sugar, the
one Moiety to the Informer, and the other to the public Use of the Island, to
be recovered as aforesaid. And no Person whatsoever, who is not an Inhabitant
and Resident of this Island, and has been so for twelve Months together, shall
hereafter publicly discourse or preach at the Meeting of the Quakers, on Pain
of six Months Imprisonment, and Forfeiture of 1000 lb. Moscovado Sugar, the one
Moiety to such as sue for it, the other to the public Use of the Island, to be
recovered as aforesaid: Provided that all Actions upon this Statute be brought
within six Months after the Offense.

Read and passed the Council the 21st of April, 1676, and consented to by his
Excellency [the Governor] the same Day.

Edwyn Steed, Deputy-Secretary.

Although in the Beginning of this Statute the instructing of the Negroes in the
Doctrine of the Quakers is represented as a Thing whereby the Safety of the
Island might be much hazarded, yet the Sequel shows that this was not the
Matter, but that it was endeavored to deprive the Quakers of their due
Liberty. What was the Issue hereof I am unacquainted with.

This Year Robert Barclay writ a Letter to the Here Adrian Paets, R. Barclay
writes a Letter in Latin to the Here Adrian Paets concerning the Doctrine of
the Quakers.
with whom he had some Discourse when the said Here returned from Spain, where
he had been Ambassador for the States of the United Provinces. This Paets
having a strange Opinion of the Doctrine of the Quakers, had a good while ago
writ a Letter to To be found in the Book called, Pras^a^^tium ac cruditorum
virorum Epistola Ecclesiastica and Theologica. Am^telodami a^^d Franciscum
Halman. 1704.
Christian Hartzoeker at Rotterdam about their Doctrine; and having afterward
discoursed with Barclay concerning the inward and immediate Revelat^^^ of the
Spirit of God, this induced Barclay to write a Letter on the ^^d Subject in
Latin to the aforementioned Here, wherein he made a more large Reply to his
Arguments, than he had done by Word of Mouth. This Letter being sent over from
Scotland to Holland, was delivered by Benjamin Furly at Rotterdam to the said
Here Paets, with a Desire that he might be pleased to return an Answer to it,
which he promised he would. But he continuing deficient in the Case, Furly at
last published the said Letter in Print, but without mentioning the Name of him
to whom 'twas written, only his Character, viz. Cuidam Legato. In this Letter
was ^et down first the Objection of the Here Paets, to wit, That since the
Being and Substance of the Christian Religion consists in the Knowledge of,
and Faith concerning the Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ Jesus, he considered the Substance of the Christian Religion as a
contingent Truth; which contingent Truth was Matter of Fact. And Matter of Fact
could not be known but by the Relation of another, or by the Perception of the
outward Senses; because there are naturally in our Souls no Ideas of contingent
Truths, such as are concerning necessary Truths, viz. That God is, and that the
whole is greater than the Part. And since it might without Ab^urdity be said,
That God cannot make a contingent Truth to become a necessary Truth; neither
can God reveal contingent Truths or Matters of Fact, but as contingent Truths
are revealed; and Matters of Fact not being revealed but by the outward Senses,
the Conclusion drawn from thence is, That Men are not obliged to believe God
producing any Revelation in the Soul concerning Matter of Fact, whether of a
Thing done or to be done, unless there be added some Miracles obvious to the
outward Senses, by which the Soul may be ascertained that that Revelation
comes from God. All these Arguments Barclay answered very circu^stantia^ly,
premising first, That it was falsely supposed that the Essence of the Cristian
Religion consisted in the Historical Faith and Knowledge of the Birth, Death,
Life, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ. That Faith and Historical Knowledge
is indeed a Part of the Christian Religion, but not such an essential Part, as
that without which the Christan Religion cannot conssist, but an integral Part,
which goes to the completing of the Christian Religion, as the Hands or Feet
of a Man are integral Parts of a Man, without which nevertheless a Man may
exist, but not an entire and complete Man. Yet he agrees, That the Historical
Knowledge of Christ is commonly manifested to us by the Holy Scripture as the
Means; but nevertheless he asserts, That God could without such an outward Mean
manifest the said Historical Knowledge to our Minds: And also, That a
contingent Truth may be known by a supernatural Knowledge. And he says, That
when God does make known unto Men any Matter of Fact by divine immediate
Revelation, he then speaks as to the Ear of the Heart of the inward Man. And
That as when any natural Idea is excited in us, we clearly know it; so also
when a supernatural Idea is raised, we clearly know That whereof it is the
Idea. He also holds forth, What properly is the inward supernatural Sense in
Man; and then he distinguishes between contingent and necessary Truths, and
shows how a Divine Revelation may be known to be such, saying that natural and
spiritual Senses are distinguishable by their Objects, and demonstrating how
godly Men may know they are in the Favor of God, and how the Wicked feel the
Wrath of God as Fire. He also relates, After what Manner the Spiritual Senses
distinguish the Good and the Evil; and he confesses there is in all Men, as
well the Godly as Ungodly, some Sort of Idea of God, as of a most perfect
Being: But he asserts, That the supernatural Idea of God, differs much from
the natural; and that in all Men there is supernatural Idea of God. He also
shows, Wherein the Motions of the Mind differ from those of the Body; and that
there are Ideas as well of supernatural, as of natural Things. And showing from
whence the Errors of false Likenesses of Reason proceed, he says, That the
natural Reason cannot perceive supernatural Things. He also asserts, That the
Revelations to the Prophets were by inward Inspirations in their Minds; and
that they were most certainly persuaded that they were divinely inspired, even
without any outward Miracle. And that it is by the Inspiration of the same
Divine Spirit, by which the Prophets prophesied that we do believe their Words
and Writings to be divine, concerning contingent Truths, as well past as to
come. Moreover he enquires, Whether Faith comes by outward Hearing, and he
shows how the outward Senses may be deceived; nay, that often they are vitiated
both by outward Casualties and natural Infirmities, whereunto the Godly are no
less subject than the Wicked.

All this is treated at large by Barclay, as may be seen in the said Letter,
and several Years after, when the Here Pa^ts was at London, being one of the
Commissioners for the Dutch East-India-Company, Barclay spoke with him again,
and so represented the Matter, that he readily yielded, That he had been
mistaken in his Notion of the Quakers; for he found they could make a
reasonable Plea for the Foundation of their Religion. And thereupon R. Barclay
translated the said Letter into English as follows;

My Friend,
ALbeit I Judge I did fully answer to all thy Arguments in that Conference we
had, concerning the Necessity and Possbility of Inward Immediate Revelation,
and of the Certainty of true Faith from thence proceeding: Nevertheless,
because after we had made an End, and were parting, thou would^st needs remit
to my further Consideration, the Strength of thy Argument, as that in which
thou supposed^st the very ^^inge of thy Question to lie: That I might satisfy
thy Desire, and that the Truth might more appear, I did further consider of it;
but the more I weighed it, I found it the weaker. And therefore that thou thy
self may make the truer Judgment of it, I thought meet to send thee my
further Considerations thereon; (which I had done 'ere now had not I both at
London and elsewhere been diverted by other necessary Occasions) wherein, I
doubt not, but thou will perceive a full and distinct Answer to thy Argument.
But if thou can^st not as yet yield to the Truth, or think mine Answer in
any Part to be defective, so that there yet remains with thee any Matter of
Doubt or Scruple; I do earnestly desire thee, that as I for thy Sake, and out
of Love to the Truth, have not been wanting to examine thy Argument, and to
transmit to thee ray Considerations thereon; so thou may give thy self the
Trouble to write and send me what thou have further to say: which my Friend N.
N. who delivers thee this, will, at what Time thou shall appoint, receive from
thee, and transmit to me thy Letter; that at last the Truth may appear where it
is.

And that the whole Matter may the more clearly be understood, it will be fit
in the first Place, To propose thy Argument, whereby thou opposest the
Immediate Revelation of God in the Saints; thence concluding, thou have fully
overturned the Foundation of the People called Quakers. Which Argument of thine
is,

That since (as thou judge) the Being and Substance of the Christian Religion
consists in the Knowledge of, H. P's Objection against Immediate Revelation
stated by way of Argument.
and Faith concerning the Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of
Christ Jesus, thou considerest the Substance of the Christian Religion as a
Contingent Truth; which Contingent Truth is Matter of Fact. Whence thou
reasonest, That --

Matter of Fact cannot be known, but by the Relation of another, or by the
Perception of the outward Senses; because there are naturally in our Souls no
Ideas of Contingent Truths, such as are concerning Necessary Truths: To wit,
That GOD is; and that the whole is greater than the Part. -- And since it may
without Absurdity be said, That

GOD cannot make a Contingent Truth to become a Necessary Truth; neither can
GOD reveal Contingent Truths or Matters of Fact, but at Contingent Truths are
revealed: But Matters of Fact are not revealed, but by the outward Senses: --
From whence thou concludest, That

Men are not even obliged to believe GOD producing any Revelation in the Soul
concerning Matter of Fact, whether of a Thing (...) be done, u^less there be
added some Miracles obvious to the outward (...), by which the Soul may be
ascertained, that that Revelation comes from GOD.

And this thou endeavourest also to prove from the Scripture, The Pr^^s of the
Arguments.
Romans x. where the Apostle says, Faith comes by H^^ving: And because the
Apostle speaks afterward of those who were sent; in the Plural Number;
thence thou concludest, That to be spoken of outward Preaching by the Ministry
of Men: And since the Apostle uses a Question, saying, How shall they believe
unless they hear, Thou gatherest from the Induction and Connection of the Text,
that the Apostle treats only of outward Hearing; thence concluding, That
without outward Hearing Faith cannot be produced: And therefore, that there can
be no Immediate Revelation by the simple Operation of the Spirit in the Mind,
unless there be somewhat proposed to the outward Senses.

Before I proceed to a direct Answer to this Argument, some Things are
necessary to be premised:

The Christian Religion consist^ not in the Historical Knowledge of Christ.
First then; That it is falsely supposed, That the Essence of the Christian
Religion consists in the Historical Faith and Knowledge of the Birth, Death,
Life, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ. That Faith and Historical
Knowledge is indeed a Part of the Christian Religion; but not such an Essential
Part, as that without which the Christan Religion cannot consist; but an
integral Part, which goes to the completing of the Christian Religion: As the
Hands or Feet of a Man are integral Parts of a Man, without which nevertheless
a Man may exist, but not an entire and complete Man.

The Historical Knowledge of Christ is a commonly manifessed to us, but by the
Holy Scripture.
Secondly, If by Immediate Revelation be understood such a Revelation of GOD,
as begets in our Souls an Historical Faith and Knowledge of the Birth of Christ
in the Flesh, without the Means of the Holy Scripture, we do not contend for
such a Revelation, as commonly given, or to be expected by us, or any other
Christians. For albeit many other Evangelical Truths be manifested to us by the
immediate Manifestation of God, not using the Scripture as the Means, yet the
Historical Knowledge of Christ is not commonly manifested to us, nor to any
others, but by the Holy Scripture, as the Means, and that by Way of a Material
Object; Even as when we see the Person of Peter or Paul to our visive Faculty
Immediately, yet not without the Medium of that Person concurring as a Material
Object to produce that Sight; while the Light of the Sun concurs, as the formal
Object of that Vision or Sight. So that when we livingly and spiritually know
the History of the Birth of Christ in the Flesh; the Inward Revelation or
Illumination of GOD, which is like the Sun's Light, proceeding from the Divine
Sun, does ^hine into the Eye of the Mind, and by its Influence moves the Mind
to assent unto the Historical Truth of CHRIST's Birth, Life, etc. in the
reading or hearing the Scripture, or Meditating therein.

Thirdly, God can manifest the Historical Truth of Christ to our Minds without
the Scripture.
Nevertheless we do firmly assert, That GOD can most easily, clearly, and
certainly manifest to our Minds the Historical Truths of CHRIST's Birth, etc.
when it so pleases him, even without the Scripture, or any other outward
Means. And because this Argument seems to be formed against the Possibility of
such a Revelation, therefore I shall proceed to discuss it: But first thou
may mind, that the Prophets who foretold Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and
be^^g to be born of a Virgin, and afterward to suffer Death, did know these
Truths of Fact by the Inward Inspiration of GOD without Outward Means: For
which see 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Now that which has been, m^ be.

Fourthly, This Argument does at most conclude, A contingent Truth may be in
kn^wn by Supernatural Knowledge.
that we cannot know naturally any Truth of Fact, but by the Relation of
another without us, or by the Perception of the outward Senses; because there
are naturally in our Minds no Ideas concerning Contingent Truths (and every
Truth of Fact is a contingent Truth) as there are of Necessary Truths. This
then proves, that we cannot naturally know any contingent Truth, but by the
Relation of another, or Perception of the outward Senses: But that hinders
not, but we may know a contingent Truth by a Supernatural Knowledge, GOD
supplying the Place of an outward Relator; who is so true, that he may and
ought to be believed, since GOD is the Fountain of Truth.

Fifthly, The Form of Revelation is the Voice of God inwardly speaking to the
Mind of Man.
When GOD does make known unto Men any Matter of Fact by divine, immediate
Revelation or Inspiration, GOD speaking as to the Ear of the Heart of the
inward Man, or as by his Finger writing it therein, two Things are to be
considered in such an immediate Revelation.

1. TO Materiale, The Matter of Fact, or Thing revealed, which is contingent.

2. TO Formale, The Form or Mode, how the Revelation is made: Which Form is an
inward, divine, and supernatural Revelation, which is the Voice or Speech of
GOD, inwardly speaking to the Ear of the inward Man, or Mind of Man, or a
divine Writing supernaturally imprinted therein. Now as to the material Part,
or the Thing and Matter revealed, this is indeed a contingent Truth, and of it
self is not manifest to the Mind; but because of the Form, that is, because of
the divine Mode, and supernatural inward Operation, the Matter is known to be
true. For that divine and supernatural inward Operation, which the Mind does
feel and perceive in it self, is the Voice of God speaking unto Man, which by
its Nature and specific Property is as clearly distinguished and understood to
be the Voice of GOD, as the Voice of Peter or James is known to be the Voice of
such Men. For every Being as a Being is knowable, and that by its own specific
Nature, or Property proceeding from its Nature; and has its proper Idea, by
which it is distinguishable from every other Thing, if so do its Idea be stirred
up in us, and clearly proposed to us.

The speaking of God in Man is a supernatural Being known by its Virtue.
Sixthly, Now as some Beings are natural, some supernatural, so some Ideas are
natural, some supernatural: And as when any natural Idea is excited in us, we
clearly know it, so also when a Supernatural Idea is raised, we clearly know
that, whereof it is the Idea. But the Voice of GOD speaking to the Mind of Man,
is a supernatural Being, and stirs up in us a supernatural Idea, by which we
clearly know that inward Voice to be the Voice of God, and not the Voice or
Operation of another, or of any evil Spirit, or Angel, because none of these
have a supernatural Idea, as the Voice of GOD, and his divine Operation has:
For it is full of Vigor, Virtue, and divine Glory, as says the Psalmist, who
had often Experience of it; and we also in our Measures are Witnesses thereof,
for the Voice of God is known to be his by its divine Virtue.

What the inward supernatural Sense in Man i^.
Seventhly, The Senses are either outward or inward; and the inward Senses are
either natural or supernatural: We have an Example of the inward natural Sense
in being angered or pacified, in Love and Hatred; or when we perceive and
discern any natural Truth, (such as the natural Maxims, to wit, That the Whole
is greater than the Part, etc.) or when we deduce any Conclusion by the
Strength of natural Reason, that Perception also in a larger Sense, may be
called an inward Sense. But an Example of an inward supernatural Sense is, when
the Heart or Soul of a pious Man feels in it self divine Motions, Influences,
and Operations, which sometimes are as the Voice or Speech of God, sometimes as
a most pleasant and glorious Illustration or visible Object to the inward Eye,
sometimes as a most sweet Savor or Taste, sometimes as an heavenly and divine
Warmness, or (so to speak) Melting of the Soul in the Love of God. Moreover
this divine and supernatural Operation in the Mind of Man, is a true and most
glorious Miracle; which when it is perceived by the inward and supernatural
Sense divinely raised up in the Mind of Man, does so evidently and clearly
persuade the Understanding to assent to the Thing revealed, that there is no
Need of an outward Miracle: For this Assent is not because of the Thing it
self, but because of the Revelation proposing it, which is the Voice of God.
For when the Voice of God is heard in the Soul, the Soul does as certainly
conclude the Truth of that Voice, as the Truth of God's Being, from whom it
proceeds.

Contingent and necessary Truths distinguished.
These Things being thus premised, I now proceed to a direct Answer. For what
is said, That God cannot make a contingent Truth to become a necessary Truth, I
agree; but when any contingent Truth is manifest to us by the immediate
Revelation of God, there is in it two Things to be considered, to wit, the
Thing revealed which is contingent; and the Revelation it self: Which upon the
Supposition, that it is a divine Revelation, is no contingent Truth, but a most
necessary Truth. And this all Mankind will say, that this Proposition, Every
divine Revelation is necessarily true, is as clear and evident, as that
Proposition, That every Whole is greater than its Part.

How a divine Revelation is known to be a divine Revelation.
But thou will say, How know thou that a divine Revelation is a divine
Revelation? I answer, How know thou, that a Whole is a Whole, and a Part is
a Part? Thou will say, by the natural Idea excited in me of a Whole, and of a
Part. I answer again, Even so a divine Revelation is known to be such by a
supernatural Idea of divine Revelation stirred up in us, and that by a divine
Motion, or supernatural Operation. But it is no Wonder that Men, who have no
Experience of supernatural Ideas, or at least do not heed them, do deny them;
which is, as if a Man naturally blind denied Light or Colors; or a deaf Man
Sounds, because they experience them not, Therefore we cannot dissemble, that
we feel a fervent Zeal even divinely kindled in us against such an absurd
Opinion, as affirms That God cannot ascertain us of his Will in any contingent
Truth, but by proposing it to the outward Senses, This Opinion does in a Manner
turn Men into Brutes, as if Man were not to believe his God unless he propose
what is to be believed to the outward Senses, which the Beasts have common with
us; yea, it derogates from God's Power, and imputes Weakness to him, as if he
could not do that, which not only both good and evil Angels can do, but which
the meanest Creatures can do, and the most unsensible. Natural and spiritual
Senses distinguished by their Objects.
As for Instance: The Heat of the Fire, the Coldness of the Air and Water
works upon us; yea, if a Pin prick us, we feel it, and that by the outward
Sense; because the Objects are outward and carnal: But since GOD is a most pure
and glorious Spirit, when he operateth in the innermost Parts of our Minds by
his Will; shall not he and his Will be clearly felt according to his Nature,
that is, by a spiritual and supernatural Sense? For as the Nature of God is, so
is the Nature of his Will, to wit, purely Spiritual, and therefore requires a
spiritual Sense to discern it; which Spiritual Sense, when it is raised up in
us by a divine Operation, does as clearly and certainly know the Voice or
Revelation of the Will of God, concerning any Thing which God is pleased to
reveal, however contingent, as the outward Sense knows and perceives the
outward Object. And it is no less absurd, to require of God, who is a most pure
Spirit, to manifest his Will to Men by the outward Senses, else not to be
credited; as to require us to see Sounds, and hear Light and Colors. For as
the Objects of the outward Senses are not to be confounded, but every Object is
to have its proper Sense; so must we Judge of inward and spiritual Objects,
which have their proper Sense, whereby they are to be perceived. And tell me,
How God does manifest his Will concerning Matters of Fact, when he sends his
Angels to Man, since Angels (as is commonly received) have not outward Senses,
or at least not so gross ones, as ours are? Yea, when Man die, and appear
before the Tribunal of God, whether unto eternal Life or Death, how can they
know this, having laid down their Bodies, and therewith their outward Senses?
And nevertheless this Truth of God is a Truth of Fact, as is the historical
Truth of Christ's Birth in the Flesh. And which is yet more near: How do good
and holy Men even in this Life most certainly know, How good Men know they are
wit^ God in Favor.
that they are in Favor and Grace with God? No outward Revelation does make
this known unto them; but The Spirit (as says the Apostle) bears witness
with our Sprits, that we are the Children of God. For the mere Testimony of a
humane Conscience, without the inward Testimony of the holy Spirit, cannot
beget in us a firm and immovable Testimony of our Sonship, because the Heart
of Man is deceitful; and if the Testimony thereof were true, at most it is but
a humane Testimony, which begets in us only a humane Faith: But that Faith,
by which holy Men believe they are the Sons of God, is a divine Faith, which
leans upon a divine Testimony of the holy Spirit, witnessing in them, that they
are the Sons of God. Moreover, when a good Man feels in himself that
undeclarable Joy of the holy Spirit, concerning which the holy Scripture
speaks, and which is the common Privilege of the Saints, how or whence feels he
this Joy? Truly, this Argument concludes no less against this heavenly
spiritual Joy, which is begotten in the Souls of the Saints by the holy Spirit,
than it does against the immediate Revelation of God: For there is no natural
Idea of this spiritual Joy, else mere natural Men, yea such as are profane and
ungodly, would feel it as much as the godly: But because it is a supernatural
Thing, therefore it can have no true Idea but what is supernatural. Moreover
whence is it that profane Men feel sometimes in themselves the Wrath of God as
Fire, How profane Men do feel the Wrath of God as Fire.
when all Things as to the outward, go as prosperously with them as with the
Godly, and oftentimes more prosperously? For there is no natural Idea in Man of
this inward Wrath of God. There is also an inward Grief oftentimes raised up in
wicked Men from the Sense of this Wrath of God, which very much vexes and
tormenteth their Minds; and nevertheless this Grief has no natural Idea in us:
For oftentimes wicked Men feel not this Sorrow; for God sometimes is, as it
were, silent, while the wicked sin, as in Psalm. i.

All which Things do most clearly demonstrate, That there are in Men
supernatural Ideas of supernatural Beings; which Ideas are nevertheless not
perceived by us unless they be stirred up by some supernatural Operation of
GOD, which raises up in us supernatural and spiritual Senses, which by their
Nature are as distinguishable from the natural Senses, whether inward or
outward, as the natural Senses are distinguished one from another by their
specific Difference. Of which spiritual Senses the Scripture speaks
frequently, as Heb. v. and xiv. where is spoken of the spiritual Senses in
general, by which the spiritual Man has the Discerning of Good and Evil: Which
Good is of a spiritual Nature, Spiritual Senses discerning Good and Evil.
and conduces to feed in us a spiritual and divine Life; and the Evil is of
that Kind, by which the spiritual Life is in us hurt; to wit, Sins, whether
carnal or spiritual: All which cannot be discerned but by such who have
spiritual Senses stirred up in them, as says the Apostle. In other Places the
Scripture also speaks of these spiritual Senses in particular; as of the
spiritual Seeing, Psalm. xxxiv. 9. of the spiritual Hearing; Psalm. ^xxxv. and 9.
of spiritual Tasting, Psalm. xxxiv. viii. of spiritual Smelling, Cant. i. 3. of
spiritual Touching, Acts. xvii. 8. and in many other Places of Scripture we
read of those spiritual Senses in particular. Yea it is the Promise of the
Gospel, That the Glory of God shall be seen of holy Men, such as are clean of
Heart, even in this Life: Isa. xxxiii. 17. Mat. v. 8. Which were fulfilled in
the primitive Christians, see John. i. 14. 1 John i. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. iii.
18. and Chap. iv. 6. But what is this Vision of GOD and divine Glory, which the
Souls of the Saints enjoy in this Life, which is Only as the Earnest or first
Fruits of that more abundant glorious Vision in the Life to come, concerning
which the Scripture so much declares, which is the highest Happiness of the
IMMORTAL SOUL? For this Argument seems to do no lesS Injury to the Saints,
than to rob them of this most glorious Treasure both in this Life, and that to
come. For there is in us no natural Idea of this divine Glory, as there is not
of GOD himself, which is any ways proportionable unto so great Happiness, which
the Scripture so much declares of, by which the Godly are rewarded partly in
this Life, and plenarily in that which is to come. The Existence of a most
perfect Being asserted.
We confess indeed, there is in all Men, as well the Godly as Ungodly, some
Sort of Idea of GOD as of a most perfect Being; and that therefore this
Propostion, There existeth a most perfect Being, does as clearly appear to
humane Understanding, as that The Whole is greater than the Part, And therefore
this Proposition, That a most perfect Being existeth, ought to be numbered
among the Principles that of themselves are manifest. But this Idea of GOD is
as manifest to ungodly, as to godly Men; yea, is as clearly perceived by the
Devil, as by the most holy Angels: For all the Devils know, that GOD is; but
yet how blind is the Devil, and all wicked Men, as to the Vision of GOD, which
is the chief Reward of the Saints.

There is then either no such Vision of GOD, neither in this Life, nor in that
to come; or there is a supernatural Idea of GOD, The supernatural Idea of God
differs from the natural.
in us, by which we are made capable of this Vision: Which supernatural Idea of
GOD differs much from that natural Idea of GOD, which Cartesius and his
Followers so much talk of, albeit others long before Cartesius did observe this
natural Idea of GOD; and spoke of it.) But the Happiness of the Saints consists
not in contemplating this natural Idea of God, else the Wicked would be as
happy as the Godly; yea, the very Devil, as the most holy Angel: Since, as is
said, both the Devil and most wicked Men do as clearly perceive this natural
Idea of GOD, as the most holy Men or Angels.

If the Scripture then be true, There is in all Men a supernatural Idea of God.
there is in Men a supernatural Idea of God, which altogether differs from this
natural Idea: I say, in all Men; because all Men are capable of Salvation, and
consequently of enjoying this divine Vision. Now this Capacity consists
herein, that they have such a supernatural Idea in themselves: For if there
were no such Idea in them, it were impossible they should so know GOD. For
whatsoever is clearly and distinctly known, is known by its proper Idea;
neither can it otherways be clearly and distinctly known: For the Ideas of all
Things are divinely planted in our Souls; for they are not begotten in us by
outward Objects, or outward Causes, (as the better philosophy teaches) but
only are by these outward Things excited or stirred up. And this is true not
only in supernatural Ideas of GOD and Things divine, and in natural Ideas of
the natural Principles of humane Understanding, and Conclusions thence deduced
by the Strength of humane Reason; but even in the Ideas of outward Objects,
which are perceived by the outward Senses; as that noble Christian Philosopher
Boethius has well observed; Boethius a Christian Philosopher.
to which also the Cartesian Philosophy agrees. For when I see any outward
Object, whether it be a Man, or Horse, or Bird, the outward Object does not
treat in my Eye, nor yet in my Mind the Idea of those Things; for the outward
Object does nothing but imprint in our sensible Organs a Corporeal Motion. Now
there is nothing in a corporeal Motion that can form in us the Ideas of those
Things; The Motions of the Body and Mind distinguished.
for all Ideas are of a spiritual Nature: Now nothing that is corporeal can
produce that which is spiritual, because The less Excellent cannot produce the
more Excellent, else the Effect would exceed its Cause; which is against all
sound Reason, that it should bring forth what were of a higher and more
excellent Kind. Therefore all Ideas, whether of natural or spiritual Things,
are divinely implanted in our Minds; which nevertheless do not always appear,
but sometimes appear, and sometimes are as it were hid in us, and sometimes are
stirred up in us by Causes outward or inward, and again do as it were sleep and
shun our Observation, and seem not to be otherways distinguished by our Minds,
but as Thoughts and Perceptions of the Mind from the Mind it self; that is, as
the Mode from the Subject, or as a bodily Motion from the Body, whereof it is
the Motion: For as is the Relation of a bodily Motion to a Body, so is the
Relation of a Thought or Perception of the Mind to the Mind. In this
nevertheless they differ, that the Mind can move it self, and operate in it
self; which a Body cannot do: But as a Body can be moved by another, so also
can the Mind after its Manner be moved by another, and that both by outward and
inward Causes, but chiefly by God himself, in whose Hand all Souls and
Creatures are. But of these Things there is enough said at present; and I hope,
I have not thus far impertinently Philosophized.

Supernatural Ideas deducible from the natural.
As there are then natural Ideas concerning the Things of the natural World; as
for Instance, Ideas of Light and Colors, Ideas of Voice and Sounds, Ideas of
Savouring and Smelling, Ideas of Tasting and Feeling, as of Heat and Cold, of
Grief and Joy; it follows also, that there are Ideas of supernatural Things,
concerning the divine and supernatural Things of the divine and supernatural
World; as Ideas of those Things above mentioned in the spiritual World. And as
the natural Ideas are stirred up in us by outward and natural Bodies, so those
divine and supernatural Ideas are stirred up in us by a certain Principle,
which is a Body in Naturals, in Relation to the spiritual World, and therefore
may be called, a divine Body; not as if it were a Part of GOD, who is a most
pure Spirit; but the Organ or Instrument of GOD, by which he works in us, and
stirs up in us these Ideas of divine Things. The Flesh and Blood of Christ,
by which the Saints are nourished.
This is that Flesh and Blood of Christ, by which the Saints are nourished;
which is a Mystery to all unregenerated and mere natural Men, never to be
reached by them, while they remain in that State.

Now if there be such supernatural Ideas, there are also Senses, or perceptive
Faculties by which those Ideas are perceived; for those are two Relatives that
suppose and infer one another, but in wicked Men those Senses or Faculties do
as it were sleep (as the visive Faculty of a blind Man) but in the Godly they
are stirred up. Now by these divine and spiritual Senses, which are distinct
and distinguishable from all the natural Faculties of the Soul, whether of
Imagination, or natural Reason, spiritual-minded Men do behold the Glory and
Beauty of GOD, The Beauty of God makes the Glory of this World despicable.
in Respect whereof, and for which all the Glory of this World is despicable to
them; yea, even as Dross and Dung. And they also hear GOD inwardly speaking in
their Souls Words truly divine and heavenly, full of Virtue and divine Life;
and they savor and taste of divine Things, and do as it were handle them with
the Hands of their Souls. And those heavenly Enjoyments do as really differ in
their Nature from all false Similitudes, and fictitious Apppearances of them,
which either the Mind of Man by its own Strength can imitate, or any evil
Spirit to deceive Man can counterfeit; as a true Man differs from the dead
Image of a Man; or true Bread, Honey, Wine, or Milk does from the mere Picture
of those Things. And albeit either the Imagination of Man, or Subtilty of the
Devil, may counterfeit false Likenesses of these Enjoyments, by which Men may
be deceived, and no Doubt many are deceived; that does not hinder, but that
those divine Enjoyments are clearly perceived in such, in whom the divine and
spiritual Senses are truly opened, and the true supernatural Ideas of those
Things truly raised up. The Cause of Mistakes by false Likenesses of Reason.
And if there be at any Time a Mistake, the divine Illumination is not the
Cause of that Mistake, but some evil Disposition of the Mind; as happens in
those Things relating to natural Reason: For there are many false Appearances
of Reason, which differ as much from true Reason, as those false and pretended
Revelations, and diabolical Inspira-from such as are truly divine. Now, how
many Men who would be esteemed Philosophers, are miserably deceived by those
false Likenesses of Reason, judging their false Reasons to be the true
Similitudes of Things, and solid Ratiocinations; which nevertheless moves no
Man of sound Reason to reject sound and solid Reason, as doubtful and
uncertain? For even sound natural Reason is an excellent Gift of GOD, Natural
Reason comprehends not Things supernatural.
and very useful to Mankind, when used in its proper Place: But let none think
to comprehend by their natural Reason Things that are of a divine and
supernatural Kind. And as we use to do, when any one is deceived by false
Appearances of Reason, we endeavor to reduce them to contemplate the first
natural Ideas of natural Things, and to meditate therein, which is as a Test or
Touchstone, by which all the Appearances and Likenesses of Reason are to be
examined; if they contradict them, to be rejected. So also when any one is
deceived by his own Imagination, or the Cunning of Satan, thinking any evil
Inspiration of the Devil to be a true divine Revelation, he that is so deceived
is to be reduced to the natural Ideas of Things (if so be that pretended
Revelation does contradict them, for no true divine Revelation can contradict
the true natural Ideas) or to the supernatural Ideas of divine Things, The
supernatural Ideas of divine Things are most clear and obvious ^o the Mind.
which are most simple, clear, and obvious to the Minds of Men, if they will
turn their Minds to the divine Seed in them; or at least those Ideas are
readily and easily stirred up. For as in natural Ideas, so in supernatural some
are more easily raised than others: For there is a certain Order both of
natural and supernatural Ideas, whereby they are gradually excited: Nor is
there any mortal Man, in whose Mind at some Time or other there is not stirred
up some Idea that is truly supernatural and divine, and who has not felt in
himself both the Wrath and Judgment of God for his Sins. And also some tender
and gentle Taste of God's Love and Goodness, by which wicked Men are invited to
Repentance. Now that which is thought to be a divine Revelation, and is felt to
contradict any divine and supernatural Idea, which is clearly perceived in the
Soul, it is a manifest Token that it is not a divine Revelation, but either a
false Imagination, or the wicked Suggestion of some evil Spirit.

But to proceed: If we will hear the Scripture (as all Christians ought) it
testifies to us, God has declared his Will even in contingent Truths in the
Scripture.
that GOD has declared his Mind and Will even concerning contingent Truths to
come, in the Prophets; as that of the first to the Hebrews does evidently
declare: GOD, who at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners spoke to our Fathers
in the Prophets. Yea, let us hear the Prophets themselves, Hosea, Chap. i.
says plainly, That the Word of the LORD was made in him (as it is in the,
Heb.) Habakkuk also says, As he was standing on his Watch, to see what Jehovah
would speak in him. Revelations were in the Minds of the Prophets by inward
Inspirations.
And it is so manifest, that the most heavenly Revelations are by inward
Illustrations and Inspirations in the very Minds of the Prophets; that it is
strange how any that believes the Scripture should doubt of it. And if it
happened at any Time, such Revelations were made in the natural Imaginations of
the Prophets, or any of their inward natural Senses; then it may be confessed,
they could not be infallibly certain, they came from GOD, unless they also felt
God in the Divine and Supernatural Senses, by which they did most nearly
approach to him, from these superior and most inward Senses working upon the
lower and less noble Faculties of the Mind. But which ever Way the Prophets
were certain, that they were Inspired of GOD, even when they foretold
Contingent Truths to come; it is without Doubt, they were most certainly
persuaded, Which were most certain without any outward miraculous
Demonstrations.
that they were divinely inspired, and that frequently without any outward
Miracle. For John the Baptist did no Miracle; and many prophesied, where there
apppeared no Miracle, as in the Scripture may be often observed. And we also by
the Inspiration of the same divine Spirit, by which the Prophets prophesied, do
believe their Words and Writings to be divine concerning contingent Truths, as
well past as to come; else that Faith, by which we believe the Scripture, would
not be divine, but merely humane. And thence we need no outward Miracles to
move us to believe the Scriptures; and therefore much less were they necessary
to the Prophets who writ them. For we see in many Places of the Prophets, where
they declare Prophecies as revealed to them of GOD, there is not a Word
mentioned of any outward Miracle, as that by which alone they were certain of
it. Moreover, the Falseness of this Argument does appear, in that the Scripture
does declare many contingent Truths to have been revealed to the Prophets in
Dreams: Divine Revelations by Dreams.
Now as natural and wicked Men do not see what they dream by a real Perception
of the outward Senses, but by inward Ideas which are presented to the Mind, and
perceived by it; so it is also in divine Revelations of this Nature. Of which
we have a clear Example in Joseph, the Husband of the blessed Virgin, who, when
he observed his Wife with Child, was told in a Dream, That she had conceived by
the Holy Ghost: Now I would know, to which of Joseph's outward Senses was this
revealed? Or what Miracle had he to induce him to believe? Which could neither
be proved, (so as to make an infallible Application to Mary) by the Testimony
of the Scripture; and which being against the Order of Nature, did choke his
Reason. The Scripture mentions no Miracle in this Matter; and yet no doubt
Joseph had highly sinned had he not believed this Revelation, and
notwithstanding rejected his Wife as an Adulteress. But if thou say, That
according to thy Hypothesis, there must have been a Miracle; that is only to
beg the Question: And how false this Hypothesis is, the Apostle shows clearly,
The outward Senses cannot discern the Things of God, for they are spiritual.
1 Cor. ii. 14. The natural or animal Man knows not, receives not the Things
of GOD. Now divine Revelations are of this Nature; and if either chiefly or
only those Things were to be judged by the outward Senses, it would contradict
the Apostle. For natural Men yea, the most Wicked have the Use of the outward
Senses as true and exact as the most Godly. And whereas the Apostle adds, For
they are spiritually discerned, it puts the Matter out of all Question: For
thence it abundantly appears, that this Discerning is not by the outward
Senses, according to the following Verse; for the Apostle says, The spiritual
Man judges all Things: This then must be done by some Senses or Properties
peculiar to the spiritual Man, and in which he excels the natural Man, which is
not in the outward Senses (as all do know) Therefore the Perception of
spiritual Things cannot be by the outward Senses, either as the chief or only
Means, as is false;ly contended for.

Now as to these Words of the Apostle, Whether Faith comes by the outward
Hearing.
Romans x. That Faith comes by Hearing, Zuinglius observed well, That the Apostle
intended not to affirm Faith to come by the Hearing of the outward Word;
neither do the following Words prove it, How shall they believe, unless they
hear? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach
unless they be sent? For the Apostle uses these Words, not as his Arguments,
but as Objections which might be formed; as the same Apostle uses in other
Places; to which Objections he answers in the same Chapter, as appears, ver.
18. But I say, have they not all heard? Yes truly, their Voice went into all
the Earth: That is, of the Father and Son, or the Father in the Word; which
Word is not only near us, but (according to the same Apostle in the same
Chapter) in our Mouths, and in our Hearts. But further thou can conclude
nothing from this, but that Faith is begotten by outward Hearing only, and no
otherwise: For this is the Strength of thy Argument, That since Faith cannot be
without outward Hearing; therefore nothing can certainly be believed, but where
somewhat is proposed to the outward Hearing. For if thou acknowledge Faith can
be begotten any otherwise than by Hearing, thou losest the Strength of thy
Argument: And if that Argument hold, That Faith comes only by outward Hearing,
thou destroyest the whole Hypothesis. For having before affirmed, That outward
Miracles are sufficient to render one certain of the Truth of any Revelation;
those Miracles, whether it be the Healing of the Sick, or the Raising of the
Dead, would avail nothing, because those (as for the most Part all Miracles,)
are obvious to the Sight, not to the Hearing: And if it be not by outward
Hearing only, thou can conclude nothing from this Place.

But I the more wonder thy using of this Argument, considering the Discourse we
had together before we entered upon this Debate: For when we were speaking of
the Opinion of a certain Person, A certain Person placing the Certainty of
every Thing in the outward Senses.
who denied the Certainty of every Thing, but what was discerned by the outward
Senses, thou condemnedst it as most absurd; But why I cannot conceive, since
there is no great Difference betwixt those two Opinions: The one says, There
can be no great Certainty concerning any Truths, whether they be necessary, or
contingent, but by the Perception of the Senses: The other affirms the same of
contingent Truths, though not of necessary Truths. But among the Number of
contingent Truths, thou esteemest what belongs to Christian Religion; for thou
reckons the necessary Truths only to belong to natural Religion. This then is
all the Difference, that that other Person says, There is no Certainty of any
Religion, neither natural nor Christian, but by the Perception of the outward
Senses: But thou say, Though thou esteemest the Certainty of natural Religion
to be without them, yet not of the Christian Religion. But again, since thou
esteemest, that not natural Religion, but the Christian Religion is necessary
to Salvation; thou must necessarily conclude, That those Truths which are
necessary to Salvation, are only known and believed by the Benefit of the
outward Senses: In which Conclusion (which is the Sum af all) thou yieldest the
Matter to that other Person.

But lastly: If all the Certainty of our Faith, Outward Senses can be deceived.
Hope, and Salvation did depend upon the Infallibility of outward Senses, we
should be most miserable; since these Senses can be easily deceived, and by
many outward Casualties, and natural Infirmities, whereunto the Godly are no
less subject than the Wicked, are often vitiated; and there are (as the
Scripture affirms,) false Miracles, which, as to the outward, cannot be
distinguished from the true; of which we cannot infallibly judge by the outward
Senses, which only discern what is outward,

'There is a Necessity then to have R^course to some other Means.

From all which it does appear, how fallacious and weak this Argument is: But
Thanks be unto GOD, who would not that our Faith should be built upon so
uncertain and doubtful a Foundation. And whoever has known true Faith, or has
felt the divine Testimony of GOD's Spirit in his Soul, will judge otherways;
neither will be moved by such Reasonings. I pray GOD therefore to remove these
Clouds which darken thy Understanding, that thou may perceive the glorious
Gospel of CHRIST: This is that saving Word of Grace, which I commend thee unto;
and that GOD may give thee a Heart inclinable to believe and obey the Truth, is
the Desire of

Thy faithful Friend, R. BARCLAY.
From the Prison of Aberdeen in Scotland, where I am confined for the Sake of
the Testimony of Jesus, November 24, 1676.

This Letter a Year ago, at the Desire of my Friend R. B. I delivered into the
Hands of the aforementioned Ambassador, desiring his Answer in Writing, which he
then promised; but not having as yet done, it was seen meet to be published.

B.F.
Roterdam the 28th of March, 1678.
A brief and distinct Solution of the Argument which the Ambassador aforesaid
uses against Robert Barclay 's THESES, whereby he attempts to evince, That not
the inward Revelation of the Holy Spirit, but the outward by the Scripture, is
the Principal Rule and Foundation of our Faith, at least to us Europeans who
have the Scriptures.
AS to his Argument, as it was transmitted to us, if he considers the Strength
and Substance of it, thus it stands; The History of the outward Coming,
Nativity, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ, is either
necessary to their Salvation, to whom the Scriptures came, or it is not
necessary, viz. to be known and believed: If we say the Second, namely, That
that History is not necessary to be known and believed in order to the
Salvation of us Europeans who have the Scriptures, then it will follow that we
are not Christians; because we deny that True, Essential and Constituti^^
Character of the Christian Religion, which consists in believing that Christ
was sent into the World, Born of the Virgin Mary, Dead and Buried, Rose again
the Third Day, Ascended into Heaven, where he sits at the Right Hand of the
Father, etc. But if we say the First, viz. That the Knowledge and Faith of the
History are necessary to our Salvation; then it will follow, that the
Scripture, and not the inward Revelation of the Holy Spirit, is the Principal
Rule and Foundation of that Historical Faith and Knowledge.

Now this he endeavors to prove, both from some other Principles of the
Quakers, so called, and from R. B's sixth Thesis, after this Manner.

That, said the Ambassador, is the principal Rule and Foundation of our Faith,
which is the only Medium or Mean, whereby that Historical Knowledge and Faith
are brought unto us: But, according to the Quakers, and the sixth Thesis, the
Scripture is the only Medium or Mean, whereby that Historical Knowledge and
Faith are brought unto us: Therefore, according to the Quakers, and the sixth
Thesis, the Scripture is the Principal Rule and Foundation of our Faith.

The Minor he proves thus; The Author of the Theses (says he) confesses in his
sixth Thesis, That there is a People, to whom God, by some inevitable Accident,
has made that Historical Knowledge and Faith impossible: And the Reason why
that Historical Knowledge and Faith are impossible to that People, is, because
they are destitute of the Scriptures, and live in those Corners of the World,
whereunto the outward Preaching of the History never came; from which Argument
it will follow, that the Scriptures are the only Medium or Mean, whereby the
Historical Knowledge and Faith of Christ came to any People.

For the clearer understanding the Solution of this Argument, some Things
worthy Observation are to be considered.

1. First then observe, that the Force of this Argument at most intends to
prove this, viz. That the Scripture is the Principal Rule and Foundation of
Historical Faith and Knowledge; but we with good Reason distinguish between
Historical and Saving Knowledge, and between Historical and Saving Faith;
because many may have an Historical Knowledge and Faith, who have not that
which is Saving. Yea, it is possible, that a Man, by the inward Revelation of
the Holy Spirit, may have an Historical Knowledge and Faith, who yet may not
have that Faith which is Saving; because Saving Faith has regard to God, not
precisely, as revealing some outward History concerning God and Christ, but as
Revealing very God and Christ by his Grace, Goodness, Mercy, and Power, ready
and willing to save us, according to his unspeakable Goodwill toward us; by
which Saving Faith we rest upon God through Christ, our Light and Life, as upon
our most merciful Father; which Faith can neither exist, nor be conceived
without Love to God, Humility before God, Denial and Dissidence of Self; and
therefore such a Faith is Saving. But Historical Faith, though wrought in the
Hearts of Men by the inward Revelation and Operation of the Holy Spirit, may be
without that Divine Love, Humility and Self-denial: Wherefore precisely
considered in its own Nature, it is not Saving. 'Twas this kind of Knowledge
and Faith which wicked Balaam had, who saw and knew many Historical Futurities,
and believed them, but had not Saving Faith.

2. Observe, Secondly, That the Knowledge and Faith necessary to Salvation are
to be understood two Ways, either by a Necessity Antecedent, or in Way of
Priority, or by a Necessity Consequent or in Way of Posteriority. Necessity
Antecedent, or in Way of Priority, is, when something is absolutely necessary
to our Salvation, that we both know and believe it; and because it is
necessary, God does therefore reveal it to us; of which Sort are such
Principles as these, viz. That God follows Men with his Love and Good Will;
that he invites and persuades them to come unto him; that he is ready to show
Favor to Men, and pardon their Sins, if they sincerely repent themselves of
their past mi^pent Life, and lead a new one for the Time to come; that God
hears the Prayers of those that are truly humble and suppliant; that he is a
glorious Rewarder of all that live soberly, righteously, and godly; that he is
a most just Avenger against all those who despise his Grace and Love, and
repent not of their Sins, etc. All which, in some Degree, are to all Men, even
to those who are destitute of the Scriptures, revealed by that inward
Evangelical Light, which enlightens all Men. Necessity Consequent or in Way of
Posteriority, is, when something is not absolutely necessary to our Salvation,
but after a certain Sort, or under some Respect, Condition and Limitation; of
which Kind are those Things which are not revealed, because they are necessary;
but because they are revealed, they are necessary to be believed by us: For
Example; if God should reveal to any Man, that it was his Will and Command, he
should go to Rome to reprove Tyranny and Superstition; certainly this
Revelation were necessary to be believed to that Man's Salvation, by a
Necessity Consequent, because that Faith is an Act of Obedience; and to obey
God is necessary to Salvation.

3. Observe in the Third Place, That among those Things that are necessary to
be believed to Salvation by a Necessity Consequent, there are some Things, though
not absolutely necessary, yet are they very profitable and conducive Means to
our Salvation; of which Sort are the Historical Knowledge and Faith concerning
God, the Creation and Government of the World, Christ's taking Flesh, and dying
therein for our Sins, etc. Whether that Historical Knowledge come to us, either
by the sole inward Revelation of the Holy Spirit, without the Medium or Mean of
Scripture, or also by both, to wit, both by the inward Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, and by the Scriptures; which two Mediums or Means do sometimes concur
in producing in Men Historical Knowledge and Faith concerning God and Christ,
as is said before, but in a different Manner. The outward Revelation (as it is
called) of Scripture is a Medium or Mean, by Way of Material Object, in
producing that Historical Knowledge and Faith: But the inward Inspiration and
Revelation wrought in the Hearts of Men by the Holy Spirit, are a Medium or
Mean by way of Formal Object, in producing the same Historical Knowledge and
Faith. By the Material Object, we understand that which is believed; and
therefore the Scriptures, which are believed, are the Material Object of
Historical Knowledge and Faith. By the Formal Object, we understand the
principal Motive in respect of the Object, for which the Scriptures are
believed. But the Principal Motive in respect of the Object is not the
Scripture it self, but that inward Testimony of the Holy Spirit, which when we
hear or read the Scriptures (when it pleases the most good and great God to
inspire the Hearts of Men) works an Assent in us, whether it inclines us to
assent to the Historical Truths hitherto declared in the Scriptures or no:
Wherefore we do not affirm that the Holy Spirit does ordinarily and commonly
speak in us something that is New, or declare to our inward Hearing those
particular Histories of God and Christ (though God may, if he shall please, do it
at this Day;) but we say, that God does by his Holy Spirit, through his sensible
and perceptible Motions and Operations Objectively representing themselves,
move and incline us to assent unto and believe the Scriptures and the
Historical Truths declared of in the Scriptures.

These Things considered, we affirm, that though the Scriptures are ordinarily
and commonly a certain Medium or Mean by way of Material Object or Condition,
for the producing of Historical Knowledge and Faith in us, and that, commonly
speaking, a necessary Mean too, as being that without which God does not
ordinarily reveal the outward History of God and Christ; yet we utterly deny
that in true Christians, the Scripture or outward History in the Scriptures, is
the Principal Motive, Foundation or Principal Rule of that Historical Faith,
much less of Saving Faith, to the Producing of which the Letter of the
Scripture does very frequently (as to many of its Acts, if not all) not concur
or cooperate, either as a Material Object, or as a necessary Condition, which
is wont commonly to be called in the Schools, Causa sine qua non, or a Cause or
Condition without which a Thing cannot be done, though it does not influence the
Effect.

Now for a direct Solution of the Argument aforesaid, We answer, that the
Historical Knowledge and Faith concerning Christ's being Born, Dead, Buried,
etc. to us Europeans, who have the Scriptures, are necessary to Salvation, that
is to say, by a Necessity Consequent, or in Way of Posteriority, (as was before
explained) which Assertion of ours nevertheless militates not against the Sixth
Thesis, which grants, that that Historical Knowledge and Faith are impossible
to those who live in those Corners of the World, where the Knowledge of the
History is wanting; which Impossibility is not absolutely to be understood, but
after a Sort, and in some Respect; because without Doubt God does ordinarily
communicate that Historical Knowledge unto Men, by the Medium or Mean of the
Scriptures; yet not as by the Principal Medium or Mean, much less as by the
only one: Because certainly that inward Motion of the Holy Spirit wrought in
our Hearts, moving and inclining us Objectively to assent unto and believe the
Scriptures, is the Principal Motive in respect of the Object, for which we
believe the Scriptures, and therefore is the Foundation and Principal Rule of
our Historical Faith also.

Wherefore we answer unto the Minor Proposition of the last Syllogism, by
plainly and directly denying that Minor Proposition, viz. That the Scriptures
are the only Medium or Mean for attaining to the Knowledge of the History: They
are indeed one certain Medium or Mean, and that necessary; but they are not the
only nor principal. An Example for the Illustration hereof occurs in Natural
and Outward Vision: For when I see a white or red Rose, that white or red Rose
is the Material Object of my Sight, and one necessary Medium for the producing
of that Sight; yet that Rose is not the only Medium or Mean; for the Light is
another, no less necessary, concurring to produce my Sight, by way of Formal
Object, by Means of which I see that Rose represented under such or such a
Color and Figure. Moreover, in that he asserts, These inward Motions wrought
by the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of Believers, are so undiscernible by us, that
Believers cannot clearly and infallibly distinguish them from their own private
and proper Motions: This he supposes, but proves not. And therein he is
deceived, either through his Inexperience, or Want of that due Waiting, and
Attention to those Motions in the Divine Illumination of Christ, wherewith he
has enlightened both him [the Ambassador] and all Men coming into the World.
But our Experience, together with the Experience of the Holy Prophets and
Apostles, is a stronger Motive to induce us to believe, that Divine, Inward
Revelation is sufficiently clear and convincing by its own Light and Evidence,
than his own bare and jejune Supposition to the contrary, by reason of his Want
of Experience or Attention.

As to the Latin, we have not been very curious in this Writing, by reason of
Haste; yet have briefly answered the Argument as a Friend communicated it to us
by Letter; if he has omitted any Thing in his Transmission, or we may seem not
to have understood or touched the Strength of the Argument, let it be remitted
to us; and we, through Divine Assistance, shall answer it at large.

George Keith, AND Robert Barclay.

This Solution was delivered to the said Ambassador not long before the Epistle
cited, page 517, and at page 17, in the Appendix to Sewel's Dutch History.

A brief Enodation of an Argument proposed by another Person.
MOreover as to what relates to another Person's Argument against that Part of
R. B's second Thesis, which asserts, That Divine Inward Revelation is that
which is evident and clear of it self, moving the well-disposed Understanding
by its own Evidence, etc. to the End of the Thesis.

The Argument is thus formed; Such an Evidence as is asserted in the Thesis, is
destructive of Faith, because it is not the Evidence of Faith. He proves the
Antecedent by the Words of the Apostle, Faith is the Evidence of Things not
seen, Heb. xi. 1. By which Words the Apostle seems to intimate, That Faith has
not this Kind of Evidence; for if it were of Things seen, it would contradict
the Apostle.

The Solution of this Argument is easy; for Evidence is threefold.

The First is the Evidence of Things sensible, appertaining to the outward
Senses.

The Second is the Evidence of things intellectual, but Natural, appertaining
to Natural Reason.

The Third is the Evidence of Things Spiritual and Supernatural, as they are
proposed to the Understanding, by the inward Illumination and Revelation of the
Holy Spirit.

The first Evidence may be called the Evidence of Sense, or Animal Evidence.

The Second, the Evidence of Reason, or Rational Evidence.

The Third, the Evidence of Faith, or Spiritual Evidence.

But Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen, that is, neither visible by the
outward Senses, or by natural Reason; yet these Things hinder not, but that
Faith may be the Evidence of Things not seen by the Understanding of a Man, not
as operating in its own natural Way, but as Divinely elevated and assisted by
the inward Illumination and Operation of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, though
Things appertaining to Faith may be very obscure, and as it were mere Darkness,
both to the outward Senses, and natural Reason; yet they have their Evidence if
duly proposed to an Understanding Divinely enlightened. Is it not said in the
same Chapter to the Hebrews concerning Moses, that by Faith he saw God? That is
to say, not by the outward Eye, nor by the Eye of natural Reason; but by the
Eye of Faith.

The Curious may see the Original Latin (from which the preceding are
translated) in the Appendix to William Sewel's Dutch History of the Quakers.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The TENTH BOOK.
THE Year 1677 had scarce taken its Beginning, 1677
when G. Fox, though the Roads were yet covered with Snow, G. F. visits J.
Reckless, formerly Sheriff of Nottingham, and thence passes through
Leicestershire, Derbyshire, etc. and meeting W. Dewsbury comes to the yearly
Meeting at London. Fox, Penn, Barclay, Keith, etc. go over to Holland.
began to travel again. After he had passed many Places, and preached in the
Meetings of his Friends, he came to York, and going from thence to Nottingham,
he went to the House of John Reckless, who was Sheriff there when G. F.
preached the first Time in that Town; and was imprisoned on that Account: But
he taking G. F. into his House, had been so reached by what he spoke, that he
embraced the Doctrine he held forth, and never departed from the Profession
thereof. From hence G. F. passed through Leicestershire, Derbyshire,
Warwickshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire, where he met with William
Dewsbury, and so came again to London, where having assisted at the annual
Meeting,

He with William Penn, Robert Barclay, George Keith, etc. went over to Holland,
to see his Friends there, and to edify them with his Gift. W. Penn and R. B.
traveled up into Germany, and since R. Barclay the Year before had spoken with
the Princess Elizabeth of the Palatinate, Daughter of Frederick King of
Bohemia, and Sister of Sophia late Duchess of Hanover, Mother of George King
of Great Britain, W. Penn had also written two Letters to her from England,
Penn and Barclay travel into Germany.
which she answered by this following.

Herford, May 2. 1677.
THis, Princess Elizabeth's Letter to W Penn
Friend, will tell you that both your Letters were very acceptable, together
with your Wishes for my obtaining those Virtues which may make me a worthy
Follower of our great King and Savior Jesus Christ. What I have done for his
true Disciples is not so much as a Cup of cold Water: It affords them no
Refreshment; neither did I expect any Fruit of my Letter to the Duchess of L.
as I have expressed at the same Time unto B. F. But since R. B. desired I
should write it, I could not refuse him, nor omit to do any Thing that was
judged conducing to his Liberty, though it should expose me to the Derision of
the World. But this a mere moral Man can reach at; the true inward Graces are
yet wanting in

Your affectionate Friend, Elizabeth.


G. Fox also from Amsterdam writ a Letter to this virtuous Princess, wherein he
commended her modest and retired Life, and exhorted her to Piety and Godliness:
To which she answered with this Letter.

Dear Friend,
I Cannot but have a tender Love to those that love the Lord Jesus Christ, Her
Answer to G Fox's Letter from Amsterdam
and to whom it is given not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for
him: Therefore your Letter, and your Friends visit, have been both very welcome
to me. I shall follow their and your Counsel, as far as God will afford me
Light and Unction; remaining still,

Your loving Friend Elizabeth.
Herford, the 30th of August, 1677.

Penn and Barclay visit the Princess, and have Meetings in her Apartment, with
the Countess of Horns, a French Gentlewoman, etc.
This Correspondence gave Occasion to W. Penn and R. Barclay to pass toward
Herford, a Town on the Frontiers of Paderborn, and to give the said Princess,
who resided there, a Visit. With her lived Anna Maria, Countess of Horns; and
in one of the Chambers of the Princess, W. P. and R. B. had a Meeting with the
Princess, the Countess, and several others to their great Satisfaction. And the
Countess who was one of Labadie's Adherents, signified to W. Penn, that she
wished a Meeting might be had where the inferior Servants might freely appear.
W. Penn not refusing this, the Princess consented to it; and after the Meeting,
(where she was not herself, that so her Servants might have a more free Access)
she expressed much Satisfaction in having had that good Opportunity. And then so
earnestly invited W. Penn and R. Barclay, (who lodged at an Inn) to sup with
her, that they not being well able to refuse the Invitation, yielded to it.
There was then with her a French Woman of Quality, who having had before a very
slight Opinion of the Quakers, now became deeply broken, and very
affectionately kind and respectful to W. Penn and R. Barclay. The next Day was
the First of the Week; and it being agreed with the Princess to have another
Meeting, W. Penn desired that not only as many of her own Family, but as many
of the Town as would willingly be there, might be admitted. To this she
yielded. And thus W. Penn and R. Barclay had a large Opportunity to preach
effectually, and to discharge themselves. After the Meeting was done, the
Princess came to W. Penn, and taking him by the Hand, she spoke to him of the
Sense she had of the Power and Presence of God that had been among them; and
thus going on she broke forth into an extraordinary Passion, crying out,
Afterward take their solemn Leave, and Barclay returns to Amsterdam, while
Penn goes to Paderhorn, Cassel and Frankford, where he has a Meeting at the
House of J. E. Merlane a Virgin of noble Birth.
I cannot speak to you, my Heart is full, clapping her Hand upon her Breast.
This affected W. Penn not a little, yet he spoke a few Words to her by Way of
Admonition; and then taking his leave of her, she said, Will you not come
hither again? Pray call here as ye return out of Germany. To this he returned,
We are in the Hand of the Lord, and being at his Pleasure, cannot so fully
dispose of our selves. Solemn Leave then being taken, R. Barclay returned to
Amsterdam, and W. Penn went to Paderborn, and so by the Way of Cassel (where he
spoke with the Aged and Learned Dureus) to Frankfort. Here he found several
Persons of Note, with whom he had several Times a Meeting, and once at the
House of a young Gentlewoman, noble of Birth, called Johanna Eleonora Merlane,
who said to him, Our Quarters are free for you, let all come that will come,
and lift up your Voices without Fear.

Departing thence, W. Penn comes to Chrisheim, and writes to the Princess
Elizabeth and Countess of Horns.
W. Penn came to Chrisheim, a Village near Worms, where then lived some of his
Friends, who afterward went to Pennsilvania, and settled themselves there.
Whilst W. Penn was in the Palatinate, he writ an exhortatory Epistle To be
found at (...) his Travels in Holland and Germany
to Elizabeth Princess Palatine, and Anna Maria Countess of Horns; and then
went to Heidelberg, the chief City of the Palatinate, to speak with the Prince
Elector, Charles Ludowick, Brother of the said Princess Elizabeth: But the said
Prince then happened to be out of Town: And since his chief Message was to
desire the Prince that the Quakers at Chrisheim might be treated more mildly;
(for Tithes were exacted from them not only by the Parson of the Village, but
also by the Popish Priests of W^^^^^ and the Vaught, or Mayor of the Town,
endeavored to restrain their Liberty of Religious Meeting together) he from
thence took (...) to write a Letter Ibid p. 96
in their Favor to the said Prince, because he had not been able to speak to
him. Returning afterward to Chrisheim, and preaching there in a Meeting of his
Friends, And to the Elector Palatine at Heidelberg.
he was overheard by the Vaught, or chief Officer, who stood at the Backdoor
that he might not be seen, who was so well pleased with what he heard, that he
afterward told the Parson, That it was his Work, if the Quakers were
Heretics, to discover them to be such: But for my part, continued he, I heard
nothing but what was good; and therefore I will not meddle with them. For the
Parson had busied himself to persuade the Vaught that it was his Duty to
suppress Heresy: But the Vaught made it appear that he had no Mind to persecute
for Religion-sake. W. Penn returns by Frankfort, Cologn, Cleves, etc. to
Amsterdam,
W. Penn having now cleared his Conscience, returned by Way of Frankfort,
Cologn, Cleves, etc. to Amsterdam, where at Cologn he received a Letter from
the Princess Elizabeth, in answer to that he had written to her from the
Palatinate; the said Letter was as follows.

Dear Friend, The 4-14th of September, 1677.
I Have received your Greetings, The Princess's Letter to W. Penn.
good Wishes, and Exhortations, with much Joy, and shall follow the latter as
far it will please our great God to give me Light and Strength. I can say
little for my self, and can do nothing of my self; but I hope the Lord will
conduct me in his Time, by his Way, to his End, and that I shall not shrink for
his Fire. I do long for it; and when he assures my Ways, I hope he will give me
Power to bear the Cross I meet therein; I am also glad to hear the Journey has
been prosperous both in the Constitutions of your Bodies, to withstand the
Badness of the Weather, and in the Reception you had in Cassel, Frankfort, and
Chrisheim. Nothing surprised me there but the good old Dury, in when I did not
expect so much Ingenuity, having lately writ a Book, entitled, Le veritable
Chretien that does speak in another Way. I wish to know what Reception you have
had at Fredericksburg, and if this find you at Cleves, I wish you might take an
Occasion to see the two Pastors of Mulheim, which do really seek the Lord, but
have some Prejudice against your Doctrine, as also the Countess there. It would
be of much Use for my Family to have them disabused; yet God's Will be done in
that, and all things else concerning

Your loving Friend in the Lord Jesus, Elizabeth.


Whilst W. Penn made this Journey into Germany, G. F. gone to Hamburgh and
Frederickstad.
G. F. was gone to Hamburg and Frederickstad, to visit his Friends there; and
Penn being returned to Amsterdam, went from thence to Friesland, and met G. F.
as he was coming back to Holland, at Leewarden, At Leewarden meets W. Penn, who
goes thence to Wicwert, where he has discourse with the famous A. M Schurman,
the Somersdykes, P. Yoon, etc.
from whence he made a Step to Wicwert, where a Society of the Labadites dwelt.
Here he spoke with the famous Anna Maria Schurman, the Gentlewomen Somersdykes,
the French Pastor Peter Yoon, and others. After some Discourse from both Sides,
when Yoon had given a Relation concerning John de Labadie, how he was bred
among the Jesuits, and deserted them, and embraced the Protestant Religion, and
how becoming dissatisfied with the formal Protestants, he with some that
adhered to him, had separated themselves from the vulgar Assemblies; Anna Maria
Schurman began to speak, and gave an Account of her former Life, Of her
Pleasure in Learning, and her Love to the Religion she was brought up in, S^e
this Discourse much more at large in W. P's Travels, (...)
but confessed she knew not God or Christ truly all that while. And though from a
Child God had visited her at Times, yet she never felt such a powerful Stroke,
as by the Ministry of J. de Labadie: And then she saw her Learning to be
Vanity, and her Religion like a Body of Death; and therefore resolved to
despise the Shame; desert her former Way of Living and Acquaintance, and to
join her self with this little Family, that was retired out of the World. This
and much more she spoke in a sensible Frame, and with a serious Mind, not
without some Trembling. And then one of the Somersdykes gave also an ample
Relation, concerning her inward State, and how she had been reached by the
Preaching of Labadie; and how before that Time she had mourned because of the
Deadness and Formality of the vulgar Christians, and said within herself, O the
Pride, the Lusts, the vain Pleasures in which Christians live! Can this be the
Way to Heaven? Is this the Way to Glory? Are these Followers of Christ? O no! O
God, where is thy little Flock! Where is thy little Family that will live
entirely to thee, that will follow thee; make me one of that Number. Then she
told How being pricked to the Heart, when she heard Labadie preach, she had
resolved to abandon the Glory and Pride of this World; and farther said that
she counted herself happy to have joined with this separated Family. After some
others had likewise given an Account of their Change, W. Penn also gave a
Circumstantial Relation How he had been gradually drawn off from the Vanity and
Pride of Life; what Adversities he had met with in the University at Oxford,
because of his not joining with the Debauchery committed there; and how after
having lived some Time in France, he had been convinced by the effectual
Ministry of Thomas Lo, and so came to be joined with the despised Quakers.
This his Relation he concluded with a serious Admonition how they ought to go
on, A Pastor's Caution to W. P. concerning the first Rise of Truth.
and to grow in the true Fear of God. At parting one of the Pastors asked him,
If the Truth rose not first amongst a poor, illiterate, and simple Sort of
People. Yes, answered W. Penn; and it is our Comfort that we owe it not to the
Learning of this World. To which the Pastor returned, Then let not the Learning
of this World be used to defend that which the Spirit of God has brought
forth; for Scholars now coming among you, will be apt to mix School-learning
amongst your simpler and purer Language, and thereby obscure the Brightness of
your Testimony. W. Penn having answered to the Purpose, W. P. travels by
Groeninghen to Embden, where he speaks to Burgo-master Andre about a Latin
Letter formerly sent him against Persecution of the Quakers.
took his Leave, and traveled by Way of Groeninghen to Embden, where the
Quakers at that Time were persecuted severely with Imprisonments and
Banishments: But I wave the Relation thereof, because it has long ago been
published in Print, and the Magistrates there, being afterward moved to Pity by
the Persecution the Protestants suffered in France, came to better Resolution,
as may be mentioned in the Sequel.

When W. Penn came to Embden, he went to speak with the Burger-master Andre at
his House, and asked him, If he and the Senate had not received a Letter in
Latin Which being translated into English runs thus,

To the Council and Senate of the City of EMBDEN.

The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who is God of all the Families of the
Earth, incline your Hearts to Justice, Mercy and Truth.

THe Noise of your severe Treatment of several Persons that are Inhabitants of
your State, reproachfully termed QUAKERS, has reached these Parts, and filled
several with Compassion and Surprise: Compassion, to hear of the Our Account
says, some were cruelly beaten by Order; others Banished; some put in (...),
Miseries of Men innocent and upright, against whom you have nothing to object,
but the pure Exercise of their Conscience to God: Surprise, That you, a
Protestant-state, should employ your civil Power to deter, punish, and
grievously afflict Men, for answering the Convictions of their Consciences, and
acting according to the best of their Understandings. Methinks you should not
be oblivious of your own Condition in the Loins of your Ancestors, who, you
think, with great Reason and Justice, strenuously advocated the Cause of
Liberty of Conscience against the Popes Bulls and the Spanish Inquisition; and
fed with Bread and Water only; several fined greater Sums of Money, it is
thought, than they had to pay
how did they Antichristian all Force on Conscience or Punishment for
Nonconformity? Their own many and large Apologies, and particularly their
Demands at the Diets of Norimberg and Spira, are pregnant Proofs in the Case;
and your Practice does not lessen the Weight of their Reasons; on the contrary,
it aggravates your Unkindness, let me say, Injustice.

Protestants, (and such you glory to be thought) got their Name by protesting
against Imposition; and will you turn Imposers? They condemned it, and will you
practice it? They thought it a Mark peculiar to the Beast; and can you repute
it the Care of a Christian Magistracy? I mean, that Persons must not live under
your Government, unless they receive your Mark in their Forehead or Right Hand?
Which in plainer Terms is, to submit their Consciences to your Edicts, and to
ask your Leave what Religion they should be of. Remember, that Faith is the
Gift of God; and, that What is not of Faith is Sin: Nothing can be more
unreasonable, than to compel Men to believe against their Belief, or to trouble
them for practicing what they believe, when it thwarts not the Moral Law of God.

You doubtless take your selves to be Christians, and would esteem it no little
Injury to be otherwise represented; yet what more Unchristian, than to use
external Force, to sway the Consciences of Men about the Exercise of Religious
Worship.

CHRIST Jesus, the Lord and Author of the Christian Religion, censured his own
Disciples, that would have had Fire from Heaven to destroy those that conformed
not to what their blessed Master taught: Are you surer of your Religion? Are
you better Christians? Or, have you more Christian Authority, than they that
were the chosen Witnesses of Jesus? However remember, they called but for Fire
from Heaven; and can you kindle Fire on Earth to devour them? Them, I say, that
are of your own People, merely for their religious Dissent from you? Doubtless,
if that was then thought no fit Argument to induce Men to Conformity by him
that was wiser than Solomon, it reflects greatly upon your Modesty and
Prudence, that you should find out new Ways, or rather old exploded ones, to
effect so ill a Design. Besides, you do not say, you know all you ought to
know, or that there is nothing farther to be revealed; have a Care therefore,
that you persecute not A^gels, by being harsh to that which you call strange:
Think not ill, much less speak, and least of all act that which is so against
what you do not perfectly understand. I am well persuaded, that those you
inflict such severe Penalties upon, mean well in what they believe (to be sure
much better than you think they do, or else you are extremely to blame) and
that the Reason of their present Distance from you, is not to introduce or
insinuate dangerous or exotic Opinions; but to live a Life of more Holiness,
Purity and Self-denial, than before: They do not think that you walk up to your
own Principles; and have Reason to believe that the Power of Godliness is much
lost among you; and having long lain under a Decay and Languishing of Soul for
want of true spiritual Nourishment, they have now betaken themselves to that
heavenly Gift and Grace of God in themselves for divine Satisfaction, even that
holy Anointing that is able to teach them all Things necessary for them to
know; as the blessed Apostle speaks; and they find the joys of the Holy Ghost
in so doing: And I am perusaded, they are not less peaceable, sober, just, and
neighbourly than formerly, and altogether as consistent with the Prosperity of
civil Society; and I am sure, it is both found and confessed among us here, by
some Men of Quality, Learning and Virtue. Farther, be pleased to consider with
your selves, that you justify the ancient Persecutions of the Christians and
first Reformers, whose Superiors thought as ill of them, as you do of these
Men; nay you show the Papists what to do, in their Dominions, to your own
Brethren. Do as you would be done by: If you would have Liberty, give it; you
know that God's Witness in your Hearts dictates this to you as an immutable Law

Could you give Faith, it were more excusable for you to punish such as should
resist; but since that is impossible, the other is unreasonable; for it is to
afflict Men for not being what they cannot be, unless they turn Hypocrites: That
is the highest Pitch your coercive Power can arrive at; for never did it
convert or preserve one Soul to God; instead thereof, it offers Violence unto
Conscience, and puts a Man either upon the Denial of his Faith and Reason, or
being destroyed for acting according to them: But what greater Disproportion
can there be, than what lies between the Intellect of Man, and Prisons, Fines,
and Banishments? They inform no Man's Judgment, resolve no Doubts, convince no
Understanding. The Power of Persuasion is not to be found in any such barbarous
Actions, no more than the Doctrine of Christianity. This Course destroys the
Bodies and And Property, which the repute themselves Guardian o^^^s ^ereby lo^^
Estates of Men, instead of saving their Souls: Were they in the wrong, it
would become you to use God's Weapons, his Sword of the Spirit that saves the
Creature, and slays the Evil in him; this Course tends to Heart-burnings and
Destruction, I am sure it is no Gospel-Argument.

I beseech you for the sake of that Lord Jesus Christ, that suffered so
patiently for his own Religion, and so sharply prohibited making other Men to
Suffer for their^ that you would have a Care how you exercise Power over Men's
Conscien^^ M. (...). Conscience is God's Throne in Man, and the Power of it his
Prerogative: It Is to usurp his Authority, and boldly ascend his Throne, to set
Lords over it. Were their Conversation scandalous, and destructive to the Good
of your State, you were to be held excusable: But verily no Man of Mercy and
Conscience, can defend your Practice upon poor Men so peaceable and
inoffensive. Gamaliel will rise up in Judgment against you, if you persevere in
this Course. Do not you help to fill the Catalogue of Persecutors, in much Love
I entreat you; but as becomes Christian Men and true Protestants, leave Men to
their particular Persuasions of Affairs relative of the other World, which have
no ill Aspect on the Affairs of this; but Vice has an evil Consequence as to
both: Therefore punish Vice, and affect Truth and Righteousness, and bend not
your Civil Power to torment Religious Dissenters; but to retrieve good Life,
lamentably lost amidst the great Pretenses that are made to Religion. Doubtless
Magistracy was both ordained of God, and elected by Men, to be a Terror's
Evildoers, and not to them that do well, though of different Judgments. You
oppugn the Roman Church for assuming Infallibility to herself, and yet your own
Practice makes you guilty of the same Presumption, or worse: For, either you
do exercise that Severity upon an infallible Knowledge or you do not; if you
do, you take that to your selves, your Principles deny ^^^y Church whatever,
which is a Contradiction; if you do not, you punish People for not conforming
to what you your selves deny any Certainty about: And how do you know but you
compel them to that which is false, as well as that which is true? Verily this
Dilemma is not easily avoided, as well as that this inhuman Practice will stain
your Profession, infame your Government, and bring a Blot upon your Posterity.

Remember that they are Men as well as your selves, born free, and have equal
Plea to Natural and Civil common Privileges with your selves: The different
Persuasion of their Consciences about Things relating to another Life, can no
ways render them unfit for this; it neither unmans nor uncivilizes them. They
have the same Right to their Liberty and Property as ever, having by no
Practice of theirs in the least forfeited any of those human Advantages, the
Great Charters of Nature and Scripture have conferred upon them: And the
Opulency of your Neighbors, and Prosperity of their Affairs, prove to you that
Indulgence is not inconsistent with Policy; howbeit, you have now tried the
Sincerity of their Procedure by what you have already inflicted, and they
sustained. Let the Time past suffice, and make them not Sacrifices for their
conscientious Constancy. If they are in the wrong, it is more than they know:
Will you persecute Men for being what they must be, if they will be true to
themselves? this were great Violence; rather commiserate, than thus violently
compel them. I beseech you seek some cheaper Way to accommodate your selves,
than by their Destruction, who are so very remote from seeking yours. Oh! the
Day will come, wherein one Act of Tenderness about Matters of Conscience, shall
find a better Reward, than all the Severity by which Men use to propagate their
Persuasions in the World; and there is great Reason for it, since the one flows
from the Savior, the other, from the Destroyer of Men. In fine, Let your
Moderation be known unto all Men, for the Lord is at hand, whose Reward is with
him; and he will recompense every Man, Family, State, Kingdom, and Empire,
according to the Nature of their Works, committed in this mortal Body; at whose
Bar it shall never be laid to your Charge, that out of Fear of taking God's
Office out of his Hands, and being unmerciful to tender Consciences, you
admitted Men of differing Judgments to dwell quietly among you; truly you
cannot be too tender in this Point.

Imitate the God of Nature and Grace, by being propitious to all; his Sun
shines on all, his Rain falls on all, he gives Life and Being to all; his
Grace visits all, and in Times of Ignorance he winketh: And though such you may
repute ours, I hope you cannot think you wink at it, who make such broad Tokens
of your Displeasure. Oh! How forbearing and merciful is he toward you? Have
you so lately escaped the Wrath of Enemies, and can you already thus sharply
treat your Friends? Had he entered into Judgment with you, what had become of
you? Let his Goodness to you prevail with you to express Clemency to others,
that so the Great God of the whole Earth, even the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, who respects not the Persons of the Rich, Poor, or Powerful in Judgment,
may show you Mercy in the Day of his righteous Judgments* Amen.

Your Friend with the greatest Integrity, in the Universal Principles of (...)
and Truth,

W. Penn

London, December 14 16^^


from an Englishman about two Years since, concerning their Severity toward
the People called Quakers? The Burger-master said, He had. W. Penn then
replied, I am that Man, and I am constrained in Conscience to visit thee on
their behalf, etc. The Burgermaster deported himself with more Kindness than
was expected, ^enn goes to (...) visits the (...) etc. ^^d a solemn ^
and gave some faint Hope of Alteration; but it appeared sufficiently that the
Senate was not as yet so disposed, for Persecution continued there yet a long
while.

After W. Penn had staid some Time at Embden, he took a Turn again to Herford,
where he was received very kindly by the Princess Elizabeth, and the Countess
of Horns; and more than once he had a Meeting in her Chamber; and the Princess
was so reached and affected by his speaking, that the said, I am fully
convinced; but oh my Sins are great! This gave Occasion to W. Penn to speak to
the Princess and the Countess apart with Respect to their particular
Conditions; which made a deep Impression on their Minds, especially the
Countess's. Being much pressed by the Princess to stay and sup with her, he
yielded: And the Countess from a serious Sense of her Compliance with the
World, told him, Il faut que je rompe, il faut que je rompe, i. e. I must break
off, I must break off. And at another Time with a weighty Countenance she cried
out, O the Cumber and Entanglements of this vain World! They hinder all Good.
Once the Princess said to him, It is a hard Matter to be faithful to what one
knows. I fear that I am not weighty enough in my Spirit. At another Time she
told him, Among my Books I have Records that the Gospel was by the English
first brought from England into Germany; and now it is come again. Thus this
excellent Princess signified how highly she valued the Preaching of the Gospel
to her by W. Penn, and how much she esteemed his Labor and Ministry. When he
took his Leave of these eminent Persons, having taken the Princess by the Hand,
which she received with a weighty Kindness, being much broken in Spirit, he
wished the Blessing and Peace of Jesus with and upon her: And then exhorting
the Countess, she frequently beseeched him, to remember her, and implore the
Lord on her Behalf.

Next taking Wagon for Wesel, Then he travels to Wesel, etc. intending to
visit the Countess of Falkenstein at Mulheim, but without seeing her; And is
roughly treated by her Father.
from thence he traveled to Duisburgh, Dusseldorp, and Cologn, and then back
again to Dusseldorp, to see if he could get an Opportunity at Mulheim to speak
with the Countess of Falkenstein, who was reported to be a very religious
Person, and therefore in his former Journey he had endeavored to visit her,
but in vain; for the Count of Bruch, and Falkenstein her Father, kept her as it
were under a Confinement, because she was of a religious Temper; and therefore
he called her a Quaker, though she did not at all converse with any of the
Quakers. He had also used W. Penn very roughly; when being necessitated to pass
by his Castle, he being Lord of that Country, asked him and his Friends, From
whence they were, and whither they went? To which they answered, That they were
Englishmen come from Holland, and going no further in those Parts than his Town
of Musheim: But they not pulling off their Hats, the Count called them Quakers,
and said, We have no need of Quakers here. Get you out of my Dominion, you
shall not go to my Town. And he commanded some of his Soldiers to see them out
of his Territory. Thus W. Penn and those with him were necessitated to lie that
Night in the open Air. But the next Day he wrote a Letter Penn's Travels, page
131
to the said Count, and therein told him, For thy saying, We want no Quakers
here, I say, under Favor, you do; for a true Quaker is one that trembles at
the Word of the Lord, that works out his Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

W. Penn now being come to Mulheim, He then goes to Duisburgh, etc. And so by
Utrecht to Amsterdam, whither G. F was also come again.
could no more find Opportunity to speak with the Countess, than the first Time
he was in those Parts; and therefore he went to Duisburgh, Wesel, and Cleves,
where having had Conferences with some Religious People, he returned by Way of
Utrecht to Amsterdam, where G. F. was also come back again.

Here W. Penn and G. F. had a Conference and Dispute with Dr. Galenus Abraham,
W. Penn and G. F. have a Dispute with Dr. G. Abraham, chief of the Socinian
Me^tists in those Parts.
an eminent Baptist Teacher, and some of that Persuasion. Galenas asserted,
That no Body nowadays could be accepted as a Messenger of God, unless he
confirmed his Doctrine by Miracles. W. Penn wanted no Arguments to contradict
this, since the Christian Religion had been once already confirmed by Miracles,
and that therefore this was needless among Christians now. G. F. now and then
spoke also something to the Matter; but he being somewhat short-breathed, went
several Times away, which some were ready to impute to a passionate Temper; but
I well know that therein they wronged him. This Dispute was indeed a
troublesome Business; for the Parties on both Sides were fain to speak by an
Interpreter, which generally was performed so imperfectly that at last the
Conference was broke off, without coming to a Decision, although many weighty
Arguments were objected against the Position. The Author's Observations on the
Subject of the Dispute.
Certainly it cannot be denied that John the Baptist was sent of God to preach
Repentance, and yet in Sacred Writ it is said positively, John did no Miracle;
and yet many believed in hi^. And although there were some among the Prophets
that wrought Miracles, yet we don't find in the holy Scriptures that Jonah, who
was indeed a notable Preacher of Repentance, did any Miracle, and nevertheless
the Ninivites believed him, and deprecated those Judgments he denounced unless
they ^^^^n^ed. Of several other true Prophets we find not the least Mention of
any Miracles they did; Deuteronomy. xiii. 1, 2.
but on the contrary the Scriptures signify, that possibly false Prophets might
arise and give Signs or Wonders; and that the doing of Miracles could not
always be a Proof or sure Evidence that any one was sent of God, appears
plainly from what our Savior himself said, viz. that among those to whom he
should one Day say, Mat. vii. 22.
Depart from me, would be such that should say, Have we not in thy Name cast
out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And what shall we think
of the Sorcerers of Egypt? Did not they seem to do the same Wonders as Moses
and Aaron did? And yet those Wonders wherewithal they deceived Pharaoh and his
Men, were in no wise wrought by a divine Power. Now since it appears plainly
from the holy Scriptures, and Christ himself said, Mat. xxiv. 24.
There shall arise false Prophets, and shall show great Signs and Wonders, we
might with good Reason suspect the Doctrine of one, who nowadays wrought
Miracles, on purpose to make what he denounced to pass for Truth. This being
duly considered, it seems to be very absurd, to require Miracles again for
Confirmation of the same Gospel which once has been confirmed by Miracles, and
to desire that the Truth of what once has been declared by the Apostles, and
strengthened by wonderful Works, should be sealed anew with outward Wonders.
But it would indeed have been another Case, if a new Gospel was preached, and
that any pretended to give forth new holy Scriptures; for then it might be said
with some Reason, that it was necessary that this new Gospel should be made
credible, and confirmed by visible Miracles. But where no other Gospel is
preached, than what has been once delivered to the Christians by the first
Promulgators of the Christian Religion, and where this is not done amongst
Heathens, but amongst Christians, or at least such as bear the Name, there it
cannot in Justice be required to confirm this Doctrine once more with Miracles;
the rather because, as has been showed already, the doing of Miracles may not
always pass for an irrefragable Proof of One's being really pious and godly. To
this may be added, that the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought to
give Credit to the Appearing of the Son of God in the Flesh, may be considered
as Types and Figures of those spiritual Wonders which should be wrought in the
Souls of People, when Christ was to be seen the second Time, and to appear by
his Spirit, to the Salvation of those who wait for him; for the Eyes of the
Mind being blinded, must be opened and enlightened by him; and many that are
dead in Sin and Trespasses, shall by him be raised, and made alive. This I
think may suffice to show, that the Position of Dr. Galenus could not stand the
Test: But whatever was objected, he continued to maintain his Opinion.

Not long after this Dispute, G.F. and W.P. after a violent Storm, arrive safe
at Harwich, and so come to London.
G. Fox and W. Penn returned to England, where, after having sustained a
violent Tempest at Sea, they arrived safely at Harwich. And passing from thence
to London, W. Penn there received the following Letter from the Princess
Elizabeth, in answer to his.

Dear Friend, Herford, October. 29. 1677.
YOUR tender Care of my eternal Well-being does oblige me much, Princess
Elizabeth to W Penn.
and I will weigh every Article of your Counsel, to follow it as much as lies
in me, but God's Grace must be assistant, as you say your self, he accepts
nothing that does not come from him. If I had made me bare of all worldly
Goods, and left undone what he requires most, I mean to do all in and by his
Son, I shall be in no better Condition than at this present. Let me feel him
first governing in my Heart, then do what he requires of me; but I am not able
to teach others, being not taught of God my self. Remember my Love to G. F. B.
F. G. K. and dear This was Gertrude Dericks, who had visited the Princess, and
afterward came to live in England, and was married to Stephen Crisp.
Gertrude. If you write no worse than your Postscript, I can make a Shift to
read it. Do not think I go from what I spoke to you the last Evening; I only
stay to do it in a Way that is answerable before God and Man. I can say no more
now, but recommend to your Prayers,

Your true Friend, Elizabeth.
P. S. I almost forgot to tell you, that my Sister writes me Word, she had been
glad you had taken your Journey by Osenburgh to return to Amsterdam. There is
also a Drossard of Limbourg near this Place (to whom I gave an Exemplar of R.
B's Apology) very desirous to speak with some of the Friends.




Yet another Letter W. Penn received from the said Princess, in Answer to one
he writ her from the Briel at his Passage toward England, which was as
follows:

To the Princess ELIZABETH, Salvation in the Cross, Amen.
Dear and truly respected Friend,
MY Soul most earnestly desires thy temporal and Eternal Felicity, W. Penn t^
the Princess.
which stands in thy doing the Will of God now on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven. O dear Princess, do it! Say the Word once in Truth and Righteousness,
Not my Will, but thine be done, O God! She died abo^^ four Years after.
Thy days are few, and then thou must go to Judgment. Then an Account of thy
Talent God will require from thee. What Improvement have thou made? Let it
prove and show its own Excellency, that it is of God, and that it leads all
that love it to God. O that thou may be able to give an Account with Joy!

I could not leave this Country and not testify the Resentments I bear in my
Mind of that humble and tender Entertainment thou gave us at thy Court: The
Lord Jesus reward thee: And surely he has a Blessing in store for thee. Go on,
be steadfast, overcome, and thou shall inherit. Do not despond; one that is
mighty is near thee; a present Help in the needful Time of Trouble. O let the
Desire of thy Soul be to his Name, and to the Remembrance of him. O wait upon
the Lord, and thou shall renew thy Strength! The Youth shall faint, and the
young Men shall fail, but they that trust in the Lord shall never be confounded.

I wish thee all true and solid Felicity, with my whole Soul. The Lord God of
Heaven and Earth have thee in his Keeping, that thou may not lose, but keep
in that divine Sense, which by his eternal Word, he has begotten in thee.
Receive, Dear Princess, my sincere and christian Salutation: Grace, Mercy and
Peace be multiplied among you all that love the Lord Jesus.

Thy Business I shall follow with all the Diligence and Discretion I can, and
by the First give thee an Account, after it shall please the Lord to bring me
safe to London. All my Brethren are well, and present thee with their dear
Love, and the rest with thee that love Jesus, the Light of the World, in thy
Family. Thou have taught me to forget thou art a PRINCESS, and therefore I use
this Freedom; and to that of God in thee am I manifest; and I know my
Integrity. Give, if thou please, the Salutation of my dear Love to A. M. de
Horns, with the Enclosed. Dear Princess, do not hinder but help her. That may
be required of her, which (considering thy Circumstances) may not yet be
required of thee. Let her stand free, and her Freedom will make the Passage
easier unto thee. Accept what I say, I entreat thee, in that pure and heavenly
Love and Respect, in which I write so plainly to thee. Farewell my dear Friend,
and the Lord be with thee. I am more than I can say,

Thy great Lover, and Respectful Friend, W. PENN.
I refer thee to the Enclosed for Passages. We visited Gichtel and Hooftman,
and they us: They were at one or two of the Meetings at Amsterdam. Vale in
aeternum.




To this Letter the Princess returned the following Answer,

Dear Friend, This 17. Nov. 1677.
I Have received a Letter from you, The Princess's Answer.
that seems to have been written at your Passage into England, which I wish
may be prosperous, without Date, but not without Virtue to spur me on to do and
suffer the Will of our God. I can say, in Sincerity and Truth, Thy Will be
done, O God, because I wish it heartily; but I cannot speak in Righteousness,
until I possess that Righteousness which is acceptable unto him. My House and
my Heart shall be always open to those that love him. Gichtel has been well
satisfied with the Conferences between you. As for my Business, it will go as
the Lord pleases, and I remain in him

Your affectionate Friend, ELIZABETH.


G. Fox now being come to London, received there Letters from New England, with
an Account of the cruel Proceedings of the Magistrates against his Friends
there: For Persecution being hot in Old England, Persecution being hot here,
makes it worse in New-Eng.
it made those in New England the worse; insomuch, that they did not only whip
the Quakers that were there, but also some Masters of Ships that were no
Quakers, only for bringing some of that Persuasion thither. The Indians make an
Inroad, and kill many.
But about that Time, the Indians made an Inroad upon the English, and slew
threescore of their Men; and having taken one of their Captains, they flayed
off the Skin of his Head, while he was alive, and carried it away in Triumph.

Now since the People called Quakers were also much persecuted in Scotland,
Quakers persecuted in Scotland.
they drew up an Account of their Sufferings, and delivered it to the King in
the Beginning of this Year; but whether they got any Ease thereby, I cannot
tell.

In the latter Part of this Year G. F. traveled through many Places of England;
in the mean while I Will again make some Mention of the Persecution there. At
Plymouth about this Time those called Quakers were generally kept out of their
Meeting House; and then performing their Worship in the open Street, as a Duty
they owed to God, and for the Omission of which they judged no Man could be
dispensed with, they suffered exceedingly, not only in Winter by the Sharpness
of the Weather, but also in Summer; for it was more than twelve Months that
they thus kept their Meetings in the open Street, being grievously abused by
the Rabble and Soldiers; Alusive behavior of Rabble and Soldiers at Plymouth
R. Samble fined.
for Beating and Punching seemed not sufficient, fiery Squibs and burning Coals
were thrown among them, and filthy Excrements cast down upon them out of a
Window: Besides, Fines were extorted for their having been at the Meeting, on
the Account of one Richard Samble, who was fined as Preacher, for having been
on his Knees at Prayer, which Fine was laid upon four of them that were at the
said Meeting.

At Franchay in Glocestershire, Violent Behavior of Justice Merideth in
Glocestershire
the Justice John Merideth behaved himself exceedingly furious in disturbing of
the Quakers Meetings; for he himself did not only beat them, but more than once
drew his Knife, to mark them, as he called it, had he not been restrained by
his Servants, who for all That, could not prevent his taking some by the Hair
of their Head, and pulling them away: Nay, the Havoc and Spoil which was made
was so extravagant, Sufferings of T. Holbrow, an ancient blind Man.
that from one Thomas Holbrow, an ancient blind Man, they took his Bed from
under him, so that he and his Wife lay about a Quarter of a Year, on Straw; and
when his Friends provided him with some Clothing against Winter, Part of that
was also taken from him: For such Plundering now went on with a full Career;
and the basest Men were authorized to deprive others of their Goods, if there
was but a Justice that favored such.

At Baytou in Suffolk, All taken form E. Bally, of Bayton in Suffolk, by
Warrant form Justice Burwell, who also fixed a Visit to Sick, as a Conventicle.
Edmond Bally was by Warrant from Justice Burwell despoiled of what he had,
both within Doors and without, his Goods having been distrained five Times; and
though he was sain to lie on Straw, yet he was not left unmolested, for they came
in the Night armed with Pistols, and broke open his Door, threatening to destroy
him. It happened there also, that a poor blind Widow, on her sick Bed, was
visited by some Persons; and this was made a Conventicle, and they were fined,
and Warrants, issued out by the aforesaid Justice to make Distress on their
Goods. In many other Places Things went no better; but I may not detain my
Reader with every Particular.

This Year died in Prison Williamu Dobson, The Death of W. Dobson, almost
always a Prisoner.
of Brightwell in Berkshire, having been spoiled of his Goods from Time to
Time, during the Space of thirteen Years, and almost always in Prison too, till
his hard Sufferings now ended with his Life.

It was also in this Year that William III. Prince of Orange, W. Prince of
Orange Marries Mary, eldest Daughter of the Duke of York.
came from Holland into England, and there entered into Matrimony with the
Princess Mary, eldest Daughter of the Duke of York, which in Process of Time
made Way for him to the Throne of Great Britain. He accomplished his Marriage
there on the 4th of November, being his Birthday; and not long after returned
to Holland with his Spouse.

About the Beginning of the Year 1678 1678 G. F. and G. W. present to the
Parliament an Account of Friends Sufferings by Laws against Papists.
, G. F. came to London, and the Parliament sitting at that Time, he and G.
Whitehead presented to them an Account of the grievous Sufferings of their
Friends, by Laws made against the Papists; and they were not without Hopes of
obtaining some Ease, because several of the Members of that August Assembly
seemed to favor them: But the Parliament was suddenly prorogued, whereby a
Stop was put to their Endeavors.

G. F. then traveling through many Places, came home to Swarthmore in the latter
Part of the Year; and since many of his Friends at this Time were under great
Persecution, and in Prison, he writ the following Epistle to them.

My dear Friends,
WHO are Sufferers for the Lord Jesus Sake, G. F.'s Epistle to comfort his
suffering Friends.
and for the Testimony of his Truth, the Lord God Almighty, with his Power
uphold you, and support you in all your Trials and Sufferings, and give you
Patience, and Content in his Will, that ye may stand valiant for Christ and his
Truth upon the Earth, over the persecuting and destroying Spirit, which makes
to suffer, in Christ (who bruises his Head) in whom ye have both Election and
Salvation. And for God's Elect-Sake the Lord has done much from the Foundation
of the World; as may be seen throughout the Scriptures of Truth; and they that
touch them, touch the Apple of God's Eye, they are so tender to him. And
therefore it is good for all God's suffering Children to trust in the Lord, and
to wait upon him; for they shall be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed from
Christ their Rock and Salvation, who is the Foundation of all the Elect of God,
of the Prophets and the Apostles, and of God's People now, and to the End;
Glory to the Lord and the Lamb over all. Remember my dear Love to all Friends;
and do not think the Time long, for all Time is in the Father's Hand, his
Power. And therefore keep the Word of Patience, and exercise that Gift; and the
Lord strengtnen you in your Sufferings, in his holy Spirit of Faith. Amen.

Swarthmore, the 5th of the 12th Month, 1678. G. F.


Persecution was now very hot in many Places. At Bawnasse in Westmorland it
happened that those of the Society called Quakers being religiously met
together, were much abused by the rude people; and besides other Insolences
that were committed, a Dog being thrown among them, J. Thompson of Westmorland
fined for speaking to the rude Rabble. Cruelty of Justice Driffield to Mary
Todd of Yorkshire.
one John Thompson said to this wicked Crew, That they ought to behave
themselves civil and moderate; and for saying so he was informed against as a
Preacher, and on that Account fined twenty Pounds. Mary Todd, a poor ancient
Widow in Yorkshire, having had a Meeting at her House, was also fined twenty
Pounds by Justice Francis Driffield; and when the Informers told him that her
Goods were not worth so much, he ordered them to take all that they could find:
This they did, and did not leave her a Bed to lie on, nay, took away all her
Clothes,

This Year the Ambassadors of the King of France, and those of the United
Netherlands, with those of several other Potentates, were met at Nimeguen, R.
Baresay writes a Latin Epistle to the Ambassadors met at Nimeguen, which, with
his Apology in Latin is delivered to each of them, etc.
to treat about a general Peace; and therefore Robert Barclay writ an Epistle
to them in Latin, to exhort them to this good Work. The Epistle, together with
his Apology for the true Christian Divinity, in Latin, was delivered to each of
the said Ambassadors, viz. a Book for every one of them, and one for their
Principals. G. F. also writ an exhortatory Epistle to them, which being
translated and printed in Latin, was also sent to them. And before this Year
came to an End, the Peace was concluded.

In the mean while Persecution went on in England, G. F. also writes to them.
and those that were envious did not want a specious Pretense to gild their
Malice; for about this Time a Plot of the Papists being discovered, Popish Plot
discovered
there seemed a Necessity to watch against seditious Assemblies; insomuch that
those who had no Mind to persecute, were in a Manner constrained to it. Of
which an Instance was seen in the Year 1679, 1679
at Castle Dummington in Leicestershire: For John Evat having been fined for a
Meeting at his House, A Constable, etc. fined for Backwardness in taking the
Goods of J. Evat of Leicestshire.
and Goods enough to answer not being found, the Constable, and three other
Officers were fined each five Pounds, because they had been backward to take
away the said Evat's Goods. But the Ecclesia-sticks showed themselves the more
covetous, to get what they pretended to be their Due; and one Michael Reynolds,
at Farringdon in Berkshire, was this Year desp^^l'd of Cattle, Goods to more
than the value of 971. taken from M. Reynolds of Faringdon in Berkshire for
T^thes
Barley, and Beans for Tithes, to the Value of more than ninety-seven Pounds,
and all this only for one Year.

Thus honest Men were oppressed, which gave Occasion to a certain Writer of
that Time, (who in Print gave many Instances of that Nature) to say, Truly the
Papists may laugh because of their Victory, How they have got a Law whereby one
Protestant fights against another. This was chiefly levelled against
Conventicles; for thereby many Families were impoverished, because often they
were robbed of thrice as much as the fine amounted to; and the basest Means
that could be thought of were used to enrich the Persecutors with the Spoil of
the Innocent: For it happened that four of those called Quakers traveling on
the Way, Four Persons traveling on the Way have their Goods dis;trained as for
a Conventicle.
this was deemed a Transgres;sion, by adding a Fifth to their Number who was
not of their Society. And thus the Informers (some of whom were often Whores,
or Wives of Informers) made a Meeting of it, and this passed; so great was the
Power of these Prosligates; and on this Account the Goods of the said four
Persons were distrained. More abominable Actions of that Kind I could mention,
if I did not think it might seem tedious. The Encouragement given to Informers
makes them very insolent.
Such Despoiling was permitted now to every naughty Fellow, and this made them
so insolent, that one Yohn Hill, Constable at Walsingham in Norfolk, when he
was showed the Injustice of the Warrant he had, said, Justice, or no, I Will take
it for all that.

At Norwich lived one William Wat, who for several Years had carried on the
Trade of Informing, but whatever he got by it turned to no Account; and often
he was seized with such Fits of Weakness, that he could not stand on his Legs;
but this Year, in October, the Hand of God fell so heavy upon him, that it put
a Period to his Life. He had supped at Night, and was as well, according to his
Wife's Relation, as ever; Sudden and remarkable End of W. Wat an Informer, at
Norwich.
but on a sudden he sunk down to the Ground, and his Daughter crying aloud, he
seemed to look at her, and so died without more ado: But what was looked upon
as a very strange Thing, his Corpse stunk so grivously, that none were willing
to carry it, and the Overseers of the Poor were necessitated to hire four Men
to bear it to the Grave.

Far otherwise was the Exit of Isaac Pennington, The pious Death and,
honorable Interment of I. Pennington.
an eminent Minister and Author among those called Quakers, and a Man of an
acute Wit, and great Endowments, who in the Year 1658, on Whitsunday, so
called, being in a Meeting at the House of John Crook in Bedshire, was so
reached by the Preaching of G. Fox, that he, who before that Time had
contradicted the Quakers with his natural Wisdom, now embraced their Doctrine
as Truth, and did not stick to make public Profession of it, for which he
afterward several Times suffered Imprisonment during the Space of many Years;
but he continued steadfast to the End without fainting, and died piously in
October, at his House near Goodnesstone in Kent, from whence his Corpse was
carried to Buckitighamshire, where he lived, and was honorably interred there.

Some Time before, G. F. (...) Queries to the Pope, etc. which being translated
into Latin by this Author were by him sent to Rome.
, G. F. had written some Queries to the Pope and the Papists, which being
translated into Dutch, and printed, I was desired by him to translate into
Latin, and to send them to Rome to the Pope. These Queries in Latin, with what
the Author W. S. writ to the Pope on that Occasion, are to be seen in the
Appendix to the Dutch History, which being translated into English, th Reader
may take as follow.


To INNOCENT XI. Pope of Rome, S.

Great Prelate!
Thou will perhaps at first Sight admire that the Writing enclosed slhould be
sent to Thee; but Know it was done at the Command of the Author; and not
undeservedly: For if thou rightly weighest and considerest the Matter, Thou
must with us acknowledge, that it would be very unworthily done to keep this
Little Treatise from thy View, which has been already printed in the Dutch
Language, and carries the Pope's Name in the Frontispiece. Nor will Thou he
able to deny, that Thou an not only not injured hereby, but that we have also
performed a Duty that we owed Thee, in Transsmitting these Questions which
properly belong to Thee, But if thou please to read them and return an
Answer, Thou will both oblige the Author, and also remove the Suspicion of
Error from your Religion, in the Sight of all Christendom, provided Thou can
give a clear Answer to the Objections, not only in Word, but in Deed also.

Amsterdam, the 23d Day of the Month called April, 1679. I writ this at the
Request of certain of my Friends called Quakers. W. Sewel


Some Questions presented to the Papists, and the Pope of Rome, as the Supreme
Head of their Church, and commended to their Consideratiou by George Fox.
Friends,
HOW comes it to pass, that the Pope and Cardinals grant not to the Protestants
living in Spain, Italy, and at Rome, that Liberty of Meeting together for the
right performming of Divine Worship, which ye your selves enjoy in England,
Holland, and other Places, where the Protestants have the chief Power?

Would not the Pope and his Ministers persecute, deliver to the Inquisition and
been them, if they should at any Time set up as many Meetings in Spain, Italy,
and at Rome, as ye your selves enjoy in many Places in Protestant Countries?

Is the Royal Law of God thus fulfilled, which teaches, To do to all Men
whatsoever we would have done to our selves? Matt. vii. 12. Would ye have those
Things done to yon by Protestants, which ye have done to them? But if not;
where then are the Royal (...) and Gospel among you? God forbid, that we should
deny Liberty to any one that ackowledgeth God, and believes in his Son, the
Lord Jesus Christ. It seems therefore very strange to us, that the Pope and
Papists do deny the same Liberty In the pre-mention'd Places, which they
themselves enjoy among the Pratestants; because it not only contrary to Reason
but also to Law and Gospel: For the Apostle affirms, That he that was born
after the Flesh personed him that was born after the Spirit, Gal. iv. 29. Have
not the Papists therefore openly shown in themselves the Fleshly Birth, which
is contrary to Reason, Law and Gospel?

2. Where did Chirst or his Apostles ever command Men to Bow themselves to
Images, and to Worship them, and keep Holy Days? Where did they commmand
Holy Days to be appointed in Remembrance of themselve, and the same to be
H^^^^red? Why do ye not tell us where in the Gospels, Epistles, or in the
Revelation, any such Thing was commanded those Churches, which were in the Time
of the Apostles and Primitive Christians?

Where, I say, did Christ or his Apostles give Command to Whip, Hang, or Burn
Men; or, to speak as gently as may be, at least to imprison any because they
dissented from them, and could not adhere to their Religion?

3. Where ever did Christ or his Apostl;es in the primitive Churches command
that Candles should be lighted at Noonday? Well, show us where it is written,
whether it be in the Gospels, or Epistles? Is not therefore the Roman Church
degenerated from the Church of the primitive Times? Is she not fallen from
Spiritual Weapons to Camal? Has she not revolted from that Purity and
Virginity, wherein she witmessed in Time past Christ to be the Head of the
Churches?

4. Did the Churches of ancient Time make Choice of a Private Man, and account
him for Head of the Universal Church? Where ever did the Primitive Church
command Infants to be sprinkled with Water? Did not Christ say, Teach all
Naitions, baptizing them, etc. Matt. xxviii. 19. Ought they not therefore to be
taught before they were baptized? Are ye not degenerated from that Faith which
Christ is the Author and Finisher of, and which purisieth the Heart, and g^^^^
Victory over Sin, and Evil, which separate from God, amd by which we have
Access to God, and wherewith he is well-pleased? Are ye not degenerated from
the Light, Truth, Grace, Power, and Spirit, wherein the Apostles were?

5. Have ye not degenerated from the Ancient Church, because ye suffer not the
People to read the Holy Scripture in their Mother-Tangue? For does not the
Apostle say, And When this Episila is read amongst you, cause that it he read
also in the Church of the Laodiceans, Call. iv. 16. and elsewhere, I charge you
by the Lord, that this Epistle be rend unto all the Holy Brethren, i These v 27.
Yea, did not Christ also say, O Fools, and slow of Heart, to believe all that
the Prophets have spoken, Luke xxiv. 25.

How can it posibly be, that your Common People should believe those Things
which Christ, the Prophets and Apostles have spoken, unless it be granted them
to read or recite the same in their own Tongue, to the End they might both hear
and understand them by the Spirit which gave them forth? Why then no ye take
away the Use of the Holy Scriptures from the Common People? Are ye afraid lest
the Truth should appear manifest, whereby they might see and believe what is
written in the Law and Prophets, and by Christ and his Apostles? Had not the
Jews the Law and the Prophets in their Mother Tongue, that their Children might
read them? Ought not therefore all Christiams likewise to have the
New Testament, that makes mention of Christ and his Apostles, in their
Mother Tongue? But if not, why do ye not show us where Christ and his Apostles
have forhidden it?

6. But what do ye not sey of the Saerament of the Altar (as it is called?) Why
have ye slain many, and burnt others alive in England, France, the Law
Countries, and other Places, because they could not approve or receive it? Ye
assert it as a Thing certain, that the Bread and Wine, as soon as ye have
consecrated them, are made Christ, yea whole Christ, consisting of Soul,
Spirit, Flesh, Blood, and Bones. Besides, ye boldly affirm that all who receive
that Sacrament do receive whole Christ, and that after your Conservation, that
very Thing becomes Immortal and Divine.

Wherefore come O Pope, Cardinals and Priests, let us take a Bottle of Wine and
a Loaf of Bread, and equally divide the Wine into two Basins, and cut the Bread
into two Parts: Then let the Pope, Cardinals or Prists consecrate one Part,
which they please; which being done, let us lay up the Consecrated the
Unconsecrated together, in some close Place, and secure the same with seven
Locks and Keys on your Part, and with as many on ours, both Papists and
Protestants keeping Watch over it. But if it plainly appear, that the
Consecrated Bread and Wine, are Immortal and Divine, and lose nothing of their
Virtue and Sat^^r, nor grow ^^^ldy or sour, as tho they had been
unconsecrated, then we will come over to you: But if they lose their Property,
Quailty and Savor, and both Parts of the Bread do alike grow (...) then It
will be reasonable for you to come over to us, and confess that your Sacrament
of the Altar (so called) is neither Christ not his Flesh, nor any thing
Immortal or Divine; for his Flesh (...) no Corruption, Act ii. 27, 31. -- xiii.
35, 37. and his precious Blood, which delivers from Sin and Corruption, cannot
be corruptible.

Let Trial then be made hereof; but let Judgment be left to Just and Equal
Arbitrators, both Papist and Protestants and that in a Place where the
Prpotestants may have the same Power that ye have: For it would be unjust to
make this Trial or Expertment, where ye have the whole Administration of the
Commonwealth, and an equal Liberty is denied the Protestants. This Thing will
make the Thurst manifest, and turn to the Honor of God: For ye have shed Blood
upon this Occasion.

Wherefore suffer your Christ whom ye have made, to be tried, that it may be
seen whether he be the True Christ, or Anticrist; whether he be the true God or
a False One; For it would be somewhat hard that Bael's Prophets should (...)
you, 1. Kings xviii 13. and xix. 14, 18
for they were willing to have thire God triad, though they had before slain many
of the People of God, because they would not worship their God; as ye also heve
often done

Come ye forth therefore publicly, and make Trial; that it may appear at
length to all Christendom, whether yours he the Divine and Immortal Christ and
God, or no. Or is not rather that Mortal and Corruptible Christ, which ye your
selves have made, and for whose Sake ye have slain Multitudes of the People of
God, because they could not believe or comply with you?

7. Further, where did Christ or his Apostles ever speak to the Saints, of
Purgatory, wherein Men should he purged from their Sins after Death? Show us
where it it written in the New Testament. Is it not therefore a plain denying,
that Christ Blood purges from all Sin, to tell the People a Fable of a certain
Purgatory to purge them from Sins after Death? Is it not likewise a Denying of
Christ's Baptism with the Holy Spirit, and of Spiritnal Circumcision, and Faith
in Christ, which, purges in this Life, and gives the Victory?

Did not Christ answer some that desired Fire might come down from Heaven and
consume those that would not receive him; Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye
are of? Did not he rebuke them, saying that he came not to destroy Men's Lives,
but to save them? Luke ix 54, 55, 56.

Ye therefore who have destroyed such a vast Number of Men and Women for their
Dissenting from you about Rites and Ceremonies, and taken away their Lives by
such kind of Instruments, Racks and Fires, as were never sent down from Heaven,
but devised and invented by your selves; Are ye not worse than they, who
desired Fire to he called from Heaven to destroy Men's Lives? And seeing Christ
told them, that they knew not what manner of Spirit they were of, do ye know
what manner of Spirit ye are of, who have devised so many Ways and Torments for
the killing of Men, and havc actually made use of them.

With what Front ran ye persuade us to commit our Souls Bodies, and Lives to
you, who know not of what Spirit ye are Children, neither have the Mind of
Christ, who said, He came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them

Are ye not all, therefore, as many as take away Mem Lives for Worship devised
by you, obnoxious to the Rebuke of Christ? For when did Christ or any of his
Apostles ever give Command, or by their Example teach, that any one that was
disobedient to them, or rejected their Doctrine and Rellgion, should be
persecuted and imprisoned, or punished by any Carnal Weapons? Tell as where any
thing of this Kind is contained, either in the four Evangelical Histories, or
in the Epistles written to the Christian Churches?

Did ever Christ or his Apostles go to the Rope-makers to buy Whips and
Halters, to whip and hang Men for dissenting from them, as ye have done? Did
they ever go to the Blacksmiths to make Chains, Fetters, Bolts and Locks? Or to
the Gunsmiths to buy Guns and Musket? or to the Sword-cutlers, to buy Swords or
Halberts? Did they ever build Prisons, or get Holes and Vaults dug, to sorce
Men by such Means to their Religion? Show us an Example and Precept given by
Christ or his Apostles, which commands and makes the Use of such Weapons and
Instruments lawful.

But if ye cannot make Proof thereof, it is necessary for you to confess and
acknowledge, that ye are fallen and degenerated from the true Christian
Weapons, which the Apostles and Primitive Christians used, saying, The Weapons
of our Warfare not Carnal, but mighty through God, that it. Spiritual, 2 Cor. x.
4.

G. Fox


To INNOCENT XI. Pope of Rome, S.
BEhold, Great Prelate, a few Questions written for the Sake of Thee and thy
Adherents, a Copy whereof we sent Thee by the Post, about three Mouths ago; but
being uncertain whether it was delivered into thy Hands or no, we thought good
to write the Qtuestions over again, and send them to Thee, that it might not he
long of us, that Thou do not read them. For we think it convenient, that Thou
should earnestly concern thy self to inspect what was printed in Dutch, and
inscribed to the Pope and his Adherents, which if Thou shall please to do, and
also vouchsafe thy Pains in answering them both by Fact and Writing, it will
satisfy the Authors, Desire, and remove a Doubt or Semple out of many Persons
Minds, Farewell,

This I have written in the Name of some of my Friends called Quaker William
Sewel
Amsterdam, the 24th of the Month called July 1679.

This I did at his Desire, but never received or heard of any Answer to em.

This Year there was a great Commotion in England, about a Plot carried on by
the Papists against the Life of the King, who made his Brother, the Duke of
York, go beyond Sea for some Time; for the Parliament suspectng him, a Motion
was made in the House of Commons to exclude him from the Succession to the
Crown; but this Project was quashed.

In the Beginning of the Year 1680, 1680
it happened that George Whitehead and Thomas Bar coming to Norwich, and
preaching there in the Meeting of their Friends. were taken Prisoners, as 'twas
said, under a frivolous Pretense, as if G Whitehead might have been a Jesuit:
And being brought before Justice Francis Bacon, who then was Recorder of the
City, The severe Proceedigns of F. Bacon Recorder of Norwich, against
G.Whitehead and T, Burr of Ware.
he after some odd Examination, demanded of them, as Preachers, tne Fine of
twenty Pounds a Man; which they refusing, he asked them, Whether they would
take the Oath of Allegiance; and they answering, that they could take no Oath
for Conscience Sake, he said, If they would neither pay the Fines Or take the
Oath, he would commit them to Jail. They having showed that they were no
Vagrants, but Men of competent Estates, that had settled Habitations, as was
well known, Bacon said, De non apparentibus,and non existeutibus, eadem est
ratio, i.e. Of Things not appearing, and Things not in Being, there is we same
Reason; Just as if he had said, Your Estates that are at London (where G,
Whitehead lived) and Ware (where T. Burr dwelt) appear not at Norwich, and
therefore they are not in Being. Now though they showed the Absurdity of this
strange Kind of Logic, yet Bacon would not hearken to it, but called them
Seducers and Seditious, and told them, there was a Statute yet in Force, that
was made in Queen Elizabeth's Days, to hang such Persons as they were. And they
asking him, If he could prosecute them upon that Law, or execute it upon them?
He answered, Yes, if the King should give Order to have it put in Execution, I
would do it, and have you hanged, if you would not abjure the Realm. From this
it may appear what a violent Man this Recorder was, and that the Prisoners
could not expect any good Treatment from him. So Night being come, he sent them
to the jail. About a Month after, at the Quarter Sessions, they were called
into the Court of Judicature to be tried; and being brought to the Bar, G.
Whitehead said; We have been five Hecks in Prison; it is meet the Court should
know for what; pray let our Mittimus be produced. But the Recorder, who sat as
Judge in the Court, said, There Is no need of your Mittimus to be read here:
I Will give an Account of the Cause. And then he told the Court, How they had
gathered together a Company of about two Hundred, and that Officers went from
him to dissipate them, but could not; that thereupon he sent the Sheriff, who
took them away; and that they being brought before him, he proffered them, if
they would pay their Fines, he would not commit them; and that they refusing,
he tendered the Oath of Allegiance to them; which they not willing to take, he
sent them to Jail. And though G. Whitehead with good Reason said, That they being
Englishmen, had a Right to travel in any Part of the Nation: And T. Burr added,
That he being a Person that was concerned in trading in Corn, by the Law of
England he might travel from Place to Place about his Concerns; yet this so
displeased the Recorder, that he said, Had not you better have been turning
your Malt at home, than to come here to preach? The Scripture says, God added
to the Church such as should be saved, but ye draw from the Church: And, said
he farther, the Church of England will never be at quiet, till some of you be
hanged. G. Whitehead then showing how unreasonably the Recorder behaved
himself, and that a Judge ought not thus to inveigh against the Prisoners, and
threaten them, alleged to that End a notable Instance, how in the Case of
Humphry Stafford, an Arch-Traitor, the Chief Justice Hussy had been unwilling
(in Compliance with the King's Desire) to declare his Opinion concerning him
before he was judicially proceeded against. The Recorder then asked, What
King's Reign was that in? In King Henry VII's. replied G. Whitehead. I perceive
you are read, returned the Recorder. And so he was indeed; and he defended his
Cause so well in the Court, that the Magistrates seemed at a Loss; for he
showed so evidently that he was unjustly committed to Prison, that the Mayor
(to whom, and to the Justices he had appealed) said, You have appealed to me;
truly we are Tradesmen, and no Lawyers: We leave Matters of Law to the
Recorder; he knows the Law, and we must acquiesce in his Judgment. If I should
repeat here all that was spoken pro and contra, so as I find it extant, I
should be fain to be almost as large as I have been in the Relation of the
Trials of John Crook and William Penn: And therefore I Will only say briefly,
that after much Reasoning, the Recorder tendered the Oath of Allegiance again
to them, that so by their Refusal he might get Occasion to praemunire them. But
this Recorder, before the whole Process came to an End, being turned out by the
Magistrates, it did not come to that Pitch; though it was a good while yet before
the aforesaid G. Whitehead and T. Burr were released, after they had shown the
Illegality of their Commitment; first, by more than one Warrant from the
Recorder, and afterward, to color the Error the better, by an Order from the
Quarter Sessions.

This Year those called Quakers at London, Friends Sufferings since the
Restoration presented to King and parliament.
published a brief Relation of the Sufferings of their Friends since the King's
Restoration, and presented it to the King and Parliament, showing therein, how
many had been fined by the Bishop's Courts, robbed of all they had, put into
Prisons, and there died; the Number of which was computed to be two hundred
forty-three Persons, many whereof had been so grievously beaten and wounded
because of their frequenting religious Assemblies, that they died of their
Hurts and Wounds. Proceedings of the (...) printed
There came forth also a printed Account of the unjust Proceedings of the
Informers, and how at their Instance, without a Juridical Process, the Accused
were bereaved ved of their Goods, the Unlawfulness of which was plainly shown
from the Books of eminent Lawyers.

G. Fox now traveled through many Places, G. F. comes to London about the Time
of the yearly Meeting.
and came to London about the Time of the Annual Meeting; and traveling
afterward again into the Country, he returned into the said City, and staid
there the most Part of the Winter.

The Parliament was then very busy with enquiring into the Plot, carried on by
the Papists; and the House of Commons especially was very active in the Case,
Bill of Exclusion of the D of Y passes the House of Commons, but is rejected by
the Lords.
so that a Bill to exclude the Duke of York from the Succession to the Crown,
passed after the third Reading: But this was opposed in the House of Lords; for
by a Majority, among which were the Bishops, who would not consent to the
Exclusion, the Bill was rejected. Now since some ill-natured Episcopalians were
very forward to place the Quakers amongst the Plotters, G. Fox gave forth the
following Declaration.

IT is our Principle and Testimony, G. F's Declaration against plotting, to be
delivered to the Parliament.
to deny and renounce all Plots and Plotters against the King, or any of his
Subjects; for we have the Spirit of Christ, by which we have the Mind of
Christ, who came to save Men's Lives, and not to destroy them: And we would
have the King and all his Subjects to be safe. Wherefore we do declare, that we
will endeavor, to our Power, to save and defend him and them, by discovering
all Plots and Plotters (which shall come to our Knowledge) that would destroy
the King or his Subjects: This we do sincerely offer unto you. But as to
Swearing and Fighting, which in Tenderness of Conscience we cannot do, ye know,
that we have suffered these many Years for our Conscientious Refusal thereof.
And now that the Lord has brought you together, we desire you to relieve us,
and free us from those Sufferings; and that ye will not put upon us to do those
Things, which we have suffered so much and so long already for not doing; for
if you do, ye will make our Sufferings and Bonds stronger, instead of
relieving; us.

G. Fox.

Not long after he also writ a Paper to all Rulers and Magistrates England, He
writes also to the Magistrates, etc. against Persecution. 1681
Scotland, and Ireland, to dissuade them from Persecution for Religion. His
Labor seemed not altogether ineffectual with the Parliament, for about the
Beginning of the Year 1681, 1681
the House of Commons resolved,

That it is the Opinion of the House, Resolution of the House of commons
against executing the penal Laws against Dissenters. Yet Persecution continues.
that Persecution of Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this Time
grievous to the Subjects, a Weakening of the Protestant Interest, an
Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

But though the House of Commons came to this Resolution, yet it did not stop
Persecution; for as long as the Laws (by Virtue whereof they persecuted) were
not repealed, which could not be done without the Concurrence of the House of
Lords and the King, those that were malicious continued in their old Way, which
lasted yet three or four Years.

G. Fox now also came into some Trouble; G. F. sued for Tithes, yet had engaged
not to meddle with his Wife's Estate.
since he and his Wife were sued for Tithes, though she had lived three and forty
Years at Swarthmore, and in all that Time no Tithe had been paid nor demanded.
Of this G. F. had Certificates; but since they would not accept them without an
Oath, it made his Case the more difficult. He proposed the Matter to four
Judges at London, and found one more moderate than the other, which put a Stop
to what her Enemies designed. And the Judges wondered when they heard that he
had made Promise in Writing, not to meddle with his Wife's Estate.

This Year the King dissolved the Parliament, and called a new One to sit at
Oxford, and so it did; but for all That he could not make it comply with his
Demands, Parliament dissolved and a new one sits at Oxford, which is also
dissolved. P. of Orange comes into England, and returns.
and so he dissolved this also. Some Time after he desired the Prince of Orange
to come over, who thereupon came from Holland into England, and after a short
Stay returned to the Hague.

It was also in this Year that the King gave a Country or great Tract of Land
in America to William Penn, with a Patent under the great Seal, to him and his
Heirs in perpet^um, since the King owed him still a considerable Sum for the
Services of his Father the Admiral Sir William Penn. K. Charles the II. grants
a large Tract of Land in America to W. Penn and to his Heirs, and gives it the
Name of Pennsylvania.
This Tract of Land on the River Delaware, from the fortieth Degree to the
three and fortieth, with all the Isles belonging to it, the King gave to W.
Penn, with full Power to erect a new Colony there, to sell Lands, to create
Magistrates, to make Laws not contrary to the Laws of England, and Power to
pardon Crimes; And in the Patent the King declared that this Tract of Land
henceforth should bear the Name of Pennsylvania. This Favor of the King W.
Penn chiefly owed (I think) to James, then Duke of York, who being Chief
Admiral of England, Sir William Penn, the Father, on his dying Bed desired him
to protect his Son against his Enemies, who, because of his Religion, were like
to fall hard upon him. This the Duke promised, and stood also to his Promise;
and therefore it was not without Reason that W. Penn afterward, when the said
Duke had ascended the Throne, showed himself ready to be serviceable to him in
all that he thought might be beneficial to the Kingdom. W. Penn now went with
much Company to America, and having seen the Land given him, he founded there
the chief City Philadelphia, and some other Towns. And that he might the more
peaceably enjoy the Country, he purchased from the Indians so much Land, that
he became the Proprietor of a Country twice as big as all the United Provinces,
as he himself once told me: And this Colony increased so suddenly, that after a
few Years, at Philadelphia there were built six hundred Brick Houses. W. Penn's
Father was deceased long before, The dying Advice and Sentiments of Sir W.
Penn, taken from the latter End of No Cross, no Crown.
and on his dying Bed he declared that he had a gracious God, and he gave Marks
of a true Christian Disposition of Mind: He also gave his Son several wholesome
Admonitions how to behave himself in this World. He complained much of the
Wickedness of the Times, and was heard at sundry Times to say, Woe to thee, O
England! God will judge thee, O England! Great Plagues are at thy Door, O
England! He also said, God has forsaken us. We are infatuated; we will shut
our Eyes. We will not see our true Interest and Happiness: We shall be
destroyed. When he was near to Death, and took his Leave of his Relations, he
said to W. Penn, Son William, if you and your Friends keep to your plain Way of
Preaching, and keep to your plain Way of Living, you will make an End of the
Priests to the End of the World. Bury me by my Mother, live all in Love, shun
all Manner of Evil; and I pray God to bless you all; and he will bless you.
Thus died the valiant Admiral Penn, Father of William Penn, Proprietor of
Pennsylvania: And now I return to other Matters.

I left G. Fox at London, and since he continued there and thereabout a good
while, I Will take a Turn to Bristol, where in the Year 1682, 1682 Dismal
Persecution at Bristol.
a dismal Scene of Persecution was opened: For the Meetings of those called
Quakers were disturbed, not only by grievously abusing, and imprisoning them;
but they were also vexed by breaking into their Houses, and committing all
manner of Violence, as among the rest in the House of Richard Marsh, Instanced
in R. Marsh, Merchant.
an eminent Merchant in that City: For, to get of him the Fine that was
pretended, first a Cask of Wine worth twenty Pounds, was taken and sold for
four Pounds; as often it happened, that the Goods thus taken, were sold for
less than the half, because honest People being unwilling to buy such Goods,
they were sold to any one that would but bid some Money, how little soever: For
what was wanting of the Fine was taken anew from the fined Person, and so they
did here also; for they broke open his Compting-house, sought for Money, and
took away his Leidger, Journal, Cash-book, and other Books and Accounts,
besides many Houshold-Goods; and several Chambers were rifled, though the Wife of
the said Marsh lay in Childbed at that Time. And carried on chiefly by Sheriff
Knight, J Helliar an Attorney, with their Accomplices Lugg, Tilley, Casse,
Patrick, Hoar, Watkins, Informers.
The chief Actors of these Insolences were the Sheriff John Knight, and John
Helliar an Attorney, who with his Companions Lugg, Tilley, Casse, Patrick, Hoar
and Watkins, served for Informers. Knight and Helliar came frequently with a
Multitude of Boys and rude Rabble, to disturb the Meetings of the Quakers; and
then they carried them to the Prisons, which grew so full, that about fifty
Persons were crowded into one Room, which was so nasty, that one of the
Aldermen, viz. Sir Robert Cann said, If he had a Dog which he loved, he would
not put him there. And though Sir Thomas Earl, Mayor of the City, and some
Justices and Aldermen, at the Request of others, showed themselves inclined to
allow the Prisoners a better Place, yet the Power of the aforesaid Sheriff John
Knight was such, that he hindered it.

The Meetings of other Protestant Dissenters were disturbed now also, but they
fainted and gave way; Other Dissenters disturbed, but give way.
whereas the Quakers stood firm, how much soever vexed; which often was done in
a very outrageous Manner: For their Meetings were not only disturbed often with
the Noise of Drums and Fiddles, but Liberty was given to the vilest Fellows to
commit all kind of Insolency, without showing any Regard to those of the Female
Sex, whose Hoods and Scarffs were torn; and Helliar, to give the Boys a Sign to
attack the Women, Vile Practices of Helliar.
was used to say to these, Have a Care of your Hoods and Scarffs; for then the
Boys fell upon them; and both aged Women and ancient Men were carried to
Prison, and forced to go faster than they well could, by pushing them, and
pinching their Arms black and blue; and when once a Girl spoke a Word against
this Cruelty, she was pulled by the Hair, and haled to Prison; nay little Boys
were beaten on the Head till they grew giddy, and then they were carried to
Bridewell, where Helliar charged the Keeper to get a new Cat of nine Tails,
endeavoring to terrify the Children, by making them believe they should be
whipped, unless they would promise to come no more to Meetings: But this
succeeded not; for his extravagant Malice did not subdue the Constancy of these
Children.

With such Diabolical Rage they persecuted this People at Bristol, and not a
Stone was left unturned to afflict them. Once they were nailed up in their
Meeting House, and thus kept about six hours; which could not but be very hard
to Nature, since there were also Women of no mean Families, and among these the
Widow of the Upper-Sheriff Lane. The Jails filled.
So many also were taken Prisoners, that at length there was no more Room in
the Jails. By these Proceedings many Families were ruined: For their Goods were
taken from them, not only on the Account of Meeting, but when any were believed
to be of good Estates, the Oath of Allegiance was tendered to them. At Court it
seems they were the more offended against the Quakers, because in the Election
of Members of Parliament, some had voted for such as they believed to be
moderate, and no Favorers of Popery; and therefore it was said underhand, It Is
insinuated, to stay persecuting the Quakers if they forbear voting for
Parliament Men
That if Mr. Penn and Mr. Whitehead would undertake for the Quakers not to vote
at Elections of Parliament Men, there should be no further Persecution of them.
In the mean while the Behavior of the Persecutors in the Meetings was brutish
in the highest Degree; insomuch that a certain Woman, seeing that the Attorney
Helliar listed up her Child by the Hair of his Head, and asking him, Why he so
abused her Child, was therefore ill treated herself by him. And by Order of the
said Helliar a Lass was committed to Bridewel, because she gave an impudent
Boy, that would have turned up her Coats, a Box on the Ear; for which defending
of her Modesty, this brutish Helliar called her a Rioter and seditious Person:
For he was, as has been said already, a Leader of insolent and saucy Boys,
which he from Time to Time took along with him to disturb the Meetings of the
Quakers. F^rt^er Instances of Knight's and Helliar's Behavior.
And Sheriff Knight did often with his Cane very violently beat those that were
met together, and once grievously abused an ancient Man called Britton; and
some Women were pinched violently in their Arms. Susannah York, an aged Woman,
was thrown down to the Ground; Mary Hooper was very roughly handled by Helliar,
had her Scarf torn off her Back, and was so thrust and flung about, that she
was much out of Order long after; and Mary Page, being big with Child, was so
violently haled out of the Meeting, that her Life was endangered by it. With
Helliar it became customary to call Men Rogues, and the Women Whores, Jades,
Carrions, and damned Bitches: He also bid the Boys to tear their Scarfs, and
take up Dirt, and throw it upon them. Of this his Beastly Rage there were many
Witnesses; for these abominable Dealings displeased many People of other
Persuasions: But it seems these enraged Fellows had Encouragement at Court,
whereon they durst rely: For the Sheriff John Knight was knighted, These Doings
encouraged at Court, and Sheriff Knight knighted.
and thereby grew more insolent. Once it happened that Helliar having disturbed
a Meeting, drove the Women along the Streets as if they had been Cattle; and
being asked, Whether he made Beasts of them? He answered, Ye are worse than
Beasts, for Beasts will be driven, but you will not.

This disturbing or Meetings continued till almost all the Men belonging
thereto were clapped up in Prison; and some of them sending a Petition to the
Mayor and Justices of the City, that they might be pleased to let them have
larger Rooms, since not only their Health, but their Lives also were
endangered, the said Magistrates showed themselves inclined to allow the
Prisoners some Ease or Enlargement: But the Power of Sheriff Knight was such,
that whatever they said or did, all proved in vain. The Mayor also signified to
the Sheriff, That he would have all Convictions made above-board, and not in
Alehouses and Taverns; and that he would have the distrained Goods brought into
a public Warehouse, and not in a By-lane. Hereupon he slights the Mayor, and
forces his Compliance.
But though the Mayor ex officio might have commanded the Sheriff, yet this
Officer was so countenanced, that he did not care for whatever the Mayor said;
nay, so exorbitant was he, that his Adherents began to threaten the Mayor he
should not be a Parliament Man; insomuch that he was forced to comply in some
Degree. In the mean while the Havoc and Spoil was so enormous, that generally
twice as much was taken as the Fine amounted to. The Severity of J. Dennis the
Jailor and his Wife.
The Prisoners, some of which lay on the Floor, others in Hamocks, and some in
a cold and open Room, exposed to the Wind, and Injury of the Weather, suffered
great Inconveniences, and the Jailor Isaac Dennis imagining that nothing could
be too bad for them, would not show them any Favor, but at a very unreasonable
Rate; and his Wife showed her self no less unreasonable than he, so that one
Extortion was at the Heels of another. Four Physicians of Bristol, Four
Physicians certify the Danger of Infection from the strait Confinement of the
Prisoners
viz. John Griffith, William Turgis, J. Chauncy, and T. Bourn, seeing how
straightly the Prisoners were penned up and thronged together, gave a Certificate
under their Hands, in which they declared, That they resenting their Condition
with Compassion, and considering what dangerous Consequence such close
Confinement might be of, were moved to certify, that the Prisoners being
destitute of Room for Rest, it had a ready Tendency to breed infectious
Distempers, to the endangering of their Lives, etc., But all this did not avail
them, it being not counted worth the while to be concerned for them. Nay, so
desperately wicked was the Jailor, that when the Prisoners complained for want
of Room, he said to his Man, If he could but shut the Door, it would be well
enough. But in due Time we shall see what Anguish and Horror befell him.

After most of the People called Quakers at Bristol were in Prison, Most of the
Quakers at Bristol imprisoned.
the Women who continued to keep up their Religious Meetings, were also seized,
and confined to that Degree, that at length few or none but Children, that
staid with the Servants in the Houses of their Parents, were left free. The
Number of the Prisoners for the Sake of their Religion amounted now to one
Hundred and fifteen, and some of them were confined in Bridewel, B. Blaugdone
and K. Evans in Bridewel.
among which were also Barbara Blaugdone, several Times mentioned before, and
Katherine Evans, who had learned at Malta what it was to suffer a tedious and
hard Imprisonment. It is very remarkable that Children under sixteen Years of
Age now performed what their Parents were hindered from: For these Children kept
up their Religious Meetings as much as was in their Power. Meetings kept up by
Children, of whom 19 are sent to the House of Correction.
But though they were not within the Reach of the Law, yet once nineteen of these
Youths were taken and carried to the House of Correction, where they were kept
for some Time. And though they were threatened with Whipping if ever they returned
to the Meeting, yet they continued valiant without fainting, although they
suffered exceedingly from the wicked Rabble. But so great was their Zeal, that
they despising all Reproach and Insolence, remained steadfast; and thus they
showed in spite of their Enemies, that God would not suffer that the Quakers
Meeting should be altogether suppressed, as it was intended. This Persecution
continued till the next Year, as it did in several other Places also; for there
wanted no Informers, who continually lay in wait for Prey even to such a
Degree, Market-people at their Inn sworn against for a Meeting.
that I find that some of those called Quakers, being come from other Places to
a Market, and being gone into an Inn to refresh themselves, a snatching
Informer did not stick to declare upon his Oath, that the Quakers had kept a
Meeting there.

But before I leave Bristol, The Case of E. Dole.
I must give some Account of a ridiculous Act, performed on one Erasmus Dole,
who bore the Name of a Quaker. He having said that he scrupled not to declare
the Contents of the Oath of Allegiance, it was contrived, that he should speak
after the Clerk, and skip over such Words he disliked, and pronounce another in
its Room, as I declare instead of I swear. This went on, and whilst he was thus
speaking, the Jailor held his Hand to the Book, and when Erasmus had said all,
put it to his Mouth, to make this pass for kissing it. With this the Court
seemed satisfied; and the Bishop of Bristol seeing these Apish Tricks, told the
Court, That altered it not from being an Oath, at which they gloried, as having
obtained a Conquest. But this was but a pitiful one; for Erasmus being a Man of
an irregular Life, the Quakers had but little Cause to regret the Loss of such
a Member, who grew so dissolute, that in Process of Time they found themselves
necessitated to deny him, because of his offensive Conversation.

In Glocestershire the People called Quakers were also under great Sufferings
by Imprisonment for keeping of their Meetings; Cruel Usage of J. Boy and his
Wife in Gloucestersh. through the Instigation of the Priest of the Parish.
and the Wife of one John Boy, being at a peaceable Meeting at Little
Badmanton, was through Instigation of the Priest of the Parish, in a violent
Manner dragged out of the Meeting by the Lord Herbert's Footmen; through which
Abuses the Woman fell sick and miscarried, to the endangering of her Life; and
her Husband, who was also taken Prisoner at the same Place, was not suffered at
his Request to see his Wife.

In Leicestershire it went no better. One Elizabeth Hill being in a Meeting at
Broughton, Inhumane Barbarity to E. Hill at Broughton in Leicestershire by the
En^ouragement of W. Cotton Priest, and his Man T. Ambrose.
was by the rude Boys dragged out, and so abused, that she was seemingly quite
spent, and near dead; and lying in the Dirt, one of the Boys, to try whether
she was still alive, put his Finger into her Mouth, and perceiving her to
breathe, said, Let us at her again. The Devil is yet in her, and we will
squeeze him out. These cruel Abuses made a neighbourly Woman cry out, What will
you kill the Woman? To which the Boys said, What care we? Mr. Cotton bid us do
so. Did he indeed? asked the Woman. Ay indeed, replied the Boys. Then, said
she, he may be ashamed of it. Thus these Boys openly said, that it was the
Parson (viz. William Cotton, who was Priest of the Parish) encouraged them to
this excessive Wickedness, and his Man said in plain Terms, His Master was one
of the best Men in England; for if every one would serve them so, this Heresy
would be rooted out. And this Man whose Name was Thomas Ambrose, did not stick
to say, That nothing would drive the Quakers away, but either Fire or Water;
and if the House was his (meaning the House where they met together) he would
burn it on their Heads. More Instances of such exorbitant Wickedness happened
at sundry Places I could mention, if I did not study Brevity.

G. Fox being this Year at London about the Time of choosing new Sheriffs for
the City, he writ a few Lines to those who standing Candidates for that Office,
desired his Friends to give their Voices for them. And he said in the
Conclusion, G. F's Terms for his Friends Voices at Elections
Shall we be free to serve and worship God, and keep his Commands, if we give
our Voices for you? For we are unwilling to give our Voices for such as will
imprison and persecute us, and spoil our Goods. The Constables now at London
were sent sometimes with Warrants to disturb the Quakers Meetings; but it was
easily seen that they would rather have been freed from such a Commission: For
coming there, they would bid G. F. or others that preached, to give over
speaking; but they and the Soldiers who sometimes came along with them,
generally behaved themselves moderate, sufficiently showing that they were not
for Persecution, and that what they did was for the sake of their Office.
Sometimes indeed they hindered the Friends going into their Meetings; but these
then being thus kept out, the Number notwithstanding increased. The Service G.
F. had, being kept out of Devonshire-house Meeting
Once it happened that G. Fox was stopped by the Constables from going into
Devonshire-house Meeting; and after having stood a while in the Yard, till he
was weary, one gave him a Stool to sit on; after a while he stood up and
preached, and in his Declaration said, Ye need not come against us with Swords
and Staves, for we are a peaceable People, and have nothing in our Hearts but
Goodwill to the King and Magistrates, and to all People upon the Earth. And we
do not meet under Pretense of Religion to plot against the Government, or to
raise Insurrections, but to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. When he had
spoken what was upon him at that Time, he sat down, and after a while concluded
the Meeting with Prayer, at which the Constables and Soldiers, as well as
others, put off their Hats; and when the Meeting was finished, a Constable
putting off his Hat, seriously said, The Lord bless you; and all were suffered
to pass away unmolested.

Thus this Year came to an End: All other Protestant Dissenters were now
suppressed: For they were restrained from exercising any public Worship; When
other Dissenters were s^pp^est, their Persecutors have said the Quakers could
not be ex^^rpated
and some there were who in their Nocturnal Meetings would pray God, That it
might please him to keep the Quakers steadfast, that so they might be as a Wall
about them, in order that other Dissenters might not be rooted out. And yet
these, to render the Quakers odious, formerly had been very active in setting
them forth in very ill Colors. But the said People continued now so valiant,
and without sainting, that some of their Persecutors have been heard to say,
That the Quakers could not be overcome, 1683
and that the Devil himself could not extirpate them.

In the Year 1683 Persecution continued in many Places; Above 700 Quakers in
Prison. Persecution still in Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, etc. And in
particular at Bristol, where R. Lindy, a blind Man of 90 is very hardly dealt
with by J. Dennis the Jailor, and some fall sick of the Spotted Fever and die.
The Dreadful Condition and Death of the said J. Dennis.
and by Computation it appeared, that above 700 of those called Quakers yet
suffered Imprisonment in England. I could mention several Instances of
Persecution in Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, and elsewhere; but to avoid
being prolix, I Will only take a Turn again to Bristol, where Persecution
continued still: For if sometimes any of the People called Quakers came to a
Meeting, they presently were committed to Prison; among these was one Richard
Lindy, a Blind-man, of about fourscore and ten Years of Age, who was carried to
Jail, and forced to sit up three Nights in a Chair, though others offered to pay
for his Lodging, if some convenient Place to lie down on had been allowed him.
Some of the Prisoners being Tradesmen, would willingly have worked in Prison,
to earn something for their Sustenance; but the Jailor Isaac Dennis would not
permit them that Liberty. Other Prisoners fell sick of the Spotted Fever, and
some died of it; yet all this did not soften the said hardhearted Jailor. But
at length a heavy Stroke from Heaven fell upon him. About the Middle of the
Month October he fell sick, and was seized with a terrible Anguish of Mind.
Then he wished he had never seen the Inside of the Jail; and he desired some of
the Quakers, to pray for him, and to forgive him for what he had done. To which
they answered, That they forgave him; but he should ask Forgiveness of God. But
still his Anguish increased; and when the Physicians ordered him to be let
Blood, he said, No Physic would do him Good, his Distemper being another
Thing; and that no Man could do him Good, his Day being over; and there was no
Hope of Mercy from God for him. Some of those called Quakers seeing him in this
woeful Condition, signified, that they desired if it was the Will of the Lord,
he might find a Place of Repentance. And it was told him, They hoped his Day
was not over, because he had such a full Sense of his Condition: To which he
answered, I thank you for your good Hope; but I have no Faith to believe. And
he further said, Faith is the Gift of God. Whatever was spoken to him, he
continued in saying, That his Day was over, and there was no Mercy for him.
Such a gnawing Worm is the Guilt of Conscience; and in this desperate State he
continued above a Month, and died the last of November, without any visible
Signs of Forgiveness; but the Judgment thereof we must commit to God.

Although the People called Quakers were oppressed by Sufferings all over the
Country, G. F. and other Teachers encourage to Faithfulness and Perseverance.
And it is remarkable these Teachers geneally went free, which was the Case of C.
Marshal.
yet generally they continued valiant; and as G. Fox did not omit from Time to
Time to encourage them by Letters to Faithfulness and Stedfastness, so several
others of their Teachers did not neglect to exhort them to Perseverance both by
Word and Writing, and what was indeed remarkable, those who traveled to and
fro in the Country, and publicly preached in the Meetings of their Friends,
generally went free; and the Informers were often disappointed of catching a
Preacher. I find it left upon Record by Charles Marshal, who was none of the
least, that though in the Time when Persecution was most hot, he traveled through
the Nation, yet none laid Hands on him, or fined him for his Preaching; which
was the more remarkable, because he being a very zealous Man, was used to lift
up his Voice in a very powerful Manner.

William Dewsbury, who was now grown ancient in his Imprisonment at Warwick,
had writ an Epistle of Consolation to his suffering Friends, which was thought
fit to be reprinted, and is as follows:

Dear Brethren and Sisters,
HEar the Word of the Lord, W. Dewsbury's Letter of Consolation to his
oppressed Friends.
Thus says the Lord, Though you now drink the Cup of Adversity, and cat the
Bread of Affliction, and are trampled upon, as though you were not worthy to live
upon the Earth, yet notwithstanding all the Fury of Men, you are resolved in
the Strength of my Spirit for ever to be deprived of the sweet Enjoyments of
Wife, Husband, tender Children, Parents, and outward Possessions, Liberty and
Life, before you deny the Testimony of my Name before the Sons of Men. Oh! you
dear and tender Children, who love not your Lives unto Death this Day, that you
may finish a good Testimony for the Glory of my Name, says the Lord God; list
up your Heads in the Light of my Covenant, and believe in my Name, for I am
near unto you, says the mighty God of Safety; and let not any Weight or
Burden lie upon you; for I will be more than Husband to Wife, and more than
Wife to Husband, or Parents to Children, or Children to Parents; yea, I will be
a Husband to the Widow, and a Father to the Children who are deprived of their
tender Parents for my Namesake: I will enlarge your Borders in the Life of my
Righteousness; you that suffer in true Innocence, will I refresh with the Depth
of my Mercies; yea I will guard you with the Angel of my Presence, and all that
devise Mischief against you shall be confounded before the Glory of my Power,
with which I will keep and preserve you in the Word of my Patience, and Safety,
in my Presence, says the Lord God.

Therefore, you dear Children, who drink the deepest in Sufferings, think it
not hard, for it is my Purpose unto you all that have not any Eye to Self, but
alone seek my Glory in all you do; I will make you more and more Honorable in
the Glory of my Life, and double my Blessings upon you and yours; for I have
beheld your Integrity, and my Bowels are mightily moved with Com^assion toward
you; therefore am I risen for your Sakes this Day, to declare unto you, my
suffering People, That not an Hair of your Head shall perish, neither shall you
be detained in Prisons and desolate Holes any longer than I have determined
shall be for your eternal Good, and the Glory of my Name for ever; Therefore in
my Life stand faithful, in Resistance of every evil Thought, or whatever would
cause you to murmur, or desire any thing but what you know will advance the
Glory of my Name, and the Exaltation of my Truth, over all that rises up
against it, in your being truly subject to the Measure of my Light and Life,
that will not let any seek a Pre-eminence or Esteem amongst Men; neither let
Self-striving nor Self-serving have Power in any; but in true Humility, Love
and Meekness watch one over another; and let the Strong take the Weak by the
Hand, that you may all gently in Love, Meekness, and holy Fear dread my Name,
and serve one another, that your Love may be manifest unto me, says the Lord
your God, and one unto another in the naked Simplicity of your Spirits; then
will I make my Dwelling amongst you, and with you; and my dreadful and glorious
Presence you shall all feel mightily in you and amongst you, moving in the
Exercise of my Spirit, to the Renown of my Name, and the Comfort of one
another; and I will crown yon with heavenly Blessings, and the Glory of my
powerful Life; and you shall praise my Name for ever that I made you my Jewels,
and counted you worthy to suffer for the Testimony of my Name. I will go before
you through all the Waters and Floods of Affilictions; and, I will appear with
you before all the Counsels of the Sons of Men; and my saving Power shall
compass you about in your hot and sharp Afflictions, all you who have your
Confidence alone in me, the LORD your GOD. Therefore trust in my Name, ye my
dear Children, and cast all your Care upon me; and if any of you joyfully
suffer the Spoiling of your Goods, I will supply with what is needful for you
and yours; and if any of you seal your Testimony in the Word of my Patience
with your Blood, I will take Care of your tender Wives and Children, or
Parents, so whom your Souls have been poured forth in Prayers unto me for their
Good.

Therefore hear my lord which is sounded unto you from the Throne of my Grace
and eternal Glory: Rejoice not too much in Spirits being made subject, but
throw down your Crowns before me, that there be not a self-seeking self-serving
Spirit in the Family of my People, but all feel the Birth-immortal raised up in
the Resurrection of my Life in you all, which truly makes Self of no
Reputation, so that all Loftiness be laid low, and all Haughtiness ^owed down
in every one, that I the Lord God in you all may be loved, obeyed, and exalted;
who is taking, and will take to me my great Power, to exalt the M^^k upon the
Earth, and reign over all the Pride of the Children of Men, (that is exalted
above my Witness in their Conscience) that so my Sons may be brought from far,
and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth, in the Sight of all People, whom I
will make to confess, in Subjection to my Power, That you are the beloved
People of the most high God, and of the righteous Seed which the lord has
blessed; and not any Weapon formed against you shall prosper, (...) come to
naught, which will be hastened for your Comforts, and certainly performed
according to what is here declared, to your eternal Joy; and you shall
assuredly know the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The Word of the Lord before expressed, came to me in the Prisonhouse in
Warwick, the 13th Day of the first Month, 1664, which constrained me to send it
to be read amongst you, dear, faithful, and suffering People of the Almighty
God, in whom I remain your Brother and Companion in Tribulation and Kingdom of
Patience in the Lord Jesus Christ.

W. D.


Whilst Persecution was on foot in England, there was some Division among those
called Quakers, The Rise and Progress of Wilkinson and Story's Separation, the
pretended Occasion, and of whom it chiefly consisted.
which had its Rise some Years before. Those who first appeared to head it,
were John Wilkinson and John Story, Preachers among them, who showed themselves
discontented against G. F. chiefly about the Management of Church Affairs,
because Things went not always so as they would have it: And since G. F. had
been the first Institutor of good Order amongst his Friends, he was the chief
Object of the Envy of the Male-con^e^ted. And because in the Beginning there
were no such Meetings, or Discipline, and yet they had lived in mutual Peace
and Unity, it was asserted, That such Meetings were needless, and that every
one ought to be guided by the Spirit of God in his own Mind, and not to be
governed by Rules of Man. By which it appeared that they were against the
establishing any Order of Government in the Church. But they were greatly bent
against (...). Women's Meetings, who as Deaconesses met together at set Times,
to provide for poor Families, and sick People that were in want. It is true, it
was objected that in those Meetings sometimes was debated what was not so
convenient in every respect, because young Women were admitted there also, to
see and learn how Matters were treated by the g^ave and ancient Women: And what
if some had been a little too forward to meddle with Affairs properly belonging
to the Men? the creepi^g in of a wrong Use can by no Means justify the
abrogating what is really ^^eful; and that honest and ancient Women took Care
for the poor and indigent Members of the Church was indeed laudable. But as in
great Communities generally are sound some Men who love to govern, without
being fit for it; so some of these soon adhered to Wilkinson and Story, besides
several others, who in Time of Persecution, rather would have met privately,
than come into public Meetings, and so be expose'd to the Fury of their
Enemies; and such also as rather would pay Tithes to the Priests, etc. than
suffer Spoil or Imprisonment for the Refusal thereof.

Hence rose a Schism or Rent first in the North of England, Appeared first in
the North of England.
and some who went under the Denomination of Separatists, began to keep
Meetings by themselves, and so to leave their former Friends, though they
pretended to agree with them in Matter of Doctrine. To these Separatists
afterward resorted such as were not strict Livers, and therefore were
unwilling to submit to Church Discipline: For this was now become the common
Saying of these People, That every one having received a Measure of the Spirit
of God, ought to regard that Leader, without minding any Rules prescribed by
others.

In Process of Time William Rogers and Thomas Crisp appeared in public Print
against their quondam Brethren, Afterward W. Rogers and T. Crisp print against
their former Brethren.
and upbraided them with every imprudent Behavior, or inconsiderate Act;
besides that, on mere Hearsay they published a multitude of Untruths, and
decry'd even lawful Things; an Instance of which appeared when Rogers
scornfully reviled them in paultry Verses, That some Sustenance had been given
from the public Cash to indigent Preachers, who, to shun the Neglect of their
public Ministry, could not duly mind their private Affairs; though this Supply
never exceeded necessary Provision. To this it was answered, That if it pleased
God to call to his Ministry Persons of mean Estate, the Church was not
warranted to hinder it, and let such suffer Want; since he, as Sovereign of the
Universe, could not be limited in the Distribution of his Gifts. Rogers would
continually appeal to the primitive Times, and to give some Color to what they
asserted, he and his Adherents published a Paper, with Edward Burroughs's Name
to it, And father on E Buroughs what G. Whitehead gives good Proof was writ by
J. Perrot. The Separation spreads, and C. Harris appears among them.
who had been dead above twenty Years; but G. Whitehead and others gave good
Proofs, that that Apostate John Perrot had been the Author of that so much
applauded Paper. At length this Rent appeared also in London, where likewise
Malcontents were not wanting, who not being strictly conscientious, would
rather live without any Restraint; and even some that were honest, were by fair
Words persuaded to Separation; for among the Separatists one Charles Harris
preached, who was pretty fluent in Speech, and not unelegant in his
Expressions, as I have seen and heard my self. But how specious soever the
Pretense of these Separatists was, and whatever Endeavors were made, yet they
were not able to continue and subsist firmly; At length they differ and come to
nothing.
but at length they decayed, and vanished as Snow in the Fields; for the best
among them came in Time to see that they had been deceived; and the less honest
grew worse; for among themselves they were not free from Division: And though
George Keith (whose Apostasy will be mentioned in the Sequel) endeavored to
skulk among them, yet he got no Adherents there. I have often wondered how
Wilkinson, Harris, and Keith (all which I have known) could apostatize to such
a Degree as they did: But yet this is not so exceeding strange as some may
think it to be; for we find on Record, that even in the primitive apostolical
Church was an Alexander the Copper-smith, and an Hymenous and Philetus, who
made Shipwreck of the Faith, and caused a Rent, insomuch that it is said, Their
Words would eat as did a Canker. 2 Timothy ii 17.


At London the Meetings this Year were often disturbed; but the Magistrates
themselves seemed not to approve it, for they clearly saw there was nothing to
be scared from the Quakers, and yet they were loath to give Offense to the
Court-party which then prevailed. G. F. plucked down at Gra. Chapter Str. and let
go; and again from the Savoy.
G. F. coming once to the Meeting in Grace Church Street, and being kept out by
the Constables, stood up in the Court and preached to the People; but a
Constable plucked him down, and afterward let him go free. At another Time
having been in the Meeting at the Savoy, and being brought to a Justice, there
was one Gabriel S^ad, an Informer, who was so full of impertinent Talk, that
the Justice grew angry; and yet he thought himself bound to do something; and
so asked G. F. If he did not preach in the Meeting? To which he warily
answered, That he did confess what Christ had done for his Soul, and did praise
God; and that he thought he might have done that in the Streets, and in all
Places; and this he was not ashamed to confess, neither was this contrary to
the Liturgy of the Church of England. To this the Justice said, The Laws were
against such Meetings as were contrary to the Church of England; and as length
spoke of sending G. F. to Newgate, and said, He would make a Mittimus after he
had dined: But the Constable coming then, the Justice bid him come again after
the Evening Service; which the Constable doing, the Justice told him, He might
let G.F. go: And next Day he signified to one of G. F's Friends, that by some
Accident he had been disappointed of fining him.

Thus G. F. was freed, A Plot said to be ^nfoot against the King and D. of Y.
headed by the Duke of M. on which ensued the Deaths of Earl of E. and Lord R.
and was now much at London, where a Plot was said to be on foot against the
King and the Duke of York, of which the Duke of Monmouth was said to be the
Head. This Design, whatever it was, cost the Lives of several Persons, among
whom was the Earl of Essex, who unfortunately perished in the Tower, and the
Lord Russel, who was fain to stoop to the Axe.

Now since Persecution continued with some Color of Justice, those called
Quakers drew up the following Address to the King.

To the KING.
The Humble ADDRESS of the People commonly called QUAKERS.
O KING,
THE King of Kings, An Address to the King.
and Lord of the whole Earth incline thy Heart to that which is just and
merciful in his Sight, and to make such clear and equal Distinctions, as that
the Innocent may not suffer in any Case for the Guilty; that it may ever
redound to thy Honor and Safety, and the peaceable Subjects Comfort.

Our Innocence, Love, and good Will to thy Person and Government that God has
committed to thee, encourage us in this our humble Address and Application.

Whereas the late Plot against the King, and his Brother the Duke of York, etc.
is made an Occasion to persecute many of us, for our religious Meetings more
severely than formerly, we do solemnly declare, that it is known to the divine
Majesty, and the all-seeing Wisdom whereby Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice, that our manifold, extreme, and continued Sufferings, being only on a
religious Account, have not been the least Motive or Provocation to us to
desire, much less to contrive the least Hurt, either to thy Person or
Government, or to the Person of thy Brother the Duke of York, etc. we are clear
in the Sight of God, Angels, and Men, from all hellish Plots, and traitorous
Conspiracies, and from all murderous Designs and Undertakings against the King,
his Brother, or any Person on Earth whatsoever, being Works of the Devil and
Darkness; having contrariwise learned of Christ Jesus our Lord, by his Light
and Grace in our Hearts, not so much as by Force to defend, much less avenge
our selves from the Injuries done us, but to commit the Cause to him that
judges righteously, as peaceable Followers of our Savior and Redeemer in his
patient Example and Sufferings, who is the Prince of Peace.

O King, we do farther declare, that God Almighty has taught and engaged us to
acknowledge, and actually obey Magistracy (as his Ordinance) in all Things, not
repugnant to his Law and Light in our Consciences, (which is certainly
agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and admits not of any immoral or injurious
Actions) and that even where, through Tenderness of Conscience we cannot conform,
it is our Duty patiently to suffer, and not to rebel, nor seek Revenge; and we
hope, by his divine Grace, ever to demean our selves, as peaceable minded
Christians, in our Conversations under the civil Government; and as we do
sincerely, and with Reverence, confess to divine Power and Providence in thy
Restoration and Preservation of thy Person hitherto, so our Prayers and
Supplications are to the Almighty for thy future Safety and Peace, and that in
a thankful Remembrance of God's great Mercies toward thee, thou may be
thereby obliged to show Mercy, and relieve the Oppressed from under these
unmerited Afflictions and Persecutions, which a great Number of us thy
peaceable Subjects do even at this Day suffer under in our Persons and Estates,
not only by Laws made against, but also by Laws never intended against us; and
which is more extreme, diverse Severities of late have been, and still are
inflicted, for which no Color or Pretense of Law has been, or can be
alleged, several Jails being so filled, as that they want Air, and many
innocent Persons held under extreme Distress, without Regard to Age Sex, or
Condition, to the Loss of some Lives already, and apparent Hazard of many more;
if not to the endangering Infection in diverse Cities and Places in this Nation;
and so many Houses, Shops, Barns, and Fields ransacked and swept of Goods, Corn
and Cattle, tending also to the great Discouragement of Trade and Husbandry,
and to the impoverishing of a great Number of quiet and industrious People, and
that for no other Cause, but for their religious Worship, and Exercise of their
tender Consciences toward Almighty God that made them, who is the sovereign
Lord of all, and King in Men's Consciences.

Therefore we humbly entreat thee, O King, in Princely Justice, Christian
Charity and Compassion, to open our Prison-doors, and take off our Bonds, where
the Innocent and Oppressed in thy Land, that fear God, and (in Conversation)
truly honor the King; and suffer not the Ruin of such as are quiet in the
Land, the Widow and the Fatherless for their peaceable Consciences, to lie at
the Door of a Prince, professing the tender and compassionate Religion of
Christ.

This Address was presented to the King at Windsor, on the 8th of the Month
called August, in this Year, by George Whitehead, Alexander Parker, Gilbert
Latey, and Francis Comfield, in Behalf of themselves and their Friends; and it
was read to him and his Brother the Duke of York, then present with some
others; With small Effect.
but no considerable Ease followed: King Charles it seems was not to be the
Instrument thereof: And though that Prince by Nature was not hard-hearted, yet
there were some that could persuade him to Severity.

I find about this Time that one Gabriel Shad, Shad an Informer found guilty of
Felony, escapes the Gallows, but is burnt in the Hand.
who had made it his Business to serve as Informer against the Quakers, and who
had lately informed also against G. F. as has been said; being confined in
Newgate at London, for stealing Goods from one William Leman, to the Value of
three hundred Pounds, had been found guilty of Felony at the Old Baily, but he
had such Friends, that he was freed from the Gallows, and having obtained the
Benefit of the Clergy, was discharged with being burnt in the Hand. Such
infamous Persons were the Informers, for honest People scorned to meddle with
such a base and abominable Work.

This Year the Princess Anne, Princess Anne married to P George.
Daughter of the Duke of York, was married to Prince George. of Denmark. The
Duke of Monmouth having been under Disgrace, came into Favor again; for the
King his Father indeed loved him, though he was loath, in Prejudice of his Brother
the Duke of York, to declare him his legitimate Son, as some great Men wished
he had. But the King persisted in his Declaration, that he never had been
married to Monmouth 's Mother. The King denies he was married to the D. of
Monmouth's Mother.


In the next Year, viz. that of 1684, G. Fox and Alexander Parker came into
Holland, to visit their Friends there; and after some Stay they returned to
their native Country,

In this Year died Thomas Stordy of Moorhouse in Cumberland, 1684
a Gentleman who twenty two Years before had been condemned to a Praemunire,
Sufferings and pious End of T. Stordy.
because for Conscience Sake he could not swear, for which, Sheriff John
Lowther seized his Estate, real and Personal for the King's Use, and kept him
Prisoner eleven or twelve Years, till discharged by the King's Declaration in
1672 or 73, and his real Estate restored. After which he suffered under great
Fines and Spoil for Meeting, and after that, was prosecuted on the Act for 20
l. a Month for not coming to their Worship; on which he continued Prisoner
several Years till he died in December, having been made willing rather to lose
all for Christ's-sake, than to be disobedient to him. He resigns an
Impropriation of 10 l. per Annum.
This Thomas Stordy released to the Landowners and their Heirs for ever, an
Impropriation of 10 l. per Annum, which descended to him from his Father and
Grandfather, making Conscience as well of receiving as paying Tithes. Not long
before his Decease, he exhorted those that were come to visit him, to
Faithfulness; for, said he, If ye continue faithful to the Lord whilst ye live
in this World, he will reward you, as now he rewards me, with his sweet
Peace. Thus piously Thomas Stordy departed this Life, showing forth that he was
really a Gentleman, whose chiefest Nobility consisted in Virtue, I could
mention some other Instances or Cases of Persecution; but to make the more
Speed toward a Conclusion, I will not detain my Reader with the Relation thereof.

Thomas Briggs, The Death of T. Briggs one of the first Preachers among the
Quakers.
who also had suffered very much, having been one of the first Preachers among
the Quakers, and being become old and weak, about this Time writ a Letter to G.
F. in which he signified his Perseverance in Godliness; and not long after,
viz. about the Beginning of the Year 1685, he died.

It was about this Time also that the King was seized with such violent Fits of
Convulsion, 1685
that he died in the Month called February. The Death of King Cha. II. who is
succeeded by his Broher Jam. II.
The Throne by his Death being become vacant, was filled again by his Brother
James II. who succeeding him, was the same Day proclaimed King. Now I cannot but
take Notice, that Persecution went on to the Death of King Charles, and
continued hot to that very Instant. And he being gone off the Stage, many
seemed to fear that worse Times were at Hand, and that burning or Heretics
would come in Vogue again, as in the former Age: Yet some there were who
imagined that Ease was like to follow; and that they guessed not amiss, Time
showed.

King James had not been long at the Helm of the Government, but the Dissenters
applied to him for Liberty of Worship, and among these were also the Quakers,
who made the following Petition.

To the KING and both Houses of PARLIAMENT, the suffering Condition of the
peaceable People called QUAKERS, only for tender Conscience toward Almighty
God, humbly presented.
Showing, Quakers Petition to the King, etc.
That of late above One Thousand Five Hundred of the said People (both Men and
Women) having been detained Prisoners in England, and Part of them in Wales
(some of which being since discharged by the Judges, and others freed by Death,
through their long and tedious Imprisonment) there are now remaining (according
to late Accounts) about One Thousand, three Hundred, Eighty and Three, above
Two Hundred of them Women. Many under Sentence of Praemunire, (both Men and
Women) and more than Three Hundred near it; not for denying the Duty, or
refusing the Substance of Allegiance it self, but only because they dare not
Swear: Many on Writs of Excommunication, and Fines for the King, and upon the
Act for Banishment: Besides above Three Hundred and Twenty have died in Prison
and Prisoners since the Year 1660, near One Hundred whereof, by means of this
long Imprisonment (as it is judged) since the Account delivered to the late King
and Parliament, in 1680; thereby making Widows and Fatherless, and leaving them
in Distress and Sorrow: The two last hard Winters Restraint, and the close
Confinement of great Numbers in diverse Jails, unavoidably tending toward their
Destruction, their Healths being evidently impaired thereby.

And here in London, the Jail of Newgate has been from Time to Time crowded,
within these two Years, (sometimes near Twenty in one Room) to the Prejudice of
their Health; and several poor innocent Tradesmen, of late, have been so
suffocated by the Closeness of the Prison, that they have been taken out sick
of a Malignant Fever, and died in a few Days after.

Besides these long continued and destructive Hardships upon the Persons of Men
and Women as aforesaid, great Violences, outrageous Distresses, and woeful
Havoc and Spoil have been, and still are frequently made upon our Goods and
Estates, both in and about this City of London, and other Parts of this Nation,
by a Company of idle, extravagant and merciless Informers, and their
Prosecutions upon the Conventicle-Act, many being convicted and fined,
unsummoned, and unheard in their own Defense. As also on Qui Tam Writs, at the
Suit of Informers (who prosecute for one third Part for themselves) and on
other Processes, for twenty Pound a Mouth, and two Thirds of Estates, seized
for the King; all tending to the Ruin of Trade, Husbandry, and Farmers, and the
i^poverishing of many industrious Families, without Compassion shown to Widows,
Fatherless, or Desolate: To some, not a Bed left to rest upon; to others, no
Cattle to till their Ground, nor Corn for Bread or Seed, nor Tools to work
withal: The said Informers and Sheriffs Bailiffs in some Places being
outrageous and excessive in their Distresses and Seizures, breaking into
Houses, and making great Waste and Spoil. And all these and other Severities
done against us by them, under Pretense of serving the King and the Church,
thereby to force us to a Conformity, without inward Conviction or Satisfaction
of our tender Consciences, wherein our Peace with God is concerned, which we
are very tender of.

The Statutes on which we, the said People suffer Imprisonment, Distress, and
Spoil, are as follows:

The 5th of Eliz. Chap. 23. De Excommunicato Capiendo.

The 23d of Eliz. chapter 1. for twenty Pound per Mouth.

The 29th of Eliz. chapter 6. for Continuation.

The 35th of Eliz. chapter 1. for Abjuring the Realm, on Pain of Death.

The 1st of Eliz. chapter 2. for twelve Pence a Sunday.

The 3d of K. James I. chapter 4. for Praemunire, Imprisonment during Life, and
Estates confiscated.

The 13th and 14th of K. Charles II. against Quakers, etc. Transportation.

The 22d of K. Charles II. chapter 1. against Seditious Conventicles.

The 17th of K. Charles II. chapter 2. against Non-conformists.

The 27th of Hen. VIII. chapter 20. some few suffer thereupon.

Upon Indictments at Common Law, pretended and framed against out peaceable
Religious Assemblies, for Riots, Routs, Breach of the Peace, etc. Many, both
Men and Women, thereupon fined, imprisoned, and detained for Non-payment, some
till Death. Instance, the City of Bristol, what a great Number have been these
diverse Years straightly confined and crowded in jail, mostly above One Hundred on
such Pretense, about Seventy of them Women, many aged. And in the City of
Norwich, in the Years 1682, and 83, about Seventy kept in hol^, Forty-five
where of in Holes and Dungeons, for many Weeks together, and great Hardships
have been, and are in other Places. So that such our peaceable Meetings are
sometimes fined on the Conventicle-Act, as for a Religious Exercise, and other
Times at Common Law, as Riotous, Routous, etc. when nothing of that Nature
could ever be proved against them, there being nothing of Violence or Injury
either done, threatened, or intended against the Person or Property of any other
whatsoever.

The during and tedious Imprisonments are chiefly on the Writs De Excommunicato
Capiendo, upon the Judgment of Pr^munire, and upon Fines, said to be for the
King.

The great Spoil and excessive Distresses and Seizures, are chiefly upon the
Conventicle-Act, and for Twenty Pound a Month, Two Thirds of Estates, and on
Qui Tam Writs. In some Counties, diverse have suffered by Seizures and
Distresses above eight Years last past, and Writs issued out for farther
Seizures in several Counties, for twenty Pounds a Month, amounting to the Value
of many Thousands of Pounds, sometimes seizing for eleven Months at once, and
making Sale of all Goods and Chattels, within Doors and without, both of
Houshold-Goods, Beds, Shop-Goods, Movables, Cattle, etc. and Prosecution
hereupon still continued, and in diverse Counties much increased. So that
several, who have long employed some Hundreds of poor Families in Manufacture,
and paid considerable Taxes to the King, are greatly disabled from both, by
these Writs and Seizures, as well as by long Imprisonments. So many
Serge-makers of Plymouth, as kept above Five Hundred poor People at work,
disabled by Imprisonment: Many in the County of Suffolk, under a long
Imprisonment, sentenced to a Praemunire, one whereof employed at least Two
Hundred poor People in the Woollen Manufacture, when at Liberty. Omitting other
Instances, that we may not seem too tedious, these may evince how destructive
such Severities are to Trade and Industry, and ruinous to many poor Families.

On the Conventicle-Act, within these two Years last past, many in and about
this City of London have been extremely oppressed, impaired, and spoiled in
their Estates and Trades, upon numerous Convictions and Warrants made against
them in their Absence, upon the Credit of Informations sworn by concealed
Informers, diverse of them impudent Women, who swear for their Profit in Part of
the Fines and Seizures, their Husbands being Prisoners for Debt, through their
own Extravagancies. The Warrants commonly made to break open and enter Houses,
which is done with Rigor and great Spoil, not sparing Widows, Fatherless, or
poor Families, who are sustained by their daily Care and Industry, not leaving
them a Bed to rest upon. The Fines upon one Justice's Warrants amounting to
many Hundreds of Pounds; frequently Ten Pounds a Warrant, and two Warrants at
once for Twenty Pounds, executed upon one Person; and three Warrants at once
from another Justice, for Sixty Pounds upon another Person, and all his Goods
carried away in about ten Cart-loads; and five Warrants at once for Fifty
Pounds upon another, etc. besides what we have suffered by others in the like
Kind. And in this destructive Course the Informers have Encouragement, and are
suffered still to go on, to the ruining many Families in their Trades and
Livelihoods; diverse so discouraged and disabled, that they are forced to give
over their Shops and Trades.

These Informers being accepted for credible Witnesses, yet Parties, swearing
for their own Profit and Gain, in the Absence of the Persons prosecuted: This
we think is very hard and undue Proceeding, and not consistent with common Law
or Justice.

As also convicting and fining us upon their Depositions, unsummon'd and
unheard in our own Defense, and so keeping us ignorant of our Accusers, (unless
upon Traverse of our Appeals.) This Procedure appears contrary to the Law Dent.
xix. 17, 18. John vii. 11. Prove. xxvi. 2. Job xxix. 16, 1^ Gen iii. 8. Judges
xix. 30.
of God, common Justice, and Equity, and to the Law and Justice of the ancient
Romans, Acts xxv. 5, 7, 8, 10, 16.
and of Nations.

And although it has been openly manifested, upon Trial of Appeals, at several
Quarter Sessions, both for Middlesex and London, and other Places, that the
Depositions of diverse Informers have been false in Fact, yet the great Trouble
and Charge in the Traverse of Appeals, and the great Encouragement Informers
have from Him who grants the most Warrants, has been a Discouragement to many
from seeking such difficult Remedy, considering also the treble Costs against
the Appellant, in Case he succeeds not, or is not acquitted upon Trial; whereas
there is no Costs nor Restitution awarded nor given against the Informers, for
unjust Prosecution. Some also having refused to grant Appeals, others denied
Copies of Warrants to prevent Appeals: Which, whether this be equal or just,
pray consider, ye that are wise and judicious Men: And whether it be for the
King's Honor, and the People's Interest, that idle, drunken, extravagant
Informers should either be encouraged or suffered to go on thus to ruin Trade,
Husbandry, and Families, or to command and threaten Justices of Peace, with the
Forfeiture of an hundred Pounds, if they do not make Convictions, and issue out
Warrants upon their bare Informations, and uncertain Depositions, frequently in
the Absence of the Accused.

And Lastly, One third Part of the Fines being assigned to the King, he can
only remit that; but the Informers and Poor being assigned two third Parts,
seems not to allow him to remit them, how much Cause soever may appear to him,
to extend his Favor in that Case. Is not this against the King's Prerogative,
to restrain his Sovereign Clemency? And how far it reflects upon the
Government, and is scandalous thereto, for beggarly rude Informers (some of
them confident Women) not only to command, threaten, and disquiet Justices,
Peace-Officers. etc. but to destroy the King's honest, industrious, and
peaceable Subjects, in their Properties and Estates, is worthy of your serious
Considerations; And whether the said Conventicle-Act ought not therefore justly
to be repealed? A noted Instance of the like Case, we have, concerning the
Statute of the II Hen. VII. chapter 3. (for determining certain Offenses and
Contempts, only upon Informers Prosecutions) being repealed in the first Year
of K. Hen. VIII. chapter 6. though that, in some Respects, was more tolerable than
this.

Be pleased to make our Case your own, and do to us, as you would be done unto;
as you would not be oppressed or destroyed in your Persons or Estates, nor have
your Properties invaded, and Posterities ruined for serving and worshipping
Almighty God (that made all Mankind) according to your Persuasions and
Consciences, but would, no doubt, enjoy the Liberty thereof: So we entreat you
to allow the same Liberty to tender Consciences, that live peaceably under the
Government, as you would enjoy your selves; and to disannul the said
Conventicle-Act, and to stop these devouring Informers, and also take away all
sanguinary Laws, corporal and pecuniary Punishments, meetly on the Score of
Religion and Conscience; and let not the Ruin and Cry of the Widow, Fatherless,
and innocent Families lie upon this Nation, nor at your Door, who have not only
a great Trust reposed in you for the Prosperity and Good of the whole Nation,
but also do profess Christianity, and the tender Religion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And notwithstanding all these long sustained Extremities, we, the said
suffering People, do solemnly profess and declare in the Sight of the
All-seeing God, who is the Searcher of Hearts, That as we have never been found
in any seditious or treasonable Designs, (they being wholly contrary to our
Christian Principle and Profession) so we have nothing but good Will, and true
christian Affection to the King and Government, sincerely desiring His and Your
Safety, Prosperity and Concurrence in Mercy and Truth, for the Good of the
whole Kingdom.

Having thus given you, in short, the general State of our Suffering Case, in
Matter of Fact, without Personal Reflection, We, in Christian Humility, and for
Christ's-sake, entreat that you will tenderly and charitably consider of the
Premises, and find out some effectual Expedient or Way for our Relief from
Prisons, Spoil, and Ruin.

The following Application was likewise presented.

To King JAMES the Second,
The Humble Application of the People called QUAKERS.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God (by whom Kings reign) to take hence the
late King Charles the Second, and to preserve Thee peaceably to succeed, We thy
Subjects heartily desire that the Giver of all good and perfect Gifts, may
please to endue Thee with Wisdom and Mercy in the Use of thy great Power, to
his Glory, the King's Honor, and the Kingdom's Good: And it being our sincere
Resolution, according to our peaceable Principles and Conversation, (by the
Assistance of Almighty God) to live peaceably and honestly, as becomes true and
faithful Subjects under the King's Government, and a conscientious People, that
truly fear and serve God, We do humbly hope that the King's Tenderness will
appear and extend, with his Power to express the same; recommending to his
Princely Clemency the Case of our present suffering Friends hereunto annexed.

To the KING.
The distressed CASE and Request of the Suffering People commonly called
QUAKERS humbly presented.
Showing,
THat according to Accounts lately given, above fourteen hundred of the said
People, both Men and Women, are continued Prisoners in England and Wales, only
for tender Conscience toward Almighty God that made them: Many under Sentence
of Praemunire, and many near it, not for refusing the Duty or Substance of
Allegiance it self, but only because they dare not swear: Others under Fines
upon the Act of Banishment, many on Writs of Excommunication: Besides some
Hundreds have died Prisoners, many by means of this long Imprisonment since the
Year 1680, (as it is judged) thereby making Widows and Fatherless, and leaving
poor innocent Families in Distress and Sorrow, these two hard Winters
Confinement, tending also to the Destruction of many in cold Holes and Jails,
their Healths being greatly impaired thereby; besides the Violence and woeful
Spoil made by merciless Informers on the Conventicle-Act, upon many, Convicted,
Unsummoned and Unheard in their own Defense, both in City and Country, as also
on Qui tam Writs, and other Process, on twenty Pounds a Month, and two Thirds
of Estates seized for the King, all tending to the Ruin of Trade, Husbandry,
and industrious Families; to some not a Bed left; to others no Cattle to Till
their Ground, or give them Milk; nor Corn for Bread or Seed; nor Tools to work
withal. And also these and other Severities done under Pretense of serving the
King and Church, thereby to force us to violate our Consciences, and
consequently to destroy our Souls, which we are very tender of, as we are of
our Peace with God, and our own Consciences, though accounted as Sheep for the
Slaughter: And notwithstanding all these long-sustained Extremities, we the
said People do solemnly profess and declare in the Sight of the Heart-Searcher,
that we have nothing but Good Will and true Affection to the King, praying for
his Safety, and the Kingdom's Peace. We have never been found in any Seditious
or Treasonable Designs, as being wholly contrary to our Christian Principles
and Holy Profession.

And knowing that where the Word of a King is, there is Power, we in Christian
Humility, and for Christ's-sake, entreat, That the King will please to find out
some Expedient for our Relief in these Cases, from Prison, Spoil and Ruin, and
we shall (as in Christian Duty bound) pray God for the King's Welfare in this
World, and his Eternal Happiness in that which is to come.

An Account of the Number of the said Prisoners called Quakers in the several
Counties.
Prisoners.
Bedfordshire 30 Berkshire 37 Bristol 103 Buckinghamshire 19 Cambri^geshire 8
Ely 11 Cheshire 9 Cornwall 32 Cumberland 22 Darbyshire 1 Devonshire 104
Dorsetshire 13 Durham 39 Essex 10 Glocestershire 66 504
Prisoners.
Hertfordshire 18 Herefordshire 1 Huntingtoushire 10 Kent 16 Lancashire 73
Leicestershire 37 Lincolnshire 12 London and Middlesex 66 Norfolk 52
Northampton 59 Nottinghamshire 6 Oxon 17 Shropshire 18 Somersetshire 36
Southampton 15 436
Prisoners.
Staffordshire 1 Suffolk 79 Surrey 29 Sussex 17 Warwickshire 31 Westmorland 5
Wiltshire 34 Worcestershire 15 Yorkshire 279 Wales 30 520 504 436 Sum 1460
Pris.
Delivered to the King the 3d of the first Month called March, 1684-5.

This List, Great Expectation of a Grant for Liberty of Conscience.
with the aforesaid Petition to the King and Parliament, was not altogether
ineffectual: For there was much talk now of Liberty of Conseience; but since
all the Liberty that was enjoyed was only precarious, it could be but little
depended upon; yet many seemed to be in Expectation that some Grant of that
Liberty would be published in Print; and thus it became common Saying, That
Liberty of Conscience was in the press, which being of an equivocal
Signification, sometimes afforded Matter of Sport. But many of the Episcopal
Church were so strongly bent to withold that Liberty from other Protestants,
that there were no ill-grounded Reports, that some in Authority had promised
the King to give their Vote for Liberty of Conscience to the Papists, provided
it was not granted to other Dissenters. Nevertheless the abovesaid Petition of
the Quakers had such Effect, that the King resolved to ease them from the
Burden of their Oppression, by Way of Pardon; for thus far his Power reached:
But the abrogating of Laws could not be done without the Consent of the
Parliament, which grew jealous, that by the Repeal of those Laws, the Papists,
who now had a King of their own Religion, would become too powerful. In the
mean while the King gave forth the following Proclamation.

JAMES, R.

WHereas our most entirely beloved Brother the late King deceased, King's
Proclamation
had signified his Intentions to his Attorneys-General for the pardoning such
of his Subjects who had been Sufferers in the late Rebellion for their Loyalty,
or whose Parents or nearest Relations had been Sufferers in the late Rebellion
for that Cause, or who had themselves testified their Loyalty and Affection to
the Government, and were prosecuted, indicted, or convicted for not taking, or
refusing to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, or one of them, or had
been prosecuted upon any Writ, or any Penalty, or otherwise, in any of the
Courts of Westminster Hall, or many of the Ecclesiastical Courts, for not
coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament.

And whereas the several Persons, whose Names are mentioned in the Schedule
annexed to this our Warrant, have produced unto us Certificates for the Loyalty
and Sufferings of them and their Families:

Now in Pursuance of the said Will of our said most Dear Brother, and in
Consideration of the Sufferings of the said Persons, our Will and Pleasure is,
that you cause all Process and Proceedings, ex officio, as well against the
said Persons mentioned in the said Schedule hereunto annexed, as against all
other Persons as shall hereafter be produced unto you, to be wholly superseded
and stayed; and if any of the said Persons be decreed or pronounced
excommunicated, or have been so certified, or are in Prison upon the Writ De
Excommunicato Capiendo, for any of the Causes aforesaid, our Pleasure is, that
you absolve, and cause such Persons to be absolved, discharged, or set at
Liberty, and that no Process or Proceedings whatsoever be hereafter made in any
Court against any of the said Persons for any Cause beforementioned, until our
Pleasure therein shall be further signified.

Given at our Court at Whitehall this 18th of April, 1685. In the first Year of
our Reign. To all Archbishops and Bishops, to their Chancellors and
Commissioners, and to all Archdeacons and their Officials, and all other
Ordinaries and Persons executing Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. By His Majesty's
Command, SUNDERLAND.

This was the King's first Step toward Liberty of Conscience, as well for
Papists, as other Persons mentioned in the Schedule annexed, which put an
effectual Stop to Persecution, A Stop put to Persecution
and the Power of the Informers was thereby much broken. And since the most of
these were generally base Fellows and profligate Persons, who did not care what
they did, provided they might enrich themselves, they often dealt treacherously
even with the persecuting Justices, who also were eager for having part of the
Prey, and yet by the Artifices of these rapacious Wretches were deprived of it,
Hilton the Informer committed to Newgate by the Recorder Jenner
which some of them now smarted for. Among the rest I find that one John Hilton
was committed to Jail, as may appear from this Warrant of the Recorder.

To the Keeper of Newgate.
REceive into your Custody the Body of John Hilton herewith sent you, being
charged upon Oath before me, for Compounding several Warrants under my Hand and
Seal, for levying of several Sums of Money of Persons convicted for being at
several Conventicles in Kent, London and Middle-sex; and being also indicted
for the same in the several Counties aforesaid, and the Bills found against
him; and also that he the said John Hilton has refused to obey the Right
Honorable Sir Edward Herbert Lord Chief Justice's Warrant. And him safely
keep, until he shall be discharged by due Course of Law. And for so doing this
shall be your Warrant. Dated the 23d of December, 1685.

Tho. Jenner, Recorder.
Let Notice be given to me before he be discharged.



Thus the Informers met with a Stop, Many released from their Imprisonment.
and the persecuted Quakers got some Rest; for Persecution not only ceased, but
many, who for Religion-sake had been several Years kept in Prison, obtained
Liberty by the Favor of a Popish Prince, which they had not been able to get
from his Brother, King Charles the Second. Now many of the fierce Persecutors
came to Shame, some to Poverty, and others to a miserable End, of which no
small Number of Instances might be produced, if I were minded to enlarge;
however I Will mention one or two.

One Edward Davis, The Behavior of E. Davis Keeper of Ivelchester Jayl to J.
Whiting, etc.
who once professed to be a Quaker, but not being sincere, found that Way too
narrow for him, and so left his Friends, which afterward, being become Keeper
of the Jail of Ivelchester in Somersetshire, he vexed most grievously, and from
mere Malice fettered some, saying to John Whiting and another, whom he had
Hand-bolted together, Those Bolts should not be taken off if Lice did eat them
up. And his Comrade Joseph Newberry was but little better; for when somebody
told him, That their Hands did swell with the Irons, he said, He did not care
if their Hearts did swell also. And when one John Dando once asked Davis, What
he thought would become of him when he came to dye? he answered, That he knew
what would become of him then, and therefore he would make the best of his Time
now. Also, that he knew where he went out, and where he must come in again if
ever he was saved; and if he thought he should never return again, he would be
as wicked as he could. Truly a most desperate Saying, just as if the Door of
Mercy always continued open for Man, and the Day of the Visitation of God's
Love never passed over his Head, The miserable Condition of the sord Davis, and
dreadful Death of his Com^^^ J. Newberry
though he persevered in Rebellion. But this Davis came to a most pitiful State,
so that he fell into Poverty, and was himself imprisoned for Debts, of which
more hereafter. And Newberry fell into a sad Condition, being taken with a
severe Palsy, and yet he did not leave off Cursing and Swearing, talking of
the Devil in a dreadful Manner. And by lying long in Bed, the Flesh rotted on
his Back, and he who had formerly said concerning the Hand-bolted Prisoners, He
did not care if their Hearts did swell, got now such a sore Tongue, that it
swelled out of his Mouth, and grew black, and so he died miserably on the tenth
of December. Thus God sometimes punishes the wicked even in this Life. And
though Persecutors come not always to such a miserable End, yet many of these
fell into Poverty, and others were discontented because they saw that those
whom they had cruelly persecuted, now enjoyed an undisturbed Liberty; for the
King who was now on the Throne continued to give Liberty to those that had been
oppressed for Religion.

But before I say more of this, I cannot ^ut mention something of the Design of
the unhappy Duke of Monmouth, who at the Death of his Father King Charles the
Second, was gone to Brussels; and being come from thence into Holland, he was
spurred on so vigorously by some hotheaded Englishmen, that having got Money
and Assistance of Malcontents, he went over to England with three Men of War,
and some Forces, having given forth a Declaration against King James, which
vented a fiery Passion toward that Prince, and was written as I have been
credibly told, D. of Monmouth, etc. lands in England, is attainted, defeated,
taken and beheaded.
by the violent Robert Ferguson. Monmouth being landed with his Forces in the
West of England near Lime, and afterward routed by the King's Troops, was
taken Prisoner by the Perfidiousness of a certain Lord, who thereby obtained
Pardon for himself; but Ferguson escaped by a cunning Artifice, crying along
the R^^d where he came galloping on Horseback, Ferguson escapes by a Wile.
The Rebels are routed, the Rebels are routed, just as if he had been a Courier
sent on purpose to Court and elsewhere. But thus he escaped, and being come
again into Holland, he told this crafty Trick to his Acquaintance. Monmouth
having been declared guilty of High Treason by a Bill of Attainder, as soon as
the News came of his Design, was, but two or three Days after his Arrival at
London, beheaded. I count it not unworthy to be mentioned, that he undauntedly
received the News of the Dead-warrant's being come, and on the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, he told the Bishops that accompanied him, Occasional Expressions of
the Duke at his Execution, with some other Passages.
If I had no true Repentance, I should not be so free from the Fear of Death.
And when it was objected, that he ought not to rely too much on that, since
that might be the Effect of natural Courage, he said, No, I don't ascribe this
to my Nature; for naturally I am more fearful than others, but now I am freed
of Fear; because I feel something in me, which gives me Assurance that I shall
go to God. The Executioner gave him several Strokes with the Ax, before the
Head was severed from the Body; and some Ecclesiastics afterward said, He
died an Enthusiast: For not showing himself very ready to comply with their
Service, and his saying, That something within him assured him that he should
go to God, seemed to them an Enthusiastical Tenet. But whatever it was, yet it
seems very probable to me, that he was a true Penitent, and so died in Peace;
for though I cannot but disapprove his Design, yet by true Repentance he might not
only have obtained Forgiveness of God, but also have had a full Assurance of it.

The Earl of Argyle, The E. of Argile has the same Lot.
who rebelled in Scotland against King James, had no better Lot; but I will not
detain my Reader therewith, neither with a Relation of the dismal Execution of
many, Dismal Executions by the in-famous L. G. Justice Jefferies, afterward L.
Chancellor.
who having been found guilty of High Treason, either for actual Rebellion, or
for having been A betters of Monmouth, were sentenced to Death by the infamous
Jefferies, who then was Lord Chief Justice, and afterward Chancellor; the
Fierceness or Cruelty of this Judge being such, that some lost their Lives only
for having given some Hay or Victuals to Monmouth's Soldiers. But this not
being within my Circuit, I Will pass it by, and go over to the Year 1686. 1686


Therefore leaving England, I Will take a Turn to Embden in (...), where a small
Company of those called Quakers had been under a severe Persecution for several
Years, The Magistrates of Emden having seen and settle Mischief of Persecution,
send to M. van Loar to invite Quakers to come and reside among them, which she
accordingly communicated.
as I have hinted before. But the Magistrates having persecuted, by the
Instigation of their Preaches, the Citizens began to be displeased with it. And
since the Protestants in France were now persecuted violently, and a Popish
Prince had mounted the English Throne, those at Embden grew more inclined to
Moderation. Probably the Decay of Trade also contributed a little to this
Change; for it appeared that the Magistrates were for getting more Inhabitants
into their Town, though they should be Quakers; and this was counted a Matter of
such Moment, that the Common Council deliberated on the Subject; and two of the
Members of that Board, viz. Polman and Bon^uyren, were sent to Magdalena van
Loar, an Inhabitant of Embden, desiring her to write to England and Holland,
That the Magistrates of the City had resolved to give Liberty to the People
called Quakers, to live, trade, and traffic there; which Grant they proffered
to confirm with the City-Seal. According to their Desire, Notice was given to
those of that Persuasion at Amsterdam, from whence an Answer being returned to
the said Magdalena van Loar, she gave it to the Counselor Polman, and he
delivered it to the Senate. After some Deliberation, the Magistrates with the
Council of Forty, and the Ecclesiastic Court met together, and came to a
Resolution, of which a Copy was sent to Amsterdam. In this Writing were
mentioned some Conditions on which the Magistrates at Embden were willing to
grant Liberty to the Quakers to live in their City. But those of that Society
at Amsterdam, having weighed and duly considered the Thing, found that the
Proposal contained some Expressions, which by others, who afterward might come
to the Helm, and not be so moderate as these at present, might be used as
Snares against the Quakers, if they now should enter upon such Terms as were
prescribed. Therefore it was thought more safe not to enter into any
Engagement, whereby great Inconvenience might afterward attend their Friends,
when the Magistracy came to be in other Hando. Yet the Conclusion was, to
acknowledge the good Intention of the Magistrates of Embden, by drawing up the
following Letter, and sending it to them.

To the Lords Burghermasters, Counselors and Rulers of the City of EMBDEN.
THese are to acquaint you with due Respect, And Friends in Holland made this
return to them.
that a Scheme or Plan of yours, dated the 16-26 February, 1686, is come to our
Hands, which having been perused by us, we have thought it convenient in the
Fear of the Lord, to send you the following Answer. First, we thank God
Almighty for the Ease and Liberty which our Friends at present enjoy under your
Government, and are like to enjoy in the future. And, Secondly, We cannot but
acknowledge very acceptably your Clemency and Meekness, which ye show by taking
Notice of the State of a despised and oppressed People, who because of their
Way and Worship, differing from the many Ways in the World, are gainsayed every
where. And therefore it is that we are the more stirred up in our Minds to pray
servently to the Lord God for your Peace and Prosperity, and the Continuance of
your good Resolution; that so all those who serve the Lord in Uprightness of
Heart may lead a peaceable and godly Life among you, by showing forth the
Fruits of true Christianity in Truth, Sincerity, and Righteousness. Now as to
what ye have been pleased to declare, that ye were willing to confirm the
aforesaid your good Resolution by a public Act, we let you know, that we are
so well satisfied with your Word and Oral Declaration concerning the
aforementioned Thing, that this is more to us than any thing we could further
desire, as knowing that good Men think themselves bound by their good Words to
perform what is good. And since ye are sensible on what Ground ye came to the
aforesaid Resolution, and declared yourselves thus, we doubt not but the same
Persuasion and Reason continuing with you, will prove a more strong Engagement
to you to perform the same, than any outward Seal can be. And in that
Engagement we are willing to acquiesce, and should not have mentioned any
other, unless some among you, as we have been informed, first had made mention
thereof. And as to what ye demand of us, we declare in the Nakedness and
Simplicity of our Hearts, that in Regard of our Temporal Conversation and
Deportment, we desire no further Protection, than when we deal righteously to
all, and walk according to that Golden Rule, That we do unto all Men, what we
desire should be done to us. And concerning our Religion and Worship, which we
believe we owe to Almighty God, it is thus: That since it differs from other
Persuasions, it makes us obnoxious not only to the Mockings and Revilings of
ignorant People, but exposes us also to the Malice and Envy of many, who hate
us without a just Cause; and therefore it is that we stand in need of your
favorable Interpretation, and your best Construction of what we do, and what
we leave undone. And if we should err in those Matters, we shall be the
greatest Losers by it; and if Truth be on our Side, then our Adversaries shall
not be able to prevail; for Truth is the strongest, and it is not good for any
to fight against it. Howsoever then it may be with us in this Matter, yet we
hope that ye will be pleased, if we behave our selves peaceable and honest
toward you and all Men, to let us be Partakers with our peaceable Neighbors
of your general Protection. And though ye might please to give us a public Act
of your aforesaid Resolution, yet we clearly foresee, that it would be hardly
possible to use such Expressions, that our Enemies, by some wresting or other
of the Words, or a wrong Interpretation of the Expressions contained therein,
should not be able to make us steemed guilty of Transgression, and so find
Matter against us. And therefore we think it very safe to rely on your Word,
and good Resolution, in which it has pleased you to declare, that we shall
enjoy Liberty to live and trade in your City, provided we pay Custom and Taxes
which other Citizens are subject to; and that then we shall be at Liberty to
meet together to worship God in such a Way as he has convinced us we ought to
do, and to call upon him, and to exhort one another to Love and good Works, and
a Christian Conversation. And on your Behalf it will tend to the Praise of the
Magistrates, that ye favor us in this. And it will also be to the promoting of
God's Glory; and will oblige us to pray for you, that the Lord God may be
pleased to preserve you, and to make you continue in such a good, wholesome,
and well-grounded Resolution. We are and rest,

Your True Friends and Wellwishers, Barent van Tongeren, William Sewel, Jacob
Claus. Stephen Crisp. John Roeloss, John Claus, Peter Hendriksz.

Amsterdam, the 9 -- 19 of the 3d Month, alias March, 1686.

In answer to this, the Senate sent the following Resolution to the Subscribers
of the aforesaid Letter, being, as appears by the Contents, the Decree of the
Senate, so as it was entered into their Records, of which the Authentic Copy,
signed by the City's Secretary, is in my Custody.

Lunae 15-25 Martii, 1686.
REceived a Letter the 12-22d Instant, The Senate of Emden's Answer.
written at Amsterdam the 9-19th of the same Month, and signed by Barent van
Tongeren, William Sewel, Jacob Claus, Stephen Crisp, John Roeloss, John Claus,
Peter Hendriksz, in answer to our Resolution of the 16-26th of February last,
with Thanks for the promised Admission and Protection of this City, in their
free Trade, and the Exercise of their Religion, without offending any;
signifying thereby also, that they will be content without an Act under our
Seal, and willing to rely on our Words. This having been under Deliberation, it
was thought meet, and resolved, That our Word shall effectually be kept to the
Rescribers, and all others of their Persuasion, and that the promised
Protection shall be really performed.

Ad Mandatum Senatus Speciale, O. Hillings, Secr.


Thus it pleased the Senate of Embden, to give to those called Quakers, Liberty
to dwell among them, with the free Exercise of their Religion. (...) Andrews,
etc. desire this may be communicated to England.
Some Time after, it happened that the Burghermaster Andrews coming to the
House of Magdalena van Loar, and the Preacher Alardyn, to the House of her
Daughter Magdalena Haasbaant, desired both that they would cause what the
Senate had resolved to be writ to England, that so it might be known there,
that if any of the Quakers Persuasion would come over, and settle at Embden,
they should be well received there.

Hereby we see how God has the Hearts of all Men in his Hands, and that he
turns them whithersoever he will: For the Magistrates of Embden had some
Years before, from a blind Zeal, kindled by those who ought to have stopped it,
given forth very severe Edicts against the Quakers, and persecuted them
fiercely; but now they allowed them an entire Liberty.

But leaving Embden, I turn again to England, where Persecution by this Time
also came to a Stand, The King sets the Imprisoned Quakers at Liberty, except
for Tithes.
insomuch that the King ordered that all such imprisoned Quakers, as it was in
his Power to release, should be set at Liberty: For those that were in Prison
for not paying Tithes, etc. were under the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which
was out of the King's Reach. But many others wno had been in Custody several
Years, appeared now at London, in the Annual Meeting of their Friends, to the
great Joy of their Brethren: And when some of these went to thank the King for
his Favor, they were kindly admitted; and thereby he drew their Inclination
toward him: For his Endeavors were now, as he said, to bring about a complete
Liberty of Conscience. What his Aim was, I am not to investigate, for he never
attained to it. In the mean while he made Persecution generally to cease, not
only in England, but also in other Places of his Dominions: For having heard
that the Quakers in the Isle of Barbados in the West Indies were very much
molested, because for Conscience Sake they could not bear Arms, he ordered some
of the Members of his Council to write the following Letter.

AFter our hearty Commendations, His Majesty having been pleased to refer unto
us the Petition of the Quakers inhabiting in the Barbados, Order for Ease to
the Quakers at Barbados.
we have thought sit hereby to pray and require you to examine the Allegations
of the said Petitions and Papers hereunto annexed. And in as much as His
Majesty having lately extended his Favor to those People here, may be inclined
to continue the same toward them in this particular, we desire you to report
unto us what Ease may be given them in Reference to the Militia-Act, and the
Penalties thereby imposed, as far as it may consist with the Safety of the
Island, and the Preserving of the Militia according to the Intention of the
said Act. And so we bid you heartily Farewell.

Your Loving Friends, Jefferys, Craven, Albemarle, Middleton.
From the Council Chamger in Whitehall, the 23d of July, 1686.

From this Letter it appears plainly that the King endeavored to relieve the
Quakers from that Burden of Persecution they were under. The following Letter
is also a Proof of it, written by the Earl of Sunderland, (then, as I think,
President of the Privy Council) to the Earl of Huntington, to stop the
Persecution in Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire, where one John Smith had
acted most grievously.

Whitehall, Dec. 7. 1686. My LORD,
THE King being informed that one John Smith, E. of Sunderland's Letter in
Favor of the Quakers in Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire.
a common Informer, does very vexatiously prosecute the Quakers in the County
of Leicester, and in the Town and County of Nottingham; and His Majesty being
pleased to extend His Favor to those of that Persuasion, His Majesty would
have your Grace direct the Justices of Peace to give no sort of Countenance to
the said John Smith, and his Prosecution against the Quakers. My Lord, I am for
his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.

Your Grace's most Faithful and Humble Servant, SUNDERLAND, P.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Huntington, one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Chief Recorder of Leicester, Custos Rotulorum of the
County of Leicester.

The King being thus inclined to give Liberty to Prisoners, those who were in
Custody for Religion, neglected no Opportunity to obtain Liberty; of which the
following Petition is an Evidence.

To Chief Justice Herbert and Judge Wright assigned to hold Assizes and
Jail-delivery for the Western Circuit, at Wells, for the County of Somerset,
the Thirtieth of the Month called March, 1686.
Several of the People called Quakers, Quakers Pe^^tion to the Judges at the
Assizes at Wells in Somersetshire.
now Prisoners to the Jail at Ivelchester, in the County of Somerset, on Behalf
of themselves and many others of the same People, in Humility show,

THAT since the wise Disposer of all Things has ordered your Employment in
this Honorable Service, to relieve the Oppressed, and deliver the Captives;
and since King James II. that now is, has committed Part of his Clemency to
your Custody, to distribute the same, according as the Lord has inclined his
Heart; and having taken particular Notice of our Sufferings, has signified his
Will and Pleasure, that we, the People commonly called Quakers, should receive
the full Benefit of his General Pardon, with all possible Ease; which Grace and
Favor we, with all Thankfulness, acknowledge to God as the chief Author, who
has the Hearts of Kings at his Disposal; and to the King, as being ready
herein to mind that which the Lord inclined his Heart unto, and not without
Hope to find the like Opportunity to render to you our hearty Thanks, for the
full Accomplishment of that which our God allows, and the King so readily
grants us: And also hearing the Report of your Nobility and Moderation, in
managing this weighty Trust committed to you, we are imboldned thus to address
our selves, though in Plainness of Speech, yet in Sincerity of Heart, to lay
before you, that we have for several Years been Prisoners to the Jail
aforesaid, not for any Plotting against the King or Government, or Harm done to
his Subjects; our peaceable Lives have manifested our Fidelity to the King, and
Love to our Neighbors, it being contrary to our Principles to do otherwise:
But only for Conscience Sake, because in Obedience to Christ Jesus we dare not
Swear at all, or forbear to worship God, as he has ordained, nor conform to
those Worships which we have no Faith in; which to omit the one, or practice
the other, we should therein sin, and so wound our Consciences, and break our
Peace with God; and what good then should our Lives do us, if we might enjoy
never so much of the World's Favor and Friendship?

Our humble Request therefore to you is, to consider and compassionate our
Suffering Condition, and improve the Power and Authority that God and the King
has entrusted you withal, for our Relief and Liberty; we still resolving, and
hoping (through God's Assistance) for the future, to manifest our Fear to God,
Honor to the King, and Honesty to all his Subjects, by our godly, humble, and
peaceable Conversation. The particular Causes of our Imprisonments are herewith
attested, under our Keeper's Hand. And we further pray, that mercenary
Informers, and envious Prosecutors against us, only for Conscience Sake, may,
according to your Wisdom and Prudence, be discouraged from Prosecuting such
Actions, by which many industrious and conscientious Families, and Persons, are
in danger of being ruined; and we encouraged in our Diligence in our respective
Callings, and may enjoy the Benefit of our Industry; and so shall we be the
better enabled to perform with Cheerfulness the Duties we owe to God, the King,
and all Men. The Lord guide you in Judgment, and more and more incline your
Hearts to love Mercy, and do Justice, and grant you the Reward thereof; which
is truly our Desire and Prayer.

This Petition was signed by sixteen Persons, some of which had been imprisoned
fifteen, others ten, and some fewer Years; and to the Time of their
Imprisonment was added, on what Account, viz. on Praemunire, On which they are
discharged
Excommunication, and for Tithes, etc. And it had such Effect, that Chief
Justice Herbert discharged these Prisoners; but before this was done, several
of those that had been imprisoned there, died. Many also were set at Liberty by
the King's Proclamation; and it was indeed an unusual Thing, to enjoy such a
free Liberty, that the malicious Persecutors were restrained by the higher
Power.

George Fox was now mostly in and about London, endeavoring to bring all
Things among his Friends into good Order; and therefore he writ several Papers,
since he could not be every where in Person, and discharge himself by Word of
Mouth: and left Carelessness should creep in, by reason af the Liberty that was
now enjoyed, he writ the following Epistle to his Friends.

Friends,
THE Lord by his Eternal Power has opened the Heart of the King to open the
Prison-doors, G. F. advises against Carelessness, and to be thankful to the
Lord.
by which about fifteen or sixteen Hundred are set at Liberty; and has given a
Check to the Informers: So that in many Places our Meetings are pretty quiet.
So my Desires are, that both Liberty and Sufferings, all may be sanctified to
his People; and Friends may prize the Mercies of the Lord in all Things, and to
him be thankful, who stilleth the raging Waves of the Seas, and allayeth the
Storms and Tempests, and makes a Calm. And therefore it is good to trust in
the Lord, and cast your Care upon him, who cares for you. For when ye were in
your Goals and Prisons, then the Lord did by his Eternal Arm and Power uphold
you, and sanctified them to you (and unto some he had made them as a
Sanctuary;) and tried his People, as in a Furnace of Affliction, both in
Prisons, and Spoiling of Goods. And in all this the Lord was with his People,
and taught them to know, that The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof;
and that he was in all Places, who crowns the Year with his Goodness, Psalm.
lxv. Therefore let all God's People be diligent, and careful to keep the Camp
of God holy, pure and clean, and to serve God and Christ, and one another in
the glorious, peaceable Gospel of Life and Salvation; which Glory shines over
God's Camp, and his great Prophet, and Bishop, and Shepherd is among or in the
midst of them, exercising his Heavenly Offices in them: So that you his People
may rejoice in Christ Jesus, through whom you have Peace with God. For he that
destroys the Devil and his Work, and bruises the Serpent's Head, is all God's
People's heavenly Foundation and Rock to build upon; which was the Holy
Prophets and Apostles Rock in Days past, and is now a Rock of our Age; which
Rock and Foundation of God stands sure. And upon this the Lord God establish
all his People. Amen.

G. F.
London, the 25th of the 7th Month, 1686.

In this Year David Barclay died at Ury in Scotland. The pious End of D.
Barclay, with some remarkable Expressions and Occurences a little before his
Death.
Before his Departure he uttered many excellent Expressions indeed. I may not
omit to mention some Particulars. In the latter End of September, being past
the 76th Year of his Age, he was taken with a Fever, which continued two Weeks;
and being much troubled with the Gravel, his Sickness was accompanied with Pain
in making Water. Two Days before his Death, feeling his Weakness, and being in
an Agony, he said to his Son Robert, who was with him, I shall go now to the
Lord, and be gathered to many of my Brethren who are gone before me. On the
11th of October, very early in the Morning, he growing weaker, the said Robert
Barclay signified to him, that his Travel was, That he that love^ him, might be
near him to the End. To which he answered, The Lord is nigh, and said further
to thofe about him, Ye are my Witnesses in the Presence of God, that the Lord
is nigh. And a little after, he said, The perfect Discovery of the Dayspring
from on high, how great a Blessing it has been to me and my Family! Robert
Barclay's Wife asking, if he would have something to refresh him, he said, It
needed not; and laying his Hand upon his Breast, he said, He had that inwardly,
that refreshed him. A little while after, he was heard several Times to say,
The Truth is over all; and taking his Son's eldest Son to him, he blessed him,
and said, He prayed God he might never depart from the Truth. Then his Son's
eldest Daughter coming near, he said, Is this Patience? (for that was her
Name.) Let Patience have its perfect Work in thee. And after kissing the other
four of his Son's Children, he laid Hands upon them, and blessed them. His
Apothecary, that attended him, coming also near, he took him by the Hand, and
said, Thou will bear me witness, that in all this Exercise I have not been
curious to tamper, nor to pamper the Flesh. To which the Apothecary said, Sir,
I can bear witness that you have always minded the better and more substantial
Part; and I rejoice to see the blessed End the Lord is bringing you to. To this
the sick Man replied, Bear a faithful and true Witness; yet it is the Life of
Righteousness; the Life of Righteousness it is that we bear Testimony to, and
not to an empty Profession. Then he called several Times, Come, Lord Jesus,
come, come! And said also, My Hope is in the Lord. Afterward he slept now and
then for some Hours; and seeing a Carpenter coming into the Room, he said to
his Son, See thou charge him to make no manner of Superfluity upon the Coffin.
In the Afternoon several of his Friends came to see him, which he having
observed, said, They were come in a seasonable Time; and after some Words were
spoken, and that Patrick Living stone had prayed, which ended in Praises, the
sick old Man held up his Hands, and said, Amen, Amen, for ever! And after those
that were present stood up, he said, How precious is the Love of God among his
Children, and their Love to one another! Thereby shall all Men know that ye are
Christ's Disciples, if ye love one another. How precious a Thing it is to see
Brethren to dwell together in Love! My Love is with you, I leave it among you.
Several of his Friends, pretty late at Night, standing about the Bed, and
perceiving some of them to weep, he said, Dear Friends, all mind the inward
Man, heed not the outward. There is one that does reward, the Lord of Hosts is
his Name. Next Morning, after he had heard the Clock strike Three, he said, Now
the Time comes. And a little after he was heard to say, Praises, Praises,
Praises to the Lord! Let now thy Servant depart in Peace. Into thy Hands, O
Father, I commit my Soul, Spirit and Body. Thy Will, O Lord, be done in Earth,
as it is in Heaven. These Sentences he spoke by little Intervals, one after
another; and soon after five in the Morning, the 12th of October, he slept in
Peace and Quiet, there being present at his End above twenty Persons, who were
Witnesses to what has been here related. His Corpse was attended to the Grave
by numerous Followers; and though he had ordered not many to be called to his
Burial, yet a great Number of the Gentry came uninvited, from an Esteem they
bore to his Memory.

In this Year also Anne Downer departed this Life, The dying Words and Death of
the faithful and serviceable Anne Whitehead, Wife to Geo. Whitehead.
one of the first of those called Quakers at London; she had been married first
to Benjamin Greenwell, and was afterward Wife to George Whitehead. Being taken
ill, she removed to a Place out of London, and her Sickness increasing, she
perceived it was like to take her away. Her ancient Friend Mary Stout, visiting
her, asked her, If she knew her, she said, Yes, very well, it is Mary Stout. I
have my Memory very well, and my Understanding is clear, though I am very weak;
but I am given up unto the Will of the Lord, whether to dye, or to live; for I
have been faithful to him in what I knew, both in Life and Death. Perceiving
some to be troubled concerning her, she said, There is no Cause for you to be
troubled or concerned; for I am well, and in Peace. Many christian Exhortations
she gave on her dying Bed, and said to some of her Friends who came to visit
her, What, do ye come on purpose to see me! I take it as an Effect of the Love
of God, and I pray God bless your Children. To another she was heard to say, If
I never see thy Face more, it is well with me: God does know my Integrity, and
how I have been, and walked before him. The Evening before she died, she said
to her Husband George Whitehead, etc. The Lord is with me, I bless his Name. I
am well: ^^ may be you are (...) I shall be taken away; and if if be, the Will
of the Lord be done. Do not trouble your selves, nor make any great ado about
me. But, my Dear, go to Bed, go to Rest; and if I should speak no more Words to
thee, thou know the everlasting Love of God. She was heard also to say, That
she had done with all Things in this Life, and she had nothing troubled her,
but was at true Peace and Ease every Way. And a few Hours before she departed,
she said, Though I am in a dying Condition, yet it is a living Death; for though
Weakn^ss seizes the Body, yet my Understanding is as clear as when in Health.
Thus she departed this Life quietly, about the Age of sixty-three Years, having
been a Woman well ^^sted, and very serviceable to the Church, not only with
wholesome Exhortations, but also by her christian Care for the Sick and Poor,
and for Widows and Orphans, who by her Decease lost an eminent Mother.

About this Time, G. Fox writ some general Epistles (some: of which were pretty
large) to his Friends, exhorting them to shun Strife, to keep to mutual Love
and Unity, and to mind true Piety. He writ many other edifying Papers, and
since the Papists now appeared barefaced, and performed their Worship
publicly, and there was much Talk of their Praying to Saints, 1687
and by Beads, in the Year 1687 he emitted the following Paper concerning
Prayer, not fearing to contradict openly that which he judged to be
Superstition, though the King himself was of the Popish Religion.

CHrist Jesus, G. F's Paper concerning Prayer.
when he taught his Disciples to pray, said unto them, When ye do pray, say,
Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc. Christ does not say,
that they should pray to Mary, the Mother of Christ; nor does he say, that they
should pray to Angels, or to Saints that were dead. Christ did not teach them
to pray to the Dead, nor for the Dead. Neither did Christ or his Apostles teach
the Believers to pray by Beads, nor to sing by outward Organs: But the Apostle
said, he would sing and pray in Spirit: For the Spirit it self makes
Intercession; and the Lord, that searches the Hearty knows the Mind of the
Spirit.

To take Counsel of the Dead, was forbidden by the Law of God; but they were to
take Counsel of the Lord; And he has given Christ in the New Covenant, in his
Gospel-day, to be a Counselor and a Leader, to all his Believers in his Light.
And Men are not to run to the Dead for the Living: For the Law and Testimony of
God forbids it. Those Jews, that refused the running Waters of Shiloh, the
Floods and Waters of the Assyrians and Babylonians came over them, and carried
them into Captivity: And they that refuse the Waters of Christ, they are
overflown with the Flood of the World, that lies in Wickedness. They that
asked Counsel of Stocks and Stones, their State was in the Spirit of Error and
Whoredom; and they were gone a whoring from God, Hos. iv. 12. And they, that
joined themselves to Baal-Peor, and eat the Sacrifices of the Dead, provoked
the Lord's Anger, and brought the Lord's Displeasure upon them, Psalm. cvi. 28,
29. So here ye may see, the Sacrifices of the Dead were forbidden. The Living
know that they shall die; but the Dead know not any Thing; neither have they
any more a Reward, for the Memory of them is forgottetn. Eccles. ix. 5. Woe to
the rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take Counsel, but not of me; and
that cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add Sin to Sin,
Isa^. xxx. 1.

On the 20th of the Month called March being the 1st Month, Robert Widders, one
of the first Preachers among those called Quakers, died; and G. Fox was now
much at London; Death of R. Widders one of the first Preachers
but he grew more and more weak in Body, having endured many Hardships and
cruel Imprisonments for the Truth. Sometimes he went into the Country to take
the fresh Air, and at other Times he was a While at the Country House of his
Son-in-Law William Mead, G.(...) at W. Mead's Country House.
who married one of his Wife's Daughters. In the mean while he writ much; for
he was of a laborious Temper, and did not omit under all his Business, to visit
the Meetings of his Friends, and to edify them by his Admonitions and
Exhortations. For now they were suffered to keep their Meetings unmolested,
since the King in the Month called April, published his long expected
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience to all his Subjects; The Substance of K
James's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience.
which contained, That henceforth the Execution of all penal Laws concerning
Ecclesiastical Matters, for not coming to Church, for not receiving the
Sacraments, or for any other Nonconformity with the established Religion, or
for performing religious Worship in any other Way, should be suspended,etc.

It would indeed have been more acceptable if this Liberty had been established
by the King and Parliament, this being granted as yet only by Virtue of his
Royal Prerogative: But however it was, Liberty was enjoyed. The Friends
therefore of the Church at London, seeing how those of other Persuasions
presented Addresses of Thanks to the King, for his Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, which was now published, and whereby the Dissenters were permitted
to perform their Worship freely, provided their Preaching did not tend to make
the Minds of People averse to the Government, thought it convenient to draw up
an Address also, and present it to the King; which was as follows;

To King JAMES II. over England, etc.
The Humble and thankful Address of several of the King's Subjects, commonly
called Quakers, in and about the City of London, on Behalf of themselves, and
those of their Communion.
May it please the KING,
THough we are not the first in this Way, The London Quakers Address to the K.
yet we hope we are not the least sensible of the great Favors we are come to
present the King our humble, open, and hearty Thanks for, since no People have
received greater Benefits, as well by opening the Prison-doors, as by his late
excellent and christian Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, none having more
severely suffered, nor stood more generally exposed to the Malice of ill Men,
upon the Account of Religion; and though we entertain this Act of Mercy with all
the Acknowledgements of a persecuted and grateful People, yet we must needs
say, it does the less surprise us, since it is what some of us have known to
have been the declared Principle of the King, as well long before, as since he
came to the Throne of his Ancestors.

And as we rejoice to see the Day, that a King of England should from, his
Royal Seat so universally assert this glorious Principle, that Conscience ought
not to be constrained, nor People forced for Matters of mere Religion, (the
Want of which happy Conduct in Government, has been the Desolation of
Countries, and Reproach of Religion) so we do with humble and sincere Hearts,
render to God first, and the King next, our sensible Acknowledgments; and
because they cannot be better expressed than in godly, peaceable, and dutiful
Life, it shall be our Endeavor, (with God's Help) always to approve our selves
the King's faithful and loving Subjects, and we hope that after this gracious
Step the King has made toward the Union of his People, and Secur^^ (...) of
their common Interest, has had a due Consideration, there will be no Room lest
for those Fears and Jealousies, that might render the King's Reign uneasy, or
any of them unhappy.

That, which remains, Great Prince, for us to do, is, to beseech Almighty God
(by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice) to inspire thee more and more
with his excellent Wisdom and Understanding, to pursue this Christian Design of
Ease to all religious Dissenters, with the most agreeable and lasting Methods:
And we pray God to bless the King, his Royal Family, and People, with Grace and
Peace; and that after a long and prosperous Reign here, he may receive a better
Crown amongst the Blessed.

Which is the Prayer of, etc.

This Address was received favorably, and therefore those of the Yearly
Meeting, which some Time after was held at London, also drew up an Address; and
some Deputies of that Meeting went to Windsor, where the Court then was, and
where W. Penn, one of those that had been chosen to present the Address, made
the following Speech to the King.

May it please the KING,
IT was the Saying of our Blessed Lord to the captious Jews, W. Penn's Speech
at the Delivery of an Address from Friends yearly Meeting.
in Case of Tribute, Render to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and to God
the Things that are God's. As this Distinction ought to be observed by all Men,
in the Conduct of their Lives, so the KING has given us an illustrious Example
in own Person, that excites us to it; for while HE was a Subject, HE gave
Caesar his Tribute; and now HE is a Caesar, gives GOD his Due, (viz) The
Sovereignty over Consciences. It were a great Shame then, for any Englishman
(that pretends to Christianity) not to give GOD his Due. By this Grace, HE has
relieved His distressed Subjects from their cruel Sufferings, and raised to
Himself a new and lasting Empire, by adding their Affections to their Duty. And
we pray God to continue the KING in this noble Resolution, for HE is now upon a
Principle, that has Goodnature, Christianity, and the Goodness of civil
Society on its Side, a Security to Him beyond all the little Arts of Government.

I would not that any should think, that we came hither with Design to fill the
Gazette with our Thanks: But as our Sufferings would have moved Stones to
Compassion, so we should be harder, if we were not moved to Gratitude.

Now since the KING's Mercy and Goodness have reached to us throughout the
Kingdom of England, and Principality of Wales; our general Assembly from all
those Parts, met at London about our CHURCH AFFAIRS, has appointed us to wait
upon the KING with our humble Thanks, and me to deliver them, which I do by
this ADDRESS, with all the Affection and Respect of a dutiful Subject.

After W. Penn had thus delivered himself, he presented the Address to the
King, which that Prince kindly receiving, gave it him again to read, which W.
Penn did, and it was as follows;

To King JAMES II. over England, etc.
The Humble and Grateful Acknowledgements of his Peaceable Subjects, called
Quakers, in this Kingdom.
From their usual Yearly Meeting in London, the Nineteenth Day of the Third
Month, vulgarly called May, 1687.
WE cannot but bless and praise the Name of Almighty God, The Address
who has the Hearts of Princes in his Hand, that he has inclined the King to
hear the Cries of his suffering Subjects for Conscience Sake; and we rejoice,
that instead of troubling him with Complaints of our Sufferings, he has given
us so eminent an Occasion to present him with our Thanks. And since it has
pleased the King out of his great Compassion, thus to commiserate our afflicted
Condition, which has so particularly appeared by his gracious Proclamation and
Warrants last Year, (whereby above twelve hundred Prisoners were released from
their severe Imprisonments, and many others from Spoil and Ruin in their
Estates and Properties) and his Princely Speech in Council, and christian
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, in which he does not only express his
Aversion to all Force upon Conscience, and grant all his dissenting Subjects an
ample Liberty to worship God in the Way they are persuaded is most agreeable to
his Will, but gives them his Kingly Word, the same shall continue during his
Reign; we do (as our Friends of this City have already done) render the King
our humble, christian, and thankful Acknowledgments, not only in Behalf of our
selves, but with Respect to our Friends throughout England and Wales; and pray
God with all our Hearts to bless and preserve thee, O King, and those under
thee in so good a Work: And as we can assure the King it is well accepted in
the Counties from whence we came, so we hope the good Effects thereof for the
Peace, Trade, and Prosperity of the Kingdom will produce such a Concurrence
from the Parliament, as may secure it to our Posterity in after Times, and
while we live, it shall be our Endeavor (through God's Grace) to demean our
selves, as in Conscience to God, and Duty to the King, we are obliged,

His Peaceable, Loving, and Faithful Subjects.

After William Penn had read the said Address, the King spoke as follows:

Gentlemen,
I Thank you heartily for your Address. The King's Answer
Some of you know (I am sure you do, Mr. Penn) that it was always my Principle,
that Conscience ought not to be forced; and that all Men ought to have the
Liberty of their Consciences. And what I have promised in my Declaration, I
will continue to perform as long as I live; and I hope before I die, to settle
it so, that after Ages shall have no Reason to alter it.

Here we see what the King declared to be his Intention: But perhaps that
Prince did not consider, that if such a general Liberty had been procured, he
should not have been able to make it continue longer than the Popish Clergy
would have thought it convenient. For who is ignorant what an unlimited Power
the Roman Prelates have usurped, not only in the Ecclesiastical, but also in
the Political Part? Insomuch, that though the King's Intention might have been
really sincere, yet it is like it would have been thwarted, though he might have
been willing that it should be otherwise. That his Meaning was sincere, several
I know, that were not of his Persuasion, have believed; and among these there
were such, who thought that Liberty of Conscience might have been so
established, that it should not have been in the Power of the Papists to break
it. But Time has shown, that King James was not to be the Instrument for
Settling such a Liberty of Conscience, and that the Repealing of the penal Laws
was reserved for another Prince. Yet the King was by some thought to do what he
could to stop rapacious Persecutors, and to restrain their Power, with Respect
to imposing of Oaths. It is true, it was said that the King might not do so;
for by granting this Liberty to the Quakers, he opened a Door for the Romanists
to bear Offices, without taking the required Oaths. Now that he discharged the
Quakers from these Oaths, may appear by the following Order to the Lord Mayor
of London;

Whitehall, Nov. 6. 1687. My Lord,
THE King being informed that Edward Brooker, The King's Order to the Lord
Mayor, to the admit Quakers to Offices without Oaths.
Henry Jefferson, and Joseph Tomlinson, being Quakers, are by Mr. Barker,
Steward of Southwark, put upon serving of several Offices, as Constables, and
the like, which they are willing to do; but the Oaths being tendered to them,
from which they think themselves exempted by the King's Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience, they are threatened to be fined, and otherwise molested for their
Refusal to take them: His Majesty commands me to let your Lordship know, that
his Pleasure is, that the said Edward Brooker, Henry Jefferson, and Joseph
Tomlinson, and all other Quakers, should now, and for the future, either be
allowed to serve the said Offices, without taking any Oaths, or else that they
be not fined, or otherwise molested upon that Account: And his Majesty would
have you give Order therein accordingly. I am, my Lord,

Your Lordship's most humble Servant, SUNDERLAND.

Now whereas in some Places Goods taken from the Quakers lay still unsold, the
King ordered those Goods to be restored to them, as may appear by the following
Letter, written to the Mayor and Aldermen of Leeds in Yorkshire.

Whitehall, Dec. 14. 1687. Gentlemen,
THE King being informed that some Goods belonging to John Wales, Another to
the Mayor of Leeds for restoring Quakers Goods that had been seized, and not
sold
and other Quakers of Leeds, which were seized and taken from them upon the
Account of their religious Worship, do remain unsold in the Hands of John Todd,
who was Constable at the Time of the Seizure, or in the Hands of some other
Persons: And his Majesty's Intention being, that all his Subjects shall receive
the full Benefit of his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, his Majesty
commands me to signify his Pleasure to you, that you cause the Goods belonging
to the said John Wales, and all other Quakers of Leeds, which were heretofore
seized, upon the Account of religious Worship, and are unsold, in whose Hands
soever they remain, to be forthwith restored to the respective Owners, without
any Charge. I am, Gentlemen,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, SUNDERLAND.


By such Means some got their Goods again, that had been taken from them upon
the Account of religious Worship; for in many Places they lay long unsold,
because few would buy Goods so taken. And that the King by these his Favors
drew the Love and Affection of many of his Subjects toward himself, none need
to wonder; for whatever his Religion was, he delivered them from that grievous
Burden, under which they had been oppressed so many Years. To this may be
added, that he used them kindly in all Respects, and would not suffer his
Servants to molest any for not pulling off their Hats, when they came near his
Royal Person; Nay, so far went this Condescension, that a certain Countryman
of the Quakers Persuasion, The King suffers Quakers to appear covered in his
Presence.
coming to him with his Hat on his Head, the King took off his own Hat, and
held it under his Arm; which the other seeing, said, The King needs not keep
off his Hat for me. To which that Prince returned, You don't know the Custom
here, for that requires, that but one Hat must be on here. I have been told of
more such like Occurrences, which I pass by; but it appears from thence, that
the King endeavored to have among the Quakers, the Repute of a mild and
courteous Prince. Grants free Liberty of Conscience also in Scotland.
And this Year he gave in Scotland also full Liberty of Conscience, and freed
those that were still under Sufferings, granting them the free Liberty of their
religious Meetings. The said Liberty he also allowed to the Presbyterians,
provided they should not meet in the Fields, or in Sheds, as some did.

The King having thus granted Liberty of Conscience to People of all
Persuasions, And endeavors to introduce Popery, permitting the Jesuits a
College in the Savoy, etc.
did whatever he could to introduce Popery in England; for he permitted the
Jesuits to erect a College in the Savoy at London, and suffered the Friars to
go publicly in the Dress of their Monastical Orders. This was a very strange
Sight to Protestants in England, and it caused no small Fermentation in the
Minds of People, when the Fellows of Magdalen College at Oxford were by the
King's Order dispossessed, W. Penn for abrogating the penal Laws, but blames
the turning out the Fellows of Magdalen College.
to make Way for Romanists. This was such a gross Usurpation, that W. Penn, who
had ready Access to the King, and who endeavored to get the penal Laws and
Test abrogated, thinking it possible to find out a Way, whereby to limit the
Papists so effectually, that they should not be able to prevail, did, for all
that, not omi^ to blame this Usurpation at Oxford, and to tell the King, That
it was an Act which could not in Justice be defended; since the general Liberty
of Conscience did not allow of depriving any of their Property, who did what
they ought to do, as the Fellows of the said College appeared to have done. But
this could not cool the King's Zeal for Popery; for he drove on fast, without
Disguise, to that Degree, that the Pope's Nuncio D' Ada, Count D' Ada, Nuncio
from the Pope, ^akes a public Entry at Windsor.
this Summer made his public Entry at Windsor, in very much State. Great
Endeavors were now made to repeal the penal Laws and Tests; for when this
Point was gained, then Papists could be admitted into the Government as well as
others: And such a general Liberty of Conscience making an alluring Show,
Several Dissenters write against the penal Laws and Test.
several Dissenters, as Baptists, and others, served the King with their Pens
on this Account: And W. Penn, who always had been a Defender of Liberty of
Conscience, was also not unactive in this Affair, though with a good Intent,
howbeit he might have failed in his Expectation. I remember, when in those Days
the Patrons of the Church of Rome asserted Liberty of Conscience to be a
Christian Duty, I heard somebody say, Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the
Leopard his Spots? The Prince and Princess of Orange (...) be persuaded ^o
assent to repealing Test, and
The King labored also to persuade the Prince and the Princess of Orange to
give their Assent to the Repealing of the Test and penal Laws; but this could
not be obtained of them. And since the King caused the Advocate James Stewart,
to write concerning this Matter to the Here Fagel, Counselor, and chief
Pensionary at the Hague, he answered this Paper in a Letter to the said James
Stewart, wherein he declared the Judgment of the Prince and Princess in this
Case, and signified, That they were willing to assent to the Repealing of the
penal Laws, as far as they had any Tendency to the Exercise of Worship; but as
for those that debarred Papists from sitting in Parliament, of which the Test
was not the least, they could not give their Assent to the Repealing of such
Limitations. This Letter was generally approved by the Protestants in England.
But the King for all That, went on with the introducing of Popery; 1688
and about the Beginning of the Year 1688, he not only put in several Romanists
to be Fellows of Magdalen College at Oxford, Romanists put (...) Magdalen
College, and others endeavored to be made ^ Magistrates.
but endeavored also to usher those of his Persuasion into the Magistracy; and
the better to cloak this Design, he would have other Dissenters also chosen;
but they generally rejected this Offer, as did also Stephen Crisp at
Colchester, who was too circumspect to be caught thus, and therefore he
declined the Offer.

The King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, The Declaration ordered to
be read in Churches and Chapels.
was, on the 27th of the Month called April, published again, To show that he
was firm and constant in his Resolution, and that his Intentions were not
changed since he issued it out, to excite his Subjects to join in it, and to
choose such Members of Parliament, as might do their Part to finish what he had
begun. Hereto was annexed an Order of the Council, for Reading this Declaration
in all Churches and Chapels throughout the Kingdom; and ordering the Bishops,
to send and distribute the Declaration throughout their several Dioceses to be
read accordingly. But they refused to do so, pretending it was not legal, (though
some there were who thought it was,) because they were against Liberty of
Conscience. Now the Archbishop of Canterbury, Seven Bishops petition against
that Order.
and six other Bishops, petitioned the King, Not to insist on the Distribution
and Reading of his Declaration, alleging, that their great Averseness to the
Distribution and Publication of it in their Churches, proceeded neither from
any Want of Duty and Obedience to his Majesty, nor yet from any Want of due
Tenderness to Dissenters; but because it was founded upon such a Dispensing
Power, as had been often declared illegal in Parliament.

This Refusal the King so resented, that he sent these Bishops to the Tower.
For which they are sent to the Tower.
Whilst they were thus confined, there was much Discourse every where about
this Matter; and since it was well known, that some Bishops had been the
Promoters of the former Persecutions, some it seems, spoke also in Prejudice of
these that were now under Confinement. Where R. Barclay makes it evident to
them, that Quakers by Order from some Bishops, had been kept in Prison till
Death.
This being reported to them, they said That the Quakers belied them, and
divulged that they (the Bishops) had been the Cause of the Death of Some. This
gave Occasion to Robert Barclay to visit the Bishops in the Tower; and speaking
with them, he gave them undeniable Proofs of some Persons, who by Order of
Bishops had been kept in Prison till Death, though they had been told of the
Danger of these Persons by Physicians that were not Quakers. This was so
evidently manifested by R. Barclay, that they were not able to deny it: Yet
Barclay told them, That since they themselves were now under Oppression, the
Intention of the Quakers was in no wise to publish such Matters, lest thereby
they should exasperate the King against them. And they were careful indeed not
to do any Thing that might aggravate the Case of these Prisoners; for it was
not Time now to rub old Sores, since the Bishops themselves seemed to be
inclined to declare for Liberty of Conscience. And since this Liberty was now
enjoyed all over the Kingdom, those called Quakers thought it convenient at
their Yearly Meeting, which was held this Summer at London, again to draw up an
Address to the King, and to acquaint him of one Thing more, which continued to
be troublesome to them. This Address they presented to him, and was as
follows;

To King JAMES II. over England, etc. The Humble Address of the People called
Quakers, from their Yearly Meeting in London, the 6th Day of the Month called
June, 1688.
WE the King's loving and peaceable Subjects, Another Address
from diverse Parts of his Dominions, being met together in this City, after our
usual Manner, to inspect the Affairs of our christian Society throughout the
World, think it our Duty humbly to represent to him, the blessed Effects the
Liberty he has graciously granted his People to worship God according to their
Consciences, has had, both on our Persons and Estates: For whereas formerly we
had ever long and sorrowful Lists brought to us from all Parts almost of his
Territories, of Prisoners, and the Spoils of Goods, by violent and ill Men,
upon Account of Conscience, We bless God, and thank the King, the Jails are
every where clear, except in Cases of Tithes, and the Repairs of
Parish-Churches, and some few about Oaths; and we do in all Humility lay it
before the King, to consider the Hardships our Friends are yet under for
Conscience Sake in those Respects, being in the one chiefly exposed to the
present Anger of the offended Clergy, who have therefore lately imprisoned some
of them till Death; and in the other they are rendered very unprofitable to the
Public and themselves; for both in Reference to Freedoms in Corporations,
Probates of Wills and Testaments, and Administrations, Answers in Chancery, and
Exchequer, Trials of our just Titles and Debts, Proceeding in our Trade at the
Custom-House, Serving the Office of Constables, etc. they are disabled, and
great Advantages taken against them, unless the King's Favor do interpose; and
as we humbly hope he may relieve us, so we confidently assure our selves he
will ease us what he can.

Now since it has pleased thee, O King, to renew to all thy Subjects, by thy
last Declaration, thy gracious Assurances to pursue the Establishment of this
Christian Liberty and Property upon an unalterable Foundation; and in Order to
it, to hold a Parliament in November next at farthest:

We think our selves deeply engaged to renew our Assurances of Fidelity and
Affection, and with God's Help, intend to do our Parts for the perfecting so
blessed and glorious a Work; that so it may be out of the Power of any one
Party to hurt another upon the Account of Conscience: And as we firmly believe
that God will never desert this just and righteous Cause of Liberty, nor the
King in maintaining of it, so we hope by God's Grace to let the World see we
can honestly and heartily appear for Liberty of Conscience, and be inviolably
true to our own Religion, whatever the Folly or Malice of some Men on that
Account, may suggest to the contrary.

This Address being presented to the King was well received. Some have been
ready to think, that the latter Part of this Address concerned the Office of
Magistrates, which not without Reason it is believed that a Christian might
serve, with no more Disparagement to an inoffensive Life, than it is
inconsistent for a pious Father to give due Correction to his rebellious Child:
For though our Savior charges not to resist Evil, Mat. v. 39, 44
but to love Enemies; and that he reproving Peter, who from a forward Zeal cut
off the High Priest's Servant's Ear, John xviii. 11
said to him, Put up thy Sword into the Sheath: And that also the Apostle James
disapproves War and Fighting, yet we find in sacred Writ, that the Apostle Paul
calls the Magistrate, (...)
the Minister of God, and a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil;
and he says in plain Terms, th^^ he bears not the Sword in vain.

But to return to my Relation, and to take up again the Thread of this History,
from which I have been diverted a little by this Digression; I know there were
some in those Days, who thought that if People of all Persuasions in England
had a Share in the Government, proportionable to their Number, a Means might
have been found out, to hinder any Party, especially the Papists, from exalting
themselves above the others. But to me it seems not improbable, that if this
had Effect, and a higher Hand had not cut off the Way thereto, it would have
appeared that those Men did not reckon well. But it never came to this Pass,
for the King's Power was tottering already, though he endeavored to support it,
even with good Means; for to be helpful to his Subjects, who, though freeborn
Men, were deprived of their Freedom, merely because for Conscience Sake they
could not swear, and to help them to this Right to which they were entitled as
well as others, could not be judged undue Means, unless under it had been
hidden an Intent to introduce this Liberty also in Favor of the Papists, though
they did not believe Swearing unlawful.

There were now at Norwich about Forty of the People called Quakers, who having
petitioned the King, that he would be pleased to cause them to be made Freemen,
obtained the following Order from him.

The King's Order on the Petition of the Quakers at Norwich for their Freedom.
To our Trusty and Well-beloved our Attorney General.
JAMES Rex.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well:
Whereas we have received a good Character of the Loyalty of our well-beloved
Subjects, Thomas Howard, Peter Lance, William Booley, Henry Jackson, Edward
Pears, John Jenn, Nicholas Comfit, John Harridence, John Gurney, Samuel Wasey,
Edmund Cobb, Philip Pain, Josiah Sherringham, Anthony Alexander, Thomas Darmar,
John Cadee, John Fiddeman, William Kiddle, James Pooley, John Defrance, Jun.
Daniel Sharpin, William Milchar, William Brown, John Sharpen, Jun. Samuel
Kettle, Stephen Ames, Richard Rose, Benjamin Stud, Edward Monk, John Cornish,
John Hodson, James Polls, Michael Parker, Richard Brown, Daniel Dye, Jun. John
Elsegood, John Pike, and John Allen, we have thought fit hereby to require you,
forthwith to make all and every the Persons abovementioned, Freemen of that our
City of Norwich, with all the Rights and Privileges thereunto belonging,
without administering unto them any Oath or Oaths whatsoever, with which we are
graciously pleased to dispense in their Behalf; and for so doing this shall be
your Warrant. And so we bid you farewell.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 13th Day of July, 1688, in the fourth
Year of our Reign. By his Majesty's Command, SUNDERLAND.

'Twas now said commonly, These Favors are ill represented, but other Affairs
here mentioned were the Cause of general Discontent.
that the King might not do thus; and those who grudged the Quakers this
Liberty, did not stick to set forth this Dispensation in very ill-favored
Colors; nay they said that William Penn advised the King to do, what he could
not do without breaking his Promise. But if the King had made no greater
Infringement, his Reign it may be would have lasted longer: But the
Dispossessing of the Fellows of Magdalen College at Oxford, the Imprisonment of
the Bishops, and the public Admittance of Jesuits and Monks, caused a Ferment
in the Minds of People. Now the Bishops were tried at the King's-bench-bar, in
Westminster Hall; but they were acquitted, and so released. The King also had
appointed some Ecclesiastical Commissioners; but many looked upon this as a
kind of Inquisition, and it seemed not well to agree with Liberty of
Conscience, which if he had maintained justly, according to the Advice of the
Quakers in their Address, it is not likely that he would have come to such a
Strait, as now he was put to.

Not long before this Time, T. Townsend publishes a very remarkable Account of
her own and her Friends Sufferings in Glocestersh.
one Theophila Townsend, a Woman of Years and Understading, published a Book,
wherein she gave a Relation of the grievous Persecution her Friends in
Glocestershire had suffered, by Imprisonment and Spoil of Goods, and how she
herself had also undergone many Sufferings, and had been imprisoned in the
Castle of Gloucester more than three Years. Among other Cases she relates also,
how some Time before her Imprisonment it happened, that by Order of the
Justices Thomas Cutler, and James George, she being seized in the Street, said
to the Latter, That the Lord would plead her Cause, and that what Measure he
meted, should be measured to him again. And it thus happened, that before she
was released, the Wife of the said George, who took her from her Husband, was
by Death taken from him. Afterward this George came with the Bishop of
Gloucester into a Meeting, where Theophila was on her Knees praying: At which
the Bishop asking him, Whether she was the Woman he spoke of, and he answering,
Yes, my Lord; Violence of the Bishop of Gloucester
the Bishop took her by the Arm with such Violence, that he had almost pulled
her down backward, saying, Give over, Woman, and obey the King's Officers. But
such was her Zeal that it could not be stopped; for the more Opposition she met
with, the more she felt herself encouraged, and inspired, to praise God for his
Goodness; And though the Bishop stirred up the Justice, yet it seemed not in his
Power to break off the Current of her Speech; so that they let her alone, till
she having discharged herself, stood up. Then the Names of those that were met,
were taken in Writing; and some Time after, she, though aged and weakly, was in
Winter-season led three or four Miles through the Snow, and committed to Jail at
Gloucester, where she was kept three Years and four Months, and then released by
King James. Afterward she published a Book, as has been said already, in which
she gave an Account how some of her Friends had been beaten, punch'd, and
abused to that Degree, that they died of it, as she testified to have seen
herself: Yet, said she, though many died who were stronger than I, it has
pleased the Lord to preserve my Life, that I may speak to the Praise of his
Name, and tell of his Wonders, and put you, Persecutors, once more in Mind what
belongs to your Peace. Blessed be the Lord, he is risen for Zion's-sake, which
ye have plowed long as a Field; and when her Enemies have done their Worst,
then the Lord shall make his Zion to be an everlasting Glory, and Jerusalem the
Praise of the whole Earth. And as ye see now in others that Persecution is
Evil, so see it also in your selves: Repent in Dust and Ashes. Remember who it
was tha^ said, The wise Man's Eyes are in his Head, but the Fool walks in
Darkness. The Eyes of Fools look out for Mistakes in others, and they blame in
others what they are guilty of themselves. Methinks the Eyelids of the Morning,
that is now dawned and rising before you, ought to bring you to a true Sight of
your Condition in this Matter. Going on thus, she reproves the Informers who
had enriched themselves with the Spoil of their Neighbors; The Priest of
Gloucester and Justice George etc. petition the King for the Quakers
Meeting House to make a Work house
and she also relates, how the Priest of Gloucester had put his Name to a
Petition to the King, in which Justice George, and others, desired that the
Meeting House of the Quakers might be given to the Town, to make a Workhouse
of for the Poor. But, said she, this is like Judas, who, when the Woman came
with an Alabaster-box of very precious Spikenard, said, Why was this Waste
made? Why was not the Ointment sold, and the Money given to the Poor? But the
Scripture says, That this he said, not that he cared for the Poor, but because
he was a Thief, and had the Bag. Reflect out on that Occasion.
Thus the Priest made it appear by what he did, that he was not a true Minister
of the Gospel; for he came short of the Works of the Law, which says, Thou
shall not covet thy Neighbor's House, nor any Thing that is thy Neighbor's.
And Christ commands, to do unto Men what we would have them do unto us; by
which it is plain that such doings are contrary to the Law and the Gospel.
Those now who will have such blind sleepy Watchmen to be their Teachers, let
them pay them, and not constrain others (who know them to be blind) to pay them
also. (...) ^ing to those who had a Hand in the Spoiling of Goods, and (...)
forth the odiousness of that Work, (...) emphatical Advi^e ^^ Persecutors.
she says at last; I do not write this from a Spirit of Revenge against any,
but it is in the Love of God, to warn you, and to exhort you to Repentance,
that ye may find Mercy with the Lord, which is the real Desire of my Soul. I
can truly say, in the Presence of the Lord, that I have nothing in my Heart but
Love and Good Will to the worst of our Enemies, and this in Purity of Heart,
and in Sincerity of Mind. I desire really your eternal Peace and Well-being,
though ye have hardened your Hearts against the Lord, and his Truth and People.
Turn to the Lord, I beseech you, bow before the Almighty, who will plead with
all Flesh, and shall call all to an Account, and reward every one according to
what he has done in the Body, whether it be good or bad. Consider this
therefore whilst ye have Time, and mind the Things that belong to your Peace,
before they be hid from your Eyes: For the Long-suffering of the Lord will come
to an End, who said, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man. Therefore
whilst the Spirit of the Lord, his Light, his Grace yet strives in your Hearts,
to turn you off from your evil Ways, be willing to embrace it, believe in it,
take Counsel of it, submit to it with all your Heart, be willing to be led and
guided by it, and incline your Hearts to follow it in all Things, and then it
will lead you to Rest and Peace with the Lord for ever. Yet more she said, but
I break off. By such Kind of emphatical Speeches sometimes Persecutors have
been so touched to the Heart, that they themselves became harmless Christians.

I am come now almost to a Conclusion of my Relation concerning Persecution; of
which I could have written much more, but that I was unwilling to extend my
Work beyond what I should have been well able to complete. Yet before I
altogether part with this Matter, I will mention something concerning
Theophilus Green, The Sufferings of T. Green, and notable Deliverances from the
Malice of his Enemies.
of whom mention has been made before. He lived at Battorsea, not far from
London, and was a Man beloved of his Neighbors, because of his honest
Conversation; yet he was much persecuted, both for attending Meetings, and for
Preaching. Once it happened that some Officers came to his House to see whether
there was a Meeting, and they behaved themselves moderately: For what they did
seemed against their Mind, it being only in Obedience to the Order of Justice
Duke, who on Account of a former Offense, had issued out Warrants to make
Distress. The Officers not satisfied in the Case, and seeing no Meeting, went
their Way, and returned the Warrant; and T. Green went afterward to the said
Justice, and speaking to him, His plain Dealing with Justice Duke, and the
Effe^^
said amongst the rest. Consider what that Mouth and Tongue of thine has said
formerly, viz. That I had been very kind to thee, and is this the Way of
requiting it? Know for certain, That that God whom I have served, and for whose
Cause I now suffer, will avenge me; for Vengeance is the Lord's and he will
repay it, one Way or other, except thou speedily repentest. At this Saying the
Justice began to tremble, and crying out, said, I will do you no more Hurt than
I will do my own Soul. Pray go to the Officers, and tell them, I will never
trouble them any more upon the Account of you. Green did so, and they were glad
of it. And Duke being upon some Complaint dismissed, one Sir John Broadrick
succeeded in his Room; and he was so moderate, that he prevented the Informers,
by keeping Theophilus and his Friends o^t of their Meeting House, which was for
about two Years and a half. Afterward they were suffered again to go into
their Meeting House, but then Justice Foster came once, and taking their Names,
fined Theophilus 10 l. as a Preacher. And afterward he with others coming with
a Constable to seize for the Fine, the Constable being come to the Door of the
House said, Neighbor Green, where are you? we are come to seize your Goods, if
you will let us in. But this so displeased the Justice, that going down the
Yard, and seeing some Oa^s and Poles, he required the Constable to take them
away. To which he answered, I am no Porter. Then said the Justice, Command some
others to do it. To which the Constable returned, I command you to do it. This
so enraged the Justice, that he fined him. Sometime after, the said Justice
coming again with an High Constable, and another, a petty Constable, seized a
Barge, and had it carried away, and several Times offered it to Sale, but none
would buy it. And after it had been carried about from Place to Place for Sale,
at length it was found adrift, by one who knew not of its being seized; and
hearing that it was Theophilus's Barge, he brought it to him. But Theophilus
went to the Constables, and told them how it came to him, and where he had it,
saying, Since it was come to him again, he was willing to keep it; but if they
took it away again, he would not hinder them. This Account being given to the
Justice, he sent a Warrant, and committed Theophilus to the Marshalsea Prison.
After three Weeks the Sessions was held at the Marshalsea, and the last Day the
said Justice came to him in the Prison, saying, The Severity and Hypocrisy of
Justice Forster.
He came out of Love to see him, and to advise him for his Good; which was,
that he would Love him pay his Fine: For, said he, I am sure the Grand Jury
has found the Bill against you; and if you should come off, I have such an
Influence with the Judge, as to cause the Oath to be tendered to you; and I
know you will not take it; and then you will be run to a Praemunire, and are not
like to come out as long as you live. To which Theophilus answered, Thou said
thy coming was in Love, to advise me for my Good; but by what thou have said,
it appears the contrary: For now I perceive thou have devised as much Mischief
as thou can against me. As to the Fine, if it were but ten Pence, nay, ten
Farthings, I would not pay it. And if the Lord should permit thee to do as thou
have said, and so be the Cause of bringing my gray Hairs the sooner to the
Grave, my Blood will be at Justice Forster's Door, and it will cry Vengeance
against thee.

The next Day the two Constables being called before the Grand Jury, were
asked, What they had against Theophilus Green, that stood there indicted: And
the High Constable answered, As to Theophilus Green, he is as honest a Man,
though a Quaker, as lives about us; and he was lately in Office for the Poor, and
behaved himself as well in it as any has (...) these twenty Years. And
touching the Barge he is indicted for, when it came to him, he came to us, and
told how it came, and where he had laid it, saying, if we would take it away
again, he would not hinder us. This is all we have to say. Some of the Grand
Jury knowing Theophilus very well, and the Cause too, did aggravate the Matter
very high against the Justice: And as to the Indictment, they brought it in
Ig^oramus. Theophilus cleared, and tho advised by Sir R. How to sue Foster
decline.
So Theophilus was cleared by Proclamation; and Sir Richard How, being one of
the Jury, advised him to arrest the Justice, there being two good Actions, as
Defamation and false Imprisonment. But Theophilus said, He owned their Love,
but would leave the thing to the Lord, for whose Cause he suffered; for
Vengeance (...), and he would repay it. And it was but some little Time after,
that the said Justice Forster died, In a little Time after, it is said Forster
dyed in Horror.
as was reported, in great Horror and Misery. The Time when this happened I do
not know exactly, yet I take it to have been some Years before the Time I now
describe. We see by this Instance a very singular Deliverance, such as did not
befall every one, but which could not but encourage Theophilus the more.

Before I conclude this Year, W. Penn Leaving (...) of the public
Miscarriages, and being (...) in some as a Papist, at the serious Request of
some Person, answers those Accusations.
I most mention something concerning W. Penn, who, when the Government of King
James was sinking, not only bore the Blame of many Miscarriages, but by some
was styled a Papist, though this was altogether false. But he had a great many
Enemies; and it was no new Thing to brand the Quakers with the odious Name of
Jesuits: For thirty Years before this Time at Bristol, great Endeavors were
used to persuade People they were Franciscans. W. Penn patiently bore the
Slander of being decried as a Papist, saying but little in Justification of
himself, till at length he made a Return to a Letter sent by one who seriously
begged of him to give an Answer to those Accusations that had been forged in
Prejudice of his Reputation. In this Paper, He ascribed his free Access to the
King, partly to the Relation his Father, as Admiral, had to the Service of the
said King, who was then Duke of York, and High Admiral of England; and his
special Favor also in releasing him out of the Tower of London in the Year
1669. To this he added, My Father's humble Request to him upon his Deathbed
was, to protect me from the Inconveniences and Troubles my Persuasion might
expose me unto; and his friendly Promise to do it, and exact Performance of it,
from the Moment I addressed my self to him: I say, when all this is considered,
any Body that has the least Pretense to Goodnature, Gratitude, or Generosity,
must needs know how to interpret my Access to the King. -- Is any thing more
foolish as well as false, than that because I am often at Whitehall, therefore
I must be Author of all that is done there, that does not please abroad. But
supposing some such Things to have been done; pray tell me if I am bound to
oppose any Thing I am not called to do? I never was a Member of Council,
Cabinet, or Committee, where the Affairs of the Kingdom are transacted. I have
had no Office or Trust, and consequently nothing can be said to be done by me;
nor, for that Reason, could I lie under any Test or any Obligation to discover
my Opinion of public Acts of State: And therefore, neither can any such Acts,
nor any Silence about them, in Justice be made my Crime. Volunteers are Blanks
and Ciphers in all Governments. And unless calling at Whitehall once a Day,
upon many Occasions, or my not being turned out of nothing, (for that no Office
is) be the Evidence of my Compliance in disagreeable Things, I know not what
else can with any Truth be alleged against me. -- I am not without
Apprehensions of the Cause of this Behavior toward me; I mean my constant
Zeal for an impartial Liberty of Conscience. But if that be it, the Cause is
too good to be in Pain about it. I ever understood that to be the natural Right
of all Men; and that he that had a Religion without it, his Religion was one of
his own Make. For what is not the Religion of a Man's Choice, is the Religion
of him that imposes it: So that Liberty of Conscience is the first Step to have
a Religion. This is no new Opinion with me, I have writ many Apologies within
the last Twenty Years to defend it, and that impartially. Yet I have as
constantly declared that Bounds ought to be set to this Freedom, and that
Morality was the best; and that as often as that was violated under a Pretense
of Conscience, it was fit the Civil Power should take Place. Nor did I ever
once think of promoting any Sort of Liberty of Conscience for any body, which
did not preserve the common Protestancy of the Kingdom, and the ancient Rights
of the Government: For to say Truth, the one cannot be maintained without the
other. -- And till I saw my own Friends, with the Kingdom, delivered from the
Legal Bondage which Penal Laws for Religion had subjected them to, I could with
no Satisfaction think of leaving England, though much to my Prejudice beyond Sea,
and at my great Expense here, having in all this Time neither had either Office
or Pension, and always refusing the Rewards or Gratuities of those I have been
able to oblige. From this little Abstract of W. Penn's Apology, it appears
sufficiently what kind of Liberty he defended; And such a Liberty afterward
took Place in the Reign of the next King.

Of G. Fox I have been long silent, G. F. continually employed in the Care of
the Church.
and I do not meet with any very remarkable Transaction that concerned him,
except that he writ much, both for Edification of his Friends, and for
Instruction and Admonition of others; for he was continually occupied with the
Care of the Church, and that Things might be kept in good Order, which to
perform the better, he now staid a long while in and about London.

In this Year died William Dewsbury, A short Relation of the Convincement,
Sufferings, Service and pious End of W. Dewsbury.
one of the first Preachers among those called Quakers, having been a very
zealous Teacher, and an eminent Instrument to the Conversion of many. He was
born in Yorkshire, and in his Youth was a Shepherd, and afterward put
Apprentice to a Clothier; but when the Civil Wars broke out, he became a
Soldier, and joined with those who said they sought for the Gospel. Now though he
was religious according to his Knowledge, yet growing more and more serious,
and turning his Mind inwardly, he saw there were inward and spiritual Enemies
to encounter with, according to the Saying of the Apostle, We wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood, but against spiritual Wickedness, Ephesians. vi. 12.
etc. And this State was inwardly manifested to him in the Words of our
Savior, John xviii. 11, 36.
Put up thy Sword into thy Sheath. If my Kingdom were of this World, then would
my Servants fight. This wrought so powerfully upon his Mind, that he could no
longer meddle with martial Affairs, but left the Army, and returned to his
former Calling, endeavoring to improve in true Godliness, in which he so
advanced gradually, that when G. F. in the Year 1651, came to Balby in
Yorkshire, and preached the Gospel there, he could not but consent to the
Doctrine declared by him, as being the same of which he himself was already
convinced in his Mind, viz. That Heed ought to be given to the inward divine
Reprovings for that which is evil, which Doctrine was preached by G. F. under
the Denomination of the true Light which enlightneth every Man coming into the
World. And that Heed must be given thereunto, as being the Grace which brings
Salvation, of which the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to Titus ii. 11. saying,
That it has appeared to all Men. W. Dewsbury having heard such a Sermon as
this, agreed not only with G. F. in this Point of Doctrine, but in Process of
Time became himself also a very zealous Preacher of it, for which he fell under
great Sufferings; insomuch that he was Prisoner at Warwick nineteen Years for
Religion-sake, 19 Years a Prisoner at Warwick besides at other Places
besides the Imprisonments he suffered on that Account in other Places. But
being now released, he came in the Month called May, to London, and preached a
Sermon there concerning Regeneration, which was taken from his Mouth in
Shorthand, and afterward printed as underneath. A Sermon preached by William
Dewsbury, at Grace Church Street, the sixth of the third Month, 1688.
My Friends,
Except ye ^e regenerated and born again, ye cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

THis is the Word of the Lord God to all People this Day; this lies not in any
Profession, and in vain Imagination, and whatsoever else it is that you d^^k
your selves withal; you must every particular Man and Woman be born again, else
(...) cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This was the Doctrine of Christ
in that prepared Body wherein he appeared in the World, and preached to
Nicodemus, that standing Doctrine to this Moment of Time, and will be so while
any Man breath^ upon the Earth; there is no other Way, no other Gate to enter
into Life, but by this great Work of Regeneration. Now to enforce People to
come to this great Work, and to see forward from Earth to Heaven, all being
driven out of Paradise by the Cherubim set with a flaming Sword, there is no
returning to that blessed Life, but by the Loss of that Life that did grieve
the Spirit of God, and which did cause Man to be driven out; there is no other
Way of return again but by this new Birth. As you are all driven and forced out
of Paradise, and the flaming Sword and the Cherubims are set to keep the Way of
the Tree of Life, so you must return into the Favor of God again, by the Light
of Christ, and you have Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little,
and there a little, to direct your Minds to the Light of Christ Jesus. As the
first Adam was made a living Soul, so the second Adam is a quickening Spirit.
This know for certain, no Man or Woman can be quickened, and raised up into the
Life of the second Adam, till the Life of the first Adam be taken away from
them.

So now, let every one of you deal plainly with your own Hearts, how you came
to be a slain People to the Life of the first Adam, in which Life there was a
Working of the Mystery of Iniquity in every Part of Man. One cries, Lo here is
Christ, another, Lo there is Christ, and every one is following his own
Imagination about the Letter of the Scripture; this is still but the vain
Spirit of Man, running and striving to recover himself; and this is the Cause
there is so much Profession (...) God, and so little of his Nature appearing
among the Sons and Daughters of Men. Now all of you that come to be
Regenerated, you must come to the Light of Christ, there is no other Way to it.
He will search your Hearts, and try your Reins, and set your Sins in Order
before you, and trace out the Iniquities that compass you about; therefore you
must see your selves a lost People, a sinful People, and so come to feel the
Weight of your Sins upon your Consciences, there is no other Way to come to
Life; you will never complain of Sin till you be burdened with it, till you
have a Trumpet sounding in your Ears, to awaken you, that you may arise from
the Dead, that Christ may give you Light; there is no other Way, dear People,
you must bring your Deeds to the Light of Christ, and abide in the Sentence of
Condemnation; if you save your Lives, you lose them; if you will lose your
Lives for Christ's sake, there is no Danger of your eternal Life. John the
Baptist, Christ's Forerunner, declared, I indeed baptize you with Water unto
Repentance, but he that comes after me is mightier than I, the Latchet of
whose Shoes I am not worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire, whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
Floor, and will gather his Wheat into his Garner, but the Chaff he will burn
with unquenchable Fire. What is it the better for you to read the Scripture if
you know not this fiery Baptism, which all must know that are regenerated;
deceive not your selves, Christ will appear in flaming Fire, and take Vengeance
on all them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

I stand here as a Witness of the Lord of Life this Day, there is no Way for
People to come to Salvation, but they must know Christ revealed in all their
Hearts. What is he doing but rendering Vengeance upon the carnal Mind, self
pleasing, and all inordinate Affections; he comes with Vengeance to take away
thy Life, he will baptize thee with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. If thou
know not this, thou art not a true Christian, thou will never look Death in
the Face with Joy, nor go down to the Grave with Triumph. If thou live at
home in the Body, and flyest for thy Life, and wilt not be willing to lose thy
Life for Christ, if thou art called to it, and if thou will nor have Christ to
wash thee (some for Shyness, and some for Self-love will refuse this) if Christ
does not wash thee, thou have no Part in him; you must come to Christ to purify
you in the fiery Furnace; the Day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven, (as the
Prophet speaks) this is a dreadful Day, a Day of Vengeance, the Day of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who redeemeth his People from their Sins, Sion is redeemed with
Judgment, and established with Righteousness. Do not make the Way to Heaven
easier in your Minds and Imaginations than indeed it is, and think it not
sufficient to live in an outward Observance of the Ways of God. If your own
Wills be alive, and your Corruption remain unmortified, the Judgment of God
will be your Portion, therefore in the Lord's Name come along with me, I am
come to declare what I have heard and seen of the Father. Come and examine thy
Conscience, have thou brought thy Deeds to the Light? then thou have received
Condemnation upon thy self, and thy Haughtiness is bowed down, and laid low,
and thou see thy self a poor miserable Wretch before the eternal God.
Whatsoever thou know of the Mind of God, have thou reformed thy Ways? Come
along with me, and tell me what is the Ground of thy Faith, and thy Confidence;
is it thy Obedience and Qualifications? Because thy Obedience is right, and thy
Qualifications right, what Use do thou make of them? Read the Book of
Conscience; have thou no Ground for thy Faith? Thou have put on the reformed
Faith, and live an unreformed Life; search and try thy self, Man, or Woman.
Do thou watch over thy self, and keep in a Sense of thy Dissolution,
notwithstanding all thy Qualifications and partial Reformation? Do thou
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and the narrow Way? Here is the lost
Sheep, thou seek, the Life of thy Will, the Life of the first Adam; the
Justice of God will not suffer thee to make a Savior of thy Duties and
Qualifications, and to take God's Jewels and to deck thy self with them; thou
can not be saved without the Righteousness of God in Christ Jesus. What says
thy Conscience, art thou brought to this Change of thy Mind, and of thy
Conversation? Are you all willing to part with your Sins, with your Pride and
Haughtiness? Are you willing to part with your vile Affections? This is the
Work of God's Grace upon you. Do thou place thy Confidence in thy Duties and
Qualifications, and take God's Jewels and Ornaments and deckest thy self with
them? Thou tookest my Jewels, says the Lord, and did play the Harlot. If
thou return to the Lord, and humble thy self, and get through this Difficulty,
thou will be happy forever. This Judgment of God, this flaming Sword that turns
every Way, will keep thee from returning to Sin, and bring thee to Christ, and
cut thee off from all Hope of Salvation but by him, and make thee to see the
absolute need of a Savior, and that thy Life is hid with Christ in God.

It is God's infinite Goodness to Men that he will hide Pride from them, and
humble them under his mighty Hand. This is the Condition of poor Creatures that
are slain by the Hands of the most High: How may I know when I am slain and
baptized, and come to have Sincerity? They that have this Baptism enter into
the Heavenly Life. If you love the Light of Christ Jesus, it will be thus with
you; God will make short work in the Earth. He will set thy Sins in order
before thee, and make thee watchful unto Prayer, and lead thee to Holiness of
Life and Conversation, and make thee abhor thy self, and despise all the Pomps
and Pleasures and Vanities of this World. When he has adorned thee with his
Graces, then watch for the Light, and in the Light of Christ thou shall see
Light, and that all thou have done, and can do, is but thy Duty. All this
thou ought to do; thou art God's Creature, and all this will not justify
thee in order to thy Eternal Salvation, for these Services thou owe unto God.
If thou diligently wait, thou shall see more Light; then the Sword that
proceeds out of the Mouth of Christ, who is called the Word of God, will cut
thee off from all thy Hopes of Salvation from any Thing thou have done, from
any of thy Qualifications, from any Thing that thou can do, so that thou will
be a hopeless Soul, nothing in thy own Sense and Apprehension. The Power of the
first Adam must die before him, and thou will cry out, I am a dead, lost, and
undone Creature, but there is a Life hid with Christ in God for me; but I can
never have it till I be slain into the Will of God, and become as a little
Child, and be stripped of all my own Excellency that I have attained. I must come
to a Sense of my own Misery, and fall down at the Foot of God; when I am become
as a little Child, humbled and slain as to my own Will, and Confidence in my
own Righteousness; I will not then question but I shall live a holy Life, but I
will give all that Life I had, for that Life which is hid with Christ in God;
O! there is none come so far, that ever miss of Eternal Life. All shuffling
People that would have Salvation by Christ, and will not let him exercise his
heavenly Power, his princely glorious Power to baptize them into his Death, it
is they that come short of Salvation; but all those that yield themselves up to
Christ to be redeemed through Judgment, and are become as little Children, these
are in a happy State. You know that our Lord Jesus Christ took a little Child
in his Arms, and said. Whosoever becomes not as a little Child, cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. You must all of you become as little Children, and
depend upon the Mercy and free Grace of God; you must all come to a holy
Resignation of your selves to God's Disposal. If you come to Christ as little
Children, and depend upon him, you cannot miss of Salvation; it is entailed
upon such Souls as hear the Voice of Christ; they that hear the Voice of the
Son of God shall live.

I stand here as a Witness for the God of Heaven. I never heard the Voice of
Christ (as his Follower, till I was slain and baptized, and lay as a little
Child under his Heavenly Chastisements. As Soon as ever my Soul was brought to
this in my Humiliation, O then the dreadful Judgment was taken away, and the
Book of Life was opened unto me, and the Lord spoke comfortably to me, I have
loved thee with an everlasting Love; and I was made a Christian through a Day of
Vengeance, and of burning as an Oven; and the Haughtiness and Pride of Man in
me was brought low. Now in this Conformity to Christ's Death, People may die
into Life, and blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from
their Labors, and their Works do follow them. Away with all your own Will, and
your Pride, and Haughtiness, and your Hypocrisy, and Deceit, and all Dependancy
upon any Qualification of your own. You must come to have your Life separated
from you, else you will all perish. Those that will die with Christ, and be
willing to die for him, he is revealed as a Savior to them. He was before us
in the Days of his Flesh, and complied with his Father's Will, he was nailed to
the Cross. The Son of God, when he was come to the Depth of his Sufferings,
what was his Cry? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This was for thy
Sake, and my Sake, and every Man and Woman's Sake that do believe in him; he
drank the Cup which his Father gave him to drink; If it was done thus to the
green Tree, what shall be done unto the dry? He went before us, and when he
comes again he will take us to himself, and take us from the Filth of Sin,
that we may be made new Creatures.

Now except we be born again, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and
there is no becoming new Creatures, till we be slain to the old Man. Thou must
be slain to thy Pride and Haughtiness, and the Corruption of thine own Will,
and all Selfishness, thou must have God to burn it up in thee; the Holy Ghost
will destroy and burn up nothing in thee, but that which will bring an eternal
Fire upon thy Soul; show me, thou whom my Soul loves, where is the Path of
Life, the Footsteps of the Flock of thy Companions? Why should I be as one
that goes aside? Now every one that lives at home in the Bosom of Self, take
this with you, Though you profess the Truth, and live in an outward Conformity
thereunto, yet if you secretly indulge your corrupt Wills, and live a
Flesh-pleasing Life, and consult with Flesh and Blood, and are not rent off
from your Lusts, you cannot enjoy the Lord of Life; While I am at home in the
Body, I am absent from the Lord.

The Body of Sin is a Loadstone to draw you from the Life of God, and from
glorying in the Cross of Christ: This is Flesh and Blood, and Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. For the Lord's Sake, for your Soul's Sake,
and for the Sake of your Eternal Happiness, put not off this Work, but pursue
it, and it will be perfected. See how Christ is revealed in you by the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire. God will redeem you by the Spirit of Judgment and
Burning: It is not ranging abroad with your Minds, but you must know Christ is
in you except ye he Reprobates. If he has set your Eyes and Hearts upon
himself, and made you to water your Couch with your Tears; if he has broken
your Sleep, so as you have cried out, I shall be damned and never come to
Salvation; (This will be your Cry, it was once my Cry,) O let not your Eyes
slumber, nor your Eyelids take any Rest, till you be sure the Lord is your God.
If you find these Qualifications, you are on your Way, otherwise you will be
like a deceitful Bow, and never abide in Judgment. If you reject the Counsel of
God against your selves, and refuse to be crucified with Christ, and to be
baptized with his Baptism, you will never have Life; but by his Baptism, and
through the heavenly Operation of his Spirit, if thou have Faith in Christ's
Name, thou shall be married to him in everlasting Righteousness. Salvation
shall be brought to us, and eternal. Life be bestowed upon us, even that Life
which is hid with Christ in God, he will give to every poor mournful Soul, that
submits to his blessed Will, and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ: This is
not a Faith of our own making, nor a Garment of our own Embroidery, but that
which the Lord has given to us. O happy Man or Woman, that obtainest this Gift
of God! O! Who will not lose their Lives for this everlasting Life? Who will
not die for this eternal Life? Now the Matter lies in the Death of your own
Wills, when you have done the Will of God, then watch that your own Wills be
slain, and that your cursed Self take not the Jewels of God, and his Bracelets
and Ornaments, and bestow them upon Self, and paint and deck cursed Self; and
take not the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot: If you
be dead to your own Wills you are risen with Christ, and shall receive a
Resurrection to eternal Life: Crucify Self, and set the World at naught, and
trample upon it, and all Things of it, and count them as Dross and Dung in
comparison of Christ, that the Father has revealed to be our Life, in the Days
of our Sorrow and Mourning, in the Day of our Calamity, in the Day when we
cried, our Hope is lost.

Thus it has been with the holiest People on Earth. It is not by Works of
Righteousness of thy own that thou can be saved; Christ comes to cut all
these down, that thou may be ingrafted into him, and justified by his Grace.
Do not make this Matter of Talk, and say, I have heard this and that, but look
into your own Hearts, and see what heavenly Workings are there; what there is
of the Power of the Lord Jesus, that has made you to loath this World, and the
inordinate Love of the Creature, that you may enjoy all these Things, as if you
enjoyed them not. We cannot when we are slain and crucified to this World, but
say, My Life is in Christ, when we come to ascribe nothing to our selves, and
all to Christ; here is a blessed Harmony, broken Hearts, melted Spirits, and
yet joyful Souls; poor Creatures that were mourning and sighing, and crying
before the Lord in retired Places, and yet rejoicing in Christ Jesus. I am
risen with Christ, I said, my Hope is cut off, I will lie down in thy Will, O
God; do what thou will with me, it is in thy sovereign Pleasure and free Gift,
whether thou give me Life, or deny it to me. There must be a Resignation of our
selves to the Will of God; it was so with the Lord Jesus, and it is so with
every true Saint of God; you must be humbled as little Children before Judgment
be taken away, and the Loving Kindness of God sealed up to your Souls. If you
seek this Work of God, you will find it; if you seek it upon your Beds, in all
your Labors and Concernments, in all your Stations and Relations; if you press
after the New Birth, you must use this World, as if you used it not, and live a
married Life, as if you were unmarried, for the Fashion of this World passes
away. This is not Rantism.

But let me tell you, a New World comes by Regeneration; a Man is not lifted up
in his own Mind, but laid low in his own Eyes, he waits for the Wisdom of God
to govern him, and he is as a Steward of the Grace of God, to give to them that
stand in need. When a Man is regenerated and born again, he is as contented
with Bread and Water, as with all the Enjoyments of this World: What is the
Matter? His own Will is gone, and put down under his Feet, and whatsoever it is
that gives Life to all his vain Desires and Affections, there is a Harmony of
all within, a Man praising of God, and blessing his Holy Name; there are no
Intanglements shall draw away the Heart from serving of God, and seeking his
Glory; and if God shall call the Husband from the Wife, or the Wife from the
Husband for the Glory of his Name, there is no whining, and complaining, and
crying out, but giving them up, and a praising and blessing God when they are
called to such an Exercise; and if they are not called to that, then they set
their Hearts to glorify God in their several Places and Stations; then they
have a full Content in a blessed Resignation. Here their Wills are slain, but
they praise God they have no Desire, but Lord thy Will be done; always praising
God, always having the Fear, and the Glory of God before their Eyes. All the
Mischief is hatched in pleasing Men's own Wills: That is, the Counsel of every
Heart that Christ does not govern: Will you live as the Quakers? Then you must
live contemptibly, the Mistress and Maid are Hail-fellow, well met. No, every
one must walk in Humility, and live in Acquaintance with the God of Heaven; she
that is wrought upon by the same Spirit, must with all Diligence behave herself
as becomes a Servant of the Lord. Here is now a New World, and the Fashions of
the Old World are gone; all Pride, Haughtiness, Crossness and trampling upon
one another are all gone, all slain, through the Operation of Christ.

What remains now? Christ is in me, and we are all one in him. Christ laid down
his Life for thee and me; now he reigns in me, and he has prepared my Body to
die for the Truth, as his prepared Body was laid down for ^^y Sin. It is a kind
of foolish Profession, to make Profession of Christ, and live in Covetousness,
Profaneness, Sensuality, and the like; they that are come to this heavenly
Birth seek the Things that are above, thou can do no other. Make the Tree
good, and the Fruit will be good. You must be ingrafted into the Vine of God's
Righteousness: O! slight not the Day of your Visitation. What was it to me to
read of any being born again, till I was slain, and knew the heavenly Baptism
of Christ Jesus? Till I saw the flaming Sword ready to slay me in every Way, in
every Turning. The Light of Christ convinced me of Sin, and his Righteousness
justified me, and those Works were abominable to me, that hindered my Soul's
Passage to Christ. Christ Jesus in marrying my Soul to himself, seized upon me,
and did work effectually in me: There is the Testimony of Christ in me, he has
sealed up my Soul to the Day of my Redemption: Here is a certain Passage, and a
certain Way which never any miss of, that lose their Lives for Christ: If you
be not ready and willing to lose your Lives for Christ, you shall never come
here: The Gate is straight, and the Way is narrow; none come hither but those
that die into a heavenly Oneness with Christ. O Friends, let us empty our
selves, that Christ may fill us; let us be nothing in our own Eyes, that we may
be all in him, and receive of his Fullness.

Now I commend you to God's Witness, that you may remember what has been
spoken among you; but consider, if you do not hearken to it, it will follow
you, and be a Plague to you to all Eternity. If you will not yield up your
selves to Christ this Day that burns like an Oven, this Fire you must dwell
with when out of the Body, there will be no quenching of this Fire for ever;
but if you be so wise for your Souls, as to resign your selves up to Christ,
and come to him as little Children, this will not hinder your earthly Concerns.
Though the World may account thee a Fool, yet thou have that Part of heavenly
Wisdom, to do what thou do as unto God; thou carriest to thy Wife, as in the
sight of God, that she may be sanctified to thee, and thou to her; and thou
carriest becomingly to thy Children and Servants, and thou will abound in
Grace, and in every good Work, which will be for thine Eternal Welfare.

O! I beseech you People, for the Lord's sake, wait for the Light of Christ to
guide you; learn of him to be meek and lowly, then happy are you; for he
dwells with the Humble, but he beholds the Proud afar off. This New Birth,
which is a true Work, a sincere and heavenly Work, it will make you for ever. O
make Room for Christ in your Hearts, or else he is never like to dwell with
you. He loves to dwell with the poor and humble and contrite Spirit, he abhors
the Proud, he will empty your Souls, that he may fill them.

And so I commend you to God. I have been long held in Durance under great
Weakness; and I was restless, till I could come up to this great City of
London, to preach the Everlasting Gospel among you, and you see I am among you
here: Pray every one of you turn inward; let not these Words passing through a
mean Vessel be as a bare empty Discourse of Truth to you, which you only hear,
and take no further Care of your Salvation. Take heed of despising the Light
that shines in the midst of you, and be pressing forward to the heavenly Work
that is laid in the Power of Christ Jesus, even through Judgment into Death, and
then he will give eternal Life. The Lord confirm this, that it may rest upon
your Hearts, that you may be dead to the Things of the World. We are not come
to Mount Sinai, that genders to Bondage, but we are come to Mount Sion, the
City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company
of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood
of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things than that of Abel. This is the
Inheritance of the Redeemed of the most High, blessed be the Name of the Lord;
let us rest in Hope, till he bring us to Humility and Lowliness of Mind, that
he may cloth us with heavenly Glory, according to his Promise, I will
beautify my House with Glory, says the Lord. This is the Portion of a poor
People, that cast down themselves before the Lord, that he may lift them up,
and be all in all to them, in whose blessed Presence they shall have Joy, and
Rivers of Pleasures at his Right hand for evermore.


His Intention was to have been at the Yearly Meeting of his Friends; but by
Illness he was prevented; and therefore before he grew worse, he returned to
Warwick, where he lived. Being come thither, his Disease increased; and lying
very sick in Bed, and being visited by some of his Friends, he said to them, in
great Weakness of Body, as follows:

My God has yet put it in my Heart to bear a Testimony to his Name and blessed
Truth, and I can never forget the Day of his great Power and blessed
Appearance, when he first sent me to preach the Everlasting Gospel, and
proclaim the Day of the Lord to all People. Therefore, Friends, be faithful and
trust to the Lord your God; for this I can say, I never since played the
Coward, but as joyfully entered Prisons as Palaces, and in the Prisonhouse I
sang Praises to my God, and esteemed the Bolts and Locks upon me as Jewels. And
Friends, this I must once again testify to you in the Name of the Lord God,
That what I saw above thirty Years ago, still rests as a Testimony to leave
behind me, That a dreadful terrible Day is at hand, and will certainly come to
pass; but the Time when, I cannot say; but all put on Strength in the Name of
the Lord, and wait to feel his eternal Power, to preserve you through the
Tribulations of those Days that approach very near. This I have further to
signify, that my Departure draws nigh. Blessed be my God. I am prepared, and I
have nothing to do but die, and put off this corruptible and mortal Tabernacle,
this Flesh that has so many Infirmities; but the Life that dwells in it,
ascends out of the Reach of Death, Hell, and the Grave; and Immortality and
eternal Life is my Crown for ever. Therefore you that are left behind, fear
not, nor be discouraged, but go on in the Name and Power of the Lord, and bear
a faithful and living Testimony for him in your Day. And the Lord will prosper
his Work in your Hand, and cause his Truth to flourish, and spread abroad. For
it shall have the Victory, and no Weapon formed against it shall prosper.

Thus fervent in Spirit was W. Dewsbury in his latter End, and he prayed to God
very earnestly for all his Friends, especially those that were met at the
Annual Assembly at London. And so he very piously departed this Life at his
House, in a good old Age, in the Month called June, in this current Year. He
was indeed a Man of a remarkable Zeal and Perception. He spoke sometimes to
young Lads as to Men, telling them that the Blessing of the Lord would rest
upon them if they lived a godly Life; some of which being since come to Man's
Estate, have experienced the Truth of his Saying.

Two Days before the Decease of W. Dewsbury, The Death of R. Travers.
Rebecca Travers departed this Life, at about the Age of 79 Years. She was a
Woman exceedingly well gifted; and spoke not only sometimes in public for
Edification of the Church, but writ also several Books for the Advancement of
Piety; in one of which she signified, That though she had been a Reader of the
Scriptures from a Child of six Years old; yet when by the Power of the eternal
Gospel she was turned from Darkness to Light, the Scriptures then became much
more plain to her, as not wanting Interpretation. She was an excellent
open-hearted Woman, and took great Care of the Poor: She had several Times been
imprisoned for Religion, but persevered constantly in the Faith, and so piously
entered into eternal Rest.

As to State Affairs, there now appeared a wonderful Agitation in England,
since it was reported that the Queen was big with Child. And the Endeavors for
introducing Popery, besides the incroaching upon some Rights and Privileges,
caused such a Stir, that William the Third, Prince of Orange, and Stadholder
(or Lord-Deputy) of Holland, etc. was entreated and invited by the English
Protestants to come to their Assistance. The Prince of Orange lands in England.
This at length he did, and came over with a Fleet, and a considerable Number
of Forces. What was the Issue of this Expedition, is very amply described by
other Pens, and also not properly my Province to relate; wherefore I think it
sufficient to my Purpose to say, that the Prince, after some Difficulty at Sea,
came into England, where having many Adherents, the King, many of whose Forces
deserted him, resolved to go to France, And K. James in France.
whither the Queen with the young Child was gone some Time before. Accordingly
he went over, where he was well received by the French King, who provided him a
Court at St. Germains. In the mean while the Prince of Orange came to London,
and was saluted there by the Great Ones as the Deliverer of England. The Lord
Mayor of the said City, with the Aldermen, and the Sheriffs, having
congratulated him, the Prince sent for some of the Members of former
Parliaments to come to him, The Prince advises with Members of former
Parliaments how to pursue the Ends of his Declaration. For which he receives
their Thanks.
and he signified to them, That he had desired them to meet to advise him in
the best Manner how to pursue the Ends of his Declaration in calling a free
Parliament, for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the restoring of
the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and settling the same, that they might
not be in Danger of being again subverted.

In answer to this, Thanks were given to the Prince for his Care and Pains in
Defense of the People, their Religion and Laws. And all Things took a
favorable Turn for him.

In Holland a good while before, A sly Paper published in Holland
a Paper was given forth in Print called, A Copy of a Letter written by a
Quaker at London, to his Friend at Rotterdam. In which forged Letter were
mentioned several Things that were not altogether untrue, and the Prince's
going over to England, was also in a Manner predicted. Who was the Author of
the said Letter, I could never learn, but of this I am fully satisfied, that he
was no Quaker; for it never was their way to ridicule Princes and to
characterize them with ridiculous Denominations, as in the said Letter we find
mentioned, of James of Great Britain, Mary of Modena, Willam of Orange, and
Mary of England his Wife. This was no more the Language of Quakers, than the
following Expressions that are found in this Letter. The Spirit has inspired
me to tell thee. I should not be able to declare my Opinion, before the Spirit
shall have revealed it to me. If the Spirit does dictate it to thee, go and
speak with him. Dentsch has had a Revelation, and the Spirit has assured him,
etc. This foolish Language betrays it self, and serves for a palpable Evidence,
that it never proceeded from the Pen of any of the People called Quakers. But
perhaps the Author of that Letter knew a Secret of State, whereof (to remain
unknown) he would acquaint the World in a ridiculous Way, that under the Cloak
of being a Quaker, he should best continue undiscovered, and that by this
Device the Letter would spread the more, as indeed it did; for it had a very
quick Vent.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The ELEVENTH BOOK.
I Proceed now to the Year 1689, 1689
in the Beginning of which the Peers of the Realm, etc. offered the
Administration of the Government to the Prince of Orange, Administration of the
Government offered to the Prince of Orange.
which he accepted of. Not long after he called a Convention of the Commons;
for a Parliament it could not be named, since in England, none but a King has
Power to call a Parliament. In the mean while the Prince had caused the
Princess his Consort to come over from Holland into England; and at length the
Convention, after many great Debates, came to this Resolution, That the Throne
was vacant; the Consequence of which was, that the Prince and Princess of
Orange, Who with his Consort were afterward declared King and Queen, and
Crowned.
were declared by the Names of William the Third, and Mary the Second, King and
Queen of England, etc. and accordingly were afterward crowned. A large
Relation thereof is to be found in several Books. By the way I Will only say,
that the Coronation was performed by the Bishop of London, the Archbishop of
Canterbury having refused to act in that Solemnity; at the Performance of
which, the King and Queen were asked by the Bishop, Will you solemnly promise
and swear to govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions
thereto belonging, according to the Statutes in Parliament agreed to, and the
Laws and Customs of the same. To which the King and Queen having answered, I
solemnly promise so to do; the Bishop asked, Will you to your Power cause Law
and Justice in Mercy to be executed in all your Judgments? Answer was made, I
will. The next Question was, Will you to the utmost of your Power maintain the
Law of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed
Religion established by Law? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy
of this Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights
and Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain to them, or any of them? To this
the King and Queen answered, All this I promise to do. After this, they laying
each of them their Hands upon the Book of the Gospel, said, These Things which
I have here before promised, I will perform and keep. So help me God. Under
these punctual and nice Questions was More hidden than some would think: For
the King having answered so as has been said, could not now free any from
paying Tithes to the Clergy, without Violation of his Oath.

Not long after, They are also declared King and Queen of Scotland.
William and Mary were thus made King and Queen of England, they were also in
Scotland declared King and Queen of Scotland. And somebody in Holland denoted
the Year of his being made King, in this manner, VVILheLMVs tertIVs angLlae
VInDeX. Not long after this, The late King James supported by the French King
driven out of Ireland by K. William.
a War was proclaimed against France, and the late King James, supported by the
French King, went over to Ireland, from whence in Process of Time he was driven
away by King William, after the bloody Battle near the River Boyn; but that not
belonging to this History, I will not detain my Reader with a Relation thereof.

A King having now mounted the Throne, the Convention was turned into a
Parliament; and then this August Assembly made it their Busness to restrain the
For^ing of Conscience; The Parliament settle Liberty of Conscience to
Protestants Dissenters by Law
and an Act passed for exempting Protestant Dissenters from the Penal Laws by
which some Dissenters, and especially the Quakers, had suffered and been
persecuted many Years. Yet Care was taken to keep that Law in Force, by which
Papists were excluded from Sitting in Parliament. And those Penal Laws, of
which Mention has been made heretofore in due Place, were now restrained,
except the Test-Act, properly required for serving in high Offices, and to keep
out the Papists. The aforesaid Act gave also Liberty to Dissenters to keep
Religious Meetings, provided the Doors were not locked, barred, or bolted,
during the Time of such Meeting. But none of these Dissenters were freed from
paying of Tithes, or other Church-Duties so called, to the Clergy, nor from
^^ing cited before Bishops Courts. But this Liberty of keeping public Meetings
was not allowed to Papists; for all that would participate of the said Liberty,
were required to take the Oath of Allegiance; yet to comply with the People
called Quakers, who for Conscience Sake scrupled to take any Oath, this Act
enjoined, that they should subscribe the Following Declaration;

I A. B. do sincerely promise, Quakers Declaration of Fidelity.
and solemnly declare, before God and the World, that I will be true and
faithful to King William and Queen Mary; And I do solemnly profess and declare,
that I do from my Heart abhor, detest and renounce as impious and heretical
that damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes excommunicated or deprived by
the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or murdered by
their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I declare that no Foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State, or Porentate, has, or ought to have any Power,
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, within this Realm.

Besides this, they were obliged to subscribe also another, with Respect to
their Orthodoxy, and for excluding Socinianism.

I A. B. profess Faith in God the Father, Another of their Christian Faith
and in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, the True God, and in the Holy Spirit, One
God, blessed for evermore: And do acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration.

And lest any Papist might make use of this Declaration, Place of Worship to be
certified.
there were required sufficient Protestant Witnesses that the Declarer was a
Protestant Dissenter. Besides, No Congregation or Assembly for Religious
Worship was permitted or allowed by this Act, until the Place of such Meeting
should be certified to the Bishop of the Diocese, or to the Archdeacon of that
Arch-Deaconry, or to the Justices of the Peace at the General or
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County, City, or Place, in which such
Meeting should be held, and registered in the said Bishop's or Arch-Deacon's
Court respectively, or recorded at the said General or Quarter Sessions, for
which the Register or Clerk should not take greater Fee or Reward than
Sixpence.

By this we now see the Religion of the Quakers acknowledged and tolerated by
an Act of Parliament, K. William the glorious Instrument of establishing
Liberty of Conscience by Law.
and themselves released from all Persecution for Performance of their public
Worship, and their Refusal of the Oath of Allegiance. This was a Work reserved
for that Great Prince King William, who being born in a Country, where Force
upon Conscience was abrogated when a Protestant Government was settled there,
now also according to his Ability introduced the like Christian Liberty in
England: But to release from the Payment of Tithes was beyond his Reach, how
unreasonably soever the Clergy acted in this Case; whereof about this Time a
notable Instance was published in Print, of one John Bishop, a Countryman at
Wortham, from whom for two Years Tithes there had been taken Horses, Kin^ and
Sheep to the Value of seventy-six Pounds, according to the Estimate of
impartial Persons, though rated by himself at eighty-three Pounds. And yet the
Priest Thomas Turlow had declared upon his Oath, T. Turlow Priest, makes
grievous Spoil on J. Bishop, of Wortham.
that he believed that the Tithes of every Year's Growth of the said John
Bishop did amount, one Year with another, to three Pounds seventeen Shillings
and Sixpence; but the Charges were reckoned so high, and the Rating of the
distrained Goods was so very much beneath the real Value, that the Loss thereby
sustained was exceeding great.

In Barbados in the West Indies, Quakers continue to suffer in Barbados, and
therefore send over a Petition to the King.
where the Inhabitants were marshaled to bear Arms, the Quakers,
notwithstanding what had been ordered in their Favor by King James, continued
yet under hard Sufferings, of which more in the Sequel. They now that were thus
oppressed, sent over a Petition to the King, wherein they set forth how they
were molested, and prayed for Relief; which had such Effect, that the King
issued out the following Order;

At the Council at Whitehall, December 12. 1689.
Present the King's most Excellent Majesty in Council.
UPon reading a Petition of the People called Quakers, His Order thereupon.
inhabiting the Island of Barbados, setting forth, that because the said
Quakers could not bear Arms, nor take an Oath in any Case, they have suffered
much by virtue of an Act made to settle the Militia in the said Island, as in
the petition hereunto annexed is more at large expressed, his Majesty in
Council is graciously pleased to refer the Matter of the said Petition to the
Examination of James Kendal, Esquire his Majesty's Governor of Barbados for the
Time being, who is to give the Petitioners such Relief in Relation to the
Militia, as to him shall seem just and reasonable to answer their particular
Circumstances, and to make Report thereof to his Majesty.

Richard Collinge.

This Year deceased Alexander Parker, The Death of A. Parker.
sometimes mentioned in this History, being a Man not only of a godly Life and
Conversation, but also of a goodly Mien and grave Deportment. In the following
Year, viz. that of 1690, 1690
Robert Barclay also departed this Life; a Man of eminent Gifts and great
Endowments, The Death and Character of R. Barclay.
expert not only in the Languages of the Learned, but also well versed in the
Writings of the ancient Fathers, and other Ecclesiastical Writers, and
furnished with a great Understanding, being not only of a sound Judgment, but
also strong in Arguments, and cheerful in Sufferings; besides he was of a
friendly and pleasant, yet grave Conversation, and eminently fitted for
composing of Differences; and he really lived up to what he professed, being of
an unblameable Deportment, truly pious, and well beloved of those he conversed
with. And in this happy State it pleased God to take him away out of this Vale
of Tears, into a glorious Immortality, in the Prime of his Age, having not
lived much above half the Life of a Man, as it is commonly accounted, viz. in
his 42d Year, on the 3d of October, at his House at Ury in Scotland, where he
died of a Sickness which did not last long; yet he signified with a good
Understanding, that if was well with him as to his Soul.

This Year Stephen Crisp writ an Epistle of tender Love and brotherly Advice to
all the Churches of Christ throughout the World, in which he exhorted them more
particularly to Charity; and since therein several remarkable Duties are held
forth and recommended, I cannot well omit to insert a Copy of it here, which is
follows;

DEarly beloved Friends and Brethren, An Epistle of S. Crisp, writ worthy the
serious Consideration of all, but particularly of such as may be concerned in
the Management of the Affairs of the Church
gathered out of the World by the eternal Arm and Power of the mighty God, to
bear his holy Name in your Generation; my Love and Life in the Fellowship of
the universal Spirit salutes you all, and my Prayer to God is, you may be kept
steadfast and immovable in the Grace of God, and in the Communion of his holy
Spirit, that ye may bring forth Fruit in Abundance, according to the abundant
Mercy and Grace bestowed upon you, to the Glory of God, and to your mutual Joy,
Comfort, and Edification.

And that you may so do, let your Eye be kept daily to the Lord, and behold and
take Notice of the wondrous Works that he has wrought in you, and for you,
since the Day ye were first quickened by his immortal Word, and stirred up to
seek after him, and to wait upon him; how good and gracious he has been to
you, in bringing you from the barren Mountains, where your Souls languished for
the heavenly Nourishment, where you knew not the Lord, nor one another, but
were without a Comforter, or any to sympathize with you in your Mournings: Oh,
how has he pitied your Groanings, and had Compassion on your Sighings, and
brought you into Acquaintance with those that were in the like Exercises; and
then he taught you to believe on him that was able to help you: And those that
were thus taught of the Father, and felt his drawing Cords of Love prevailing
upon them; these came to Christ their Savior, and in him began to feel a Unity
one with another, in the Faith you had received in him; whereby you believed he
would give you of his Spirit to teach and guide you in the Way of Truth,
Righteousness and Peace; and thus was the Foundation of your holy Communion
laid, and a lively Hope raised in each particular Soul, that he that had begun
this blessed Work would carry it on; and this Hope made you that ye were not
ashamed to make a public Profession of his Name before the World, but
cheerfully to take up his Cross, and deny your selves of your former Pleasures,
Friendships, and Delights of this World: This Hope has been your Support in
many sharp Trials, and bitter Combats you have had with the Enemy of your
Soul's Peace within, and with the Enemies of God's holy Way and Truth without;
and in all your Conflicts you have sound him nigh at Hand, to put forth his
Power on your Behalf, as you have depended upon him for his Assistance; and by
these Experiences of his Goodness, your Faith has been strengthened; and by the
same Word of Life that quickened you, many more have been reached unto, so that
you have seen a daily Addition of Strength in the Particular, and also an
Addition to your Number, to your great Comfort and Encouragement; and many have
come to wait upon the Lord among you, and many are daily enquiring the Way to
Zion, with their Faces thitherward. These Things are worth your Remembrance,
and serious Considerations, that you may look upon these great Mercies, as
Obligations upon your Souls to walk humbly before the Lord, and to be devout
and fervent in your Testimony, for that God that has done thus great Things
for you.

And, Friends, consider of the great Works that this mighty Arm of the Lord
has brought to pass in the general, as well as in the particular; how many
Contrivances have been framed, and Laws and Decrees made to lay you waste, and
to make you cease to be a People, and how have the Wicked rejoiced thereat,
(for a Season) crying, Ah, ha! thus would we have it; they are all now given up
to Banishments, to Imprisonments, to Spoils and Ruins; now let us see if that
invisible Arm they trust in can deliver them. Oh Friends! how has your God
been your Support in the Midst of all these Exercises? And when he has
pleased, how has he quieted the sharpest Storms, and turned back the greatest
Floods and Torrents of Persecution that ever you met? And how has he
confounded his and your Enemies, and brought Confusion upon the Heads of them
that sought your Hurt? Were not these Things wrought by the Power of God? Did
your Number, your Policy, your Interest, or any Thing that might be called your
own, contribute any Thing to these your great Preservations and Deliverances?
If not, then let God have the Glory, and acknowledge to his Praise, These have
been the Lord's Doings, and are mavelous in our Eyes.

Again, Dear Friends, consider how the wicked One has wrought in a Mystery
among your selves, to scatter you, and to lay you waste from being a People as
at this Day; how many several Ways has he tried, raising up Men of perverse
Minds, to subvert, and to turn you from the Faith, and from the Simplicity that
is in Christ Jesus our Lord, and to separate you from that invisible Power that
has been your Strength, and to separate you one from another, and by subtle
Wiles, to lead you into a false Liberty above the Cross of Christ; and
sometimes by sowing Seeds of Heresy and Seditions, endeavoring to corrupt the
Minds of whom they could with pernicious Principles; but oh, how have their
Designs been frustrated, and the Authors thereof confounded and brought to
naught! And how have you been preserved as a Flock under the Hand of a careful
Shepherd, even unto this Day, which ministers great Cause of Thanksgiving unto
all the Faithful, who have witnessed the Working of this preserving Power in
their own Particulars.

Also, My Friends, it is worth your Considerations, to behold how that by this
invisible Power, so many faithful Watchmen are raised up upon the Walls of your
Zion, that in most of your Meetings there be Men and Women, upon whom God has
laid a Concern to be taking Care for the Good of the Whole, and to take the
Oversight upon them, to see all Things kept in good and decent Order, and to
make due Provision for the comforting and relieving the Necessities of the
Needy and Distressed, that nothing be lacking to make your Way comfortable; and
these have not been, nor are brought under this Charge by any Act of yours, but
God has raised up Pastors and Teachers, Elders and Deacons of his own Election
and Choice, and bowed their Spirits to take upon them the Work and Service to
which they are appointed, for the Lord's-sake, and for the Body's-sake, which
is the Church, to whom it may truly be said, as in Acts xx. 28. Take ye heed to
the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, etc. And
such ought to be hearkened to in the Discharge of their Trust, as those that
must give an Account to him that called them, and gifted them for their several
Works and Services in the Church.

And by these Ways and Means has the Lord established among you a heavenly
Government, and built as it were a Hedge about you, that ye may be preserved
from Generation to Generation, a People fitted for the Glory that is, and shall
daily more and more be revealed among and upon the Faithful, who delight in
that Power that called them to be Saints, and to bear a Profession for the holy
Name of God against the many Names and Ways that Men in their changeable Minds
have set up, that the Name of the Lord alone may be exalted.

And, dear Friends and Brethren, I entreat you, that the Consideration of these
great and weighty Things which God has wrought for you, and among you, may
have that deep and weighty Influence upon your Souls, that ye may find your
selves engaged to answer the Love and Mercy of God in your Lives and
Conversations, and in all you have to do in this World, that ye may show forth
the Honor of God in all Things, that the Light which has shined in you, may
shine forth through you unto others, who yet sit in Darkness; that all Men may
know by your innocent and harmless Conversations, and by your close keeping to
the Lord, that ye are a People who are assisted and helped by a supernatural
Power, which governs your Wills, and subjects them to his blessed Will, and
that guides and orders your Affections, and sets them upon heavenly and divine
Objects, and that gives you Power to deny your own private Interests, where
they happen to stand in Competition with the Interest of Truth; for these and
these only, will be found the true Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, who can
deny themselves, take up a Cross daily, and follow him in the Guidance of his
regenerating Power, which brings Death upon Self, and crucifies the old Nature,
with its Affections and Lusts, and raises up a Birth in you, that has a holy
Will, and Desire to serve the Lord, and do his Will in the Earth; and such as
these are Instruments in the Hand of God for him to work by, and to do Works of
Righteousness, of Justice, of Charity, and all other the Virtues belonging to a
Christian Life, to the Honor of God, and for the Comfort and Benefit of his
Church and People. And all you, dear Friends, upon whom the Lord has laid a
Care for his Honor, and for the Prosperity of the Truth, and gathered you into
the good Order of the Gospel, to meet together to manage the Affairs thereof;
take Heed that ye have a single Eye to the Lord, to do the Lord's Business in
the Leadings of his Spirit, which is but one, and brings all (that are given up
to be governed by it) to be of one Mind and Heart, at least in the general
Purpose and Service of those Meetings; although through the Diversity of Exercises,
and the several Degrees of Growth among the Brethren, every one may not see or
understand alike in every Matter, at the first propounding of it; yet this
makes no Breach of the Unity, nor hinders the Brotherly-kindness, but puts you
often upon an Exercise, and an inward traveling to feel the pure peaceable
Wisdom that is from above, to open among you, and every one's Ear is open to
it, in whomsoever it speaks, and thereby a Sense of Life is given in the
Meeting, to which all that are of a simple and tender Mind, join and agree: But
if any among you should be contrary minded in the Management of some outward
Affair, relating to the Truth, this does not presently break the Unity that ye
have in Christ, nor should weaken the brotherly Love, so long as he keeps
waiting for an Understanding from God, to be gathered into the same Sense with
you, and walks with you according to the Law of Charity, such a one ought to be
born with, and cherished, and the Supplications of your Souls will go up to God
for him, that God may reveal it to him, if it be his Will, that so no
Difference may be in Understanding, so far as is necessary for the Good of the
Church, no more than there is in Matters of Faith and Obedience to God; For, My
Friends, it is not of absolute Necessity that every Member of the Church should
have the same Measure of Understanding in all Things; for then where were the
Duty of the Strong bearing with the Weak? Then where were the Brother of low
Degree? Where would be any submitting to them that were set over others in the
Lord, which all tend to the preserving Unity in the Church, notwithstanding the
different Measures, and different Growths of the Members thereof; for as the
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, so are the Spirits of all
that are kept in a true Subjection to the Spirit of Life in themselves, kept in
the same Subjection to the Sense of Life given by the same Spirit in the
Church; and by this Means we come to know the one Master, even Christ, and have
no Room for other Masters in the Master of our Obedience to God; and while
every one keeps in this true Subjection, the sweet Concord is known, and the
Oil is not only upon Aaron's Head, but it reaches the Skirts of his Garment
also; and Things are kept sweet and savoury, and ye love one another from the
greatest to the least in Sincerity, and (as the Apostle says) without
Dissimulation; and this Love excludes all Whisperings of evil Things; all
Backbiting, Tale-bearing, Grudgings, and Murmurings; and keeps Friends Minds
clean one toward another, waiting for every Opportunity to do each other Good,
and to preserve each others Reputation; and their Hearts are comforted at the
Sight of one another; and in all their Affairs, both relating to the Church,
and to the World, they will be watchful over their own Spirits, and keep in the
Lord's Power, over that Nature and Ground in themselves that would be apt to
take an Offense, or construe any Word or Action to a worse Sense than the
Simplicity thereof, or the Intention of the other concerned will allow of.

And whereas it may often fall out, that among a great many, some may have a
different Apprehension of a Matter from the rest of their Brethren, especially
in outward or temporal Things, there ought to be a Christian Liberty maintained
for such to express their Sense, with Freedom of Mind, or else they will go
away burdened; whereas if they speak their Minds freely, and a friendly and
Christian Conference be admitted thereupon, they may be eased, and oftentimes
the different Apprehension of such an one comes to be wholly removed, and his
Understanding opened, to see as the rest see; for the Danger in Society does
not lie so much in that, that some few may have a differing Apprehension in
some Things from the general Sense, as it does in this; namely, when such that
so differ do suffer themselves to be led out of the Bond of Charity, and shall
labor to impose their private Sense upon the rest of their Brethren, and to be
offended and angry if it be not received, this is the Seed of Sedition and
Strife that has grown up in too too many, to their own Hurt.

And therefore, my dear Friends, beware of it, and seek not to drive a Matter
on in Fierceness or in Anger, nor to take Offense into your Minds at any Time,
because what seems to be clear to you is not presently received; but let all
Things in the Church be propounded with an awful Reverence of him that is the
Head and Life of it; who has said, Where two or three are met in my Name, I
will be in the Midst of them: And so he is, and may be felt by all who keep in
his Spirit; but he that follows his own Spirit, sees nothing as he ought to see
it. Therefore let all beware of their own Spirits and natural Tempers, (as they
are sometimes called) but let all keep in a gracious Temper, then are ye fit
for the Service of the House of God, whose House ye are, as ye keep upon the
Foundation that God has laid; and he will build you up, and teach you how to
build up one another in him, and as every Member must feel Life in themselves,
and all from one Head; this Life will not hurt it self in any, but be tender of
the Life in all; for by this one Life of the WORD ye were begotten, and by it
ye are nourished, and made to grow into your several Services in the Church of
God; it is no Man's Learning, nor artificial Acquirement^; it is no Man's Riches
nor Greatness in this World; it is no (...) Eloquence and natural Wisdom, that
makes him fit for Government in the Church of Christ, unless (...) with all his
Endowments, b^^^^^some with the heavenly Salt, and his Spirit subjected, and
his Gifts pass through the Fire of God's Altar, a Sacrifice to his Praise and
Honor, that so Self be crucified and baptized in Death, and the Gifts made use
of in the Power of the Resurrection of the Life of Jesus in him; and when this
great Work is wrought in a Man, then all his Gifts and Qualifications are
sanctified, and they are made use of for the Good of the Body, which is the
Church, and are as Ornaments and Jewels, which serves for the Joy and Comfort
of all, who are Partakers of the same divine Fellowship of Life in Christ Jesus
our Lord; and thus come many to be fitted and furnished to good Words, and to
good Works, which are brought forth in their due Seasons, for Edification, and
building up the Weak, and for repairing the decayed Places, and also for
Defense of them that are feeble, that hurtful Things may not come near them.

Oh Friends! great is the Work the Lord has called you to, and is a fitting
you for, who innocently wait upon him; and the Lord has opened my Heart unto
you, and laid it upon me to exhort and beseech to have a Care that ye quit your
selves as ye ought, in what God requires of ye; and for the more particular
expressing what lies before me in the Matter, I shall set down a few particular
Observations for your Benefit and Advantage; and my Soul's Desire is, that my
Labor of Love may have a good Effect in all your Bosoms, that God may be
honored thereby. And, Friends, ye know the chief Business, to which ye are
called in your particular Men and Women's Meetings, is under these two Heads,
Justice and Charity; the first, to see that every one has Right done him, and
the other to take Care there be nothing lacking to the Comfort of the Poor that
are made Partakers of the same Faith with you.

And when ye meet about these Things, keep the Lord in your Eye, and wait to
feel his Power to guide and direct you, to speak and behave your selves in the
Church of God, as becomes the peaceable Gospel: And beware of all Brittleness
of Spirit, and sharp Reflection upon each others Words; for that will kindle up
Heats, and create a false Fire, and when one takes a Liberty of a sharp Word
spoken out of the true Fear and Tenderness, it oftentimes becomes a Temptation
to another; and if he has not a great Care, it will draw him out also, and
then the first is guilty of two Evils, first being led into a Temptation, and
then secondly, he becomes a Tempter to others; therefore all had need be upon
their Watch, neither to tempt, nor be tempted; and let none think it a
sufficient Excuse for them that they were provoked; for we are as answerable to
God for every evil Word spoken upon Provocation, as without Provocation; for,
for that End has the Lord revealed his Power to us, to keep and preserve us in
his Fear and Counsel in the Time of our Provocations; and therefore if any Man
through Want of Watchfulness, should be overtaken with Heat or Passion, a soft
Answer appeaseth Wrath, says the wife Man; and therefore such a Time is
fittest for a soft Answer, lest the Enemy prevail on any to their Hurt, and to
the Grief and Trouble of their Brethren; for it is the proper Duty of Watchmen
and Overseers, to spare the Flock, that is, let nothing come nigh them that
will hurt them, and wound and grieve them: Nay, the good Apostle was so careful
over the Flock of Believers, that if there were any doubtful Matters to be
disputed of, he would not have them that were weak in the Faith at such
Disputes, much less ought they that are weak to see those that are strong
descend from their Strength, and go into the Weakness where they are not able
to bear, for that is certainly the weak that cannot bear; those that really
live in the Strength and Power, they can bear even Burdens for

them that cannot bear their own. The Apostle in the Place beforementioned,
when he sent for the Elders of Ephesus to Miletus, and lest a Charge with them,
before he said, Take heed to the Flock of God; he said, Take ye heed to your
selves: And indeed we are none of us like to discharge our selves well toward
others, but by taking heed to our selves, to be kept in that sober innocent
Frame of Spirit, which the Truth calls for.

In the next Place, My dear Friends, when ye are called upon in Point of
Justice, to give a Sentence of Right between Friend and Friend, take heed that
neither Party get Possession of your Spirit aforehand, by any Way or Means
whatsoever, or obtain any Word or Sentence from you in the Absence of the other
Party, he not being yet heard: There is nothing more comely among Men than
impartial Judgment; Judgment is a Seat, where neither Interest nor Affection,
nor former Kindnesses may come; we may make no Difference of the Worthiness or
Unworthiness of Persons in Judgment, as we may in Charity; but in Judgment, if
a good Man, being mistaken, has a bad Cause, or a bad Man a good Cause,
according to his Cause must he have Sentence: It was a good Saying, He that
judges among Men, judges for the Lord, and he will repay it. Therefore let
all be done as unto the Lord, and as ye are willing to answer it in his
Presence; and although some may for a Time be discontent thereat, yet in Time God
shall clear up your Innocence as the Sun at Noonday; and they that kick at
sound Judgment, will find but hard Work of it, they do but kick against that
which will prick them; and however such, through their Wilfulness, and their
abounding in their own Sense may hurt themselves, yet you will be preserved,
and enjoy your Peace and Satisfaction in the Discharge of your Consciences in
the Sight of God.

And as concerning practical Charity, ye know it is supported by Liberality, and
where Liberality cease, Charity waxes cold, yea, so far cease; where there
is no Contribution, there is no Distribution; where the one is sparing, the
other is sparing; and therefore let every one nourish Charity in the Root, that
is, keep a liberal Mind, a Heart that looks upon the Substance that is given
him, as really bestowed upon him for the Support of Charity, as for the Support
of his own Body; and where People are of this Mind, they will have a Care of
keeping back any of God's Part, for he has in all Ages in a most singular
Manner, espoused the Cause of the Poor, the Widow, and Fatherless, and has
often signified by his Prophets and Ministers, a special Charge upon rich Men
that had this World's Goods, that they should look to it that they were
faithful Stewards of what they possessed, and that they might be found in good
Works, and might not suffer their Hearts so to cleave to uncertain Riches, as
to neglect the Service God had given them the Things of this Life for, either
to give them up when called for in a Testimony of his worthy Name, or to
communicate of them to those that were in Necessity.

Now as concerning the Necessities of the Poor, there is great Need of Wisdom,
when ye meet together about that Affair; for as I said before, though the
Worthiness or Unworthiness of Persons is not to be considered in Judgment, yet
in this it is; and you will find some that God has made poor, and some that
have made themselves poor, and some that others have made poor, which must all
have their several Considerations, in which you ought to labor to be
unanimous, and not one to be taken up with an Affection to one Person more than
another, but every one to love every one in the universal Spirit, and then to
deal out that Love in the outward Manifestations thereof, according to the
Measure that the Lord in his Wisdom working in you shall measure forth to them.

And as to those who by Sickness, Lameness, Age, or other Impotency, are
brought into Poverty by the Hand of Providence; these are your peculiar Care,
and Objects pointed out to you, to bestow your Charity upon, for by them the
Lord calls for it; for as the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness of it, he
has by his sovereign Power commanded in every Dispensation, that a Part of
what we enjoy from him, should be thus employed: The Israelites were not to
reap the Corners of their Fields, nor to gather the Gleanings of the Corn nor
Vintage, it was for the Poor; and in the Time of the Gospel they were to lay
apart, on the First Day of the Week, a Part of what God had blessed them with,
for the Relief of those that were in Necessity; nay, they did not confine
themselves in their Charity to their own Meetings, but had an universal Eye
through the whole Church of Christ, and upon extraordinary Occasions, sent their
Benevolence to relieve the Saints at Jerusalem in a Time of Need; and all that
keep in the Guidance of the same universal Spirit, will make it their Business
to be found in the same Practice of Charity and good Works; To do Good, and to
communicate, forget not, says the Apostle: So they that forget not this
Christian Duty, will find out the Poors Part in the Corners and Gleanings of
the Profits of their Trades and Merchandizings, as well as the old Israelite
did the Corners and Gleanings of his Field; and in the Distribution of it, will
have a Regard to comfort the Bowels of such, who are by the divine Providence
of God put out of a Capacity of enjoying those outward Comforts of Health, and
Strength, and Plenty, which others do enjoy; for while they are Partakers of
the same Faith, and walk in the Way of Righteousness with you, submitting
themselves patiently to the Dispensation of God's Providence toward them, they
are of your Household, and under your Care, both to visit, and to relieve as
Members of one Body, of which Christ Jesus is Head; and he that gives to such
Poor, lends to the Lord, and he will repay it.

But there is another Sort of Poor, who make themselves poor through their Sloth
and Carelessness, and sometimes by their Wilfulness, being heady and
high-minded, and taking Things in Hand that are more than they can manage, and
make a Flourish for a Season, and then through their own Neglects, are plunged
down into great Poverty: These are a Sort the Primitive Churches began to be
troubled withal in the early Days of the Gospel; for the Apostle took Notice of
some that would not work at all, and sharply reproved them, and said, They that
would not work should not eat; and these are commonly a Sort of Busy-bodies,
and Meddlers with others Matters, while they neglect their own, and run into a
worse Way than the Unbelievers, while they profess to be Believers, yet do not
take a due Care for those of their own Household.

The Charity that is proper to such, is to give them Admonition and Reproof,
and to convince them of their Sloth and Negligence; and if they submit to your
Reproof, and are willing to amend, then Care ought to be taken to help them
into a Way and Means to support themselves; and sometimes by a little Help in
this Kind, some have been reclaimed from the Snares of their Soul's Enemy: But
if they will not receive your wholesome Counsel and Admonitions, but kick
against it, either in their Words or Actions, Friends will be clear of such in
the Sight of God; for it is unreasonable to feed them that will not be ruled by
you; they break the Obligation of Society by their disorderly walking; for our
Communion does not stand only in frequenting Meetings, and hearing Truth
preached, but in answering the blessed Principle of Truth, in Life and
Conversation, and therein both the Rich and the Poor have Fellowship one with
another.

There is another Sort that are made poor by the Oppressions and Cruelties of
others. These oppressed Poor cry loud in the Ears of the Almighty, and he will
in his own Time avenge their Cause; but in the mean Time there is a Tenderness
to be extended to them, not knowing how soon it may be our Turn, and if there
be Need of Counsel and Advice, or if any Applications can be made to any that
are able to deliver them from the Oppressors, in such Cases let all that are
capable be ready and willing to advise, relieve and help the Distressed; and
this is an acceptable Work of Charity, and a great Comfort to such in their
sharp Afflictions, and their Souls will bless the Instruments of their Ease and
Comfort.

And, My dear Friends, as God has honored you with so high and holy a
Calling, to be his Servants and Workmen in this his great and notable Day, and
to work together in his Power, in setting forth his Praise and Glory in the
Earth, and gathering together in one the scattered Seed in this and other
Nations: Oh, let the Dignity of your Calling provoke and encourage you to be
diligent Attenders upon his Work and Service you are called to, and let not
your Concerns in the World draw you from observing the Times and Seasons
appointed to meet together; but you that are Elder, set a good Example to the
younger Sort, by a due Observation of the Hour appointed, that they that come
first one Time, may not by their long Staying for others be discouraged, so as
perhaps they may be last another Time; but when the Time is come, leave your
Business for the Lord's Work, and he will take Care your Business shall not
suffer, but will add a Blessing upon it, which will do more for you than the
Time can do that may be saved out of his Service.

And when ye have to do with perverse, and froward or disorderly Persons, whom
ye have Occasion to reprove and to rebuke for the Truth's-sake, and you find
them stout and high, and reflecting upon ye, th^^ is a Time for the Lamb's
Meekness to shine forth, and for you to feel your Authority in the Name of
Christ to deal with such an one, and to wait for the pure and peaceable Wisdom
from above, to bring down and confound the earthly Wisdom. And in this Frame of
Mind you labor together to pull the entangled Sheep out of the Thicket, and ^o
restore that which is gone astray, to the Fold again, if you can; but if you
cannot, yet you save your selves from the Guilt of his Blood; and if such do
perish, his Blood will be on his own Head: But on the other hand, if ye suffer
their perverse Spirits to enter, and their Provocations to have a Place in you,
so as to kindle your Spirits into a Heat and Passion, then you get a Hurt, and
are incapable to do them any Good; but Words will break out that will need
Repentance, and the Wicked will be stiffened and strengthened thereby, and you
miss the Service that you did really intend. Therefore, dearly Beloved, keep
upon your Watch, keep on your Spiritual Armor; keep your Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and the God of Peace will be with you, and
crown your Endeavors with good Success, to your Joy and Comfort, and will
bring up his Power over your Adversaries and Opposers more and more, to which
many shall bow and bend in your Sight; and will bring Shame and Confusion upon
the Rebellious, who harden their Hearts, and stiffen their Necks against the
Lord, and his Christ, and Kingdom, which he will exalt in the Earth,
notwithstanding all that Satan, and all his evil Instruments can do to hinder
the Growth and Progress of his blessed Truth; for of the Increase of the
Government, and of the Peace of the Kingdom of Christ there shall be no End.

And now, Friends, I having cleared my Conscience of what lay upon me for some
Time, to write unto you by Way of Remembrance, and as the Exhortation of my
Life unto you, I remain traveling in Spirit for the Welfare of Zion: And
although the outward Man decays, yet in the inward Man I am comforted, in
beholding daily the great Things that our God has done, and is still doing for
those that have their sole Dependence upon him. So committing you to the Grace
of God, for your Director and Preserver, in these and all your several Services
unto which God has called you, that by the Operations of his mighty Power ye
may be kept blameless and unspotted of the World, to his Honor and your
Comfort, and to the universal Comfort and Edification of the Church, that so
Praises and Thanksgivings may fill your Hearts and Mouths, your Families and
your Meetings; for he is worthy, who is our Tower, our Support, the Lord of
Hosts, the King of Saints, to whom be Glory, Honor and Renown through this and
all Generations for ever and ever, Amen.

From your Friend and Brother in the Communion and Fellowship of the Gospel of
Peace and Purity. STEPHEN CRISP.
London, the 15th of the 7th Month, 1690.

Passing now by other Matters of this Year, 1691
we step to the next, being that of 1691, An Account of the Sickness, Death and
Character of G. Fox.
about the Beginning of which, G. Fox departed this Life, who even in the last
Period thereof writ much, and continued laborious without fainting. The last
Epistle I find of his, was to his Friends and Brethren in Ireland, who because
of the Revolution and Troubles there, suffered much, chiefly as I think by the
Papists; and therefore in the said Epistle he exhorted his Friends to
Stedfastness: This was in the Month called January; and the next Day, being the
first of the Week, and the 11th of the said Month, he went to the Meeting at
Grace Church Street, where he preached very effectually, treating of many
Things with great Power and Clearness; and concluded with a Prayer. After
which, the Meeting ending, he went to Henry Gouldney's in White-Hart-Court,
near the Meeting House, where he said to some that came with him, He thought he
felt the Cold strike to his Heart, as he came out of the Meeting. Yet added, I
am glad I was here. Now I am clear, I am fully clear. When those Friends that
were with him, were withdrawn, he lay down in his Clothes upon a Bed, but soon
rose again; yet after a little Time he lay down again, complaining still of
Cold; and his Strength decaying, he not long after undressed, and went to Bed;
where he lay in much Contentment and Resignation, continuing very sensible to
the last. His Distemper increasing, and perhaps perceiving that his End was at
Hand, he recommended the spreading of Books (containing the Doctrine of Truth)
to some of his Friends, that came to him after having been sent for. And to
some others who came to visit him in his Illness, he said, All is well, the
Seed of God reigns over all, and over Death it self. And though (continued he) I
am weak in Body, yet the Power of God is over all, and the Seed reigns over all
disorderly Spirits. He used often, even in his Preaching, when he spoke of
Christ, to call him the Seed; wherefore those that were with him, very well
knew what he meant when he spoke of the Seed. Thus he lay in a heavenly Frame
of Mind, and his Spirit being wholly exercised toward the Lord, he grew weaker
and weaker in Body, until on the third Day of the Week, and of his Sickness
also, he piously departed this Life. About four or five Hours before, being
asked, How he did, he answered, Don't heed, The Power of the Lord is above all
Sickness and Death; the Seed reigns, blessed be the Lord. And thus triumphing
over Death, he departed from hence in Peace, and slept sweetly on the 13th of
the Month anciently called January, (for being as a Door or Entrance into the
New Year) about ten a-clock at Night, in the 67th Year of his Age. His Body was
buried near Bunhill-Fields on the 16th of the said Month, the Corpse being
accompanied by great Numbers of his Friends, and of other People also: For though
he had had many Enemies, yet he had made himself also beloved of many. He was
tall of Stature, and pretty big-bodied, yet very moderate in Meat and Drink;
neither did he yield much to Sleep. He was a Man of a deep Understanding, and
of a discerning Spirit; and though his Words were not always linked together by a
neat Grammatical Connection, and that his Speech sometimes seemed abrupt, as
with a kind of Gap; yet he expressed himself intelligently, and what was
wanting in human Wisdom, was abundantly supplied with Heavenly Knowledge. He
was of a quick Apprehension; and though his Wit was not polished by humane Arts,
yet he was ingenious; and in his Prayers (which generally were not very long,
though powerful) appeared a decent Gravity, mixed with an awful Reverence, to
Admiration. His Qualities are at large set forth by Thomas Elwood, an eminent
Author, who having much conversed with him, His Character by T. Elwood.
gave the following Character of him. He was indeed an heavenly-minded Man,
zealous for the Name of the Lord, and preferred the Honor of God before all
Things. He was valiant for the Truth, bold in asserting it, patient in
suffering for it, unwearied in laboring in it, steady in his Testimony to it,
immovable as a Rock. Deep he was in divine Knowledge, clear in opening
heavenly Mysteries, plain and powerful in Preaching, fervent in Prayer. He was
richly endued with Heavenly Wisdom, quick in discerning, sound in Judgment;
able and ready in giving, discreet in keeping Counsel; a Lover of
Righteousness, an Encourager of Virtue, Justice, Temperance, Meekness, Purity,
Chastity, Modesty, Humility, Charity, and Self-denial in all, both by Word and
Example. Graceful he was in Countenance, manly in Personage, grave in Gesture,
courteous in Conversation, weighty in Communication, instructive in Discourse,
free from Affectation in Speech and Carriage. A severe Reprover of hard and
obstinate Sinners, a mild and gentle Admonisher of such as were tender and
sensible of their Failings. Not apt to resent Personal Wrongs, easy to forgive
Injuries; but zealously earnest, where the Honor of God, the Prosperity of
Truth, the Peace of the Church were concerned. Very tender, compassionate, and
pitiful he was to all that were under any sort of Affliction; full of brotherly
Love, full of fatherly Care: For indeed the Care of the Churches of Christ was
daily upon him, the Prosperity and Peace whereof he studiously sought. Yet more
is said of him to his Praise, both by the said Tho. Elwood and others; but I
will not detain my Reader any longer therewith. His Wife, about six Months
before his Death, came to him at London, and being glad of his Health, which
then was better than some Time before, she, after some Stay in the said City,
returned Home well satisfied, leaving him at London, where his general Service
to the Church seemed to be then most requisite. After his Decease an Epistle
was found, which was writ with his own Hand, and left sealed up with this
Superscription, Not to be opened before the Time. What this signified, seemed
to be a Riddle; but he being now deceased, it was judged to be the Time to open
this Letter, which was directed to his Friends, and was as follows;

For the Yearly and Second-Days-Meeting in London, and to all the Children of
God in all Places in the World. By and from G. F.
This for all the Children of God every where, that are led by his Spirit, and
do walk in his Light, in which they have Life and Unity, and Fellowship with
the Father, and the Son, and one with another.
KEep all your Meetings in the Name of the Lord Jesus that be gathered in his
Name, An Epistle of G. Fox left sealed up.
by his Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; by which you will feel his
blessed and refreshing Presence among you, and in you, to your Comfort and
God's Glory.

And now all Friends, all your Meetings, both Men's and Women's, Monthly and
Quarterly, and Yearly, etc. were set up by the Power, and Spirit, and Wisdom of
God; and in them you do know that you have felt both his Power, and Spirit, and
Wisdom, and blessed refreshing Presence among you, and in you, to his Praise
and Glory, and your Comfort: So that you have been a City set on a Hill, that
cannot be hid.

And although many loose and unruly Spirits have risen betimes to oppose you and
them, both in Print and otherways; but you have seen how they have come to
naught; and the Lord has blasted them, and brought their Deeds to Light, and
made them manifest to be the Trees without Fruit, and Wells without Water, and
wandering Stars from the Firmament of God's Power, and the raging Waves of the
Sea, casting up their Mire and Dirt: And many of them are like the Dog turned
to his old Vomit, and the Sow that was washed, turned again to the Mire. And
this has been the Condition of many, God knows, and his People.

And therefore all stand steadfast in Christ Jesus your Head, in whom you are
all one, Male and Female, and know his Government, and of the Increase of his
Government and Peace there shall be no End; but there will be an End of the
Devil's, and of all them that be out of Christ, and do oppose it and him, whose
Judgment does not linger, and their Damnation does not slumber: And therefore
in God and Christ's Light, Life, Spirit and Power live and walk, that is over
all (and the Seed of it) in Love and in Innocence, and Simplicity; and in
Righteousness and Holiness dwell, and in his Power and Holy Ghost, in which
God's Kingdom does stand. All Children of New and Heavenly Jerusalem, that is
from above, and is free, with all her Holy, Spiritual Children, To her keep
your Eyes.

And as for this Spirit of Rebellion and Opposition, that has risen formerly
and lately, it is out of the Kingdom of God and heavenly Jerusalem; and is for
Judgment and Condemnation, with all its Books, Words and Works. And therefore
Friends are to live and walk in the Power and Spirit of God, that is over it,
and in the Seed, that will bruise and break it to pieces: In which Seed you
have Joy and Peace with God, and Power and Authority to judge it; and your
Unity is in the Power and Spirit of God, that does judge it; and all God's
Witnesses in his Tabernacle go out against it, and always have and will.

And let no Man live to Self, but to the Lord, as they will die in him; and
seek the Peace of the Church of Christ, and the Peace of all Men in him: for
Blessed are the Peacemakers. And dwell in the pure, peaceable, heavenly Wisdom
of God, that is gentle, and easy to be entreated, that is full of Mercy; all
striving to be of one Mind, Heart, Soul and Judgment in Christ, having his Mind
and Spirit dwelling in you, building up one another in the Love of God, which
does edify the Body of Christ, his Church, who is the Holy Head thereof. So
Glory to God through Christ, in this Age, and all other Ages, who is the Rock and
Foundation, and the Emanuel, God with us, Amen, over all, the Beginning, and
the Ending; in him live and walk, in whom you have Life Eternal, in whom you
will feel me, and I you.

All Children of New Jerusalem, that descends from above, the Holy City, which
the Lord and the Lamb is the Light thereof, and is the Temple; in it they are
born again of the Spirit: So Jerusalem that is above is the Mother of them that
are born of the Spirit. And so they that come, and are come to heavenly
Jerusalem, are them that receive Christ; and be gives them Power to become the
Sons of God, and are born again of the Spirit: So Jerusalem, that is their
Mother. And such do come to Heavenly Mount Sion, and the innumerable Company of
Angels, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect; and are come to the Church
of the Living God written in Heaven, and have the Name of God, and the City of
God written upon them: So here is a New Mother, that brings forth a heavenly
and a Spiritual Generation.

There is no Schism, nor Divison, nor Contention, nor Strife, in Heavenly
Jerusalem, nor in the Body of Christ, which is made up of Living Stones, a
Spiritual House. And Christ is not divided, for in him there is Peace. Christ
says, in me you have Peace. And he is from above, and not of this World; but
in the World below, in the Spirit of it there is Trouble: Therefore keep in
Christ, and walk in him, Amen.

G. F.

And Jerusalem was the Mother of all true Christians before the Apostasy; and
since the outward Christians are broken into many Sects, and they have gotten
many Mothers: But all they that are come out of the Apostasy by the Power and
Spirit of Christ, Jerusalem that is above, is their Mother, (and none below
her;) who does nourish all her Spiritual Children.

Read at the Yearly Meeting in London, 1691. G. F.


It was in this Year, W. Goodridge of Somersetshire released after severe
Sufferings.
I find that William Goodridge of Banwell in Somersetshire, was released from
Prison, where he had been confined about thirteen Years. He had been premunired
for refusing to take the Oath; and his Goods, whereof the Movables were rated
at two hundred forty-four Pounds, and the real Estate counted worth sixty
Pounds per Annum, were confiscated. Thus to suffer Spoil of Goods has been the
Lot of many others, B. Brown of Suffolk stripped of all.
and among these was Benjamin Brown, an ancient Man, of Brownish in Suffolk,
who also, for not taking the Oath, was stripped of all, so that his Wife and
Child were fain to lie on the Floor without a Bed.

Now Time calls me to say something of the Apostasy of George Keith, A short
Account of the Apostasy of G. Keith.
who being in Pennsylvania, made a great Bustle there. He was a witty Person,
and esteemed very learned; and at the University obtained the Degree of Master
of Arts. He often also gave Proofs of an high soaring Knowledge, and was very
ready to show from Philosophy the Reasons and Causes of many Things in the
Creation; but the Doctrine of Francis Mercurius, Who imbi^es the Notion of
Transmigration from Van Helmont.
Baron of Helmont, concerning the Transmigration of Souls, became so Palatable
to him, that he not only in some Manner approved it, but also was believed to
be concerned in the Book containing two hundred Queries about that Matter,
great Part of which, as I have been informed, he acknowledged to have been put
in Writing by himself, though it appeared in Public without the Author's Name.
But this Notion meeting with no Acceptance among the Quakers, his Love to them
began to abate, and his Discontent increased, because two Persons, who opposed
him, had, (as he said) used some unwarrantable Expressions, and were not so
sharply reproved, as he, who was of a fiery Temper, desired. He accused them,
that they had said, That the Light within was sufficient to Salvation, without
any Thing else. From whence he endeavored to prove, that they excluded the Man
Jesus Christ, as not necessary to Salvation; but they denied this to be their
Doctrine. Differs with (...) Brethren in Pennsylvania.
He afterward said of William Stockdel, one of those two Persons at
Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, That he had charged him G. K. to have preached
two Christ's, because he preached Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without
us. Now though Stockdel would not allow this to be true, and some of the Hearers
also denied it, though asserted by two others of his Party, yet G. Keith blew the
Fire of this Quarrel, and so got some Adherents. He also charged the
Deputy Governor Thomas Lloyd, to have said, That Faith in Christ without us, as
he died for our Sins, and rose again, was not necessary to our Salvation. But
others said, that the Words were not so, and that the Matter was not fairly
stated; since the Question was not, Whether Faith in Christ without us, as he
died for our Sins, and rose again, was not necessary to our Salvation: But,
Whether that Faith were indispensably necessary to all Mankind, and that none
could be saved without it, though they had not the Means, Opportunity or Capacity
to know or receive it. Which being asserted, it was thought that such a
Position did not only exclude from Salvation whole Nations, but also Infants,
and deaf and dumb Persons. Better had it been that such Questions never had
been started; for a passionate maintaining of a different Position, often
breeds Strife and Contention. But G.Keith, Separates from their Society.
with some others, having now separated themselves from the mutual Society, he
said, His Dissatisfaction was only with some unsound Quakers in America, but he
was in Unity with all faithful Friends in England. And since now he began to
behave himself very disrespectfully, and was on that Account sharply reproved
by the aforesaid Tho. Lloyd, Is reproachful to the Deputy Governor, and
slanders the Magistrates in Print.
he did not stick to speak to him in a reproachful way, charging him with
Impudence, and saying, That he was unfit to be a Governor, and that his Name
should stink, etc. Now because some Members of the Council did not expect to be
better treated by him, since he had called one of the Magistrates impudent
Rascal, this was much resented, and the more, because G. Keith having drawn in
a Printer, published a Paper, wherein he not only scandalously slandered the
Diligence of the Magistrates in restraining of Robbers, but also the Judicial
Proceedings against Murderers. Joined by the Mennonites.
And now seeing several Mennonites of the County of Meurs lived also in
Pennsylvania, it was not much to be wondered, that they who count it unlawful
for a Christian to bear the Sword of Magistracy, Is fixed for slandering the
Magistrates, but the Fine not exacted.
did stick to him; and to get Adherents seemed the main Thing he aimed at; for
he himself was not trained up under such a Notion, but in the Doctrine of the
Kirk of Scotland. The Consequence of this Case was, that Keith, and one Thomas
Bud, who (with him) had been Compiler of the aforesaid Paper, And some time
after comes again into England, and complains to the Church at London.
were fined for it; but yet the Government was so moderate, that the Fine was
never exacted: And for all that, G. Keith did not stick to make a great Clamor
of his Sufferings; and about two Years after, he came into England, to make his
Complaint to the Church at London.

This Year in the Month called August, 1692
Stephen Crisp deceased near London. Qualifications and Death of S. Crisp, with
some of his dying Expression.
He had long been weak in Body, and was much afflicted with the Stone,
performing nevertheless his Ministry of the Gospel; and his Service was very
acceptable, because he had a Gift beyond many, being not only sound in Doctrine
and Judgment, but grave and elegant in his Utterance, and well qualified for
convincing his Hearers, and to touch them to the Heart; so that he generally
met with a great Concourse of People. Four Days before his Decease, lying sick
in Bed, and being under great Pain, he was visited by G. Whitehead, to whom he
said in Substance, I see an End of Mortality, and yet cannot come at it; I
desire the Lord to deliver me out of this painful Body: If he will but say the
Word, it is done: Yet there is no Cloud in my Way; I have a full Assurance of my
Peace with God in Christ Jesus; my Integrity and Uprightness of Heart is known
to the Lord, and I have Peace and Justification in Jesus Christ, who made me
so. The Day before his Departure, G. Whitehead being come again to see him,
found him in a dying State, and almost speechless; yet he was understood to
say, I hope I am gathering, I hope, I hope. G. Whitehead near parting from him,
asked him. Whether he had any thing to his Friends? To which he gave this
Answer, Remember my dear Love in Jesus Christ to all Friends. The next Day,
being the 28th of the aforesaid Month, he died at Wansworth, Many of his
Sermons are printed.
about five Miles from London. Many of his Sermons taken in Shorthand from his
Mouth are published in Print, and give Proofs of his having been indeed an able
Minister of the Gospel.

In this Year also died Katharine Evans, The Death of K. Evans, who had been
Imprisoned at Malta, etc.
who, as has been mentioned here before, had been long imprisoned at Malta.
She had suffered much for her Religion; and in the Year 1657, having at
Salisbury exhorted the People to Repentance, this so incensed the Magistrates,
that by Order of Humphry Ditton Justice, and Robert Good Mayor, she was
stripped, and fastened to the Whipping-post in the Market, and then whipped.
Afterward coming thither again, and speaking to the People in the Market, by
Way of Admonition, she was sent to Bridewel, and put into a dark nasty Place.
After her Return from Malta, Imprisonment fell to her Share in England several
Times; once at Welchpool in Montgomeryshire in the Year 1666, for refusing to
swear; and several Years after she was also imprisoned at Bristol. And after
many Adversities and great Sufferings, having lived to a great Age, she died,
and so entered into everlasting Rest.

Now I return again to George Keith, G. Keith appears at the Yearly Meeting,
but is irreconcilable. Preaches at Turners-Hall.
who appeared in the Annual Assembly at London, Anno 1694, but there he showed
himself so passionate and boisterous, that no Means could be found to compose
the Difference. Yet he seemed to get Adherents among some of the Separatists
about London: But these also soon growing weary of him, he got a Place called
Turners-Hall to preach in. Here at first he had a great Concourse of People,
since Novelties generally beget Curiosity. But he from Time to Time, more and
more courting those of the Church of England, and falling in with the
Episcopalians, began to lose his Esteem among People of other Persuasions,
especially when at length he entirely conformed to that Church, which formerly
in Print he had zealously attacked: But in Process of Time he took a Gown,
Conforms to the Church of England, is ordained and puts on the Surplice.
and was ordained to be a Preacher. After which he sometimes preached with the
Surplice on, which in all probability he would have abhorred before ever he
joined with the Quakers; for he had been a Member of the Presbyterian Kirk of
Scotland, which always has been a zealous Opposer of the Episcopal Ceremonies.
By his disingenuously misrepresenting the Quakers Belief, obliges them anew to
publish an Account of their Christian Doctrine.
And since he had contradicted that which formerly he had asserted and defended
in good earnest, and charged the Quakers with a Belief, which they never had
owned to be theirs, they found themselves obliged publicly to set forth their
Faith anew in Print, which they had often before asserted both in Words and
Writing, thereby to manifest that their Belief was really Orthodox, and
agreeable with the holy Scriptures. This they did by the following
Representation, which in the Year 1693, 1693
came forth in Print at London, as follows with this Title;

The Christian Doctrine, 1693
and Society of the People called QUAKERS, cleared, etc.
WHereas diverse Accounts have been lately published in Print, of some late
Division and Disputes between some Persons under the Name of Quakers in
Pennsylvania, about several fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith, (as
is pretended by one Party) which being particularly mentioned, and thereupon
Occasion very unduly taken by our Adversaries to reproach both the Christian
Ministry, and whole Body of the People commonly called Quakers, and their Holy
and Christian Profession, both in England and elsewhere, though no ways concerned
in the said Division or Matters charged, but rather grieved and troubled at it,
and at the indiscreet and reproachful Management thereof in Print, to the
amusing and troubling the World therewith, and giving Occasion to the Loose,
Ignorant, and Profane, to slight and contemn the Truth, and the Interest of
the tender Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ;

We are, therefore, tenderly concerned for Truth's-sake, in behalf of the said
People (as to the Body of them, and for all of them who are sincere to God, and
faithful to their Christian Principle and Profession) to use our just
Endeavors to remove the Reproach, and all causeless Jealousies concerning us,
touching those Doctrines of Christianity, or any of them pretended (or
supposed) to be in Question in the said Division; in Relation whereunto, we do
in the Fear of God, and in Simplicity and Plainness of his Truth received,
solemnly and sincerely declare what our Christian Belief and Profession has
been, and still is, in respect to Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God,
his Suffering, Death, Resurrection, Glory, Light, Power, Great Day of Judgment,
etc.

We sincerely profess Faith in God by his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, as
being our Light and Life, our only Way to the Father, and also our only
Mediator and Advocate with the Father. Heb. xii. 2. 1 Pet. i. 21. Joh. xiv. 6.
1 Timothy ii. 5.


That God created all Things, he made the Worlds, by his Son Jesus Christ, he
being that powerful and living Word of God by whom all Things were made Ephesians.
iii. 9. Joh. i. 1, 2, 3. Heb. i. 2.
, And that the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit are one, in divine Being
inseparable; one true, living and eternal God, blessed forever. 1 John v 7.


Yet that this Word, or Son of God in the Fullness of Time, took Flesh, became
perfect Man, according to the Flesh descended and came of the Seed of Abraham
and David Romans i. 3, 4.
, but was miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary
Mat. i. 23.
. And also farther, declared powerfully to be the Son of God, according to the
Spirit of Sanctfication, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans i. 3, 4


That in the Word (or Son of God) was Life, and the same Life was the Light of
Men; and that he was that true Light which enlightens every Man coming into the
World Joh. i. 4, 9.
, and therefore that Men are to believe in the Light, that they may become
Children of the Light Joh. xii. 36. Isa. ii. 5.
: Hereby we believe in Christ the Son of God, as he is the Light and Life
within us; and wherein we must needs have sincere Respect and Honor to (and
Belief in) Christ, as in his own unapproachable, and incomprehensible Glory and
Fullness 1 Timothy vi 16
, as he is the Fountain of Life and Light, and Giver thereof unto us; Christ,
as in himself, and as in us, being not divided. And that as Man, Christ died
for our Sins, rose again, and was received up into Glory in the Heavens 1 Pet.
iii. 18. 1 Timothy iii 16. Mat. xix. 28. and xxv. 31 Luke ix. 26. and xxiv. 26.
. He having, in his dying for all, been that one great universal Offering and
Sacrifice for Peace, Atonement and Reconciliation between God and Man Romans v.
10, 11. Heb. ii. 17, 18. Ephesians. ii. 16, 17 Col. i. 20, 21, 22.
: And he is the Propitiation not for our Sins only, but for the Sins of the
whole World 1 John ii. 2. 2 Cor. v. 14, 15. Heb ii. 9.
We were reconciled by his Death, but saved by his Life.

That Jesus Christ who sits at the right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the Heavens, yet is he our King, High Priest and Prophet Zech. ix. 9. Luke
xix. 38. Joh. xii. 15. Heb. iii 1, 6. Deuteronomy. xviii. 15, 18. Act. iii. 22. and
vii. 37.
, in his Church, a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which
the Lord pitched, and not Man Heb. viii. 1, 2.
. He is Intercessor and Advocate with the Father in Heaven, and there appearing
in the Presence of God for us, Heb. vii. 25. Heb. ix. 24.
being touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities, Sufferings and Sorrows. And
also by his Spirit in our Hearts, he makes Intercession according to the Will
of God, crying Abba, Father Romans viii. 26, 27, 34. Gal. iv. 6.
.

For any whom God has gifted Ephesians. iii. 7. 1 Pet. iv. 10.
and called sincerely to preach Faith in the same Christ, both as within and
without us, cannot be to preach two Christ's, but one and the same Lord Jesus
Christ 1 Cor. viii. 6. chapter xv. 3, 8.
, having Respect to those Degrees of our spiritual Knowledge of Christ Jesus in
us Joh. xv. 26. and chapter xvi. 13, 14, 15.
, and to his own unspeakable Fullness and Glory Joh. i. 16.
, as in himself, in his own entire Being, wherein Christ himself and the least
Measure of his Light or Life, as in us or in Mankind, are not divided nor
separable, no more than the Sun is from its Light. And as he ascended far above
all Heavens, that he might fill all Things Ephesians. iv. 10.
, his Fullness cannot be comprehended, or contained in any finite Creature Col.
i. 19 and ii. 9.
, but in some Measure known and experienced in us, as we are capable to receive
the same, as of his Fullness we have received Grace for Grace. Christ our
Mediator received the Spirit, not by measure Joh. iii. 34.
, but in Fullness; but to every one of us is given Grace, according to the
Measure of ^is Gift. Ephesians. iv. 7.


That the Gospel of the Grace of God should be preached in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Mat xxviii. 19.
, being one Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
, in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, and indivisible, (or not to be divided) in
the great Work of Man's Salvation.

We sincerely confess (and believe in) Jesus Christ, both as he is true God,
and perfect Man Joh. i. 1, 2. Romans ix. 5. 1 John v. 20. 1 Timothy ii. 5.
, and that he is the Author of our living Faith in the Power and Goodness of
God, as manifest in his Son Jesus Christ, and by his own blessed Spirit (or
divine Unction) revealed in us 1 John ii. 20, 27. and chapter i. 1.
, whereby we inwardly feel and taste of his Goodness 1 Pet. ii. 3. Joh. vi. 33,
35, 51, 57, 58
, Life and Virtue; so as our Souls live and prosper by and in him: And the
inward Sense of this Divine Power of Christ, and Faith in the same, and this
inward Experience is absolutety necessary to make a true, sincere, and perfect
Christian in Spirit and Life.

That Divine Honor and Worship is due to the Son of God Joh. v. 23 Heb. i 6
; and that he is, in true Faith to be prayed unto, and the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ called upon, (as the primitive Christians did) 1 Cor i. 2 Acts
vii. 59.
, because of the glorious Union or Oneness of the Father and the Son Joh. x.
30. 1 John v
; and that we cannot acceptably offer up Prayers and Praises to God, nor
receive a gracious Answer or Blessing from God, but in and through his dear Son
Christ.

That Christ's Body that was crucified was not the Godhead, yet by the Power of
God was raised from the Dead; and that the same Christ that was therein
crucified, ascended into Heaven and Glory Luke xxiv. 26.
is not questioned by us. His Flesh saw no Corruption Psalm. xvi. 10. Acts ii.
31. and xiii. 35, 37.
, it did not corrupt, but yet doubtless his Body was changed into a more
glorious Phil. iii. 21.
and heavenly Condition than 'twas in when subject to diverse Sufferings on
Earth; but how and what Manner of Change it met withal after 'twas raised from
the Dead, so as to become such a glorious Body (as it is declared to be) is too
wonderful for Mortals to conceive, apprehend, or pry into (and more meet for
Angels to see); the Scripture is silent therein, as to the Manner thereof, and
we are not curious to enquire or dispute it; nor do we esteem it necessary to
make our selves wise above 1 Cor. iv. 6.
what is written as to the Manner or Condition of Christ's glorious Body, as in
Heaven, no more than to enquire how Christ appeared in diverse Manners or Forms
Mark ^^i 12. Joh. xx. 15.
, or how he came in among his Disciples, the Doors being shut Joh. xx. 19. Luke
xxiv. 36, 37. and chapter xxiv. 31.
, or how he vanished out of their Sight, after he was risen. However, we have
cause to believe his Body, as in Heaven, is changed into a most glorious
Condition, far transcending what 'twas in on Earth, otherwise how should our
low Body be changed, so as to be made like unto his Glorious Body Phil. iii. 21.
; for when he was on Earth, and attended with Sufferings, he was said to be
like unto us in all Things, Sin only excepted Heb. ii. 17. and iv. 15.
; which may not be so said of him as now in a State of Glory, as he prayed for
Joh. xvii. 5.
, otherwise where would be the Change both in him and in us?

True and living Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of the living God Joh. xiv. 1.
, has respect to his entire Being and Fullness, to him entirely as in himself,
and as all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him Mat. xviii. 18. chapter xi.
27. Joh. xvii. 2. Heb i. 4. chapter ii. 8.
, and also an Eye and Respect to the same Son of God Joh. xiv. 23. and xvii.
21, 22, 23, 24, 26. ver.
as inwardly making himself known in the Soul, in every Degree of his Light,
Life, Spirit, Grace, and Truth, and as he is both the Word of Faith, and a
quickening Spirit in us 1 Cor. xv. 45. Romans x. 7, 8.
whereby he is the immediate Cause, Author, Object, and Strength of our living
Faith in his Name and Power, and of the Work of our Salvation from Sin, and
Bondage of Corruption; and the Son of God cannot be divided from the least or
lowest Appearance of his own divine Light (or Life in us or in Mankind) no more
than the Sun from its own Light; nor is the Sufficiency of his Light within by
us set up in Opposition to him the Man Christ, or his Fullness considered as in
himself, or without us; nor can any Measure or Degree of Light, received from
Christ (as such) (...) properly called the Fullness of Christ, or Christ as in
Fullness, nor exclude him (so considered) from being our comple^^ Savior; for
Christ himself to be our Light, our Life and Savior Joh. i. 4, 9. and chapter iii
19, 20. and chapter xii. 35, 36, 46. and chapter viii. 12.
is so consistent, that without his Light we could not know Life, nor him to
save us from Sin, or deliver us from Darkness, Condemnation or Wrath to come:
And where the least Degree or Measure of this Light and Life of Christ within
is sincerely waited in, followed and obeyed; there is a blessed Increase of
Light and Grace known and felt, a^ the Path of the Just it shines more and
more, until the perfect Day Pro. iv. 18. Psalm. xxxvi. 9.
, and thereby a growing in Grace, and in the Knowledge of God, and of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, has been, and is truly experienced. And this Light,
Life, or Spirit of Christ within (for they are one Divine Principle) is
sufficient to lead unto all Truth, having in it the diverse Ministrations both
of Judgment and Mercy, both of Law and Gospel (even that Gospel which is
preached in every intelligent Creature under Heaven:) It does not only, as in
its first Ministration manifest Sin, and reprove and condemn for Sin, but also
excites and leads them that believe in it to true Repentance, and thereupon to
receive that Mercy, Pardon, and Redemption in Christ Jesus, which he has
obtained for Mankind in those Gospel-terms of Faith (in his Name) true
Repentance and Conversion to Christ thereby required.

So that the Light and Life of the Son of God within, truly obeyed and
followed, as being the Principle of the second or new Covenant, as Christ the
Light is confessed to be, (even as he is the Seed or Word of Faith in all Men)
this does not leave Men or Women (who believe in the Light) under the first
Covenant, nor as Sons of the Bondwoman, as the literal Jews were, (when gone
from the Spirit of God, and his Christ in them) but it naturally leads them
into the new Covenant, into the new and living Way, and to the Adoption of
Sons, to be Children and Sons of the Freewoman, of Jerusalem from above.

It Is true, that we ought not to lay aside, nor any way to undervalue (but
highly to esteem) true Preaching and the Holy Scriptures, and the sincere
Belief and Faith of Christ, as he died for our Sins, and rose again for our
Justification, together with Christ's Inward and Spiritual Appearance, and Work
of Grace in the Soul, livingly to open the Mystery of his Death, and perfectly
to effect both our Reconciliation, Sanctification, and Justification; and
wherever Christ qualifies and calls any to Preach and Demonstrate the Mystery
of his Coming, Death, and Resurrection, etc. even among the Gentiles, Christ
ought accordingly to be both preach^^, believed and received.

Yet supposing there have been, or are such pious and conscientious Gentiles,
in whom Christ was and is as the Seed or Principle of the second or new
Covenant, the Light, the Word of Faith, (as is granted) and that such live
uprightly and faithfully to that Light they have, or to what is made known of
God in them, and who therefore in that State cannot perish, but shall be saved,
as is also confessed; and supposing these have not the outward Advantage of
Preaching, Scripture, or thence the Knowledge of Christ's outward coming, being
outwardly crucified and risen from the Dead, can such, thus considered, be
justly excluded Christianity, or the Covenant of Grace, (as to the Virtue,
Life, and Nature thereof) or truly deemed no Christians, or void of any
Christian Faith in the Life and Power of the Son of God within, or be only Sons
of the first Covenant, and Bondwoman, like the literal outside Jews? Or must
all be excluded any true Knowledge or Faith of Christ within them, unless they
have the Knowledge of Christ as without them? No sure, for that would imply
Insufficiency in Christ and his Light, as within them, and to frustrate God's
good End and Promise of Christ, and his free and universal Love and Grace to
Mankind, in sending his Son. We charitably believe the contrary, that they must
have some true Faith and Interest in Christ and his Mediation, because of God's
free Love in Christ to all Mankind, and Christ's dying for all Men 2 Cor v. 14,
15
, and being given for a Light to the Gentiles, and for Salvation to the Ends of
the Earth Isa xlix 6 Luke ii. 32. Acts xiii. 4^
. And because of their living up sincerely and faithfully to his Light in them,
their being pious, conscientious, accepted and saved, (as is granted) we cannot
reasonably think a sincere, pious, or godly Man, wholly void of Christianity,
of what Nation soever he be: because none can come to God or Godliness but by
Christ John xiv. 6.
, by his Light and Grace in them: Yet we grant if there be such pious sincere
Men or Women, as have not the Scripture or Knowledge of Christ, as outwardly
crucified, etc. they are not perfect Christians in all Perfections, as in all
Knowledge and Understanding, all Points of Doctrine, outward Profession of
Christ; so that they are better than they profess or pretend to be, they are
more Jews inward, and Christians inward th^n in outward Show or Profession.
There are Christians sincere and perfect in Kind or Nature, in Life and
Substance, though not in Knowledge and Understanding. A Man or Woman having the
Life and Fruits of true Christianity, the Fruits of the Spirit of Christ in
them that can talk little thereof, or of Creeds, Points or Articles of Faith,
yea many that cannot read Letters, yet may be true Christians in Spirit and
Life; and some could die for Christ, that could not dispute for him; and even
Infants that die in Innocence are not excluded the Grace of God, or Salvation
in and by Christ Jesus, the Image and Nature of the Son of God being in some
Measure in them, and they under God's Care and special Providence. See Mat.
xviii. 2, 10.

And though we had the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and a Belief
of Christ crucified and risen, etc. we never truly knew the Mystery thereof,
until we were turned to the Light of his Grace and Spirit within us; we knew
not what it was to be reconciled by his Death, and saved by his Life, or what
it was to know the Fellowship of his Sufferings, the Power of his Resurrection,
or to be made conformable unto his Death; we knew not, until he opened our
Eyes, and turned our Minds from Darkness unto his own divine Light and Life
within us.

Notwithstanding, we do sincerely and greatly esteem and value the holy
Scriptures, Preaching and Teaching of faithful, divinely inspired, gifted and
qualified Persons and Ministers of Jesus Christ, as being great outward Helps,
and instrumental in his Hand, and by his Spirit for Conversion, where God is
pleased to afford those outward Helps and Means, as that we neither do nor may
oppose the Sufficiency of the Light or Spirit of Christ within to such outward
Helps or Means, so as to reject, disesteem, or undervalue them; for they all
proceed from the same Light and Spirit, and tend to turn Men's Minds thereunto,
and all center therein.

Nor can the holy Scriptures or true Preaching without, be justly set in
Oppostion to the Light or Spirit of God or Christ within, for his faithful
Messengers are Ministers thereof, being sent to turn People to the same Light
and Spirit in them. Acts xxvi. 18. Romans xiii. 2. 2 Cor. iv. 6. 1 Pet. ii. ix. 1 John ii. 8.

It Is certain, that great is the Mystery of Godliness in it self, in its own
Being and Excellency, namely, That God should be, and was manifest in the Flesh
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, pr^^^^^d unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, and received up into Glory.

And it is a great and precious Mystery of Godliness and Christianity also, that
Christ should be spiritually and effectually in Men's Hearts, to save and
deliver them from Sin, Satan, and Bondage of Corruption, Christ being thus
revealed in true Believers, and dwelling in their Hearts by Faith, Christ
within the Hope of Glory, our Light and Life, who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. i. 30. And
therefore this Mystery of Godliness, both as in its own Being and Glory, and
also as in Men (in many hid, and in some revealed) has been and must be
testified, preached and believed, where God is pleased to give Commission (and
prepare Peoples Hearts for the same) and not in Man's Will.

Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and the great Day of Judgment, yet to
come, beyond the Grave, or after Death, and Christ's coming without us, to
judge the Quick and the Dead (as diverse Questions are put in such Terms.) What
the holy Scriptures plainly declare and testify in these Matters, we have have
great Reason to credit, and not to question, and have been always ready to
embrace, with respect to Christ and his Apostles own Testimony and Prophecies.

1. For the Doctrine of the Resurrection; If in this Life only we have Hope in
Christ, we are of all Men most miserable, 1 Cor.x xv. 19. We sincerely believe,
not only a Resurrection in Christ from the fallen sinful State here, but a
Rising and Ascending into Glory with him hereafter; that when he at last
appears, we may appear with him in Glory, Col. iii. 4. 1 John iii. 2.

But that all the Wicked, who live in Rebellion against the Light of Grace, and
di^ finally impenitent, shall come forth to the Resurrection of Condemnation.

And that the Soul or Spirit of every Man and Woman shall be reserved in its
own distinct and proper Being, (so as there shall be as many Souls in the World
to come as in this) and every Seed (yea every Soul) shall have its proper Body,
as God is pleased to give it, 1 Cor. 15. A natural Body is sown, a spiritual
Body is raised; that being first which is natural, and afterward that which is
spiritual. And though it is said this corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and
this mortal shall put on Immortality; the Change shall be such as Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption inherit
Incorruption, 1 Cor. xv. We shall be raised out of all Corruption and
Corruptibility, out of all Mortality; and the Children of God and of the
Resurrection shall be equal to the Angels of God in Heaven Mat. xxii. 30. Mark
xii. 25. Luke xx. 36
.

And as the celestial Bodies do far excel terrestrial; so we expect our
spiritual Bodies in the Resurrection shall far excel what our Bodies now are;
and we hope none can justly blame us for thus expecting better Bodies than now
they are. Howbeit we esteem it very unnecessary to dispute or question how the
Dead are raised, or with what Body they come? But rather submit that to the
Wisdom and Pleasure of Almighty God.

2. For the Doctrine of Eternal Judgment.

God has committed all Judgment unto his Son Jesus Christ, and he is both
Judge of Quick and Dead, and of the States and Ends of all Mankind, John v. 22,
27. Acts x. 42. 2 Timothy iv. 1. 1 Pet. iv. 5.

That there shall be hereafter a great Harvest, which is the End of the World,
a great Day of Judgment, and the Judgment of that great Day, the holy Scripture
is clear, Mat. xiii. 39, 40, 41. chapter x. 15. and xi. 24. Jude 6. When the Son of
Man comes in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the Throne of his Glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations,
etc. Mat. xxv. 31, 32. to the End, compared with chapter xxii. 31. Mark viii. 38.
Luke ix. 26. and 1 Cor. xv. 52. 2 These. i. 7, 8. to the End, and 1 These. iv.
16. Rev. xx. 12, 13, 14, 15.

That this blessed heavenly Man, this Son of Man, who has so deeply suffered
and endured so many great Indignities and Persecutions from his Adversaries,
(both to himself, and his Members and Brethren) should at last, even in the
last and great Day, signally and manifestly appear in Glory and Triumph,
attended with all his glorious heavenly Host and Retinue, before all Nations,
before all his Enemies, and those that have denied him; this will be to their
great Terror and Amazement, that this most glorious heavenly Man, and his
Brethren that have been so much contemned and set at naught, should be thus
exalted over their Enemies and Persecutors, in Glory and Triumph, is a
righteous Thing with God; and that they that suffer with him, should appear
with him in Glory and Dignity when he thus appears at last. Christ was Judge of
the World, and the Prince thereof, when on Earth, John ix. 39. and xii. 31. He
is still Judge of the World, the Wickedness and Prince thereof, by his Light,
Spirit, and Gospel in Men's Hearts and Consciences, Joh. xvi. 8, 11. Mat. xii.
18, 20. Isa. xlii. 1. Romans 11. 16. 1 Pet. iv. 6. And he will be the Judge and
final Determiner thereof in that great Day appointed; God having appointed a
Day wherein he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has
ordained. Christ soretold, It shall be more tolerable for them of the Land of
Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for that City or People that
would not receive his Messengers or Ministers, etc. Mat. x. 15. and see chapter xi.
24. and Mark vi. 11. Luke x. 12, 14. It Is certain that God knows how to deliver
the Godly out of all their Trials and Afflictions, and at last to bring them
forth, and raise them up into Glory with Christ; so he knows also how to
reserve the Unjust and finally Impenitent unto the Day of Judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. ii. 9. He will bring them forth unto the Day of Destruction,
Job xxi. 30. The Lord can and will reserve such impenitent, presumptuous, and
rebellious Criminals, as bound under Chains of Darkness (as were the fallen
Angels) unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude 6. Mat. xxv. 30. It Is not for
us to determine or dispute the Manner how they shall be so reserved; but leave
it to God, he knows how.

A POSTSCRIPT relating to the Doctrine of the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment.
AT the last Trump of God, and Voice of the Archangel, the Dead shall be raised
incorruptible, the Dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Cor. xv. 52. 1 These. iv.
16. compared with Mat. xxiv. 31.

Many are often alarmed in Conscience here by the Word and Voice of God, who
stop their Ears, and slight those Warnings; but the great and final Alarm of
the last Trumpet, they cannot stop their Ears against nor escape, it will
unavoidably seize upon, and farther awaken them finally to Judgment. They that
will not be alarmed in their Consciences unto Repentance, nor out of their Sins
here, must certainly be alarmed to Judgment hereafter.

Whosoever do now wilfully shut their Eyes, hate, contemn, or shun the Light of
Christ, or his Appearance within, shall at last be made to see, and not be able
to shun or hide themselves from his glorious and dreadful Appearance from
Heaven with his mighty Angels, as with Lightning and in flaming Fire, to render
Vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 These. iv. 17. Mat. xxiv. 27. Luke xvii. 24. Dan. x. 6. Job
xxxvii. 3.

And though many now evade and reject the inward Convictions and Judgment of the
Light, and shut up the Records or Books thereof in their own Consciences, they
shall all be at last opened, and every one judged of these Things recorded
therein, according to their Works, Rev. x. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Signed in Behalf of our Christian Profession and People aforesaid, George
Whitehead, Ambrose Rigg, William Fallowfield, James Park, Charles Marshall,
John Bowater, John Vaughton, William Bingley.


This Paper generally gave Satisfaction, F. Bugg anenvious Apostate, charges
the Quakers with Socinian Notions.
and was well received also in Holland, where, having translated it into Dutch,
I got it published in Print. Now since Francis Bugg, an envious Apostate,
charged the Quakers with some Socinian Notions, and being set on by some
Churchmen, endeavored also to render them odious with the Government, the
following Confession of Faith, signed by one and thirty Persons, of which G.
Whitehead was one, was in December presented to the Parliament.

Be it known to all, that we sincerely believe and confess,

I. That Jesus of Nazareth, And thereupon this Confession Faith is presented to
the Parliament.
who was born of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah, the very Christ, the Son
of the living God, to whom all the Prophets gave Witness: And that we do highly
value his Death, Sufferings, Works, Offices, and Merits for the Redemption of
Mankind, together with his Laws, Doctrine, and Ministry. II. That this very
Christ of God, who is the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World,
was slain, was dead, and is alive,, and lives for ever in his Divine Eternal
Glory, Dominion, and Power, with the Father. III. That the holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, are of Divine Authority, as being given by
Inspiration of God. IV. And that Magistracy, or Civil Government is God's
Ordinance, the good Ends thereof being for the Punishment of Evildoers, and
Praise of them that do well.
By this and the like Writings, By these Means such as are in the Government
are informed, and grow more moderate.
the Eyes of many that were at the Helm began to be more opened; and even among
the Bishops were some that inclined to Moderation; for the King endeavored as
much as he could to promote the most moderate among the Churchmen to those
high Dignities; and Prejudice, which had blinded many in respect to the
Quakers, began to abate more and more. But yet there was one Thing which
continually caused them much Hardship, viz. their Refusing to Swear; for by
Reason of This they were not only deprived of their Rights, as Freemen, but
also of giving Evidence in Courts of Judicature. They did not therefore omit
from Time to Time to petition the Parliament, wherein they desired to be
relieved of this heavy Burden; though hitherto they had not been able to obtain
this Favor: Wherefore on the 26th of November they delivered a Petition to the
Parliament, Friends present a Petition to the Parliament, for an Affirmatim
instead of an Oath.
setting forth Their great Sufferings, for Want of their solemn Declaration
being taken instead of an Oath; and that not in their own Cases only, but in
Evidence wherein others were concerned.. This Petition they concluded thus;

We therefore ernestly and humbly request, that you will favorably please to
give Leave to bring in a Bill to admit, that our solemn Answer, Affirmation, or
Denial, may be accepted instead of an Oath, to relieve us in the Cases
aforesaid, or in such of them as you in your Wisdom shall see meet. We freely
submitting, that if any reputed a Quaker shall falsify the Truth, and be duly
convicted thereof, that every such Person shall undergo the like Pains and
Penalties, as are provided against perjured Persons. And your Petitioners shall
as in Duty bound, pray, etc.

William Mead, William Bingley, George Whitehead, Samuel Waldenfield, William
Crouch, John Staploe, Walter Bental, William Macket, Thomas Heart, Joseph
Wright, Jun. Michael Russel, Theodor Ecclessone.


This Petition being read in the House of Commons, they came to the following
Resolution;

A Petition of the People called Quakers was read. Resolved that the
Consideration thereof be referred to a Committee, and that they report their
Opinions therein to the House.

A Committee being ordered accordingly, The Committee to whom (...) said
Petition was referred agree they ought to (...) Relief. But their Enemies find
Means to retard it.
sat thereupon, and gave their Judgment as follows;

Upon the Whole, it is the Opinion of this Committee, that the Quakers ought to
be relieved according to the Prayer of their Petition.

But nothing was obtained that Session; for their Enemies were yet so powerful
Parliament, that they found Means to retard this beneficial Work, and to stay
the Progress of it; For so long as the Quakers were not relieved in the Case of
Oaths, they who now were not liable to Prosecution on Account of their public
Worship, might yet for all that be otherwise molested and vexed. Wherefore, on
the 22d of December, in the Year 1694, 1694
A Representation of their Case of not Swearing, being signed in their Behalf
by Theodor Ecclestone, was delivered to the Members of Parliament, and was as
follows;

A brief Representation of the Quakers Case of not Swearing; and why they might
have been, and yet may be relieved therein, by PARLIAMENT.
IT IS a certain Truth, Thereupon T. Ecclestone in their Behalf, gives the
Members of Parliament a Representation of their Case.
that among Christians, and Protestants especially, there are diverse particular
Things about Religion, conscienciously scrupled by some as unlawful, that
others esteem orthodox: And therefore it is not to be wondered, that the
Quakers differ from many others (though not from all) in this Case of Oaths; they
believing they are absolutely forbid to swear in any Case, by that positive
Command of Christ, Mat. v. 44. and the earnest Exhortation of his Apostle,
James v. 12. And that this is undeniably their Christian Persuasion, is
evidenced by their Sufferings these many Years for not Swearing.

And therefore their Case may be worth the charitable Notice of the Government,
by Law to relieve them therein; and not for their religious Persuasion, to
continue them and their Families exposed to Ruin, who among their Neighbors
cheerfully pay to the Support of the Government, and by their Trades and
Industry (according to their Capacities) advance the national Stock.

It may therefore be humbly offered, That it is not the Interest of the
Government to refuse them Relief.

Their Industry in Trade, both at Sea and Land, bringing Profit to the
Government, as well as others; the Station they stand in, as Merchants,
Farmers, Manufactors, Improvers of Lands and Stocks, is advantageous to their
Neighbors as truly as others. And as it seems not the Interest of the
Government in general, that they should be any Ways discouraged in their honest
Industry; so neither is it the Interest of an eminent Part of the Government,
that they should not be relieved, viz. due Judges.

For the frequent Suits that are brought against the Quakers, before the
Chancery and Exchequer Judges, are no do doubt very troublesome and burdensome,
by the Difficulty of getting at a just Issue, for Want of Swearing; whereby
Justice is delayed, and their Causes often held very long; and no doubt when
just Judges see the Quakers wronged, and abused, and cannot relieve them, it is
irksome to them: So that it is humbly conceived, 'twould be a great Ease to
those Courts, to have the Quakers relieved in this Case of Oaths.

Neither is it without Advantage to the King's other Courts, to be able to use
the Evidence of one who is now a Quaker, that perhaps was not so, 1694
same Years ago; when he was a Witness to a Bill, Bond, Book-debt, or Deed of
Indenture; or when he was Steward, or Trustee, or Servant, either to Persons of
Quality, or to others of Trade, or Estate.

Nor may their Testimony be unuseful to Coroners, in Case of unnatural Deaths;
nor inconvenient in Cases of Trespass or Felony, etc.

And it is farther proposed, That it is not the Interest of the Subject to
continue them unrelieved: For it is not the Interest of those the Quakers are
indebted to; because, though such may sue and harrass the Quakers in Person and
Estate, yet they may long want a Decis on of their Debt or Claim, as to the
Right of it, for Want of an Answer upon Oath.

It is not the Interest of those they are concerned with, in any doubtful Case,
because of the Difficulty to come to Trial.

And for those that owe Money to the Quakers, to be allowed to fly into
Chancery for a Refuge, to obstruct paying just Debts, is such an Injury, as
it is hoped, no one that is rational will countenance, or desire should be
continued upon them. And may it nor then be asserted, that it is no honest Man's
true and just Interest, (to have the Quakers denied Relief) no not the Gown-men
of Westminster Hall, whose few Fees from the Quakers, as Plaintiffs might
suggest (though unduly) that they have no long tail'd Debts to sue for, nor
Titles to recover; but if they so suppose, it is a Mistake, for it is rather
their Despair or Relief, and their well-known Inability to pursue a Cause, that
is their common determent to begin.

So that of all Causes that crowd those Courts, few are brought by the Quakers,
though they may need it as much as others, to the great Loss of the Learned in
the Law, as well as the poor injured Quaker.

And one might think 'twere great Pity an industrious People should be kept
liable to all injurious Suits, and so much barred from Suing for their Rights,
be their Cause never so reasonable, just or necessary.

Seeing their Relief is to them so needful, so harmless to all, and so useful
to the Government, and their Neighbors; let us a little consider the common
Objections, which may be sum'd up in short thus:

First Objection, How shall we then be at a Certainty? Secondly, Why should the
Laws be altered for them? For, Thirdly, 'Twould be to raze old Foundations.
Fourthly, And let them into the Government.
Which it is hoped will not be difficult to answer one by one, and that to
reasonable Satisfaction.

And to the first, viz. The Doubt of Certainty. It may be rationally affirmed,
That whosoever is bound to tell the Truth, (especially against Men's own
Interest, where the Temptation, if any, mainly lies) such are either so bound
by the Law of God, or the Laws of Men, or both.

Now the Obligations by the Law of God are binding on good Men, whether they
give Answers on Oath, or on their solemn Affirmation in the Fear of God; and
Knaves are only bound by the penal Laws of Men; which if made equally severe,
to those that give fallacious Answers, as well without Oath as by Oath, would
be equally effectual and binding, both to them that give Answers without
Swearing, and to them that Swear.

The Second Objection, That 'twould be an Alteration of the Law; Not of the
Substance; of the Law, but of a Circumstance; and if that has no Detriment in
it, but that the Alteration be really an Amendment, and a Convenience to an
honest, industrious People, pray why should it not be done? What Sessions of
Parliament is there, that passes, but some Law or other is made for the Ease,
Security, or Relief of the Subject?

If Foreigners are too hard for our seafaring People, out goes an Act of
Navigation to prevent it.

If our Poor at home want Silk to work with, how soon is it granted?
(notwithstanding the same Act) to come over Land, and not directly in Shipping
from the Places of its Produce, as the said Act before did enjoin: And shall
the Ease of Trade be so soon granted against a positive Statute; and the Ease
of Conscience be so long denied in this, as positive a Command of Christ, at
least really so believed and accepted?

And for the Third Objection, That it is to raze old Foundations. Answer, No, as
'twas said, it is rather to mend them; a proper Work for Parliaments.

Did not Parliaments abrogate Popery, with all its Claim of Antiquity? Did not
a Parliament make the Act of Habeas Corpus against the Claim of Prerogative?
And was it more reasonable to secure the Subject from perpetual Imprisonment by
a King, without Trial, than it is to secure one Subject from imprisoning
another till Death, for not giving an Answer in Chancery, or Exchequer, upon
Oath? Does it belong to Parliaments to secure other Subjects in their Estates,
Liberties, and Properties? And is it unparliamentary, to secure the Quakers
from Sequestrations against their whole Estates? because they dare not comply
to a Circumstance of the Law, when (as they understand it) it is against an
express Command of Christ? Surely no: And therefore their Relief in Parliament
is a sitting Case to be there tenderly taken Notice of, and provided for.

May it not then be well worth the While for this present Parliament, to
relieve these distressed People, and afford their suffering Case Redress? That
thereby their Causes may the sooner come to an Issue; whether they sue for just
Debts, or are sued; whereby many unjust and vexatious Suits, by injurious and
litigious Persons, may be prevented, which have often tended rather to the
Quakers Ruin, and others Damage, than Recovery of their Right.

As to the Fourth Objection, That 'twill tend to let them into the Government:
For Answer thereto, Bar that as hard as you please; only don't let the Supposal
of that, from which so easily and so willingly they may be excluded, be a
Hindrance to that Ease and Benefit the Government may so easily afford them.

But now while you have Opportunity by the Station Providence has placed you
in, pray be you of such noble, generous Spirits, as to relieve them, though they
differ from you in the Construction of a Text they esteem plain and positive on
their Side, and from which they dare not swerve, Chrysostom, etc. Swinderby 's
Appeal to the King.
having therein the Concurrence of many ancient Fathers, and Martyrs, and since
them the Mennists, and of late Francis Osbourne, Esquire in his Political
Reflections, 7th Edition, p. 319. who treating of Judicial Cases, calls Not
swearing, Walter Brute's Declaration Act, and Monuments, Vol. I. 570new Edition
Young's First Exam. fol. 910. old Edition; with abundance others.
a yielding a sincere and faithful Obedience to the Precept of our Savior,
Swear not at all, (which [says he] the corrupt Glosses of Expositors labor
much, though all in vain, to clude.)

And Swinderby, in his Appeal to the King, complaining of the Errors of the
Papists says thus, As Christ forbids Swearing, so [says he] the Pope justifies
Swearing, and compels Men to Swear.

Which no Man can rationally say, is only spoken of Swearing in Communication,
for his Complaint is against justifying Swearing, and compelling Men to Swear,
which cannot be pretended to mean other than solemn Swearing; for no Age, that
we read of, did ever authorize profane Swearing, much less compel to it.

Since therefore not only profane Swearing, but also solemn Swearing was early
complained of by Protestants, let it not seem strange to any, that the Quakers
now scruple Swearing, and for Ease therein have often sought Relief in
Parliament, the proper Place.

Seeing then they believe they have the Authority of Christ's Command, and the
Apostle's Exhortation, and the Martyrs Doctrine on their Side; though diverse of
you, are not so persuaded;

Yet let the World behold your Justice and Willingness (according to your
Power) to do Good to all the honest and industrious People you both represent
and govern; by enacting, That their Solemn Affirmation shall be accepted in
Lieu of an Oath; and all that falsify therein, shall be punished equally with
perjured Persons.

It having been made appear to a Committee of this Parliament, [ Dec. 2. 1692]
that they are exposed to great Hardships, as aforesaid; and not themselves
only, but others also; [which was the Case of a Member, or two of this present
Parliament.]

So that upon the whole Matter, the said Committee were of Opinion, and did
report it to the House, That the Quakers ought to be relieved according to the
Prayer of their Petition, [then newly presented to the House.]

Wherefore, as Liberty has been given them to declare their Allegiance to the
Government without Swearing, for which Ease they are sincerely thankful; so be
pleased to add to that Kindness, their Relief in the Matter of Oaths, between
them and other Subjects, as well as between the Government and them.

Signed in Behalf of the said People, THEODOR ECCLESTONE.
London, Dec. 22. 1694.
Though after the delivering of the said Representation, the Parliament this Year
came not to a full Resolution for their Relief, yet several Members showed
themselves more inclined to it, and in the next Year the Matter was taken in
Hand again in good Earnest.

Toward the Conclusion of this Year, The Death of Queen Mary.
Mary the Second, Queen of England, deceased: She was a Princess eminent beyond
many, being well versed in Reading, and of a great Knowledge, of which I Will
mention only this Passage, The English Ambassador at the Hague in vain
endeavors to reconcile her to the Popish Religion.
viz. That the Ambassador of the King her Father at the Hague, having tried by
many Arguments to bring her over to the Papal Religion, said afterward in the
Presence of some great Men, That he never before believed that a Woman was to
be found any where so well experienced in the Doctrine of Christian Religion;
and that therefore he would not advise any to enter into Discourse with her
about that Matter. On the 21st of December some Symptoms of the Smallpox
appeared on the Queen, who had been ill a Day or two before; and her Distemper
suddenly increased to that Degree, that the Physicians began to despair of her
Recovery; But this was so far from frighting her, that she said, God be
thanked, I am prepared. And this Quietness of Mind did not leave her, even when
she felt Death approaching; for then she was heard to say, I believe now that I
shall die shortly; and I thank God, that from my Youth I have learned this true
Doctrine, that Repentance ought not to be deferred to a Dying-Bed. In such a
Christian Disposition she continued to her dying Hour, and so quietly gave up
the Ghost to her Creator from whom she had received it, The King constantly
with her in the Time of her Sickness
departing at Kensington not long after Midnight, between the 26th and 27th of
December, and lest the King in unspeakable Sorrow, who, in all the Time of her
Sickness, it is said, had not departed from her Chamber. 1695
Many Pens labored to celebrate her Praises and bewail her Death; and perhaps
no Queen in many Ages has been more beloved than she was. The Bishop of
Salisbury writes an Essay on her Memory.
But I break off; others have given an Account of her excellent Qualities and
Character to the World, and it may be none better than Gilbert Burnet, Bishop
of Salisbury, in a Treatise entitled, An Essay on the Memory of the late Queen.

Now I return again to the Case and Affairs of the Quakers.

And since those of Barbados in America were still about this Time much
molested, The Sufferings of the Quakers in Barbados for not bearing Arms
for not bearing Arms, they sent over a List in the Year 1695, of what had been
taken from them under the Government of the Colonels Searle and Muddiford, the
President Wallum, the Lords Francis Willoughby and William Willoughby, the
Knight Jonathan Atkins and Richard Datton, and the Colonels Edwin Stead and
James Kendal, all which amounted to 1423164 lb. Muscovado Sugar, and 2910 l. 16
s. in Money. And Fate of many of their Persecutors
To this List was joined an Account of the Disasters which befell several of the
Persecutors in Barbados. In this Account I find above thirty Marshals or their
Deputies named, who' though they had enriched themselves with the Spoil and
Havoc of the Goods of honest People, yet they all died poor, and several
either by an unnatural Death, or with great Pains; but I decline mentioning all
the Particulars. Among these was John Thurborn, And in particular of John
Thurborn.
Marshal to Colonel Tidcomb, who used scoffingly to call the Quakers his
Milch-Cows, saying, That George Gray (one of these People) was one of his best
Cows, and gave a brave Mess of Milk every Exercising-Day. For he and other such
Birds of Prey, took always much more than the Fine amounted to: But at length
he died in Poverty, being afflicted with a Fistula in his Fundament, that did
admit of no Cure.

It was not only for not bearing Arms, that the Quakers suffered thus; but
frequent Occasions were sought to vex them. For when they (to bring their
Negroes, if possible, to some Knowledge of the true God) caused them to meet
together for an Hour or two once a Week, to instruct them according to their
Capacity, by reading to them some Part of the Holy Scriptures, and speaking
something to this Purpose, a Law was made, A Law made forbidding Quakers to let
their Negroes be present at their Meetings.
forbidding the Quakers to let their Negroes come into their Meetings, though
kept in their own Houses, on Pain of forfeiting every such Negro as was found
there, or ten Pounds instead thereof. And by one Tho. Cobham, And an Action is
brought against R. Fretwel for ^o Negroes, by T Cobham, who loses the Cause,
and soon after dies in a dreadful Condition.
an Action was brought against Ralph Fretwell, for eighty Negroes of his own at
a Meeting in his own Family. But though the Justice John Merrick did what he
could to countenance the said Cobham, yet after several Sessions of the Court,
at which the said Justice was an Assistant, Judgment was given in favor of the
Defendant; and it was remarkable that the abovesaid Cobham, though a lusty likely
young Man, became dejected, and generally slighted; and soon after was taken
with a Fever and an Inflammation in his Neck and Throat, which so increased,
that toward his latter End he cried out, Fire, Fire; I am all on Fire; and to
his Mother he said, She needed not provide a Coffin for him; for he should be
burnt up before it was made, crying out, Neither Heaven nor Hell, but all Fire,
Fire; to which he added, Now the Quakers will say, it is a Judgment fallen on
me. After this Manner he miserably ended his Days. The dismal End of other
Presecutors of this new Law, viz. of Justice Merrick.
And Justice Merrick's Exit was also dismal: For riding to his House, after
having drank too much, he was thrown from his Horse, whereby his Brain was so
hurt, that he lay some Days in a violent raving Condition, to the Terror of his
Friends, and so died. In like Manner William Sharp, And W. Sharp. a Judge of
the Court.
a Judge of the Court, who had been a great Opposer of the Quakers instructing
their Negroes, riding from his House to Bridge-Town, fell from his Horse, and
was so hurt that he was not heard to speak any thing else afterward, but, O my
Head! and three or four Days after his Fall he died.

Sir Timothy Thornhill, Major General, The wicked (...) and horrible
Blasphemies of Major General Thornhill, a Persecutor, who (...).
had often threatened to take away the Quakers Lives, and was such an abominable
Blasphemer, that I feel my self seized with Horror in reading the most
detestable and direful Blasphemies which this monstrous Wretch belched out: For
being at a Feast, and drinking so excessively, that some of the Company refused
to drink so hard, he wished, (shall I say it, or be silent) Seipsum esse Deum
Omnipotentem quo posset damnare animas little qui cum ipso bibere noll^nt. At
another Time being in Company where a Woman by Way of Discourse spoke of the
Power and Omnipotency of Almighty God, he returned this accursed Language,
worse than that of the Devil himself, Mat. iv. God damn ye, go to the Top of
yonder Tree, and see if God Almighty can save you from breaking your Neck
before you come to the Bottom. Other devilish Language he spoke, I pass by with
Silence. When once a Person was brought before him for not appearing in Arms,
and told him, He could not do so for Conscience Sake, he returned, God damn
your Conscience; if I cannot make your Conscience how, I'II make your stubborn
Dog's Back bend, and so tied him Neck and Heels with his own Hands, so
violently, that he almost deprived the Man of Life. He also once, when a
Declaration of War was published in the ^^land, said, That the first Time an
Enemy appeared, he would hang up the Quakers, binding his Words with abominable
Oaths, to which he was so accustomed, that he seldom spoke without them. But
now at length the Time came, that he must remove from this to the other World.
He had been sick, and being pretty well recovered, he boasted among his
Companions of his Conquest over Death, and daringly said, That he had taken a
ne^^ I ease of his Life from God Almighty for thirty Years longer. But within a
few Months after, the Thread of his Life was cut, and his pretended Lease was
taken from him by the Sovereign of the Universe. Thus he died unlamented by
moderate People, and cursed by others who lost considerably by him,
notwithstanding a great Estate left him by his Father.

But more happy was his Marshal John Batt, J Batt, who had been a Persecutor,
died a Penitent.
who had taken much Goods from the Quakers, yet on his Dying-Bed, some Years
before, viz. 1679, was so sensibly touched with Repentance, that he caused the
following Paper to be writ, and signed it.

WHereas I John Batt the Younger, of the Island of Barbados, was lately, by
Commission from Colonel Thornhill, Marshal to his Regiment of Foot-Soldiers,
and by that Power did distrain upon the Estates of several of the People called
Quakers, and took and carried away many Parcels of their Sugar, and other
Goods, for their Defaults in not appearing in Arms in the said Regiment, which
they refused out of Tenderness of Conscience, to which I had not Regard* but
now the Lord having laid his Hand sorely on me, by afflicting me with a hard
and grievous Sickness, those Things done to the aforesaid People, come fresh in
my Mind, to my very great Grief and Terror, and I do declare, that all the Sins
that I have been guilty of besides, (which are very many) do not trouble or lie
so heavy upon my Conscience, as those my Doings to that People; and do believe
that no Man will ever be blessed or prosper that practices such Things against
that People. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand this Tenth Day of
May, 1679.

John Butt, Jun.
Witness William Howard Antrobus.



Well had others done if they had taken Example by it; but it was not in vain
that our Savior, in the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, made Abraham say
to the Rich Man, Luke xvi. 31
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though
one rose from the Dead. But other Persecutors took no Caution by this penitent
John Batt; for yet long after some others in Barbados most furiously showed
their Malice and Rage against the Quakers, Colonel A Ruddock's inveterate
Prejudice against, and barbarous (...) of the Quakers.
and among these one Alexander Ruddock, a Scotchman, who was not only a Colonel
of a Regiment of Foot, but also a Judge of a Court, and one of the Council. He
caused one of the Society of the Quakers to be rated four hundred Pounds of
Sugar, for Payment of the Priest's Wages, who was his Son-in-Law; whereas upon
Complaint of the said Person, and upon Enquiry, it appeared that the pretended
Due was but ten Pounds of Sugar; And it was well known, that he and his Friends
duly paid for maintaining the Poor, and for mending Highways: But all this
could not avail him; for a Cow was taken from him worth ten Pounds Sterling.
And though some of the Magistrates, seeing the Unreasonableness of these
Proceedings, would have had the Cow returned to the right Owner, yet such was
the Power of the said Ruddock, that they were not able to withstand it. And
because the aforesaid Man had complained of the Wrong and Oppression he
suffered,, this so incensed Ruddock, that he caused him to be fined five Pounds
Sterling, for having refused to take the Oath as Constable, though he was willing
to have served the Office. And for this Fine Ruddock issued out a Warrant
against him, upon which was taken from him a Negro-Woman, that by the
Management of Ruddock was valued at but two thousand three hundred Pounds of
Sugar, which, as the Price of Sugar then went, might amount to eleven Pounds
ten Shillings; and yet the Negro was sold for six and twenty Pounds Sterling,
and all kept for the Fine of Five Pounds. From this same Man was taken the
Value of above seven thousand Pounds of Sugar in one Year, by the Direction of
Ruddock, which the Sufferer laying before him in the Presence of his Daughter,
the Priest's Wife, and telling him, He had suffered all that for Complaining of
the Wrong he had done him about his Cow, he as rejoicing at it said. It should
be so yearly, so long as he was Magistrate. But he did not live a Year after.
He was of a fierce Temper, and very ready to put Negroes to Death for an
Example, He is ready to put Negroes to Death for Example.
saying, What is it for Barbados to put twenty or thirty Negroes to Death
Yearly for Example sake? And as he vexed the Quakers many Ways, so he showed
his Grudge also by taking away the Meat they bought and paid for; nay, Would
not have Quakers eat fresh Meat.
so malicious he was, that meeting once a Butcher carrying Meat to the House of
him that bought it, he commanded him to carry it back, saying, The Quakers
shall not eat fresh Meat. But at length the Measure of his Iniquity was full:
He came from the Council, where an Order was issued from the Governor to break
up the Quakers Meetings, Gets an Order to disturb their Meetings.
and he promised the Governor, diligently to obey all his Commands. But in his
very Way Home he was taken ill, But being taken ill, by Mistake poisons himself
and dies wret^hedly.
and being come to his House, he called for some C^mor Tartari, which he used
to take in his Broth; but by his own Mista he took Aesenick instead thereof,
and so wretchedly ended his Days. And how wicked soever he was, yet the Priest
Kennedy, his Countryman, did not stick when he was to preach his
Funeral-Sermon, to take his Text from these Words of the Apostle, Tim. iv 7, 1
I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. And in his Sermon
it was declared of him, That he had attained to the Prudence of a Judge, the
Dignity of a Colonel, and the Honor of a Counselor; and that he had served
his King and Country faithfully, and died a Saint. This last Expression seemed
to regard some.

Repentance he had shewad; but whatever it was, we must commit that to God; and
in the mean while not rely too much on such a Repentance; since Judas also
repented of hia Wickedness. If I did not study Brevity, I could relate more
remarkable Cases concerning the Persecutors in Barbados; but I break off.

Now I return to England, Quakers obtain an Act of Parliament, that their
Sotemn Affirmation, etc. be taken instead of an ^ath
where the Parliament sitting the latter End of this Year, had effectually
taken in Hand the making of an Act to case the People called Quakers from that
heavy Burden of Swearing; but this Work met with great Opposition: For though
many good-na-tur'd Members were inclined to it in good earnest, yet their
Enemies were so active in altering and clipping the Bill, that it looked almost
as if the whole Project would have come to naught. But the King himself
forwarded the Work, and to his Praise be it said, he was the principal Promoter
of it: Insomuch that in the Beginning of the Year 1696, 1696
it was enacted by the King and Parliament, That the solemn Assirmation and
Declaration of the people called Quakers shall be accepted instead of an Oath
in the usual Form, as appears by the Act, which was as follows.

An Act that the solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People called
Quakers, shall be accepted instead of an Oath in the usual Form.
Whereas diverse Dissenters, Preamble.
commonly called Quakers, refusing to take an Oath in Courts of Justice, and
other Places, are frequently Imprisoned, and their Estates Sequestered by
Process of Contempt issuing out of such Courts, to the Ruin of themselves and
Families: For Remedy thereof, Be it enacted by the King's most excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same. That from and after the fourth Day of May, which shall
be in the Year of our Lord, Quakers insted of an Oath to make a Solemn
Affirmation.
One thousand six thousand ninety six, every Quaker within this Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, who shall be
required upon any lawful Occasion to take an Oath in any Case, whereby Law an
Oath is required, shall instead of the usual Form, be permitted to make his or
her Solemn Affirmation or Declaration, in these Words following, viz.

I A, B. do declare in the Presence of Almighty God, the Witness of the Truth
of what I say. II. Which said Solemn Affirmation or Declaration, Affirmation to
be of the same force in Law as an Oath.
shall be adjudged and taken, and is hereby enacted and declared, to be of the
same Force and Effect, to all intents and purposes, in all Courts of Justice,
and other places, where by Law an Oath is required, within this Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as if such Quaker
had taken an Oath in the usual Form.

III. And be it further enacted by the Authority afiresaid, Penalty on Quakers
making false Affirmation.
That if any Quaker, making such Solemn Affirmation or Declaration, shall be
lawfully Convicted, wilfully, falsely, and corruptly to have affirmed or
declared any matter or thing, which, if the same had been in the usual Form,
would have amounted to wilful and corrupt Perjury, every such Quaker so
offending, shall incur the same Penalties and Forfeitures, as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm are enacted against Persons convicted of wilful and
corrupt Perjury.

IV. And whereas, Refusing to pay Tithes or Church rates
by reaooson of a pretended Scruple of Conscience, Quakers do refuse to pay
Tithes and Church-Rates, Be it enacted by the Anthority aforesaid, That where
any Quaker shall refuse to pay, or compound for his great or small Tubes, or to
pay any Church-Rates, it shall and may be lawful, to and for the two next
Justices of Peace of the same County (other than such Justice of the Peaee as
is Patron of the Church or Chapel, whence the said Tithes do or shall arise, or
any Ways interested in the said Titkes) upon the Complaint of any Parson,
Vicar, Farmer, or Proprietor of Tithes, Churchwarden or Churchwardens, who
ought to have, receive or collect the same, by Warrant under their Hands and
Seals, to convene before them such Quaker or Quakers neglecting or refusing to
pay or compound for the same, and to examine upon Oath, which Oath the said
Justices are hereby empowered to Administier, or in such Manner as by this Act
is provided, the Truth and Justice of the said Complaint, and to ascertain and
state what is due and payable by such Quaker or Quakers to the Party or Parties
complaining, Justices on stating what is due, may direct Payment. On Refusal,
to levy by Distress.
and by Order under their Hands and Seals to direct and appoint the Payment
thereof, so as the Sum ordered, as aforesaid, do not exceed ten Pounds: And
upon Refusal by such Quaker or Quakers to pay according to such Order, it shall
and may be lawful to and for any one of the said Justices, by Warrant under his
Hand and Seal, to levy the Money thereby ordered to be paid, by Disiress and
Sale of Goods of such Offender, his Executors or Administrators, rendering only
the Overplus to him, her or them, necessary Charges of Distraining being
thereout first deducted and allowed by the said Justice; Persons agrieved may
appeal to the Quarter-Sessons, who are of finally to do termine.
and any Person finding him, her or themselves agrieved by any Judgment given
by such two Justiees of the Peace, shall and may appeal to the next General
Quarter Sessions to be held for the County, Riding, City, Liberty or Town
crpotate; And the Justices of the Peace there present, or the major Part of
them, shall proceed finally to bear and determine the Matter, and to reverse
the said Judgment, if they shall see Cause; And if the Justices then present,
or the major Part of them, If Judgment continued give Costs.
shall find Cause to continue the Judgment given by the first two Justices of
the Peace, they shall then decree the same by Order of Sessions, and shall also
proceed to give such Costs against the Appellant, to be levied by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said Appellant, as to them shall seem
just and reasonable; And no Proceedings or Judgment had or to be had by virtue
of this Act shall be removed or superseded by any Writ of Certiorari, No
Judgment to be superseded
or other Writ out of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or any other Court
whatsoever, unless the Title of such Tithes shall be in question.

V. Provided always, No Distress till Appeal be determined.
That in case any such Appeal be made as aforesaid, no Warrant of Distress
shall be granted until after such Appeal be determined.

VI. Provided, Quakers not to be Evidence in Criminal causes, etc
and be it enacted, That no Quaker, or reputed Quaker, shall by virtue of this
Act he qualified or permitted to give Evidence in any Criminal Causes, or serve
on any Juries, or bear any Office or Place of Profit in the Government; any
thing in this Act contained to the contrary in any wife notwithstianding.

VII. Provided, That this Act shall continue in Force for the Space of seven
Tears, and from thence to the End of the next Session of Parliament, and no
longer.

Thus the Quakers became discharged, and free from that grievous Burden, by
which they had been oppressed so many Years. This Parliament made also an Act
for enforcing the Laws which restrain Marriages without Licenses or Banns, and
for the better registring Marriages, Births and Burials: And for keeping a
distinct Register of all Persons born; G. Keith preacheas at Turners-Hall, and
D^rget the Quakers with He (...)
for which no more was to be paid than six Pence.

Mention has been made already that George Keith had at London got a Place
called Turners-Hall to preach in; and as his Auditory consisted chiefly of
Persons envious against the Quakers, so there were amongS mong these also many
of the vulgar Sort, who generally are sickle and unsteady, and often inclined
to Novelties; though Keith would as yet in some Respecct be looked upon us an
Adherent of the Quakers; he had also given sorth in Print some Papers, wherein
he endeavored to make it appear that they held several heterodox Sentiments.

The Books which he had published concerning this Matter, His Chargely answered
were so fully answered by the Quakers, that he being at a Loss to make a Reply
to their Answers, pretended that he was not in a Condition to set the Press at
Work, and bear the Charges of the Impression. But that this was a srivolous
Evasion, was well known. Yet he, todosome thing, fell upon another Project, and
published an Advertisement, that on the 11th of the Month called June, he would
desend his Charge a against the Quakers, e fummons u to meet at Tur. is-Hall,
rich they pru-itially decline Reasons read are
and therefore he summoned some of them to appear there at that Time, to answer
for themselves. He now beginning; to comply with the Episcopalians, had, as he
said afterward, given notice of his Intention to the Lord Mayor of London, who
not having forbidden it, he grew the more bold. But the Quakers did not think
Persons might not have got together, and caused a dangerous Disturb-ance. And
therefore they declined to appear there, and gave the following Reasons of
their Refusal, which were read in the appointed Meeting, and afterward
published in Print.

WHereas G. Keith has, Reasons for not ineeting G. Keith at his Summons
after his wonted irregular and unruly Manner, challenged diverse of us to
defend our selves against such Charges as he has to exhibit against us at
Turners-Hall; These are to certify all whom it may concern, That the Reasons
why we decline any such Meeting, are as follow;

1. Because the said G. Keith has given us such frequent Proofs of his very
passionate and abusie Behavior, at the many more Select Meetings we have had
with him, in all Manner of Sweetness s, Long-suffering and Patience, on our
Side, to satisfy and preserve him from these Extremes: That we cannot assure
ourselves now of any better Entertainment, or that the Meeting can have any
desirable Success, for a thorough Information.

2. We decline to meet, because it is not an agreed Meeting on both Sides,
which it ought to have been; and where that is not, or can-not be adjusted; the
Press is the next sair Way and Expedient, which he has begun with, and now
seems to decline; nor has he sent us a Copy of his Charge or Indictment
against us, which also he ought to have done.

3. That he has two of our Books which lie hard at his Door; in Vindication of
us and our Doctrines from his Exceptions, and which he has not yet answered; so
that he is not upon equal Terms with us; and therefore we think his Challenge,
Appointment and Sumnous unsair; and that all that are not partial will be of
the same Mind with us.

4. Such public and unlimited Meetings are too often attended with Heats,
Levity and Confusion, and answer not the End, desired by sober and enquiring
Men. Besides, that it lets up a Practice that Authority may judge to be an
Abuse to our Liberty and so draw that under Resiectoin as no Friend to the
Civil Peace.

5. We know not what Religion or Persuasion this Wavering Man is of, or what
Church or People he adhcres to, or will receive him, with his vain Sp
culations, that have led him to desert us; nor who are accountable to us for
him and his Irregularities and Abuses; the generality of such Assemblies
usually making ill Auditors, worse Judges, and no good Security for our
Satisfaction. And we must therefore take Leave to say, it seems to us an
indirect Way of disquieting and invading our present Liberty, that so
irreligious a Meeting should be held, whose End is to abuse other Men for their
Religion. If this should be imitated by all the several Sorts of different
Persuasions in this City, what Heats and Confusions must necessarily ensue?

6. Wherefore, Lastly, Be it known unto all, That for the sake of Religion, the
Liberty granted us, and the Civil-Peace, we decline to meet him; and not from
any Apprchensions we have of his Abilities, or our own Consciousness of Error,
or Injustice to the said G. Keith, whose weak and unbridled Temper we know is
such, that what Learning and Parts he has, have not been able to balance and
support him on less Occasions, so that we may say they are in ill Hands; and if
he procweds as he begins, they will be employed to an ill End, which his (poor
Man!) cannot but be, unless he change his Course; which we heartily pray for,
that a Place of Repentance he may find; and through a true Contrition, the
Remission of his great Sin on Envy, and evilly entreating the Lord's People and
Way, which we profess, and which he the said G. Keith has long and lately both
professed, and zealously vindicated as such.

These Reasons the Quakers, as has been said, published in Print, to show the
World, that it was not without a weighty Cause, that they did not accept G.
Keith's Summons. Now though G. Whitehead and W. Penn, for the above said Reasons
did not appear in Turners-Hall, yet some of their Friends were there as
Spectators, to see what would be the Issue of this Business. G. Keith seeing
himself thus disappointed in his Intention, took upon him for all that, to
defend his Charge in the Absence of his Adversaries, which now he could do
easily, since none contradicted him, and he was applauded by the frequent
Shoutings of the Mob that was there in great Numbers. Which he oh-jects to very
srieclously
After the Reasons of Nonap pearance were read, Keith signified that they were
not satisfactory, by calling them slender, weak and frivolous. What, said he,
may a Male factor make this Excuse, You shall not call me before a Justice
without my Consent? If a man robs me, I may complain of him as a Robbrer, and
without his Consent call him to account. But here is a st range thing: If in
juring Men may not be called to account without their Consent, it will tres
pass against the Law, and intrenches upon Liberty of Conscience. This Reason he
published in Print in his Narrative of that Day's Work. But who would formerly
ever have thought that such a little Man as he was, would have been so big. It
looked just as if the Quakers were obliged to appear as Malefactors before the
pretended Judge Keith, ac companied with his Assistants the Mob, and I don't
know who. And to keep to G. Keith's Companion, Though a Malesactor may not say,
You shall not call me before a Justice without my Consent. yet with somc good
Reason he might say, You shall not make yourself a Justice, as Keith now did.
It is proable that he was supported by some great Churchmen, otherwise such a
bold Action might casily have turned to his Disadvantage.

My Limits do not admit of a circumstanstial Relation of what was transacted at
that Time in Turnvers-Hall; yet to show briesly how he treated Matters, I Will
produce one or two Instancen, by which my Reader may know, ut ex unguc Leonem,
and so judge of the rest. He said, he would charge the Quakers with nothing but
what he could prove from their own Writings, His abusive Perversion of G. W's
Writings
and he went on thus: I offer to prove that G. Whitehead has denied Christ
both to be God and Man. A strange Thing in deed, since it was very well known
that G. Whitehead had published a Book of above twenty Sheets, under this
Title, The DIVINITY of CHRIST, and Unity of the Three that bear Record in
Heaven, with the blessed End and Effect of Christ's Appearance coming in the
Flesh, Sufferings and Sacrifice for Sinners, confessed and vindicated by his
Followers called Quakers. This Book G, Keith could not pretend Ignorance of,
for he picked somewhat out of it an his Narrative. But to maintain his Charge,
he appealed to a Book of G. Whitehead's called, The Light and Life of Christ
within. This Book G. Whitehead had written in Answer to W. Burnet, a Baptist
Preacher, who writing of Christ said, As he was God, he was Co-Creator with the
Father, and so was'before Abraham, and had Glory with God before the world was,
and in this Sense came down from Heaven. To which G. Whitehead answered, What
Nousense and unscripture-like Language is this, to tell of God being Co-Creator
with the Father? Or that God had Glory with God? Does not this imply two Gods,
and that God had a Father? Let the Reader judge. Certainly it appcars from this
plainly, that G. Whitehead did not intend any thing else but to censure the
unseriptural Expressions of his Antagonist, as Co-Creator, Gal. iii. 20. John
x. 30
and implying two Gods: For not only the Apostle faith, God is one, but Christ
himself faith, I and the Father are one. Yet G. Keith did not stick to say, G.
Whitehead denies the Divinity of Christ, and he deceives the Nation and
theParliament, by telling them, The Quakers own Christ to be both God and Man,
and-believe all that is recorded of him in the Holy Scripture. This he strove
to prove from a Passage taken out of the aforementioned Book, which in Sense
agreed with the former; and speaking in another Page of the same Matter, viz.
The Baptists calling God the Word, Co-Creator with the Father. G.Whitehead
answers thus to it, To tell of the Word God, Co-Creator with the Father, is all
one as to tell of God being Co-Creator with God, if the Father be God', and
this is to make two Gods and two Creators: For God Co-Creator with the Father
plainly implies two. Was this showing of others their absurd Expressions, a
Denial that Christ was God, as Keith would have it? Might it not be asked here,
whether the acute Wit of Keith was now altogether flown away? But a great; Part
of his Auditory consisted of an ignorant Crew, and one or other of them was
continually heard to cry out, It is sufficient.

Now to prove that G. Whitehead had denied Christ to be Man, Keith cited from
the forementioned Book, called, The Divinity of Christ, etc. these Words, If
the Body and Soul of the Son of God were both created, does not this render him
a fourth Person? Here Keith stopped, and broke off with an etc. without adding
the following Words; For Creation was in Time, which contradicts the Doctrine
of three distinct, uncreated, Coeternal, Co-essential Persons in the Deity,
secing that which was ere 'ted, was not so. This G. Whitchead asked and said to
show his Opponent T. Dansou the Absurdity of his Assertions about the
Personalities of the Deity. But Keith went on reading from G. Whitehead's Book,
thus, Where does the Scripture say, That his Soul was created? For was not he
the Brightuess of the Father's Glory, and the express Image of his divine
Substance. But supposing the Soul of Christ was with the Body created in Time,
etc. Here Keith broke off again, omitting the following Words; I ask, if from
Eternity he was a Person distinct from God and his holy Spirit, without either
Soul or Body? Where does the Scripture speak of any Person without either Soul
or Body? Let Us have plain Scripture.

Now though G.Wbitebead had written this to show, how we often enter into
inextricable Straits, when we do not keep to the Words of the holy Scripture,
which qo where speaks of Three Persous in the Deity: Yet Keith perverting the
Passage abusively, said to his Auditory, Here ye see he will not own that
Christ had a created Soul. At this Rate and after this Manner Keith reasoned,
and treated the other Passages. But how smartly would he have carpt at others,
if they had cited his Words thus piecemeal?

But now he had a temporal Reward in his View; and seeing for that End he began
more and more to declare himself in Favor of the Episcopal Church, W. C. endra
vours to show Keith to be an Apostate in a very Respect
somebody of that Persuasion, who did no farther make himself known, than by
these initial Letters W.C. made it his Business to show the Changeableness of
Keith's Opinion and Sentiments from his own Writings, which he had published in
Print, and there by evidently proved, that in every respect Keith was turned an
Apostate, though he appeared much offended at the Quakers, because they had
called him so: But said this Author, If the Presbyterian Principles (of which
Society Keith once was a Member) were better than the Quakers, then is Mr.
Keith an Apostate, in revolting from and deserting the Presbyterians and
turning his Coat Quaker- fashion. But if the Quakers were more in the Right
than the Presbyterians, then e contra.

Now he appeared to sawn on the Episcopal Clergy, G. K. by oppo-sing the
Quakers seems to hope for the best Recompense from the Epit copaliams
and estcemed lawful what formerly he had zealously oppugned. For he was in
hopes that by opposing the Quakers, he should be best rewarded among the
Episcopalians; and this was not altogether without Reason; for it being no more
in their Power now to persecute the Quakers in Manner as formerly, they made
Use of other Means as much as possibly they could, to render them and their
Dorine odious; for which Keith seemed to them no unsit Tool; for he being both
of a witty and impetuous Temper, was also crafty, subtle, cunning, and violent
in his Expressions. And to charge the Quakers with Inorthodoxy, he himself
lanch'd into an he-torodox Sentiment: For it was believed, that for maintaining
this Position, That the Historical Knowledge of Christ's Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Lc. was absolutely necessary for Salvation, he had no other
Ground than the twelve pretended Transmigrations or Transitions of Man's Soul
from one Body into another; because the ignorant Souls from hence seemed to get
Opportunity of being informed before the End of the World, concerning the Death
and Resurrection of our Savior. Who would have imagined before, He charges the
Quakers with Inorthodoxy in Points he had formerly very notnbly defended.
particularly a against C. Mather.
that this same G. Keith should have accused the Quakers of Inorthodoxy in
Point of Doctrine, which he had often so efsectually defended, and among the
rest in a Book against one Cotton Mather? wherein upon the Charge of their
being guilty of many Heresies and Blasphemies, He said after this Manner: Our
Principles do mostly agree with the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Protestant Faith. According to my best Knowledge of the People called Quakers,
and those owned by them, as preachers and publishers of their Belief, being of
an unquestionable Esteem among them, and worthy of double Honor; as there are
many such, I know none of them that are guilty of such Hcresies and Blasphemies
as they are charged with. And I think I should know and do know those called
Quakers, havil been conversant with them in public Meetings as well as in
private Disicourses, with the most noted and estcemed among them, for about
twenty-eight Years pust, and that in many Plates of the World, both in Europe
and America. Who would ever have thought then, that one who had conversed so
many Years with the Quakers, preached their Doctrine, and desended it publicly
both by Writing and by Word of Mouth, should afterward have decried them, as
Denicrs of the most essential Points of the Christian Faith! But to what
Extravagancies may not temporal Gain transport a Man, the Case of Balaam may
serve for an Evidence.

I have in all this Relation of Keith's Behavior set down nothing but what I
believe to be really true; The Author'S Apology for what (...) had said of G. K.
neither have I endeavored to aggravate his Failures; for I never bore him ill
Will, but a good Esteem when I believed him to be upright, because in that Time
I perceived in him some good Abilities. And I yet wish from my very Heart, that
it may please God in his unsearchable Mercy, so to touch his Heart before the
Door of Grace be shut, that seeing the Greatness of his Transgression he may by
true Repentance obtain Forgiveness from the Lord, of his Evil, N.B. This was
written some Years before I heard G. Keith was deceased
which I take to be worse, because by his Crastiness he endeavored to fet
false Colors on Things that were really good, thereby to insinuate himself
into Favor with the Episcopal Party. And since some others, suborned thereto,
did not omit also to render the Quakers odious, as such that held inorthodox
Sentiments, these did not neglect to show in Print, how they were injured and
wronged. For now the old Tale, That there were Popish Emissaries among them,
was revived and divulged anew. But it was no hard Matter for them to show how
ill-grounded this Conceit was; and therefore they might say, We are so well
known to our Neighbors, that if this were true, our Adversaries would be very
active to find out and discover such Emissaries, since the Law against them is
stiil in Force. Three Norsolk Clergymen misrepresent the Quakers to the K. and
Parlia meant.
Three Episcopal Clergy Men in Norsolk had also drawn up a Paper to the King
and Parliament, to blacken the Quakers from their own Writings; but George
Whitehead, William Penn, and others were not backward to show how their Woe ds,
or the true Meaning thereof were perverted; since at such a Rate even the
salutary Lcssons of the holy Scriptures might be expoled as wicked Expreffions.

Now the late King James intending an Invasion upon England, The late King
James prepar-ingforan Invasion-a Plot is discovered against K. William.
and great Preparations being made in France, in order thereto, a Plot was
difcovered in England against King William; this gave Occasion to the House of
Commons to draw up a kind of Declaration, which was called an Association, to
be signed. by all their Members, as follows;

Whereas there has been a horrible and dctestable Conspiracy, Association of
the H. of Commons.
formed and carried on by Papists, and other wicked and traitorous Persous for
assassinating his Majesty's Royal Person, in order to encourage an Inva-sion
from France, to subvert our Religion, Laws and Liberties, We whose Names are
hereunto subseribed do heartily, sincerely and soleinly profess testify, and
declare, that his present Majesty King William is rightful and lawful King of
these Realms. And we do mutually promise and engage to stand by and assist each
other, to the at most of our 'Power, in the Support and Defense of his
Majesty's most sacred Person and Government against the late King James, and
all his Adherents. And in Case his Majesty come to any violent and untimely
Death (which God forbid,) We do hereby farther freely and unanimously oblige
our selves to unite, associate, and stand by each other, in revenging the same
upon his Enemies and their Adherents, and in sapporting and desending the
Succession of the Crown, acording tu an Act made in the first Year of the Reign
of King William and Queen Mary, entitled, An Act declaring the Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects and settling the Succession of the Crown.

An Association was also signed by the Lords, and both presented to the King,
and were followed by all the Corporations in England. See Life of K.W. vol. 3.
The Dissenters also presented Declarations to the King, that had some
resemblance with the other. But the Quakers prosessing Nonresistance and an
inoffensive Behavior, could in no wise enter into such a League; yet to show
that they were Loyal and faithful to the King, they drew up the following
Declaration, and published it in Print:

The Ancient Testimony and Principle of the People called Quakers, renewed with
Respect to the King and Government, and touching the Present Association.
WE the said People do solemnly and sincerely declare, Quakers Testimony
relating to the Association.
That it has been our Judgment and Principle from the first Day we were called
to profess the Light of Christ Jesus manifested in our Consciences, unto this
Day, That the setting up, and putting down Kings and Governments, is God's
peculiar Prerogative, for Causes best known to himself; and that it is not our
Work or Business to have any Hand or Contrivance therein, nor to be Busy-bodies
in Matters above our Station; much less to Plot and Contrive the Ruin or
Overturn of any of them: But to pray for the King, and for the Safety of our
Nation, and Good of all Men, that we may live a peaceable and quiet Life, in
all Godliness and Honesty under the Government which God is pleased to set over
us.

And according to this our Ancient and Innocent Principle, we often have given
forth our Testimony, and now do, against all Plotting, Conspiracies and
contriving Insurrections against the King or the Government) and against all
Treacherous, Barbarous, and Murtherous Designs whatsoever, as Works of the
Devil and Darkness: And we sincerely bless God, and are heartily thankful to
the King and Government, for the Liberty and Privileges we enjoy under them by
Law; esteeming it our Duty to be true and faithful to them.

And whereas we the said People are required to sign the said Association, we
sincerely declare, that our refusing so to do, is not out of any Disaffection
to the King or Government, nor in Opposition to his being declared rightsul and
lawsul King of these Realms, but purely because we cannot for Conscience Sake
fight, kill, or revenge, either for our selves, or any Man else.

And we believe that the timely Discovery and Prevention of the late barbarous
Design, and mischievous Plot against the King and Government, and the sad
Effects it might have had, is an eminent Mercy from Almighty God; for which we,
and the whole Nation, have great Cause to be humbly thankful to him, and to
pray for the Continuance of his Mercies to them and us.

From a Meeting of the said People in London, the 23d of the first Month,
called March, 1695-6.

In this Year died of a Fever, The Death of R. Haydock, and Character by
Eleanor his Widow
Roger Haydock, at his House in Penketh in Lancashire, about the Age of fifty
three Years. He had been in Holland the Year before, in which Time I had more
than once Opportunity to speak with him privately, and discovered thereby such
Christian Qualities in him, that were indeed excellent; and therefore the News
of his Decease did much affect me; and because of his Ministry, in which he was
eminent, being more than ordinary full of Matter in his Preaching, his Death
was much lamented among those Churches in England where he had labored most in
the Gospel. His Wife Eleanor in her Testimony concerning him said, My Spirit
has been, and is bowed under, a deep Sense of my great Loss and Exercise in
the Removal of my dear Husband, when it has pleased God in his Wisdom to take
(...) me who was Comfort to my Life, and Joy to my Days in this world, being
given me of God, in great Mercy and loving Kindness; and so he has been en
joyed by me in Thankfulness of Heart, to the Close of that Time God had
appointed and now is taken from the Worlds with all its Troubles and Excreises,
as also from all his labors and 'Travels, which were great amongst the
Churches of Christ, which with me have no small Loss in his Removal. But what
shall say? Wise and good is the Lord, who does what he will in Heaven and in
Earth, and amongst his Churches and his Chosen. He can break and bind up, wound
and head, kill and make alive again, that the Living may see his Wonders, and
magnify his 'Power in all, through all and over all, who is God eternal, blessed
for ever, Amen.

Then in her Testimony she gives an Account of his Life, and how in her ^oup
Pears he had been to her a faithful Instructor in Godliness and at (...) became
her Husband. After a Description of his Life, and his many Travels in the
Ministry of the Gospel, to edisy and build up the Churches, the says also,
That Though his Love to her was above all visibles, as the best of Enjoyments he
had in this World, yet she was not too "dear to him to give up to serve the
Truth of God. I was made (says the) a Blessing to him, more comfortable every
Day than other: He would often express it; and truly so was he to me every Day,
every Way, and in every Respect. No Tongue or Pen can relate the Full of that
Comfort and Joy we had in God, and one in another. Tet we find such has been
the Pleasure of 'God concerning them he has loved, to try them in the most
near and dear Enjoyments, that it might be manifest he was loved ahovt, all;
that no Gifts may be preserved above the Giver; but that he may be all in all,
who is, and is to come, God blessed for ever and ever. And truly there has
been great Care and Watchsuluess one over another, and over our own Spirits, to
see that our Love, though great, was bounded and kept within its Compass, the
Truth being its Original, the Alpha and Omega also. Although it has been the
Pleasure of God to try me, in the Removal of so great a Blessing from me, sure
it is,, that I may be the more inward to him, and have his Love always in my
Remembrance, who gives and takes away, and in till bless his Name. My Soul
travels that I may always follow his Footsteps of Self-Denial in all Things,
that 1 may finish my Course in this World, to the Glory of God, as he did, and
have my Part in that Mansion of Gloy with him eternal in the Heavens; though it
may be my Lot to pay for a Time in this World of Troubles; yet I have Hope in
Immortality and Eternal Blessedness, when Time in this World shall be no more.
Thus Hie writ: But to shun Prolixity,, I break off. She then giving some
further Account of his Life and Ministry, mentions, that being gone from home,
she was not present at his Death; but that they having taken Leave of each
other before, had parted in great Love, with mutual Brewings to God for one
another's Welfare: And she concludes with these Words: Though I saw not his Going
away, yet I have seen in what he went, that it was full of Zeal and Fervency in
the Love of God, and Life of Righteousness. So in pure Submission to the Will
of God, I conclude this short but true Relation of my worthy dear Husband,
whose Name and Memorial is blessed, and will live, and be of a sweet Savor in
the Hearts of the Righteous through Ages. With such a Tcstimony it was that
Eleanor transmitted the Memorial of her beloved Confort to Posterity.

Meeting in this Year with no more remarkable Occurrences, I pass over to that
of 1697, 1697
in which a Treaty of Peace was concluded between England, Peace between
England, France and Holland
France, and Holland; and though many thought it would be lasting, yet among the
Popish Clergy there were those that had another Opinion of it; of which this
artificial Distich sent over by a Clergyman from Ghent in Flanders to Holland,
so that it fell first into my Hands, was an Evidence;

Prespicimus modo quod d^rabun^ Fader^ longo
Tempore, n^^ nobis pax cito diss^gi^t.
which may be turned into English thus, An Artifisial Distich thereupon.
We foresee now that the Consederacy shall last a long Time, and that Peace
will not quickly fly away from us. But if one reads this Distich backward, it
runs thus:

Dissugi^t cito pax nobis, nec tempore longo
Foedera durabunt, quad modo prospicimus.
and it makes out a quite contrary Sense, viz. Peace will soon fly away from
us, and the Covenant shall not last long; which we foresee already.

This Peace being concluded, the Inhabitants of England vied with one another
to congratulate their King on that Account, who was now acknowledged as King of
Great Britain by the French King Lewis XIV. And since the Magistrates of
Cities, the Heads and Fellows of the Universities and People of all Societies
and Persuasions addressed the King, the Quakers were not wanting in this
Respect, and therefore drew up also an Address, which they presented to the
King, and was as follows;

To King WILLIAM the Third, over England, etc.
The Grateful Acknowledgement of the People commonly called QUAKERS, humbly
presented.
May it please the KING,
Seeing the most High God, who rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and appoints
over them whomsoever he will, Dan. v. 21
has by his overruling Power and Providence placed Thee in Dominion and
Dignity ever these Realms, and by his Divine Favor has signally preserved and
delivered Thee from many great and eminent Dangers, and graciously turned the
Calamity of War into the desired Mercy of Peace, We heartily wish that we and
all others concerned may be truly sensible and humbly thankful to Almighty God
for the same, that the Peace may be a lasting and perpetual Blessing.

And now, O King, the God of Peace having returned Thee in Safety, it is Cause
of Joy to them that fear him, to hear thy good and seasonable Resolution
effectually to discourage Profaneness and Immorality, Righteousness being that
which exalts a Nation: And as the King has been tenderly inclined to give
Ease and Liberty of Conscience to his Subjects of different Persuasions, (of
whose Favors we have largely partaken) so we esteem it our Duty gratefully to
commemorate and acknowledge the same, earnestly beseeching Almighty God to
assist the King to prosecute all these his just and good Inclinations, that his
Days here may be happy and peaceable, and hereafter he may partake of a lasting
Crown that will never fade away.

London, the 7th of the 11th Month called January, 1697.

This Address being signed, and presented to the King by G.White-head, Thomas
Lower, Daniel Quare, John Vaughton, John Edge, and Gilbert Latey, The King
Watchmaker and the Duck of Gloucester's Nurse, Quakers.
was favorably received, and accepted by that Prince, who gave signal Proofs,
that he bore no Ill Will to any for Difference of Opinion in Religion, if they
were honest People; of which this may serve for an Evidence, that both his
Watch-maker, and the Nurse of the young Duke of Gloucester, were of the
Persuasion of the Quaker.

I think it was about the Beginning of the Year School, School
that a Bill was brought into Parliament, For restraining the Licenciousness of
the Press. Those called Quakers perceiving that this might be pernicious, drew
up the following Remarks, which they delivered to the Members of Parliament;

Some CONSIDERATIONS humbly offered by the People called QUAKERS, relating to
the Bill for restraining the Licenciousness of the Press.
THIS Bill is, Bill for restraining the Press d^^pt.
They conceive, of like Nature with the expired Act 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 33.
And many Inconveniences did attend the Subjects by it whilst in Force, by which
the said People were Sufferers.

To prevent the Printing and publishing of Seditious or Treasonable Books
against the Government, and Scandalous Pamphlets tending to Vice and
Immorality, is the wisdom of all good Governments, and must be the Desire of
all good Men.

But to Limit Religious Books to a License, where the Tolerated Persuasions are
many, they conceive, seems altogether unsafe to all, but that whose Opinion the
Licenser is of, who by this Bill has Power to allow what he shall judge Sound
and Orthodox, or reject what he shall construe to be either Heretical,
Seditious, or Offensive.

History and Experience have taught how the obscure Term of Heresy has been
turned and stretched against Primitive Christians, Martyrs, and famous
Reformers: Nor is it forgotten for what Reafons the Writ De Haeretico
Comburendo was abolished.

29 Car 2. cap. 9.
It Is no strange Thing to have Learned See Dr. South and Dr. Sherlock.
Men of the same Church interfere in their Opinions concerning several Texts of
Holy Scripture; and it is uncertain when their Opinions come to the Licenser,
whether the World shall have the best or no.

The different Apprchensions Men have of diverse Parts of Scripture, gives Birth
to different Persuasions, who yet all make the Scripture the Test thereof;
which by the Kindness of the Government being Tolerated, they conceive, they
ought to be left free to defend them, from the Misrepresentations, Prejudice,
or Mistake of others, without being subjetcted to the Censure of a Licenser of
a different Persuasion.

They therefore humbly hope, That nothing may be Enacted that will lessen the
Toleration, which they thankfully enjoy under the Favor of this, as well as
the late Government.

These Considerations, with what others were offered, were of such Effect, that
the Bill dropped.

About this Time the Writings of Antonia Bourignon were not only translated
into English, A. Bouringnon's Writings translated
but also published in Print at London. This displeased many of the Clergy, and
an Author was employed to write against them, but chiefly against the Quakers.
He called his Book the snake in the Grass; but his own Name he concealed; though
it was discovered afterward that he was a suppressed Parson, who had refused
the Oath of Allegiance to King William. This Man, to render the Quakers odious,
had picked up and collected many Things from their Writings; but he had so
mutilated their Expressions, by omitting several Words that went before, or
followed, and by skipping over some in the midst of the Period, that they made
out quite another Sense than the Authors had given. To this he added Relations
of several Things that happened, as he said, among the Quakers, whereas some of
these were fictitious, and mere Untruths. He also raked up Things that never
had been approved by the Quakers; as the Case of James Navlor, described here
before in its due Place; notwithstanding the said J. Naylor had publicly given
eminent Tokens of true Repentance.

Among the Author's Untruths this was one, That the Quakers in their Schools
did not suffer the Children to read the Holy Scriptures.

The Falseness of which was made to appear evidently by a Certificate of the
French Usher of one of their Schools at Wansworth near London, who himself was
no Quaker, as also by the Testimonies of some of the Neighbors that were
People of Note; and declared that the Bible was daily read by the Scholars in
the said School, beginning with Genesis, and going on to the End of the
Revelations; and then from Geness again. The false Citations of the aforesaid
Author were also clearly set forth: For if any would be so malicious, it might
by his Method be insinuated from Psalm. xiv. I. a nd Psalm. liii. I. that in the
Holy Scriptures was said, There is no God; because these Words are indeed found
there. But who would be so desperate as to draw such a wicked Conclusion from
thence, unless he were an Atheist, who openly made a Mock of what is sacred? G.
Whitehead and J. Wyeth answer this Book.
The Answerers of this poisonous Book, The Snake in the Grass, were G.
Whitchead and Joseph Wyeth; this being a Work which required more Toil and
Labor than Art, to review all those manifold Citations from many Authors, and
to show the Unfairness and Disingenuity of the Snake. Now since many were very
ready to take for true the Falsities in that Book, and also in the Pamphlets of
the Apostate Francis Bugg, Bugg also abuses the Quakers, which occasions the
Reprinting a Book of J. Crook's.
who was gone over to the Church of England; at the Request of John Crook, (who
was still alive, though above eighty Years of Age) a Book of his was reprinted,
first published in the Year 1663, and so five and thirty Years before, the
Title of which was, Truth's Principles concerning the Man Christ, his
Suffering, Death, Resurrection, Faith in his Blood, the Imputation of his
Righteousness, etc. By this it appeared that the Sentiments of the Quakers
concerning these Points, were not only orthodox now, but that they had been so
in those early Days.

Having thus again made mention of John Crook, Some Account of J. Crook.
of whom I have spoken several Times in this History. I proceed now to mention
somewhat concerning his Decease, since he departed this Life in the Year 1699.
1699
He left behind in Writing an Exhortation or Advice to his Children and
Grandchildren, written scarce two Months before his Death, and of this Tenor;

Dear Children,
I Must leave you in a wicked Age, His Advice to his Children and Grandchildren.
but commend you to the Measure of the Grace of God in your inward Parts, which
you have received by Jesus Christ; and as you love it, and mind the Teachings
of it, you will find it a Counselor to instruct you in the Way everlasting,
and preserve you out of the Ways of the Ungodly.

I have seen much in my Days, and I always observed, that the Fear of the Lord
God proved the best Portion, and those that walked in it were the only happy
People, both in this Life (while they continued faithful) and when they come to
die, though they meet with many Hardships in their Passage. By Experience I can
speak it, That the Ways of Holiness afford more true Comfort and Peace to the
upright Soul, than the greatest Pleasures this World can afford; the former
reaches the Heart and Soul, while the Delights of this World are but a Show,
and Appearance only, vanishing like a Dream; and whoever believes otherwise of
them, will certainly find them to be but lying Vanities; therefore the Apostle,
Romans vi. 21. might boldly put the Question to the converted Romans, (viz.) What
Fruit had you then in those Things whereof you are now ashamed? For the End of
those Things is Death.

Therefore, Dear Children, be in Love with Holiness; make it your Companion,
and those that walk in it; you may find Buddings of it, from an Holy Seed in
your Hearts; as you mind the inner Man, the Light will manifest the Stirrings
of it after God, which I felt from my tende^ Years; although I understood them
not so plainly, till I heard the Truth declared.

I advise you to keep a pure Conscience, both toward God and Man; for if that
be desiled, Hypocrisy and Formality will deprive you of all comfortable Feeling
of God's Presence; and then Deadness and Dryness will be your miserable Portion.

Be careful how you spend your precious Time, for an Account must be given of
every idle Word, though but few regard it; but foolish jesting, and vain Talking
are said to grieve the Spirit of God; read Ephesians. iv. 30. But improve your Time
in Prayer, and Religious Exercises, etc. and be diligent in your lawful
Callings; for The Desire of the ^^othful Man kills him, Prove. xxi. 25.

Be careful what Company you frequent; for a Man is commonly known by the
Company he keeps, as much as by any one outward Thing; and of your Behavior in
Company; for I have found that a wife and sober Deportment, adds much to a
Man's Reputation and Credit in the World.

Watch to the Light, and its Discoveries of Good and Evil, that you may not be
ignorant of Satan's Devices; so the Net will be spread in vain in the Sight of
the Bird; for Watchfulness will make you in Love with a retired Estate; and the
more truly and perfectly any Man knows and understands himself, the better
discerning will such have of other Men; as in the Beginning, when deep Silence
of all Flesh was more in Use, the Spirit of discerning was more common, and
quicker, than since it has been neglected; therefore be sure you spend some
Time (at convenient Seasons) in waiting upon God in Silence, though it be
displeasing to the Flesh; for I have had more Comfort, and Confirmation in the
Truth, in my inward retiring in Silence, than from all Words I have heard from
others, though I have often been refreshed by them also.

Love the Holy Scriptures, prefering them to all other Books whatsoever; and be
careful to read them with an holy Awe upon your Spirits, lest your Imaginations
put Constructions upon them to your Hurt; but exercise Faith in the Promise of
Christ, who has said, My Spirit small take of mine, and show them unto you.

Keep constantly to Religious Meetings amongst Friends; but look to your
Aflections, that you respect not Persons, but the Power and Life of Truth, from
whomsoever it comes; not minding the Tickling of your Affections, but the
Demonstration of the Truth to your Understanding and Consciences; for that will
abide, when Flashes of Affections will fade and come to nothing, after the
Words are ended.

Love one another truly, manifesting your Love by good Counsel, and being
helpful to each other upon all Occasions; being good Examples to all you
converse with, especially to your Children, and those of your own Families,
that Pride and Vanity may not be countenanced by you, but rather reproved;
remembering, while they are under your Government, you must give an Account of
the Discharge of your Duty to Gad toward them.

Lastly, Be always mindful of your latter End, and live as you would die, not
knowing how soon your Days may be finished in this World: And while you do live
in it, despise not the Chastenings of the Lord, whatever they be he is pleased
to ^^fit you withal. I have been afflicted from my Youth up, both inw y and
ourwardly, but the God whom I served provided for me, when all my outward
Relations forsook me, none of them giving me any Portion to begin the World
withal. This I speak to let you know, I shall leave more outwardly, even to the
least of you, than was left me by all my Relations, etc. I need not mention
this sharp Affliction (beyond Expression) in my old Age, because, in some
measure, you know it; but 1 could not have been without it, as the Lord has
showed me, for I have seen his Wonders in the Deeps: Therefore I say again,
Despise not Afflictions, but embrace them as Messengers of Peace to your Souls,
(though displeasing to the Flesh.)

These Things I commend to you, out of true Love to your Souls, knowing how the
vain Mind of Man little regards such Advice as this I leave behind me: But by
this Advice I show my true Love to you all, desiring God's Blessing upon it; to
whom I commit you all, my Dear Children, and end my Days.

Your Loving Father and Grandfather, JOHN CROOK.
Hertford, the First: of the 1st Month, School-99.

The sharp Affliction he speaks of in this Writing was more than one Distemper,
His^odily Afflictions, patience and Support under them.
for the Stone, Gout and Cholick attacked him sometimes sorely; and though this
had been for a long Time, yet he always behaved himself patiently, though his
Pain was sometimes so violent, that he was often heard to say, that did he not
feel and witness an inward Power from the Lord, he could not subsist under his
great pains. That of the Stone was the greatest, which continued with him to
his End; and yet he was not heard to utter any unsavory Word, or to cry out
impatiently; but when the Extremity of his Fits were over, then he expressed
his inward Joy and Peace, and so praised the Lord. He had an excellent Gift in
opening the Mysteries of the Holy Scriptures, so that he was like Apollos, of
whom we find upon Record, His Qualifications.
that he was an eloquent Man, and mighty in the Scriptures. And by his zealous
and effectual Preaching, when he was in the Strength of Life, many were
convinced of the Truth. In his latter Days he said sometimes, That the Furnace
of Affliction was of good Use to purge away the Dross and earthly Part in us.
And under the Sorrow and Grief he had concerning some of his Offspring, he
would sometimes comfort himself with the Words of David, 2 Samuel xxiii 5.
Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all Things, and sure. In his old Age he was many Times
heard to say, Many of the Ancients are gone to their long Home, and we are
making haste after them: They step away before we, and I, that would go,
cannot. Well it will be my Turn soon also. And then he seerned to rejoice in
the Consideration, that the Time of his Dissolution, to be freed from his sore
Distempers, approached apace. Yet in the latter Part of his Life he often
appeared so strong in the Spiritual Warsare, that some judged, that in some
Respect he might have said with Caleb. Josh xiv I.
As yet I am as strong this Day as I was in the Day that Moses sent me: As my
Strangth was then, even so is my Strength now, for War, has to go out, and to
come in. About three Weeks before his Death, though he was weak in Body, yet he
said powerfully, and after a prophetical Manner, Truth must prosper, Truth
shall prosper; but a trying Time must first come, and afterward the Glory of
the Lord shall more and more appear. He continued in a sedate and truly
Christian Frame of Mind to the last Period of his Life, and departed the 26th
of the Month called April, His Age and Death
in the eighty-second Year of his Age, in his House at Hertford, where he had
lived many Years. I knew him in England and he has also been in Holland, so
that I do not speak of one that was unknown to me.

George Keith, by vilisying the Doctrine of the Quakers, was now so much in
Favor with the Episcopal Clergy, that he began to serve them as a Viear, 1700
having been ordained by the Bishop of London about, the Year 1700. And since
this secmed strange and wonderful to many, somebody, An Account publisted of G.
Keith's former Sentiments of a national Church, Clergy, and Sacrament ( so
called) of the Lord's Supper. Gal. ii. 18.
of what Persuasion I do not know, made a Collection of his Sentiments
concerning a National Church, and its Clergy, and what Account he gave of their
Rites and Ceremonies, from Books and Papers he had publishca many Years before;
to which the Author gave this Title, Mr. George Keith's Account of a National
Church and Clergy, humbly presented to the Bishop of London: To this were added
some Queries he once writ concerning what is called The Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. This Account was now published in Print, and presented to the Bishop of
London, ending with these Words of the Apostle, If I build again the Things
which I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor.

In the next Year, 1701
viz. 1701, the late King James died in France. I mentioned before how that
unhappy Prince, The Death of the late King James in France.
after having ascended the Thronc, fell suddenly by his hasty Conduct, and
ardent Defire to introduce Popery in England, and all his Endeavors to regain
his lost Kingdoms, proved ineffectual. In September, being at Mass, he was
seized with a Qualm, and the Distemper increasing, within a Day or two he
vomited Blood, and all Remedies made use of were unprositable. It what was
written about that Time from Paris, be true, he declared that he forgave all
Men what they had done amiss to him; and on the 16th of the said Month he died
at St. Germains in France, where he kept his Court.

King William was returned from Holland, where he had been because of new
Troubles drawing on from France. The Succession to the Crown settled in
Remainder on the House of Hanover. Plot discovered against King William.
And since the Succession of the Crown of England was now settled in the
Protestant Line, and for Want of nearer Protestant Heirs then to the House of
Hanover, the King was congratulated on that Account with many Addresses from
his Subjects: And therefore those called Quakers thought it also their Duty to
address him (against whose Life a horrible Plot was discovered) with a thankful
Acknowledgment of his Favors. This they did as follows, it being presented
to the King in December, by George Whitehead, William Mead, and Francis
Camfield.

To King WILLIAM III. over England, etc.
An Address from the People commonly called Quakers, humbly presented,
May it please the KING,
WE the dutiful Subjects sincerely express our Joy for thy safe Return to thy
People, Quakers Addrss on that Occasion.
having great Cause to love, honor, and pray for thee, as a Prince whom we
believe God has promoted and principled for the good Ends of Government, under
whose Reign we enjoy great Mercies and Favors, and particularly that of
Liberty to tender Consciences in religious Worship, as a proper Expedient to
unite thy Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection.

For which great Mercy we cannot but be humbly thankful to God, and renew our
grateful Acknowledgment to the King, whom God by his Almighty Power has
eminently preserved, and made exemplary in Prudence as well as Goodness to
other Kings and Princes, whereby thy Memorial will be renowned to Posterity.

We are also engaged to bless the Lord, for that he has manifestly frustrated
the mischievous and treacherous Designs of thine and the Nations Adversaries,
both against the lawful Establishment of thy Throne, and the true Interest of
thy Protestant Subjects.

And we beseech Almighty God to bless the good Designs and just Undertakings of
the King, and his great Council, for the Good of his People, and for obtaining
to Europe a firm and lasting Pane; and continue thee, O king, a Blessing to
theset Nations, cstablish, thy Throne in Mercy and Truth, give to thee a long
and prosperous Reign over us, and hereafter a glorions Imhiortaltty) is, and
shall be the servent Prayer of us, thy trne and faithful Subjects.

Signed in Behalf and by Appointment of the aforesaid People, at a Meeting in
London, the 8th Month, 1701.
This Address being read to the King, was favorably received, and he thanked
those that presented it. George whithead and the others saying what they
thought material to the Case, the King returned, I have protected you, and
shall protect you And repairing with the Address to his Closet, he read it over
again, as was understood afterward, and spoke in its Commendation. But he
keeping the Paper some Days by him, without giving it to be made public, by the
Gazetleer, Misrepresented by the French News-writers.
some French News-writers at London forged a very ridiculous Address, and sent
it beyond Sea; and the French Gazetteers in Holland were very ready to divulge
in their Prints such fictitious Stuff, though the Expressions therein were so
exceeding blunt and unmannerly, that they could not be spoken to a King, but by
such who were impudent enough publicly to make a Mock of crowned Heads, which
the Quakers never have been guilty of. After a few Days the King gave the
Address to be made public; and then every Body could fee how shamefully the
French News-mongers had exposed their Malice.

This Year being come to an End, that of 1702 followed, 1702
and also the End of King William's Life.

The French King, The French King places his Grandson on the throne of Spain,
and acknowledees the Pretender as King of Eng land.
upon the Death of the King of Spain, had not only placed his Grandson, the
Duke of Anjon, on the Throne of that Kingdom, but had also acknowledged the
pretended Prince of Wales as king of England; by which, in a Manner, he
attainted King William's Crown; who thereupon took Occasion to make Alliances
sor his Security with other Princes and Potentates. Of this he gave Notice to
the Parliament that was then sifting; who promised to assist, him to the utmost
of their Power, and to maintain the Succession cf the Crown in the Protestant
Line. And an Abjuration was also drawn up, wherein it was declared, That the
aforesaid pretended Prince, who now suffered himself to be called James the
Third, King of England, etc. had no Right or Claim to the Crown of that
Kingdom, or any Dominions appertaining thereto. Now though all this was intended
for maintaining and assisting the rightful King William, yet he lived not to
see the Effect of it; for his Time was near expired, and his Glass run, as soon
appeared.

About the Beginning of the Month called March he went a Hunting, K. William by
a Fall from his House, breaks his Collar-bone.
and riding a House he never rid on before, the Horse fell, and the King at the
same Time broke his Collar-bone: The Fracture was soon set, and all seemed like
to do well; but the King having endured many Fatigues and Hardships, had been
weak in Body some Time before; insomuch, that this sore Fall seemed to occasion
his Sickness which soon followed, and put a Period to his Life. But before his
Departure he did yet one good Work more for the Quakers; for the Term of seven
Years grunted for their Affirmation to be accepted instead of an Oath, was near
expiring; and therefore they follicited the King and Parliament that this Act
might be continued, and confirmed by a new one; which was obtained; for the
King always showed himself willing to favor them as his peaceable Subjects;
and in Parliament many eminent Member were well affected toward them. Renews
the Affirmation Act
Thereupon this renewed Act, containing a Prolongation of the said Grant for
the, Space of clever Years, passed at length, after mature Consideration, the
King having named. Commissioners, who on the 3d of March, gave the Royal Assent
to it in the Houie of Lords, because, by Reason of his Illness, he could not
appear himself on the Throne. He also sent a Message to the Parliament,
Recommends to the Parliament ^uniting England and Scotland.
recommending the Uniting of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland into one,
Commisioners being already appointed in Scotland, to treat with the English
concerning that Affair: But Time showed that he was not to bring that Work to
an End, since the Accomplishing thereof was reserved for his Successor, though
some Hopesappeared of his Recovery; for he had been walking a little in his
Garden to take the Air, and fitting down afterward, he caught Cold, which was
followed by a Fever; and his Sickness so increased, that on the next First Day
of the Week, And on the Month called March dies at Kensington, preatly lanunted
both leve and in Holland.
being the 8th of the Month called March, he died at kensington, to the great
Grief of all his saithful Subjects; nay, such was the Sorrow on the Death of
that excellent Prince, that the News of it being come to Holland, it caused a
general Dejection, and drew Tears from many Eyes; for perhaps no King in these
late Ages has been more beloved than he was. The Day before his Demise he had
by Commissioners given the Royal Asvent to the Bill of Abjuration of the
pretended Prince of Wales; and the following Night, feeling Death approaching,
After he had taken his last Farewell of Princess Anne.
he sent for the Princess Anne, Sister of his deccased Confort, Queen Mary; and
having kept her some Time with him, after tender embracing, he wished her the
last Farewell. Then he sent for the Archbishop of Canterbury, And sent for the
Archbishop of Canterbury
and his Understanding continuing good to the last, with evident Tokens of
Piety, and a Resignation to the Will of his Creator, in the Morning about eight
of the Clock, he gave up the Ghost to him from whom he had received it, being
entered into the fifty-second Year of his Age, and having reigned as King above
thirteen Years.

In the Afternoon the Princess Anne was proclaimed Queen of England, Queen Anne
proclaimed.
Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. and the Parliament promised to assist her,
in maintaining those Alliances that mere already made, or should yet be made,
with foreign Powers. This the Queen accepted with much Satisfaction, and
confirmed the Ministers and high Officers in their Respective Stations. She
also writ to the States General of the united Netherlands, "That she would keep
to the Alliances made with the "States by the deceased King her brother.

The Body of the King, The Body of the deceased King opened.
which was lean, and much emaciated, was opened after his Death, and many of
the inward Parts appeared sound, especially the Brain; yet in general little
Blood was sound in the Body; but in the Lungs, which adhered much to the
Pleura, was more than in all the other Parts; his Heart was firm and strong;
but some Inflammation on the lest Side of the Lungs, was thought to have been
the immediate Cause of the King's Death, for he had long been asthmatical.

He was of a middle Stature; His Character.
his Face lean and oblong; his Eyes were exceeding good, quick and piercing;
his Hands very fine and white; he did not talk much, but was solid in Thought;
of a strong Memory, quick of Apprehension, of a composed Mind, and not given to
Voluptuousness, but grave in his Deportment: He often gave Evidence of a devout
Attention at the Hearing of the Name of God; and even in the Midfst of Dangers
put great Trust in divine Providence Thus he was valiant and undaunted without
Temerity; for where he judged his Presence to be necessary, he repaired thither
without Fear. He was a great Lover of Hunting, that being his most pleasant
Diversion, which made him the more fit to endure the Fatigues of War. He was
easy of Access, and gave a favorable Hearing to every Body, ind those that
spoke to him he treated discreetly; and such was his Devotion, that he often
retired privately, when some thought he was about other Business. Many had
conceived Hopes that this great Prince, in that citical Juncture, should have
lived yet some what longer: But his Work was done; and God has siace that Time
showed very eminently, that he is not limited to any Instruments; and the
Queen, who succeeded on the Throne, gave afterward signal Prooss of it to the
World. His Corpse was interred the 12th of the Month called April, about
Midnight, in the Chapel of King Henry VII. in Westminister-Abby.

It was by the Favor of this King,(a Hollander by Birth) that the Quakers, so
called, were tolerated as a free People; so that now they iaw fulfilled the
Truth of what some of their deceased Friends had prophetically foretold, viz.
That it should not be in the Power of their Enemies to root them out, but that
God in his own lime should work the^ Deliverrace.

Thus we have now seen from what weak Beginnings they had their Rise, and how
they increased and became a great People against all Opposition, The Number of
Friends very small in their first. Appcaronce.
of which at first there seemed little Probability; as in the Beginning of this
History may be seen: And to look a little back, it may appear also by a
Testimony of George Fox, published after his Death, in the Collection of his
Epistles, viz.

WHEN the Lord first sent me forth in the Year 1643, An Epistle of G F.
ocncerying his first Mission.
I was sent as an innocent Limb (and young in Years) amongst (Men in the Nature
of) Wolves, Dogs, Bears, Lions, and Tigers into the World, which the Devil had
made like a Wilderness, no right Way then found oat of it. And I was sent to
turn People from Darkness to the Light, which Christ, the second Adam, did
enlighten them withal; that so they might see Christ, their Way to God, with
the Spirit of God, which he does four upon all Flesh, that with it they might
have an Understanding to know the Things of God, and to know him, and his Sou
Jesus Christ, which is eternal Life; and so might worship and serve the Living
God, their Maker and Creator, who takes Care for all, who is Lord of all; and
with the Light and Spirit of God they might knew the Scriptures, which were
given forth from the Spirit of God in the Saints, and holy Men and Women of God.

And when many began to be turned to the Light (which is the Life in Christ)
and the Spirit of God which gave them an Understanding, and had found the path
of the Just, the shining Light, then did the Wolves, Dogs. Dragons, Bears,
uons, Tigers, wild Beasts, and Birds of prey, make a roaring and a screeshim
Noise against the Lamus, Sheep, Doves and Children of Christ, and were ready to
devour them and me, and to tear us to pieces. But the Lord's Arm and Power did
preserve me, tho many Times I was in Danger of my Life, and very often cast
into Dungeons, and Prisons, and baled before Magisirates. But all Things did
work together for Good: And the more I was cast into outward Prisons, the more
People came out of their spiritual and inward Prison (through the Preaching of the
Gospel.) But the Pnests and Prosessors were in snch a great Rage, and made the
rude and prosane People in such a Fury, that I could hardly walk in the
Streets, or go in the Highways, but they were ready off-times to do me a
Mischief. But Christ, also has all Power in Heiven and in the Earth, did so
restrain and limit them with his Power, that my Life was preserred, tho many
Times I was near killed.

Oh, the Burdens and Travels that I went under! Often my life press' d down
under the Spirits of' Prosessors and Ten hers without Life, and the Prosane!
And besides, the Troubles afterward with Backstiders, Ap^sates, and salse
Brethren, witch were like so many Juda^ in betraying the Truth, and God's
faithful and chosen Seed, and causing the Way of Truth to be evil spoken of But
the Lord blasted, wasted, and confounded them, so that none did stand long; for
the Lord did either destroy them, or bring them to naught, and his Truth did
flourish, and his People in it, to the P^ise of God, who is the Revenger of his
Chosen.

G. F.

Fox then having in England been the first of the Quakers that preached and
proclaimed Christ the Light, The Fruits thereof.
which enlightwneth every Man coming into the World, had in a short Time (as we
have seen in this History, notwithstanding all Opposition) man Adherents,
whereby several others also began to publish that Doctrine. And many of these
first Preachers were like Sons of Thunder; for they testiiying of the Light of
Christ shining in the Confidences of Men, proclaimed, that the Day of the Lord
was dawned, and should yet farther break forth, to the destroying of the former
Buildings of human Inventions and Institutions, tho not of that which had
formerly beer, selt and enjoyed by true Experience of the Operations of the
Spirit of God in People's Hearts. By their powerful Way of Preaching Repentance
many were awakened out of the Sleep of caredess Security, and came to see that
their Covering was too short, and that they were not clothed with the true
Wedding Garment: And many that had been of a rude Life, came to be so touched
to the Heart by these zealous Preachers, that crying out, What shall we do to
he saved? they were brought to Repentance, and Conversion; and so from wild and
rough, came to be sedate and sober. And as in the Beginning many of these first
Preachers did run on like a mighty Stream, and seemed sit to thresh and grind
Mountains and Stones, and to hew down tall Cedars, and wash away all
Opposition; so there were others also, who as Sons of Consolation, proclaimed
glad Tidings to the hungry and thirfsty Souls, many of which were in England
about that Time; insomuch, that some said, Now the everlasting Gospel is
preached again. And it was indeed remarkable, that though these Promulgators of
the Doctrinc of the inward Light shineine in the Hearts of Men, were mean and
illiterate, yet many People of Note, not only such as were in Magilstracy, but.
also many Preachers of several Persuasions, were so touched at the Heart by
their lively Preaching, that they not only received their Doctrine, but came
themselves in Process of Time to be zealous Publishers thereof and thus a great
Crop was gathered; nay, sometimes even Men of great Skill, and sharp Wit were
deeply struck by plain and homely Preaching; of whom

Isaac Pennington, mentioned more than once in the History, was a signal
Instance, as may appear from a Relation concerning himself, writ with his own
Hand, and found among his Papers after his Death, wherein he speaks thus;

I Have been a Man of Sorrow and Affliction from my Childhood, I. Pennington's
Relation concerning himself, well worthy the Reader's serious consid ration.
feeling the Want of the Lord and moarning after him, separated by him from the
Love, Nature and Spirit of this World, and turned in Spirit toward him, almost
ever since I could remember.

In this Sense of my lost Estatc, I sought after the Lord, I read Scriptures,
watched over mine own Heart, I cried unto the Lord for what I felt the Want of,
I blessid his Nairn in what he mercifully did for me, and bestowed on me, etc.
Whatever I read in the Scriptures, as the Way of God to my Understanding, I
gave my self to the faithful Practice of; being contented to meet with all the
Reproach, Opposition and several Kinds of'S^sserings,. which it pleased the
Lord to mcasure out to me therein. And I cannot but say, that the Lord was good
unto me, did visit me, did teach me, did help we, did testify his Acceptance of
me many Times, to the refreshing and Joy of my Heart before him.

But my Soul was not satisfied with what I met with, nor indeed could be, there
being further quickuings and pressings in my Spirit, after a more full, certain
and satisfaclory Knowledge; even after the Sense,, Sight and Enjoyment of God,
as was testified in the Scriptures, to have been felt and enjoyed in the former
Times: For J saw plainly, that there was a Stop of the Streams, and a great
Falling-hort of the Power, Life and Glory which they partoo^ of. We had not so
the Spirit, nor wers so in the Faith, nor did so walk and live in God, as they
did. They were come to Mount Sion and the heavenly Jerusalem, etc. which we had
hardly so much as the literal Knowledge or Apprehension what they were. So that
I saw the whole Course of Religion among us, was (for the most part) but a Talk
to what they felt, enjoyed, possessed and lived in.

This Sense made me sick at Heart indeed, and set me upon deep crying to God,
close searching the Scriptures, and waiting on God, that I might receive the
pure Sense and Understanding of them, from and in the Light, and by the Help of
his Spirit. (And what the Lord did beslow on me in that State, with
Thankfulness I remember before him at this very Day: For he was then my God and
a Pitier and a Watcher over me; though he had not pleased then to direct me, how
to stay my Mind upon him and abide with him.) And then I was led, (indeed I was
led, I did not run of my self) into a way of Separation from the Worship of the
World, into a gathered Society: For this both the Scripture and the Spirit of
God in me gave Testimony unto; and what we then met with, and what Leadings and
Help we then felt, there is a Remembrance and Testimony in my Heart to this
Day. But there was somewhat wanting, and we mustook our Way: For whereas we
should have pressed forward into the Spirit and Power, we can too much outward
into Letter and Form: And though the Lord in many Things helped us, yet therein
he was against us, and brought Darkness, Confusion and Scattering upon us. I
was sorely broken and darkened, and in this darkened State, sometimes lay still
for a long Season, secretly mourning and crying out to the Lord Night and Day;
sometimes I ran about, bearkning after what might apped^ or break forth in
others, but never met with any Thing, whereto there was the least Answer in my
Heart, save in one People, who had a Touch of Truth: But I never expressed so
much to any of them, nor indeed felt them at all able to reach my Condition.

At last, after all my Disiresses, Wandarings and sore Travels, I met with some
Writings of this People called Quakers, which I cast a slight Eye upon and
disdained, as falling very short of that Wisdom, Light, Life and Power, which I
had been longing for and searching after: I had like wise (some pretty Distance
of Time after this) Opportunity of meeting with same of them, and diverse of
them were by the Lord moved (I know it to be so since) to come to me: As I
remember, at the very first they reached to the Life of God in me, which Life
answered their voice, and caused a great Love in me to spring to them: But
still in my Reasonings with them, and Disputes alone (in my Mind) concerning
them, I was very far off from owning them, as so knowing the Lord, or so
appearing in his Life and Power as my Condition needed, and as my Soul waited
for. Yea, the more I conversed with them, the more I seemed in my Understanding
and Reason to get over them, and to trample them under my Feet, as a poor,
weak, silly, contemptible Generation, who had some Smatterings of Truth in
them, and some honest Desires toward God, but very far off from the clear and
full Understanding of his Way and Will. And this was the Effict almost of evrey
Discourse with them, they still reached my Heart, and I felt then in the
Secrets of my Soul, which caused the Love in me always to continue, yea
sometimes to increase toward them: But daily my Understanding got more and
more over them, and therein I daily more and more despised them.

After a long Time I was invited to hear one of them (as I had been often, they
in tender Love pitying me, and feeling my Want of that, which they possessed)
and there was an Answer in my Heart, and I went in Fear and Trembling, with
Desires to the most High, who was over all and knew all, that I might not
receive any Thing for Truth, which was not of him, nor withstand any Thing
which was of him, but might how before the Appearance of the Lord my God, and
none other. And indeed, when I came, I felt the Presence and Power of the most
High among them, and Words of Truth, from the Spirit of Truth, reaching to my
Heart and Conscience, opening my State as in the Presence of the Lord. Yea, I
did not only feel Words and Demonstrations from without, but I felt the Dead
quickened, the Seed raised, insomuch as my Heart (in the Certainty of Light, and
Clearness of true Sense)said, This is he, this is he, there is no other; this
is He whom I have waited for and fought after from my Childhood, who was always
near me, and had often begotten Life in my Heart, but I knew him not
distinctly, nor how to receive him or dwell with him. And then in this Sense
(in the Melting and Breakings of my Spirit) was I given up to the Lord to
become his, both in waiting for the farther Revealings of his Seed in me, and
to serve him in the Life and Power of his Seed.

Now what I met with after this, in my Travels, in my Waitings, in my spiritnal
Exercises, is not to be uttered; only in general I may say this, I met with the
very Strength of Hell. The cruel Oppressor roared upon me, and made me feel the
bitterness of his Captivity, while he had any Power: Yea, the Lord was far from
my Help, and from the Voice of my roaring. I also met with deep Subtilties and
Devices to entangle me in that Wisdom, which seems able to make wise in the
Things of God, but indeed is Foolishness and a Snare to the Soul, bringing it
back into Captivity, where the Emmy's Gins prevail And what I met with
outwardly from my own dear Father, from my Kindred, from my Servants, from the
People and Powers of the World, for tio other Cause but fearing my God,
worshipping him as he has required of me, and bowing to his Seed (which is his
Son) who is to be worshipped by Men and Angels for evermore; the Lord my God
knows, before whom my Heart and Ways are, who preserved me in Love to them,
in the midst of all I suffered from them, and does still so preserve me,
blessed be his pure and holy Name.

But some may desire to know, what I have at last met with: I answer, I have
met with the Seed. Understand that Word, and thou will be satisfied, and
enquire no farther. I have met with my God, I have met with my Savior; and he
has not been present with me without his Salvation, but I have felt the
Healings drop upon my Soul from under his Wings; I have met with the true
Knowledge, the Knowledge of Life, the living Knowledge, the Knowledge which is
Life, and this has had the true Virtue in it, which my Soul has rejoiced in,
in the Presence of the Lord. I have met with the Seed's Father, and in the Seed
I have felt him my Father: There I have read his Nature, his Love, his
Compassions, his Tenderness, which have melted, overcome and changed my Heart
before him. I have met with the Seed's Faith, which has done and does that,
which the Faith of Man can never do. I have met with the true Birth, with the
Birth which is Heir of the Kingdom, and inherits the Kingdom. I have met with
the true Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, wherein the Lord is prevailed with,
and which draws from him whatever the Condition needs, the Soul always looking
up to him in the Will, and in the Time and Way which is acceptable with him.
What shall I say? I have met with the true Peace, the true Righteousness, the
true Holiness, the true Rest of the Soul, the everlasting Habitation, which the
Redeemed dwell in: And I know all these to be true, in him that is true, and am
capable of no Doubt, Dispute or Reasoning in my Mind about them, it abiding
there, where it has received the full Assurance and Satisfaction. And also I
know very well and distinctly in Spirit, where the Doubts and Disputes are, and
where the Certainty and full Assurance is, and in the tender Mercy of the Lord
am preserved out of the one, and in the other.

Now (the Lord knows) these Things I do not utter in a boasting Way, but would
rather be speaking of my Nothingness, my Emptiness, my Weakness, my manifold
Infirmities which I feel more than ever. The Lord has broken the Man's Part in
me, and I am a Worm and no Man before him: I have no Strengh to do any Good or
Service for him, nay I cannot watch over or preserve my self: I feel daily that
I keep not alive my own Soul, but am weaker before Men, yea weaker in my Spirit
(as in my self) than ever I have been. But I cannot but utter to the Praise of
my God, that I feel his Arm stretched out for me; and my Weakness (which I feel
in my self) is not my Loss, but Advantage before him. And these Things I write,
as having no End at all therein of my own, but felt it this Morning required of
me, and so in Submission and Subjection to my God, have I given up to do it,
leaving the Success and Service of it with him.

I. Pennington.
Ailsbury, 15th of 3d Month, 1667.
From this Conclusion we see the Humility of the Mind of this Friend, A Caution
to conceived Wits.
who, when he writ this, was already much advanced in the Way of Godliness, and
had lived several Years in the Communion of those called Quakers. Now, though it
be the Duty of every one, not to be conceited of himself, yet certain it is,
that Men of refined Wits above all others have need to continue truly humble,
and not to rely thereon, since the trusting to Acuteness of Wit has rather
drawn off many from the Way of Truth, than led them to it; nay, it has
occasioned the Fall of some. But that I. Pennington endeavored to continue in
true Humility, appears plainly from the Relation above. He was a Man of a very
compassionate Temper, and yet valiant in Adversities: He also suffered not a
little on the Account of his Religion, but endured many tedious and long
Imprisonments, which were the more hard to him, because he being of a weakly
Constitution, the Suffering of Cold and Hardship, did him the more Hurt. And
yet he never fainted, but continued steadfast to the End of his Life, which was
in the latter Part of the Year 1679, when he departed in a pious Frame of Mind.

By the foregoing Relation it appears evidently that he was very earnestly
seeking after the true Way to Salvation, before he attained to a perfect
Quietness of Mind; yet in that Time there wanted not such as were helpful to
him with good and wholesome Advice; and among these John Crook (whose
Occurrences make up no small Part of this History) was none of the least. And
since there is yet extant a Letter of his to him, wherein he not only spoke
very effectually to the inward State of I. Pennington, but for his Instruction
and Encouragement, gave also an Account of the great Difficulties and
Temptations he himself had met with, I cannot well omit to insert the same here;
because from the ingenuous and open-hearted Leters of familiar Friends to one
another, we generally may discover very plainly their inward State, and also
their outward Qualities. This Letter was as follows;

Dear Friend,
MY dear and tender Love salutes thee, A very weighty Letter of Advice and
Comfort by J Crook to I. Pennington
in that Love from whence I had my Being, and from whence sprang all my
Father's Children, who are born from above, Heirs of an everlasting
Inheritance. Oh! how sweet and pleasant are the Pastures which my Father
causes all his Sheep to feed in; there is Variety of Plenty in his Pastures,
Milk for Babes, and strong Meat for them of riper Age, and Wine to refresh
those that are ready to faint, even the Wine of the Kingdom, that makes glad
the Heart when it is ready to faint, by Reason of the Infirmities: Sure I am,
none can be so weary but he takes Care of them, nor none so nigh fainting but
he puts his Arm under their Heads, nor none can be so beset with Enemies on
every Side, but he will arise and scatter, nor none so heavy laden and big with
Young but he takes Notice of them, and gently leads them, and will not leave
them behind unto the merciless Wolf, because they are his own, and his Life is
the Price of their Redemption, and his Blood of their Ransom; and if they be
so young that they cannot go, he carries them in his Arms, and when they can
feel nothing stirring after him, his Bowels yearn after them; so tender is this
good Shepherd after all his Flock. I can tell, for I was as one that once went
astray, and wandered upon the barren Mountains; and when I had wearied my self
with Wandering, I went into the Wilderness, and there I was torn as with
Briars, and pricked as with Thorns, sometimes thinking this was the Way, and
sometimes concluding that was the Way, and by and by concluding all was out of
the Way, and then bitter Mourning came upon me, and Weeping for Want of the
Interpreter; for when I sought to know what was the Matter, and where I was, it
was too hard for me; then I thought I would venture on some Way where it was
most likely to find a lost God, and I would pray with them that prayed, and
fast with them that fasted, and mourn with them that mourned, if by any Means I
might come to Rest, but found it not, until I came to see the Candle lighted in
my own House, and my Heart swept from those Thoughts and Imaginations, and
Willings, and Runnings, and to die unto them all, not heeding of them, but
watching against them, lest I should let my Mind go a whoring after them; and
here I dwelt for a Time as in a desolate Land uninhabited, where I sat alone as
a Sparrow upon the Housetop, and was hunted up and down like a Partridge upon
the Mountains, and could rest no where, but some Lust or Thought or other
followed me at the Heels, and disquieted me Night and Day, until I came to know
him in whom was Rest, and no Occasion of Stumbling, in whom the Devil has no
Part, and he became unto me as an Hiding Place from the Storms, and from the
Tempests. Then came my Eyes to see my Savior, and my Sorrow to fly away, and
he became made unto me all in all, my Wisdom, my Righteousness, and my
Sanctification, in whom I was and am complete, to the Praise of the Riches of
his Grace and Goodness that endures forever. Therefore be not discouraged, O
thou tossed as with Tempests, nor dismayed in thy self, because thou see such
mighty Hosts of Enemies rising up against thee and besetting thee on every
Side; for none was so beset, and tried and tempted as the true Seed was, who
was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief: But be thou still in thy Mind,
and let the Billows pass over, and Wave upon Wave, and fret not thy self
because of them, neither be cast down, as if it should never be otherwise with
thee; Sorrow comes at Night, but Joy in the Morning, and the Days of thy
Mourning shall be over, and the Accuser will God cast out for ever; for
therefore was I afflicted, and not comforted, and tempted and tried for this
End, that I might know how to speak a Word in due Season unto those who are
tempted and afflicted as I once was; as it was said unto me in that Day when
Sorrow lay heavy upon me: Therefore be not disconsolated, neither give Heed
unto the Reasonings and Disputings of thy own Heart, nor the Fears that rise
therefrom, but be strong in the Faith, believing in the Light which lets thee
see them, and his Grace thou will know to be sufficient for thee, and his
Strength to be made perfect in thy Weakness, and so will thou rather glory in
thy Infirmities, that his Power may rest upon thee, than in thy earnest Desires
to be rid of them; for by these Things thou will come to live in the Life of
God, and joy in God, and glory in Tribulation, when thou have learned in all
Conditions to be contented, and through Trials and deep Exercises is the Way to
learn this Lesson. These Things in dear Love to thee I have written, being
somewhat sensible of thy Condition, and the many Snares thou are daily liable
unto, therefore watch that thou fall not into Temptation, and my God and Father
keep thee in the Arms of eternal Love, over all, unto the End, unto his Praise.
Amen.

John Crook.


This John Crook had been a Man of Note in the World, A farther Hint concerning
J. Crook.
not only because he had been a Justice of Peace, as has been said in due
Place, but also because he was a Man of good Intellects, and yet his Zeal for
what he believed to be Truth, was such, that he became willing to bear the
Reproach of the World, that so he might enjoy Peace with God. But though he was a
Man of Learning, yet most of the first Preachers of the Doctrine held forth by
those called Quakers, were People of small Account in the World; but yet they
were so Powerful in their Preaching, that many thereby were turned to true
Godliness.

Some have been reached by the Sayings of dying Penitents; Some convinced by
dying Penitents.
for there have been remarkable Instances of young People, sprung from honest
Parents, who having walked in the broad Way, did very earnestly bewail their
Outgoings on a dying Bed, and then declared, that if it pleased God to raise
them up again, they would not, as before, be ashamed of the despised Way of the
Quakers, nor fear any Mockings, or Persecution, but that they would serve the
Lord in Uprightness, and with all their Heart. These thus repenting with Tears
for their Transgressions, have experienced, after great Agonies, that God wills
not the Death of Sinners, but that they should repent, and so live in
everlasting Happiness.

Of several such like Cases, A Warning to young People, against Pride, etc. in
the remarkable Repentance of S Whitrow
I Will only mention one, viz. that of a young Maid at London, called Susanna
Whitrow, whose Mother was of the Society of the Quakers, but not her Father. On
her dying Bed she complained exceedingly of her Rebellion and vain Behavior:
Ah, said she to her Mother, how often have thou said, The Lord would plead with
us? Now the Day is come. Pride and Disobedience were my cursed Fruits, which I
brought forth when I was a Hearer in the public Church. How often have I
adorned my self, as fine in their Fashion as I could make me? Yet they despised
my Dress, and said to me, How like a Ta^dry have you dressed your self? You are
not at all in the Mode. Then coming Home on the Sabbath Day, I went immediately
up into my Chamber, and locking the Door, I altered all my Lates, and so I went
to their Worship in the Afternoon, dressed in their Mode, and then I pleased
them. At another Time she said, O that I might have a little Time longer to go
into the Country, and walk in the Woods to seek the Lord! O what Matter for
fine Houses, and silk Apparel! O remember him that sat on the Ground, and wore
a Garment without a Seam, our blessed holy Lord, who went up to the Mountains
to pray, and withdrew himself into Gardens, and desolate Places. I have done
nothing for the Lord, but he has done all for me: Therefore I desire to live,
that I might live an holy and righteous Life, that my Conversation might be in
Heaven, though my Body be here on Earth. How would I then invite and warn others,
not to spend their precious Time in adorning themselves like Jezebel, patching
and painting, and curling their Hair. O the Christian Life is quite another
Thing: We must not give our selves the Liberty to think our own Thoughts, much
less to act such Abominations. Several Days she was in a strong Wrestling and
Conflict of Spirit, and in fervent Prayer to God, so that when somebody was for
removing her Head a little, she refusing it, said, I would not suffer a Thought
to wander; if I move, I shall be drawn off my Watch, and then the Tempter will
prevail. Continuing in this Conflict, she conceived at length Hopes of
Forgiveness; and being thus strengthened by Mercy, she said to the Lord, O what
can my Soul say of thy Power! When I sought thee but could not find thee; I
knocked hard but none did open; for my Sins stood like Mountains, that I could
not come near thee: I would fain have prayed to thee but could not. Thus I lay
several Days and Nights, struggling for Life, but could find none; and I said,
There is no Mercy for me: Then I said, I will never leave thee; if I perish, I
will perish here; I will never cease crying unto thee. And then I heard a Voice
say, Jacob wrestled all Night before he obtained the Blessing. Oh then thy
Word, O Lord, was strong to my Soul: Then my stony Heart was broken to Pieces,
and the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication was poured upon me. And now I can
sing as David did, of Mercy and of Judgment: Unto thee, O Lord, will I sing
with a rent Heart, and with my Mouth in the Dust will I sing Praises to thee,
my blessed Savior. In this Frame she endeavored to continue, and once she
prayed for her Father, called Robert Whitrow, Part of which Prayer was as
follows. O Lord, remember not his Offenses, let me ^ear them; let it be easy
to him; make his Friends to be Enemies to him, that thou may have Mercy upon
him. His Temptations are great, Lord carry him through; O let him not perish with
the World; do thou' support him over this World. Shall a little Dirt of this
World draw away his Mind? O Lord, let his Mind be set on Things above; fix his
Mind upon thee. Thus fervently this young Maid prayed for her Father, herself
now having attained to a full Assurance of her Salvation, so that she once said
to the Lord: O thou Beloved of my Soul, what shall I say of thee! For thou art
too wonderful for me: O Praises be unto thee. And afterward perceiving that her
End was approaching, she said to her Mother, I must lay down this Body; the
Lord will not trust me longer in this present wicked World: Happy am I: My
Savior, my Soul loves thee dearly; thy Love is better than Wine: My Savior,
my Holy One, how glorious art thou! I have seen thy Glory; I am overcome with
thy sweet Countenance: O how lovely art thou! My Heart is ravished with the
sweet Smiles of thy glorious Countenance. O, come away, come away! Why do
thou stay? I am ready, I am ready. Then she lay some Time very still, and so
departed this Life without Sigh or Groan, which was about the Year 1677.

Such like dying Persons have been the Means sometimes to stir up others to
true Godliness, Some convinced by beholding the weighty Frame of Friends in
their silent Assemblies.
whereby they came to be joined with the People called Quakers; and though these
in Time came to be very numerous, yet at first there were but few Laborers in
the Ministry of the Word. But these recommending one another to give diligent
Heed to the Word of God in the Heart, and to mind That as their Teacher, did
often meet together, and keep Assemblies, sitting down with such a deep
Retiredness of Mind, being turned inward to God, that Tears trickled down their
Cheeks, to the Astonishment of many that looked upon them, some of which, only
by beholding this serious Retiredness, came to be so effectually reached, that
they also joined with them, and frequented their Meetings. In the mean while
many of these became more and more confirmed in their Minds by this silent
Exercise, and their Understandings came to be so opened, that in Process of
Time they became apt and fit Instruments to exhort others to Godliness: And
among these, several Women also found it their Duty to preach the Gospel.

There have been many who were very averse to the Quakers, C. Bacon going to a
Meeting in a vain Mind, is so reached, that in Time he became a zealous
Preacher and Sufferer among Friends.
and yet came to join with them in the Faith; as among others Christopher Bacon
in Somersetshire, who (about the Year 1656, coming into a Meeting, not with
Intention to be edified there, but rather to scoff, and to fetch his Wife from
thence, who went thither against his Mind) was so reached by the lively
Exhortation he heard, that he was not only convinced of the Truth preached
there, but in Time became a zealous Preacher of it himself, and was valiant in
Sufferings. Once being taken up at a Meeting at Glassenbury, and brought before
Bishop Mew at Wells, who called him a Rebel, for meeting contrary to the King's
Laws, Christopher, having formerly been a Soldier for the King, said to him,
Do thou call me Rebel? I would have thee to know, that I have ventured my
Life for the King in the Field, when such as thou lay behind Hedges. By this he
stopped the Bishop's Mouth, who did not expect such an Answer, and therefore was
willing to be rid of him.

The like Instance of an unexpected Conversion was seen also in William Gibson,
W. Gibson convinced going to distrub T. Holms, etc. at a Meeting.
whom I knew well, and who at the Time of the Civil Wars being a Soldier at
Carlisle, he and three others having heard that a Quakers Meeting was appointed
in that City, they agreed to go thither, and abuse the Preacher, whose Name was
Thomas Holms: But Gibson hearing him powerfully declare the Truth, was so
affected by his Testimony, that he stepped in near him, to defend him, if any
should have offered to abuse him: And he himself afterward came to be a
zealous Preacher of that Truth he had been at unawares convinced of.

To these Instances I may add that of a certain Trumpeter, And a Trumpeter much
in the like Manner.
who coming into a Quakers Meeting, began in an insolent Manner to sound his
Trumpet, thereby to drown the Voice of him that preached: But this had a
contrary Effect, and stirred up the Zeal of the Preacher the more, so that he
went on as if none disturbed him. The Trumpeter at length to recover his
Breath, was fain to cease blowing; but being still governed by an evil Spirit,
after some Intermission began to sound again: But whatever he did, he was not
able to divert the Preacher from his Discourse, though he hindered the Auditory
from hearing what was spoken. Thus he wearied himself so much, that he was
forced to rest again for Respiration; whereby, in Spite of his evil Will, he
came to hear what the Preacher spoke, which was so piercing, that the Trumpeter
came to be deeply affected with it, and bursting out into Tears, confessed his
Crime, and came to be a true Penitent; a remarkable Evidence of the Truth of
that Saying of the Apostle; Romans ix. 16.
So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows Mercy.

Among these, As likewise Justice Pearson by J N. and G Fox
who contrary to their Intent entered into Communion with the Quakers, so
called, may be reckoned also Anthony Pearson, the Justice, of whom in this
History it has been mentioned that he was so reached by G. Fox at Swarthmore,
that he came to be one of his Followers; which though true, yet it was before
that Time that he was in some Respect convinced of the Doctrine maintained by
the People called Quakers, which happened to be by James Naylor, who upon an
Indictment of Blasphemy appearing at the Sessions at Appleby in the Month
called January, 1652, found the said Justice Pearson sitting there on the
Bench, as one of his Persecutors, who asking him several Questions, received
such pertinent Answers from J. Naylor, that in a great Degree he was convinced
of the Truth held by J. N. and his Friends.

By what has been related here, The conclusion of this Book manifests the
Increase of this People, notwithstanding the Severity and Cruelty of their
Adversaries, and at length their being tolerated by Law.
may be seen how unexpectedly some entered into Society with the Quakers, so
called; more Instances of which might be produced if needful, since I have
known such, who being naturally of a boisterous Temper, yet were so struck with
the Terror of the Lord, that they came to be of such a quiet Spirit, and
harmless Behavior, that as formerly they could not suffer the least
Provocation, so now they bore all Revilings and Mockings with an even and
undisturbed Mind, because the Fear of God had made such deep Impressions upon
them, that they were careful, lest by an angry or impetuous Deportment, they
should sin against him. And thus continuing to live in Fear, and a reverential
Awe, they improved in true Godliness; insomuch, that by their pious Lives, they
preached as well as others with Words. After this Manner the Number of their
Society increased; but then grievous Sufferings ensued; for the Priests could
not endure to see that their Hearers left them; the furious Mob were spurred
on, and among the Magistrates there were many, who being of a fierce Temper,
used all their Strength to root out the Professors of the Light, (as they were
called at first) and to suppress and stifle their Doctrine: But all proved in
vain, as appears abundantly from this History, although there were hardly Prisons
in England, where some of these People were not shut up, besides the Spoil of
Goods, and cruel Whippings that befell some of them. Yet all this they bore with
a more than ordinary Courage, without making Resistance, how great soever their
Number was, and notwithstanding many of them had been valiant Soldiers, who
often had slain their Enemies in the Field, without regarding Danger.

In the Consideration of this undaunted Stedfastness, it has seemed to me,
that there have been some such among this People, whose Talent was, valiantly
to endure Persecution for a good Cause, and who perhaps in Ease would not have
been such good Christians, as they proved to be under these Sufferings;
resembling the Cammomil in this, which the more it is depressed, or rubbed, the
better it grows, and yields the stronger Scent. Being then thus oppressed, they
found themselves under a Necessity of continuing vigilant and watchful, and
according to King Solomon's Advice, to keep their Heart with all Diligence.
This made them love what they judged to be Truth more than their Lives, and it
caused them to be careful, lest that should come over them which the Church of
Ephesus was threatened with, because she had left her first Love, viz. the
Removing of her Candlestick out of its Place. Thus their mutual Love increased,
and their own Lives they valued not, when the grieving of their Consciences
stood in Competition with it. Having thus passed through many Adversities, with
an unwearied and lasting Patience, and being become a great People, known by
the Name of Quakers, they were at length, by the generous Clemency of King
William III. and the Favor of the Parliament, declared to be a Society, who
should henceforth be tolerated in the Kingdom as Protestant Dissenters, with
Liberty to perform their Religious Worship in public without Disturbance.

THE HISTORY Of the CHRISTIAN PEOPLE called QUAKERS. The TWELFTH BOOK.
QUEEN Anne having now ascended the Throne, and taken in Hand the Reins of
Government, was congratulated from all Quarters; and the People called Quakers
thought themselves no less obliged than others, to condole the King's Death,
and to testify their Affection and Fidelity to the Queen; and therefore they
drew up an Address; and when some of them, of whom G. Whitehead was one, went
to present it (which was on the 11th of the 2d Month, April) they were
introduced by the then Earl, but now Duke of Marlborough, and the Duke of
Ormond. The Address was as follows;

To Queen ANNE over England, etc.
May (...) please the Queen,
WE thy peaceable Subjects cannot but be sorrowfully affected with a deep Sense
of the Loss sustained by the Death of our late King William the Third, Quakers
Address to Queen Anne.
whom God made the Instrument of much Good to these Nations; a Prince who
indeed desired to be the common Father of his People, and as such did by his
great Example, as well as Precept, endeavor to unite them in Interest and
Affection, and promoted and confirmed a legal Liberty to tender Consciences, by
all which his Reign was adorned to the Renown of his Memory.

And it having pleased the all-wise God, the Disposer of Kingdoms, to preserve
thee to succeed to the Government of these Nations, and thereby to the
maintaining and Consummating those great Works so happily begun; we humbly beg
Leave to congratulate thy free and peaceable Accession to the Throne, from
whence we observe the Queen's excellent Declaration, manifesting her Care for
the Good of all her People, and therefore doubt not but we her Protestant
Dissenting Subjects shall partake of her Royal Favor and Protection.

We sincerely declare, that with the Assistance of the Grace of God, we will
always, according to our Christian Duty, demonstrate our good Affection, Truth,
and Fidelity to the Queen and her Government, and heartily pray that his Wisdom
may direct, and his Blessing be upon the Queen and her great Council, to the
Suppressing of Vice and Immorality, and the Promoting of Piety, Peace, and
Charity, to the Glory of God, and the Benefit of these Nations.

May the King of Kings make thy Reign long and glorious, to which temporal
Blessing we shall pray for thy eternal Happiness.

Signed on Behalf and by Appointment of the aforesaid People, at a Meeting in
London, the 10th of the second Month, 1702.

This Address was very favou^^bly received by the Queen, and after it was read
to her, she answered,

I thank you for your Address, And her Answer.
and I assure you of my Protection.

It was scarce a Month after when War was proclaimed in England against France,
which had been proclaimed in Holland also against that Crown some Days before.
Not long after followed the general yearly Meeting of those called Quakers,
held at London, in which it was thought fit to thank the Queen for her
Declaration that she would maintain the Act of Toleration in Favor of the
Dissenters; and therefore an Address was drawn up by the said Assembly, which
was as follows;

To Queen ANNE over England, etc.
The Humble and Thankful Acknowledgment of the People commonly called Quakers,
from their yearly Meeting in London, the 30th Day of the third Month called
May, 1702. May it please the Queen,
WE thy peaceable and dutiful Subjects, Their yearly Meeting Address.
met from most Parts of thy Dominions at our usual yearly Meeting (for the
Promotion of Piety and Charity) being deeply affected with thy free and noble
Resolution in thy late Speech at the Prorogation of the Parliament, to preserve
and maintain the Act of Toleration for the Ease and Quiet of all thy People,
could not but in Gratitude esteem our selves engaged both to thank Almighty God
for that favorable Influence, and to renew and render our humble and hearty
Acknowledgements to the Queen for the same, assuring her (on Behalf of all our
Friends) of our sincere Affection and Christian Obedience.

And we beseech God, the Fountain of Wisdom and Goodness, so to direct all thy
Counsels and Undertakings, that Righteousness which exalts a Nation, and Mercy
and Justice that establish a Throne, may be the Character of thy Reign, and the
Blessings of these Kingdoms under it.

Signed by the Appointment and on the Behalf of the said Meeting.

Of those who presented this Address, William Penn was the Deliverer, and the
Queen was pleased to speak to him in a very kind Manner, and not only received
the said Address favorably, but after it was read to her, she (...) the
following most gracious Answer;

Mr. Penn, The Queen's Answer.
I am so well pleased that what I have said is to your Satisfaction, that you
and your Friends may be assured of my Protection.

This Year died Margaret, A short historical Account of the Life and Death of
Margaret the Widow of Judge Fell, afterward of G. Fox.
the Widow of G. Fox, at about eighty seven Years of Age, as appears (...) from
an Account of her Son-in-Law Dr. Thomas L^we^, in which (...), that she was
born at Marsh-Grange, in the (...) of Dalton in Lancas^^^e. Her Father was John
Askew, a Gentleman of an ancient Family, a Man of a good Estate, and famous for
his Piety and Charity. His Daughter Margaret was religious even in y^r young
Years, and was married before she had attained the Age of eighteen, (...)
Thomas Fell of Swarthmore, who being bred a Lawyer, became a Justice of Peace,
and having afterward been a Member in several Parliaments, was made
Vice Chancellor of the County of Lancaster, and in Process of Time a Judge,
being beloved because of his Justice, Wisdom, Moderation and Mercy.

In the Year 1652, G. Fox coming the first Time to his House, when he himself
was from home, did by his Exhortations so reach to the Family, that a Priest
with some Gentlemen went and told Judge Fell, that a great Disaster had befaln
his Wife and Family, they being seduced and turned Quakers. This was so
odiously represented to him, that it troubled him not a little: But being come
home, and received very kindly by his Wife according to her usual Manner, he
soon perceived that it had been intended to made him believe Untruths, and
po^^ess him with Prejudice. Not long after G. Fox got Opportunity to speak to
him, which gave him such Satisfaction, that he owned that which was spoken to
be Truth; and his Wife ordered a Dinner to be made ready for her Friend G. Fox,
and those that were with him. And some Time after he told his Wife, when he
heard that she and her Friends were consulting where to have a Meeting, that
they might meet in his Hall; which they did; and though he himself did not come
there, yet when a Meeting was kept, he used to sit in a Chair so near to it,
that though he could not be seen of every Body, yet he could hear what was
preached; which he liked ^o well, that it is not known, that after he had heard
G. Fox, he ever frequented the public Church: Insomuch, that though he entered
not into full Society with the Quakers, yet he favored them, and several Times
stopped the Malice of their Persecutors, when it was in his Power so to do.

After he had been married six and twenty Years, to Margaret, Death of Judge
Fell
and had nine Children by her, he deceased in the Year 1658, leaving behind him
a Son and seven Daughters.

Margaret being thus become a Widow, neglected no Opportunity to serve her
Friends. In the Year 1660, when King Charles II. was restored, (scarce two
Weeks after he came in) she went to London, and spoke several Times with that
Prince, that he would cause the Sufferings of her Friends to cease; and in
Order thereto she writ, not only to him, but also to the Dukes of York and
Gloucester, the Queen Mother, the Princess of Orange, and the Queen of Bohemia.
And after having been about fifteen Months at London, she at length prevailed
with the King, that her Friends who were in Prison were released by
Proclamation. But Persecution afterward beginning again, she went to speak
with the King and the D ke of York at Hampton Court. In the Year 1664 for
refusing to swear, she was confined in Lancaster-Castle, and kept long in
Durance; for (because of her great Service in the Church) she was much envied
as well as G. Fox, to whom she was married about eleven Years after the Decease
of her first Husband Judge Fell. But not long after she was again imprisoned,
and continued a Year in Jail, being most Part of that Time sickly; and
afterward was several Times fined for Preaching. In the seventieth Year of her
Age she spoke again with the King, which was the last Time; but she was not
received so favorably as formerly, for he seemed to be somewhat angry; and
therefore she writ to him, and staid at London in Hopes of an Answer; but he
was suddenly taken away by Death. Afterward she spoke with King James, and
writ to him also. And at length, after a laborious and godly Life, she piously
departed from hence in a great Age, as has been said already, having uttered
in the Time of her Sickness many excellent Sayings, by which it appeared that
she was prepared for Death, She writ The Call of the Jews out of Babylon,
dedicated to M. B Israel, and many other Pieces.
and longed to be dissolved. She had been a zealous Preacher, and also written
much, and among the rest a Book entitled, The Call of the Jews out of Babylon,
which she dedicated to the famous Manasseh Ben Israel, and charged him, as he
would answer it before God, to cause it to be read among his Brethren. This
Book being translated by William Ames into Dutch, was also printed in that
Language, whilst her first Husband lived.

The same Year she died, G. Keith sent to preach in America, returns with very
little Success, but gets a Benefice of about 120 l. per Annum in Sussex.
George Keith, who now preached up and down where the Bishops thought fit, went
by their Order to New England, New York, Pennsylvania, etc. for it seems he
imagined that in those Parts he should get many Adherents among the Quakers:
But he came much short of his Aim; for even in Pennsilvania, where many of the
Baptists formerly sided with him, he was by them looked upon with Disdain, and
rejected for wearing a Clergyman's Gown; and now appearing to be a great
Apostate, there was no Likelihood for him to get Entrance, or to be esteemed
there. After some Time being returned into England, he got a Living in the
Parish of Edburton in Sussex, worth about 120 l. a Year. Now though the
Episcopalians seemed to be in great Expectation that Keith should suppress the
Doctrine of the Quakers, yet all his Endeavors proved in vain; His Endeavors,
as well as those of all others, to suppress the Doctrine of the Quakers, vain.
for whatever some may think, it is certain, and appears from this History,
that they are become a great People after a very singular Manner, and that all
Projects and Attempts to root them out, have been quashed, and come to naught:
And from this Consideration it was, as I have Reason to think, that many of the
Quakers, so called, in their Preaching did found forth these Words, being as it
were extorted from Balaam: There Is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination
against Israel; as I my self have often heard. And now the Strength and Power
of their violent Opposers was broken by the Favor of King William III. and his
Successor Queen Anne has favorably confirmed the Liberty of Conscience and
Worship, granted by an Act of Parliament to the Quakers. So that now we may
look upon them as a free People, and a Society tolerated by supreme Authority;
and therefore I might now finish this History, as to the Import of the Title.

But before I conclude, Something as to their Doctrine. Concerning the Light.
I intend to say something concerning their Doctrine, of which Mention has
been often made in this Work, viz. That their chief Principle, in which they
differ from the Generality of modern Christian Societies, is, that every Man is
enlightened with the Divine Light, according to the Evangelist John, who in the
first Chapter, speaking of Christ as he was from Eternity with the Father,
calls him the Word, John i. ^.
and says, That The Word was God, that all Things were made by him, that in
him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. And the Evangelist speaking
concerning John the Baptist, who was sent from God, says, He was not that
Light, but was sent to bear Witness of that Light: That was the true Light,
which lights every Man that comes into the World. By this it appears, that
the Quakers have not coined a new Phrase, but only made use of the express
Words of the holy Scripture. I am not unacquainted that, during the great
Apostasy, People generally have not clearly understood this; yet it ought not
to seem strange, because the Evangelist says, The Light shines in Darkness,
and the Darkness comprehended it not. But to elucidate this Doctrine a little
more, it may serve for Information, that the Quakers believe this Light to be
the same that the Apostle Paul calls The Grace of God that brings Salvation,
and has appeared to all Men: And concerning its Operation, he says, teaching
us, that denying Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World.

Thus much briefly concerning the abovementioned Denominations of this Divine
Light; and to make it appear more plainly what this Phrase means, Take heed to
the Light; thereby we understand, that each one minding the Counsel of the
Light in their Souls, may learn to fear God, and hate Pride, Arrogance, and
every evil Way, which will beget in us such a reverential Awe toward God, that
we dare not do any Thing which we certainly know will displease him; and this
is the first Step to Godliness: And therefore both David and Solomon have said,
that the Fear of God is the Beginning of Wisdom, viz. that Fear which is filial
and accompanied with Circumspection and Cautiousness; and as we persevere in
this Fear, we are enabled to serve the Lord in Holiness and Righteousness all
the Days of our Life.

But since we can do this only by the Grace of God, Prayer.
it is absolutely necessary that we take heed thereto: And therefore we ought to
pray to God continually for his Assistance. But here starts up something, of
which People generally have a wrong Notion: For all Sorts of Christians agree,
that we must often pray to God, but in the manner of it many err greatly. For
some think they perform this Duty of praying to God, when in the Mornings and
Evenings, and at other certain Times of the Day, they repeat or recite some
Forms of Prayer, and don't seem to consider, Luke xviii. ^. 1 These. v. 1^. Ephesians.
vi. 18
That Men ought always to pray, and not to faint. And the Apostle Paul exhorts
to pray without ceasing. And what this means, he himself explains in these
Words, Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, which
plainly shows, that it consists not in a continual repeating of Prayers, but in
pious and devout Breathings to God, raised in the Soul by the Spirit of Christ,
that it may please him to keep us continually in his Fear and Counsel, since we
are in want of daily Support from him. And thus praying in Faith, we receive an
Answer to our Breathings in some Measure, though not always so soon as we desire:
But we must not faint; and our Prayer must be from a sincere believing and
breathing of the Heart; otherwise we pray amiss, and do not receive, James iv.
3.
according to the Saying of the Apostle James, Ye ask, and receive not, because
ye ask amiss. But what Devices and Wiles have not been invented by the Enemy of
Man's Soul, to keep him off from this continual State of Prayer! Mat. xxvi. 41.
Although Christ very expressly says, Watch and pray, Mark xiii. 37
that ye enter not into Temptation. And, What I say unto you, I say unto all,
Watch. Which in regard to the Instruction we may reap thence, does not imply a
continual Watching without sleeping, but a Vigilance of the Mind, which Solomon
recommends in these Words, Keep thy Heart with all Diligence. Prove. iv. 23
Now though our Constitution does not seem to admit an incessant Continuance in
the deepest Retiredness of Mind, yet this is certain, that the more fervently
we turn our Minds to God, the more we are kept from Evil. And Man persevering
in this godly Excrcise, is the less in Danger of falling into spiritual Pride;
since he finds that his Preservation is in true Humility, and in a continual
Dependence upon God: For if he once departs from thence, and thinks himself
safe enough, and that now he needs not to walk circumspectly in Fear as he once
did, then he is caught already, and somewhat gone astray from his Spiritual
Guide, to wit, from that which showed unto him his Transgressions, and troubled
him whilst he was in the evil Way. And this is the Manifestation of the Spirit,
1 Cor. xii. ^.
which the Apostle says, is given to every Man to profit withal. Now to call
this Principle which reproves Men for Evil, and consequently discovers it,
Light, does not carry with it any Absurdity; especially if we consider that
this Denomination is found in Sacred Writ. Evil Deeds are called by the Apostle
the Works of Darkness; Ephesians. v. 11
and says he, All Things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light:
For whatsoever does make manifest, Ephesians v 13
is Light. By which it appears plainly, that the Quakers have not coined a new
Phrase, but only followed the Scripture Language. And that they are not the
only People that have declared of the Light, might be proved from other Authors
of good Esteem, if Necessity required.

As to Oaths, Oaths
they judge the taking of an Oath unlawful, and why, may abundantly be seen in
this History from a Multitude of Instances.

The making of War, Wars
they also believe to be inconsistent with pure Christianity, and esteem that
its Followers being led by its Precepts, will come to beat their Swords into
Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning-books, and not to learn War any
more. According to the Prediction of the Prophet Isaiah, ii. 4. and Christ the
Author of our Faith, unto whom we are commanded, to look, John xviii ^^
says expressly, My Kingdom is not of this World: If my Kingdom were of this
World, then would my Servants fight; And the Apostle James iv. gives us to
understand, that Wars and Fightings come of Lusts. And we believe, that by
receiving the Spirit of Christ in our Souls, and being entirely guided by it,
Enmity and Lu^^s (the Root of Wars and Fightings) come to be destroyed, and his
Love remains, by which we not only love one another sincerely, but also can
love our Enemies, and pray for them; as also for those who hate and persecute
us for his Name, not rendering Evil for Evil, but Good for Evil; and this we
believe to be that Lamb-like Spirit which will prevail, and must overcome. And
therefore they judge it not lawful for them to make War, and for all That they
think that they may very safely be tolerated by the Civil Government, not only
because they are willing and ready to pay Taxes to Caesar, but also that since
they cannot fight for the Government, neither can they fight against it.

Concerning the Sword of Magistracy, Magistracy.
they do in no wise assert, that it is unlawful for some Christians to be
Magistrates: For to say so, what does it imply but the Unchristianing of
Magistrates, whom they truly honor; Magistracy being the Ordinance of God. But
although they believe this Office to be consistent with Christian Religion, yet
they think it more safe for themselves not to seek for it.

Tithes to the Priests they do not look upon as a Gospel-Maintenance; Tithes.
since our Savior said in express Terms to his Disciples, Mat. x. 8.
Freely ye have received, freely give; yet they don't stretch this so far, as
not to suffer that any who has imparted of his Spiritual Gifts to others,
might not receive Temporal Gifts of them, if he himself was in want thereof,
provided the maintenance of a Minister of the Gospel be free, and not forced;
and also that it consists not in a fixed Stipend, which leads to turn the
Ministry of the Gospel into a Provision of a Livelihood: which they look upon
to be far beneath the Dignity of the Ministerial Office, which ought to be
performed purely out of Love to God and our Neighbor, and not with any Regard
to secular Gain.

The ordinary Way of showing Respect or Honor in common Conversation is also
what they scruple: For to give the same outward Sign of Respect to Men,
Salutations and Greetings.
which is given to God, viz. the Uncovering of the Head, they think (not
without good Reason) to be unfit; and so they esteem also the giving flattering
Titles of Honor, since Christ so sharply reproves the Greetings in the
Markets, Mat. xxiii. ^ 8.
and the being called of Men Rabbi, Rabbi, saying, Be not ye called Rabbi;
which Title of that Time may be equalled with the modern Master or Sir. Thus
Christ says also, How can ye believe, John v 44.
who receive Honor of one another? Yet they limit this only to common
Conversation with ones Equals: For a Servant may call his Master by that Title,
and Subjects their Magistrates by the Title of their Office, and this may be
spoken not contrary to Truth; whereas the other is nothing but mere Flattery,
invented to gratify and cherish Pride; and therefore they think it
inconsistent with the true Gravity of a Christian to call one's self a Servant
of one who has not any Mastership over us; and they believe we cannot be too
cautious in speaking, Mat. xii. 36.
since our Savior says, That every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall
give Account thereof in the Day of Judgment. The common Fashion of Greeting
they also decline, thinking it more safe not to imitate the ordinary Custom
therein. But that it is more agreeable with Christian Simplicity to greet one
another by giving their Hand, or by other innocent and harmless Notice in
passing by, which are Signs of Friendship and Respect, that may be showed,
without giving to Man that which appertains to God, as the uncovering of the
Head is among Christians: For the uncovering of the Head is an outward Sign of
the Worship and Honor that is paid to God: And if we give the same Token also
to Men, it may be queried, wherein the Difference consists? If it be answered,
that it consists in the Meaning and Intention, then Use is made of the same
Argument, whereby Papists endeavor to excuse their Adoration of Images and
Relics.

As the Quakers testify against the common vain Way of Salutation, ^o likewise
against Gaming, Interludes, ^esting, and all sinful and unprofitable
Recreations, Vain Recreations, etc
and drinking of Healths, all which they believe ^o be contrary to the
Exhortation of the Apostle, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God.

In their Method or Marriage, Marriage
they also depart from the common Way; for in the Old Testament they find not
that the Joining of a Couple in Marriage ever was the Office of a Priest, nor
in the Gospel, any Preacher among Christians appointed thereto. Therefore it is
their Custom, that when any intend to enter into Marriage, they first having
the Consent of Parents or Guardians, acquaint the respective Men's and Women's
Meetings of their Intention, and after due Enquiry, all Things appearing clear,
they in a public Meeting solemnly take each other in Marriage, with a Promise
of Love and Fidelity, and not to leave one another before Death separates them.
Of this a Certificate is drawn, mentioning the Names and Distinctions of the
Persons thus joined, which being first signed by themselves, those then that
are present sign as Witnesses.

In the burying of their Dead they mind Decency, Burial of the Dead.
and endeavor to avoid all Pomp; and the wearing of Mourning is not approved
among them; for they think that the Mourning which is lawful, may be showed
sufficiently to the World by a modest and grave Deportment.

As to Water Baptism and the outward Supper, Water Baptism.
though they don't use the external Signs, (witnessing Christ the Substance to be
come) yet they are not for judging others who do use them conscienciously and
devoutly. They do not deny that Water Baptism was used by some in the Primitive
Church; but let it be considered unto whom it was administered, viz. to such
that came over either from the Jews or the Gentiles, to the Christian Society:
And Baptism was as well a Judaical Ceremony as Circumcision: For according to
the Account of Maimonides, ^^d. Joh. Leusden P^^^olog. Hebraeo mixed. Dissetat.
xxi. de Prose^t. Sect. 1. page mihi 144.
a Gentile who would be received into the Covenant of the Jews, must be
baptized as well as circumcised, whereby he became a Proselyte. Whence it
evidently appears that Baptism did not come in the Place of Circumcision, as it
has been often urged to persuade the Ignorant. But as a Jewess Proselyte
needed not to get the Child she brought forth baptized, since the Jews did not
baptize their Children, but administered Baptism only to such of the Gentiles
that came over to them, so we do not find the least Evidence that the primitive
Chris ians in the Time of the Apostles did baptize their Issue, that so they
might claim to be Members of the Church; but the contrary seems rather to
appear from what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. vii 14
The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by the Husband; else were your Children unclean; but now are they
holy: Which implies no more, but that such Children, whose Father or Mother
alone was a Believer, were not excluded from, but comprehended in the outward
Membership: For this cannot have any Relation to that Sanctification, whereby
the Mind comes to be cleansed: But in Regard of being Partaker, of the outward
Fellowship, this reached so far, that if but one of the Parents, either Father
or Mother, was a Believer, the Child thereby became entitled to the outward
Society. For to make one a true and real Member of the Church of God, the
Baptism of the Spirit was required, as the main Thing; which made John the
Baptist, speaking of Christ, say, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. And
the Apostle Peter signifies, that Baptism, which now saves us, is not the
putting away of the ^^lth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God. This was that Baptism of which God by the Prophet Ezekiel said
concerning Israel, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 24, 25.
I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all Countries.
Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you; and ye shall be clean from all your
Filthiness, etc. It is a common Objection, that Christ himself was baptized
with Water, and that we are required to follow his Footsteps: But let it be
considered that he was circumcised also, though the one as well as the other
needed not to his Melioration, but was done for our sake, to show us by the
latter, that our Hearts must be circumcised, that is, separated from all evil
Inclinations and Lusts. And by the Baptism which he suffered to be administered
to him, is signified to us, that we must be baptized by his Spiritual Baptism.
And if it be objected, that Christ said to Nicodemus, Except a Man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. It may be
answered, that if this must be understood of outward Water, the Consequence
will be, that Water Baptism is of such an absolute Necessity, that if any be
deprived of it, he is to be shut out of Heaven, which, though believed by
Papists, yet I think Protestants will hardly say so; neither was John Calvin
Vid. Calvin. Epist. 184. and 229.
of that Opinion. It is also worth taking notice, that John the Baptist said,
that Christ should baptize with Fire; by which it appears, that both Water and
Fire in this Sense are metaphorical Expressions: For they both serve for
cleansing and purifying, though in a different Way. Now although some did baptize
with Water, yet it ought to be considered, that if the Command of Christ to his
Disciples, Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, related absolutely to
Water Baptism, it would indeed have been very strange, that Paul that eminent
Apostle of the Gentiles, did not think himself commissionated for the
Administration of that Baptism. Whereas, if the Apostles had really received a
Commission from the Lord to that Purpose, he by no Means would have been
singled out; since speaking of himself he says, 2 Cor. xi. 5.
that he supposed he was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles; 1 Cor.
i. 17. v. 14.
and yet he also says in express Terms, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel. And, I thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and
Gaius. And I baptized also the Household of Stephanas: Besides, I know not
whether I baptized any other. And yet he says, There is one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, which was the Baptism of the Spirit. 1 Cor. i. 16.
And the same Apostle says also, As many as have been baptized into Christ,
Ephesians. iv. 5.
have put on Christ: And this cannot have Relation to Water Baptism, Gal. iii.
27.
because many receive that, who never put on Christ, and become conformable to
his Image, which however is required of all Christians. To his may be added,
that if the Command to baptize, Mat. xxviii. 19. were literally restricted to
Water Baptism, then why may not our Savior's Words be as well understood
literally concerning the washing his Disciples Feet, when he said to Peter's,
John xiii. 8, 14.
If I wash thee not, thou have no Part with me; and to his Disciples, If I then
your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye also oug t to wash one another
Feet. More might be said on this Subject; but since R. Barclay has treated of
this Matter at large long ago, the Reader may apply to his Apology for the true
Christian Divinity.

Concerning the outward Supper it may be truly said, The outward Supper.
that it was the Passover that was kept by Christ at the eating of the Paschal
Lamb, which likewise was a Judaical Ceremony, that Christians generally take to
be a Figure or Shadow. But is not the modern Use of the outward Supper in
Remembrance of Christ's Sufferings, also a Figure, viz. of his Spiritual Supper
with the Soul; and does it not seem absurd, that one Figure should be the
Antitype of the other. The Passover was not a Memorial of another Sign that was
to follow; but it was a Memorial of the slaying of all the Firstborn in Egypt,
and of the Preservation of Israel and their Firstborn. Moreover it may be
said, that the Paschal Lamb was eaten in their Families, whereas the outward
Supper now is celebrated in public Places for Worship. We find, that the
Apostles breaking Bread from House to House, Acts ii 46
did eat their Meat with Gladness and Singleness of Heart; which implies an
usual Meal or Eating. And certainly they do well who daily at Meals remember
Christ and his Sufferings: For the Spiritual Supper, which is the Thing
required, ought to be partaken of by every true Christian; and this cannot be,
unless we being attentive, open the Door of our Hearts to Christ and let him
come in. Let it also be considered, that the Soul wants daily Food as well as
the Body; and being destitute of that, will faint and languish, and so become
unable to do Good; and therefore our Lord recommended his Disciples to pray for
To^ (...), signifying, according to the nice Explanation of Paser, Bread to
maintain or uphold the Essence or Substance; though others have translated it
Superessential Bread
daily Bread. For that this chiefly had Relation to the Spiritual Manna, the
Bread that comes down from Heaven, John vi 2^
appears from this Saying of Christ, Labor not for the Meat which perishes,
but for that Meat which endures unto everlasting Life. Rom xiv. 17
Besides, the Apostle tells us, that the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink;
but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Heb xiii ^
And the Author to the Hebrews says, It is a good Thing that the Heart be
established with Grace, not with Meats, which have not profited them that have
been occupied therein. All this then being duly considered by those called
Quakers, it has restrained them from the Use of those Ceremonies. For the Man
who through Grace is become truly spiritual, has no need of Ceremonies or
outward Means to depend upon, but finds himself excited to rely on the inward
Divine Grace, and to depend upon God alone, walking continually in reverential
Watchfulness before him, and so keeping to the immediate Teachings of Christ in
his Heart, he approaches with Boldness to the Throne of Grace, and with a full
Assurance of Faith becomes a Partaker of Salvation.

But I leave this Matter to say something also concerning the Way of Worship of
the People called Quakers. Way of Worship.
It is usual among them, when they meet together in their Religious Assemblies,
to spend some Time in a devout Silence and Retiredness of Mind, inwardly
praying with pure Breathings to God, which they generally call Waiting upon the
Lord: And if, under this Spiritual Exercise, any one feels himself stirred up
of God, to speak something by Way of Doctrine or Exhortation, he does so, and
sometimes more than one, but orderly, one after another. And that this was
usual in the Primitive Apostolical Church, appears from what Paul says, 1 Cor.
xiv 3
If any Thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his
Peace: For ye may all prophesy one by one. And what Prophesying signifies
under the New Covenant, the Apostle himself explains with these Words, 1 Cor
xiv 4
He that prophesyeth, edifieth the Church. Yet let none think this Liberty of
Speaking to be so unlimited, that every Body that can say something, may freely
do so in the Congregation: For he that will speak there, must also by all Means
be of a good, and honest, and holy Life, and found in Doctrine; and if in
Process of Time he finds in himself a Concern from the Lord to travel in the
Ministry, and desires a Certificate of his Soundness in Doctrine and orderly
Life, he may have it from the Congregation where he resides. And certainly a
Preacher himself ought to have Experience of the Work of Sanctification, before
he is qualified to instruct others in the Way thereto: For mere Brain-Knowledge
cannot do that effectually. Sometimes in their Meetings there is a public
Prayer before Preaching; and Preaching is generally concluded with a Prayer.

Now Preaching among them is not confined to the Male Sex, Women's Preaching.
as among others: For they believe that Women whom the Lord has gifted for
Gospel Ministry, may exercise their Gifts among them to Edification: For who
will presume to say to him, What do thou? To him namely, 1 These. v. 19 1 Cor.
xiv. 34.
who by his Apostle has said, Quench not the Spirit. They are not ignorant
that the same Apostle said to the Corinthians, Let your Women keep Silence in
the Churches. Now not to insist on the Word your, which seems to carry an
Emphasis along with it, as being chiefly applicable to those Corinthian Women,
yet by what follows, it appears plainly, that it regards ignorant Women, since
it is said there, If they will learn any thing, that is, if they will be
farther instructed concerning some Points of Doctrine, Let them ask their
Husbands at Home. Whereby it appears that this Saying has Relation to such
Women, who either from Indiscretion or Curiosity, or out of a Desire to be
looked upon as such that knew also to say something, proposed Questions to the
Church, and thereby caused more Confusion than Edification: For it is indeed a
Shame for such Women to speak in the Church; and the Apostle's Precept is, ver.
40.
Let all Things be done decently and in Order. Moreover, it ought to be
considered also, that these Words, Let your Women keep Silence, have a Tendency
also to the Subjection which Women owe to their Husbands, because it is said
there also that Women are commanded to be under Obedience. ver. 34.
This the Apostle explains farther in one of his Epistles to Timothy, 1 Timothy
ii. 11, 12.
where he says, Let the Woman learn in Silence with all Subjection: But I
suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp Authority over the Man. Now that the
Apostle does not absolutely forbid Women speaking to Edification in tne Church,
appears from his own Words, 1 Cor. xi. 5.
when he says, Every Woman that prays or prophesyeth with her Head
uncovered, dishonors her Head: For here he gives to Women a Prescript how to
behave themselves when they prophesy; and what he means by Prophesying he
himself declares in the same Epistle, as has been hinted already, 1 Cor. xiv.
3, 4.
where he says, He that prophesyeth, speaks unto Men to Edification, and
Exhortation, and Comfort; and he that prophesyeth edifieth the Church. And pray
what is this but that which we now adays call Preaching? For though Prophesying
under the old Covenant seems chiefly to signify a Prediction of what is to
come, yet it is credible that the ancient Prophets were also Preachers; and
according to the New Testament Language it is evident that Prophesying is
chiefly Preaching. Hence we may easily understand what kind of Virgins the four
Daughters of Philip were, Acts xxi. 9. Romans vi.
which did prophesy, and what kind of Servant of the Church Phoebe was, and
Tryphena, and Tryphosa, who labored in the Lord, and Persis, which labored
much in the Lord, which is considerably more than what is said of that Mary,
who bestowed much Labor on the Apostles. How significantly does the Apostle
call Priscilla and Aquila, his Helpers in Christ Jesus. And what he means by
his Helpers in that Sense, we may see Philip. iv. 3. where he speaks of Women
which labored with him in the Gospel. All this then being duly considered, the
Quakers, so called, think it unlawful to for id such Women to preach, whom the
Lord has gifted, and who are of a godly Life and Conversation, since it
appears sufficiently that in the primive Church they were not debarred from
that Service. And as in those Days, so in ours, it has evidently appeared,
that some pious Women have had a very excellent Gift to the Edification of the
Church. All which tends to the Glory of God, who is no Respecter of Persons,
and is pleased to make use of weak Instruments to show forth his Praise.

As to singing the Words of David, Singing in the Churches
since they do not suit the State and Condition of mixed Assemblies, they difuse
the customary formal Way of singing in the Churches, which has neither Precept
nor Precedent in the New Testament.

Concerning the Resurrection, The Resurrection.
their Belief is orthodox, and agreeable with the Testimonies of the Holy
Scriptures: But because they judge it to be very improper to say that we shall
rise again with the same numerical Bodies we now have, their Opposers have
often falsely accused them, as such who deny the Resurrection, though they fully
believe this Saying of the Apostle, If in this Life only we have Hope in
Christ, 1 Co^ x^ 19
we are of all Men most miserable. And as to the Qualities of the Bodies
wherewith we shall arise, ver. 44. Phil iii 2^.21.
he says, It is sown ^ natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body. For says
the same Apostle, our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the Working whereby he is
able to subdue all Things unto himself. ^ Cor. xv. 51.
And he says also in express Words, We shall all be changed. And therefore
they have counted it more safe not to determine with what kind of Bodies we
shall be raised, provided we have a firm Belief that there is to be a
Resurrection of the Dead: For from such a Determination many Difficulties may
arise, which otherwise are avoided; and therefore they have also said to their
Antagonists, Christ's Resurrection is indeed an Argument for our Resurrection;
but would it be valid from thence thus to argue: Because Christ's Body, which
was without Sin, and was not corrupted in the Grave, was raised the same it was
buried, therefore our Bodies which admit of Corruption, must also be raised the
same they are buried? Nay, by insisting ^^ifly on this Point, we fall into many
Difficulties. Who will venture to say, that when People die, and are buried
about the Age of ninety Years, their Bodies in the Resurrection shall be the
same decrepit Bodies they were when buried; and that unborn Children dying,
shall be raised with such small Bodies they had then? To shun therefore such
kind of Absurdities, they think it better, not to suffer human Wit to expatiate
too far, since the Apostle says, Romans xii. 16 ver. 3.
Mind not high Things; and advises every Man, not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think.

Now as to Church Government, Churh-Government
both for looking to the orderly Conversation of the Members, and for taking
Care of the Poor, and of indigent Widows and Orphans, and also for making
Enquiry into Marriages solemnized among them, they have particular Meetings
either Weekly, or every two Weeks, or Monthly, according to the Greatness of
the Churches. They have also Quarterly Meetings in every County, where Matters
are brought that cannot well be adjusted in the particular Meetings. To these
Meetings come not only the Ministers and Elders, but also other Members, that
are known to be of sober Conversation; and what is agreed upon there, is entered
into a Book belonging to the Meeting. Besides these Meetings a general Annual
Assembly is kept at London in the Whitson Week, so called; not for any
superstitious Observation the Quakers have for that more than any other Time,
but because that Season of the Year best suits the general Accommodation.

To this Yearly Meeting, which sometimes lasts four, five, or more Days, are
admitted such as are sent from all Churches of that Society in the World, to
give an Account of the State of the particular Churches; which from some Places
is done only by Writing; and from that Meeting is sent a general Epistle in all
the Churches, which commonly is printed; and sometimes particular Epistles are
sent also to the respective Churches. By which it may be known every Year, in
what Condition the Churches are; and in the said Epistle generally is
recommended a godly Life and Conversation, and due Care about the Education of
Children. If it happens that the Poor any where are in Want, then that is
supplied by others who have in (...), or sometimes by an extraordinary
Collection.

As to the Denomination by which they are distinguished from other Religious
Societies, Name Quakers given in S^orn.
it is, as is well known, Quakers, but since that Name was given them in Scorn,
as has been said in due Place, they don't assume it any farther than for
Distinction-sake from others; but the Name whereby they call one another is
that of Friends. Among themselves, etc. distinguished by the Name of Friends.
And herein they have the Example of the Primitive Christians, as may be seen
Acts xxvii. 3. where it is said, that Julius the Centurion courteously
entreated Paul, and gave him Liberty to go unto (...), which is not (...), or
our Friends, at it is rendered, but the Friend^
the Friends (for so the Greek has it) to refresh himself. And 3 Epist. John
14. we read, The Friends salute thee; and greet the Friends by Name. Now this
Name of Friends is so common among the Quakers in England, that others also
know them, and sometimes call them by that Name.

It was, 1705
as I find, in the Year 1705, that Anne, the late Wife of Thomas Camm, A
farther Account of Anne Audland, afterward the Wife of Tho. Camm, her
Sufferings and religious Exit.
deceased in a great Age; and having already made mention of her by the Name of
Anne Audland, I Will say something more of her before I describe her Exit. She
was Daughter of Richard Newby, in the Parish of Kendal in Westmorland, being
born in the Year 1627, and well educated; and being come to Maturity, she
conversed much with the most Religious People of that Time. About the Year
1650, she was married to John Audland, and in the Beginning of 1652 they both
were by the Ministry of G. Fox convinced of that Truth he preached; and in the
next Year they began to preach that Doctrine to others; for which in the
following Year she was committed to Prison in the Town of Aukland in the County
of Durham, where she had Opportunity to speak to th People through the Window,
which she did so pathetically, that several were affected with her Testimony;
and after being released, she traveled up and down the Country, and had good
Service; but not long after she was again committed to Prison on an Accusation
of having spoken Blasphemy, for which she was tried at Banbury in Oxfordshire;
the Indictment drawn up against her containing that she had said, God did not
live: Whereas that which she said was, that true Words might be a Lie in the
Mouth of some that spoke them, alleging for Truth the Saying of the Prophet
Jeremiah, v. 2. Though they say the Lord lives, sure they swear falsely. The
Judge before whom she appeared, behaved himself moderately, and observing how
wisely she answered to his Questions with a modest Boldness, proposed the
Matter to the Jury thus; That she acknowledged the Lord her God and Redeemer to
live, and that there were Gods of the Heathen that were dead Gods. Some of the
Justices upon the Bench, who sought her Destruction, perceiving they should not
obtain their End, (for it had been divulged that she should be burnt) went off
to influence the Jury, and bias them; which had this Effect, that they brought
her in guilty of Misdemeanour; which made one perfect say, It was illegal to
indict her for one Fact, and to bring her in (...) of another; since they ought
to have found her either guilty or not guilty upon the Matter of (...) charged
in the Indictment. The Judge, though he had carried himself discreetly, had a
Mind however somewhat to please the Justices that were her Enemies; and
therefore at her Refusal to give Bond for her good Behavior, she was sent to
Prison again; though he was heard to say, that she ought to have been discharged.
And the Prison whither she was sent was a n^^ty Place, several Steps under
(...); on the Side whereof was a common Sewer, which sometimes (...) very much,
and Frogs and Toads crawled in the Room. Here she was (...) about eight Months;
but showed herself content, being persuade^ that it was for the Lord's Sake she
thus suffered. Her Husband John ^^dland died, as has been said before, about
the Beginning of the Year at 1664, and two Years after she was married to
Thomas (...), a Minister also of the Gospel. She lived very retiredly, and
spent much Time in Solitariness, and was almost daily exercised in reading the
Holy Scriptures and other edifying Books. Her Husband suffered Imprisonment
three Years at Kendal, and about six Years at Appl^by; insomuch that she came
to be well acquainted with Adversities: But by all these she was the more
spurred on to advance in true Pi^^^; and was a very remarkable Teacher in the
Church, having an extraordinary Gift to declare the Truth. And yet she was very
modest and humble, insomuch that how full soever she was of Matter, she rarely
appeared to preach in large Meetings, where she knew there were Men qualified
for that Service; and she was grieved when she perceived any of her Sex to be
too forward on such Occasions; and therefore she advised them to be cautious,
though she did not omit to encourage the Good in all, and endeavored not to
quench the Spirit in any. Thus she continued in a virtuous Life to the End of
her Days. At Bristol she once fell so sick, that it was thought she was nigh
Death; and then she exhorted those that stood by, to prize their Time, and to
prepare for their latter End, as God, said she, has inclined me to do, so that
I enjoy unspeakable Peace here, with full Assurance of eternal Rest and
Felicity in the World to come. But she recovered from this Sickness; and when
her dying Hour came, which was in her Dewlling Place near Kendal, she was not
less prepared, but said, I bless the Lord I am prepared for my Change. I am
full of Assurance of eternal Salvation, and a Crown of Glory, through my Dear
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Many other excellent Sayings she uttered during
the Time of her Sickness; and when she drew near her End, some of her Friends
asking her, Whether she knew them. Yes, said she, I know you every one. I have
my Understanding as clear as ever: For how should it be otherwise, since my
Peace is made with God through the Lord Jesus Christ. I have no Disturbance in
Mind, therefore is my Understanding and Judgment so good and clear; but to lie
under Affliction of Body and Mind, to feel pinching Pangs of Body even to
Death, and to want Peace with God; O that would be intolerable to bear! She
advised her Husband to quit himself of the Cumber of the Things of this World,
after her Death, that he might with the more Freedom attend the Ministry of the
Gospel; and said she, Warn all, but especially the Rich, to keep Love, and not
to be high-minded: For Humility and Holiness is the Badge of our Profession. A
little before her Departure, some fainting Fits taking her, she revived again,
and said, I was glad, thinking I was going to my eternal Rest, without
Disturbance. I have both a Sight and Earnest of eternal Rest with God in the
World to come. A little after she said, Methinks I grow weak and cold. My Hands
and Feet are grown very cold, yet my Heart is very strong. I must meet with
sharper Pangs than I have yet ^el^. -- This Pain is hard to Flesh and Blood,
but must be endured a little Time; Ease and eternal Rest is at hand; I am glad
I see Death so near me. A little after, seeing her Friends weep, she said, Be
not concerned, for all is well: I have only Death to encounter, and the Sting
of it is wholly taken away: The Grave has no Victory, and my Soul is ascending
above all Sorrow and Pains. So let me go freely to my heavenly Mansion, disturb
me not in my Passage. My Friends, go to the Meeting; let me not hinder the
Lord's Business, But let it be the chief, and by you all done faithfully, that
at the End ye may receive your Reward: For wine is sure. I have not been
negligent, my Days-work is done. Feeling afterward her Pains increasing, she
prayed the Lord to help her through the Agony of Death; and a little after she
said, O my God, O my God, thou have not forsaken me, blessed be thy Name for
ever. O my blessed Savior, that suffered for me and all Mankind, great Pains
in thy holy Body upon the Cross, remember me thy poor Handmaid in this my great
bodily Afflict^^^ My Trust is in thee, My Hope is only in thee, my dear Lord. O
come, come dear Lord Jesus, come quickly, receive my Soul to thee, I yield it
up, help me now in my bitter Pangs. Then her Husband prayed to God, that he
would be pleased to make her Passage easy. And she had no more such Pangs, but
drew her Breath shorter by Degrees, and said little more, but that it was good
to leave all to the Lord. And so she slept in the Lord the 30th of November,
1705, in the 79th Year of her Age. Thus Anne C^^m departed this Life, and her
Husband said afterward, that he counted it a great Blessing to have had her to
Wife: For she was indeed a very excellent Woman, and therefore I have described
her latter End thus circumstantially.

Having now related what has come to my Knowledge, that I thought remarkable,
and of singular Moment in Respect of the Rise and Progress of the People called
Quakers, I think what I have written may suffice, and answer the Contents of
the Title of this History; and therefore I Will add only a few Occurrences, and
then come to a Conclusion.

Many Years ago, The Union of England, and Scotland accomplished.
even in the Time of King James I. Endeavors were used to unite England and
Scotland into one Kingdom, but all in vain; King William III. also tried what
could be done in this Case, but his Life did not permit him to bring the Work
to Perfection. Yet at length the Matter was agreed and settled about the
Beginning of the Year 1707, in the Reign of Queen Anne, it being concluded that
these two Kingdoms henceforth should be united into one, and be called Great
Britain. 1708
In the Forepart of the Year 1708, Scotland was threatened with an Invasion by
the pretended Prince of Wales; An Attempt to invade Scotland.
but he failed in the Attempt, and his Design came to naught. Now since the
Union of the said Kingdom with that of England was accomplished, and the
Succession of the Crown in the Protestant Line established by Law, the Queen on
that Account was congratulated by a Multitude of Addresses of her Subjects; and
the Quakers, so called, judged themselves obliged also to testify their
Affection to that Princess, as they did by the following Address.

To ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc. The Grateful and Humble Address of the
People commonly called Quakers, from their Yearly Meeting in London, this 28th
Day of the third Month called May, 1708.
WE having good Cause to commemorate the manifold Mercies of God vouchsafed to
this united Kingdom of Great Britain, Yearly Meeting Address.
believe it our Duty to make our Humble Acknowledgements, first to the Divine
Majesty, and next to the Queen, for the Liberty we enjoy under her kind and
favorable Government, with hearty Desires and Prayers to Almighty God (who
has hitherto disappointed the mischiev^^s and wicked Designs of her Enemies,
both foreign and domestic) that he will so effectually replenish the Queen's
Heart, together with th^se (...) Council with his Divine Wisdom, that
Righteousness, Justice and Moderation, which are the Ornaments of the Queen's
Reign, and which exalt a Nation, may be increased and promoted.

And we take this Opportunity to give the Queen the renewed Assurance of our
hearty Affection to the present establised Government, and that we will as a
People in our respective Stations, according to our peaceable Principles, by
the Grace of God, approve our selves in all Fidelity the Queen faithful and
obedient Subjects, and as such conclude with fervent Prayers to the Lord of
Hosts, that after a prosperous, safe and long Reign in this Life, Thou, O
Queen, may be blessed with an Eternal Crown of Glory.

This Address was signed in the Name of the Meeting by fourteen Members
thereof, who also were ordered to present it; but it being understood that the
Queen seemed willing to be attended with it in private, only seven, among whom
were G. Whitehead and Tho. Lower, went in with it, and were introduced by the
Principal Secretary of State -- Boil; G.Whitehead speaks to the Queen
and G. Whitehead presenting it, said, We heartily wish the Queen Health and
Happiness: We are come to present an Address from our Yearly Meeting, which we
could have desired might have been more early and seasonably timed, but could
not, because our said Meeting was but the last Week; and therefore now hope the
Queen will favorably accept our Address. Then G. Whitehead delivering it, the
Queen said; Pray read it: Whereupon he took and read it, and the Queen answered,

I thank you very kindly for your Address, The Queen's Answer.
and I assure you of my Protection; you may depend upon it.

To which G. Whitehead replied, G. Whitehead 's Reply
We thankfully acknowledge, that God by his Power and special Providence has
preserved and defended the Queen against the evil Designs of her Enemies,
having made the Queen an eminent Instrument for the Good of this Nation and
Realm of Great Britain, in maintaining the Toleration, the Liberty we enjoy in
respect to our Consciences against Persecution. Which Liberty being grounded
upon this (...) in the late King's Reign, for the uniting the Protestant
Subjects in (...) rest and Affection, the Union of Great Britain now settled
tends to the Strength and Safety thereof: For in Union is the Strength and
Stability of a Nation, or Kingdom; and without Union no Nation or People can be
safe, but are weak and unstable. The Succession of the Crown being settled and
established in the Protestant L^ne, must needs be very accept able to all true
Protestant Subjects.

And now, O Queen, that the Lord may preserve and defend Thee for the future,
the Remainder of thy Days, and support Thee under all Thy great Care and
Concern for the Safely and Good of this Nation and Kingdom of Great Britain,
and that the Lord may bless and preserve Thee to the End, is our sincere Desire.

To this the Queen returned, With the Queen's Return
I thank you for your Speech, and for your Address; and ye may be assured I
will take care to protect you.

And G. Whitehead replied, And G. Whitehead^ Reply
The Lord bless and prosper the Queen in all her good Intentions. And thereupon
he and his Friends withdrew.

The most remarkable Occurrences the Quakers in England now met with, were,
that they enjoying the Liberty to perform their Religious Worship publicly
without Disturbance, were afterward encountered by the Writings of their
Enemies from Ignorance or Envy, and represented as Maintainers of Heterodox
Sentiments; but they not sailing of Answers, the Eyes of many were opened, and
some came over to them. And though sometimes those of the public Church, and the
Success to draw over one that was born and educated among the Quakers, but
inclined to more Liberty, and to be esteemed by the World; yet there have been
others of the Episcopal Church, who not from any earthly Consideration, but
merely by a Convincement of their Mind, have entered into Society with the
Quakers, not scaring to make public Profession of their Religion, as may
appear by two Letters which I Will insert here; the one of Samuel Crisp, a
Clergyman of the Episcopal Church, who gave the following Account of his Change
to one of his Relations.

My dear Friend,
I Received a Letter from thee the Week before last, Letter of S. Crisp, a
Clergyman, turned Quaker.
which was sent by thy Uncle Bolton: There were a great many kind Expressions
in it, and in thy Sister Clopton's likewise. I acknowledge my self much obliged
to you both, and to the whole Family, for many repeated Kindnesses, and if my
School had not engrossed so much of my Time, I would have taken Opportunity to
answer my dear Friend's Letter now, and upon that Account my Delay will be the
more excusable.

The News thou have heard of my late Change is really true, I cannot conceal
it, for it is what I glory in; neither was it any Prospect of temporal
Advantage that induced me to it, but a sincere Love to the Truth, and pure
Regard to my own Soul: Neither can I be sufficiently thankful to God, that he
has let me live to this glorious Day, and not cut me off in the midst of my
Sins and Provocations against him; he is long-suffering to us ward, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance: He has brought
me off from the Forms and Shadows of Religion, and let me see in a more
illustrious Manner what is the Life and Substance of it, as he found me in some
Degree faithful to that Measure of Light and Knowledge he had bestowed on me,
whilst I was in the Communion of the Church of England; therefore he was
pleased of late, as I humbly waited upon him, to make known to me greater and
deeper Mysteries of his Kingdom; and I can truly say, that I find by daily
Experience, as I keep low and retired into that pure Gift which he has planted
within me, Things are every Day more and more cleared up to me. and the Truth
shines and prevails greatly over the Kingdom of Darkness; and if I should now
turn my Back upon such Manifestations as these, and entangle my self again with
the Yoke of Bondage, surely I should grieve the holy Spirit, so that he might
justly withdraw his kind Operations, and never return more to assist and
comfort me; for God is not mocked; Religion is a very serious and weighty
Thing; Repentance and Salvation are not to be trifled with, nor is Turning to
God to be put off till our own Time, Leisure or Convenience, but we must love
and cherish the least Appearance of Christ, not slighting or despising the Day
of small Things, but embrace the first Opportunity of following Christ in any
of his Commands: When he speaks there is such Force and Authority in it, that
we cannot stand to cavil, dispute or ask Questions; for unless we will be so
obstinate as to shut our Eyes against the Sun, we must needs confess to the
Truth of his Doctrine, and presently strike in with it; and therefore when for
several Weeks I had lived more privately and retiredly in London, than was
usual, fasting twice or thrice in a Week, or sometimes more, spending my Time
in reading the Scriptures, and in Prayer to God, this was a good Preparation of
my Mind to receive the Truth which he was then about to make known to me: I
lamented the Errors of my past Life, and was desirous to attain a more
excellent Degree of Holiness than I had discovered in the Church of England. In
this religious Retirement God knew the Breathings of my Soul, how sincere I
was, and resigned to him when alone; I wanted him to set me free, and to speak
Peace and Comfort to my Soul, which was grieved and wearied with the Burden of
Sin; for though I had strictly conformed my self to the Orders and Ceremonies of
the Church of England, and had kept my self from running into any great or
scandalous Enormities, the Fear of the Almighty preserving me, yet still I had
not that Rest and Satisfaction in my self which I desired, and greatly longed
for; I found when I had examined my State and Condition to Godward, that
Things were not right with me.

As for a sober and plausible Conversation in the Eye of the World, I knew that
was a very easy Attainment, a good natural Temper, with the Advantage of a
literal Education, will quickly furnish a Man with Abilities for that, so that
he shall be looked upon as a Saint, and very spiritual, when perhaps in Chains
of Darkness, in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the very Bond of Iniquity: If
this Sort of Righteousness would have done, perhaps I might make as fair
Pretensions that Way as some others; but alas, I quickly saw the Emptiness and
Unsatisfactoriness of those Things: This is a Covering that will not protect or
hide us from the Wrath of the Almighty when he comes to Judgment: It Is not a
Man's natural Temper, nor his Education that makes him a good Christian; this
is not the Righteousness which the Gospel calls for, nor is this the Truth in
the inward Parts which God requires; the Heart and Affections must be cleansed
and purified before we can be acceptable to God; therefore it was Death to me
to think of taking up my Rest in a formal Pretense of Holiness, wherein yet I
saw to my Grief Abundance of People wrapped themselves, slept securely and
quietly, Dreaming of the Felicity of Paradise, as if Heaven were now their own,
and they needed not trouble themselves any more about Religion: I could not
entertain so dangerous an Opinion as this, for then I should be tempted to take
up my Rest by the Way, whilst I was traveling toward the promised Land. I
think I made a little Progress in a holy Life, and through God's Assistance I
weakened some of my spiritual Enemies whilst I lived in the Communion of the
National Church. I thank my God I can truly say, whilst I used those Prayers I
did it with Zeal and Sincerity, in his Fear and Dread, but still I ceased not
my earnest Supplication to him in private, that he would show me Something more
excellent, that I might get a complete Victory over all my Lusts and Passions,
and might perfect Righteousness before him; for I found a great many Sins and
Weaknesses daily attending me: And though I made frequent Resolutions to forsake
those Sins, yet still the Temptation was too strong for me, so that often I had
Cause to complain with the Apostle in the Bitterness of my Soul, O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Who shall set me
free, and give me Strength to triumph over Sin, the World, and the Devil? That
I may in every Thing please God, and there may not be the least Thought, Word,
or Motion, Gesture, or Action, but what is exactly agreeable to his most holy
Will, as if I saw him standing before me, and as if I were to be judged by him
for the Thought of my Heart next Moment. O Divine Life! O Seraphick Soul! O
that I could always stand here! for here is no Reflection, no Sorrow, no
Repentance! but at God's Right Hand there is perfect Peace, and a River of
unspeakable Joy. O that we might imitate the Life of Jesus, and be thoroughly
furnished unto every good Word and Work! This was the frequent Breathing of my
Soul to God when I was in the Country, but more especially after I had left my
new Preferment of a Chaplain, and took private Lodgings in London: In this
Retirement I hope I may say, without Boasting, that I was very devout and
religious, and I found great Comfort and Refreshment in it from the Lord, who
let me see the Beauty of Holiness; and the Sweetness that arises from an
humbled mortified Life, was then very pleasant to my Taste, and I rejoiced in
it more than in all the Delight and Pleasures of the World.

And now it pleased God to show me, that if I would indeed live strictly and
holily a^ becomes the Gospel, then I must leave the Communion of the Church of
England; but knew not yet which Way to determine my self, not to what Body of
Men I should join, who were more orthodox, and more regular in their Lives. As
for the Quakers, so called, I was so great a Stranger to them, that I had never
read any of their Books, nor do I remember, that ever I converted with any one
Man of that Communion in my whole Life: I think there was one in Foxly while I
was Curate there, but I never saw the Man, though I went several Times to his
House on Purpose to talk with him, and to bring him off from his mad and wild
Enthusiasm, as I then ignorantly thought it to be: As for that Way, I knew it
was every where spoken against; he that had a Mind to appear more witty and
ingenious than the rest, would choose this for the Subject of his profane Jests
and Drollery; with this he makes Sport, and diverts the Company; for a Quaker
is but another Name for a Fool or a Madman, and was scarce ever mentioned but
with Scorn and Contempt. As for Drollery, I consess I was never any great
Friend to it; but indeed if all was true that was laid to the Quakers Charge, I
thought that they were some of the worst People that ever appeared in the
World, and wondered with what Face they could call themselves Christians, since
I was told they denied the fundamental Articles of the holy Faith, to which I
ever bore the highest Veneration and Esteem; and notwithstanding I had always
lived at the greatest Distance from that People, and was very zealous in the
Worship of the Church of England, and upon all Occasions would speak very
honorably of it, moreover was content to suffer some few Inconveniences upon
that Account, (as thou very well know) yet my Father still looked upon me as
inclining to the Quakers; and some Years ago signified to a Friend, he was
afraid I would become an Enthusiast; and whilst I was at Bungan School, he sent
me two Books to read that were writ against the Quakers, one of which was John;
Foldo's, who has been sufficiently exposed for it by William Penn.

Whilst I lived in London in that private retired Manner (I was just now
speaking of) walking very humbly in the Sight of God, and having Opportunity to
reflect upon my past Life, as I had Ocasion to be one Day at a Bookseller's
Shop, I happened to cast my Eye on Barclay's Works; and having heard in the
Country, that he was a Man of great Account amongst the Quakers, I had a Mind
to see what their Principles were, and what Defense they could make for
themselves; for sure, thought I, these People are not so silly and ridiculous,
nor Maintainers of such horrid Opinions, as the Author of the Snake, and some
others would make us believe. I took Barclay home with me, and I read him
thro'in a Week's Time, save a little Treatise at the End, which I found to be
very philosophical, I omitted; but however I soon read enough to convince me of
my own Blindness and Ignorance in the Things of God; there I found a Light to
break in upon my Mind, which did mightily resresh and comfort me in that poor,
low, and humbled State, in which I then was; for indeed I was then, and had
been for a considerable Time before, very hungry and thirsty after
Rightcousness, and therefore I received the Truth with all Readiness of Mind;
'twas like Balm to my Soul, and as Showers of Rain to the thirsty Earth, which
is parched with Heat and Drought. This Author laid Things down so plainly, and
proved them with such Ingenuity and Dexterity of Learning, and opened the
Scriptures so clearly to me, that without standing to cavil, dispute, raise
Argument or Objection., or consulting with Flesh and Blood, I presently
resigned my self to God, and weeping for Joy that I had found so great a
Treasure, I often thanked him with Tears in my Eyes for so kind a Visitation of
his Love, that he was graciously pleased to look toward me when my Soul cried
after him; so, though before I was in great Doubt and Trouble of Mind, not
knowing which way to determine my self, yet now the Sun breaking out so
powerfully upon me, the Clouds were scattered: I was now fully satisfied in my
own Mind which Way I ought to go, and to what Body of People I should join my
self.

So I immediately left the Communion of the Church of England, and went to
Gracious-street Meeting. After I had read Barclay, I read some other Books of
that Kind, among which was an excellent Piece, though in a small Volume, called,
No Cross, no Crown: Thus I continued reading and frequenting Meetings for
several Weeks together, but did not let any one Soul know what I was about: The
first Man I conversed with was George Whitehead, and this was several Weeks
after I began to read Barclay, and frequent their Meetings: By him I was
introduced into more Acquaintance, and still the farther I went, the more I
liked their Plainness, and the Decency and Simplicity of their Conversation:
They do not use the Ceremonies and Salutations of the Church of England, but
shake Hands freely, and converse together as Brothers and Sisters that are
sprung of the same Royal Seed, and made Kings and Priests unto God. O, the
Love, the Sweetness and Tenderness of Affection I have seen among this People!
By this, says Christ, shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
Love one to another: Put on therefore, says the Apostle, ( as the Elect of God
holy and beloved) Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering.

Thus, my dear Friend, I have given thee an Account of my Proceeding on this
Affair. As to my Bodily State, if thou desire^ to know what it is, I may
acquaint thee that I have my Health as well as ever, and I bless God I have
Food and Raiment sufficient for m^ so that I want no outward Thing; and I have
the Necessities and Conveniences of Life liberally: Let us not burden our
selves with taking Care for the Vanities and Superfluities of it; 1 These iv 4
let us possess our Vessels in Sanctification and Honor; and as we bring our
Minds into perfect Subjection to the whole Will of God, so let us bring our
Body to the most simple and natural Way of living, being content with the
fewest Things, never studying to gratify our wanton Appetites, nor to follow
the Customs and Humors of Men, but how we may so contract our earthly Cares
and Pleasures, that we may bring most Glory to God, most Health and Peace to
our own Souls, and do most Service to the Truth; and if this be our Aim,
certainly a very small Portion of the Things of this World will suffice us:
Seeing we are Christians, we should therefore earnestly pursue those Things
which bring us nearest to God, and which are most perfective of humane Nature;
for what is more than a Competency seems to be a Burden to a gene^ous
philosophical Soul, which would breathe in a pare Vehicle, that so it may have
a quick Sense and Relish of all Blessings, both of the superior and inferior
Worlds.

Thou know, my dear Friend, that Religion is a very serious Thing, and
Repentance is a great Work, and one precious immortal Soul is of more Worth,
than ten thousand perishing Worlds, with all their Pomp and Glory: Therefore
let us take Courage, and be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, let us not
content our selves with a Name and Profession of Godliness, let us come to the
Life and Power of it, let us not despond of getting the Victory; we have a
little Strength for God; let us be faithful to him and he will give us more
Strength, so that we shall see the Enemy of our Peace fall before us, and
nothing shall be impossible unto us: I say, my Friend, let us be faithful to
that Measure of Light and Knowledge which God has given us, to be profited and
edified by it in a spiritual Life. and as God sees we are diligent and faithful
to work with the Strength we have, he will more and more enlighten us, so that
we shall see to the End of those Forms and Shadows of Religion wherein we have
formerly lived; but if he sees we are about to take up our Rest in those
Shadows, that we grow cold and indifferent in the Pursait of Holiness, running
out into Notions and Speculations, and have more Mind to dispute, and to make a
Show of Learning and Subtilty, than to lead a holy and devout Life, then it is
just with God to leave us in a carnal and polluted State, to continue yet but
in the outward Court, where we may please our selves with beholding the Beauty
and Ornaments of a worldly Sanctuary, and never witness the Veil being taken
away, and that we are brought by the Blood of Jesus into the Holiest of all,
where alone there is true Peace with God, and Rest to the weary Soul. I could
say much upon this Head, if Time or Leisure would give Leave.

As for a particular Answer to thy Letter, I have not Time now to give it; and
for the present let this general Answer suffice: And if thou will consider
Things in their pure abstracted Nature, and not suffer the Prejudice of
Education to sway thee, but in Fear and Humility wilt search out the Truth for
thy ^^lf, thou will find that there needs no other Answer to thy Letter tha^
that I have already given; for by waiting upon God, and diligently se^ing him,
thou will find Answer to it in thy own Bosom, and this will be much more full,
clear, and satisfactory than I, or any other Man living can pretend to give
thee, or any other Friend who has lovingly wrote to me, for whom I desire,
with all the sincere-hearted in the Church of England, that they may come to
witness the Almighty Power of God, to save and redeem them from every Yoke; and
that they may see clearly to the End of those Things which are abolished, and
come to the Enjoyment of spiritual and heavenly Things themselves, is the daily
Prayer and deep Travel of my Soul, God knows. 'Till I can be more particular,
if thou please thou may communicate this to them, and let them know that I
am well, and thank them for their kind Letters. Let us remember to pray for one
another with all Fervency, that we may Hand perfect in the whole Will of God,
Amen, says my Soul. I am thy most affectionate Friend and Servant in Jesus,

Samuel Crisp.


The following Letter or Account of one Evan J^vans is also remarkable;

SINCE it has pleased the Divine Goodness to ^ndu^ me with Redson, E. Jevans's
Account of his Change.
I heartily thank his most excellent Majesty, that it has been the further
Product of his good Will to give me Life and Being in that Part of the World,
where I have had the Freedom to use it; especially in the Choice of my
Persuasion, and Way of returning my Acknowledgments to him. I wish that all,
who make any Pretensions to Religion, would make Use of this noble Faculty with
Subjection to the Divine Will, to determine their Choice in this grand Affair;
and not let the Religion of their Education be that of their Judgment. If
People were thus truly wise unto their own Salvation, and did not too lazily
resign thmselves to the Conduct of their Guide, thereby regarding more their
Ease than Safety, they would not only be the better able to give a Reason of
the Hope that is in them, but they would show more Warmth in their Devotion,
more Charity in their Religion, and more Piety in their Conversation than at
present they do.

When I was visited some Time ago by the chastising Hand of the Lord for Sin,
and my Disobedience to his holy Will, I labored under great Affliction of Mind
and Anguish of Spirit; and though I was constant above many in my Attendance on
the public Prayers of the Church, strict in my Observation of its Ceremonies,
and exceeding frequent in the Use of private Devotion, yet my Barden increased,
and I waxed worse.

In this wretched and doleful Condition I was, when at a Relation's House, who
had providentially returned from Pennsylvania to his native Country, I lighted
upon R. Bar^lay's Apology for the Quakers; by the Reading whereof I was so we^l
persuaded of their Principles, and by turning my Mind inward to the divine
G^^t, (according to their D^^trine) it gave me Victory in a great Measure, over
our common Enemy, banished away my disorderly Imaginations, and restored me to
my former Regularity: I received such Satisfaction and Comfort to my distressed
Soul, that thereupon I left the Church of England, and joined my self in
Society with them; and I am the more confirmed in my Change, especially where
it respects the Worship of our Creator, because it is not only the most
agreeable to the Scriptures of John iv 23, 24. Romans viii 26, 27 Lam. xxv. 26
Ps. xxvii. 14. x. 17 Ephesians. vi. 18 Jude 20, and
Truth, but Heaven has given us Assurance of its Approbation thereof, it having
been at Times, to my own Experience, most powerfully attended with the Presence
of the Most High.

I hope none will begrudge me this Mercy, because I received it not by their
Ministry; if they do, I have Cause to suspect their Charity is not of a
Christian Latitude, since our blessed Redeemer approved not of that Narrowness
in his Disciples in somewhat a like Case.

But here to obviate the Objection some may make to my Change, because of the
Distress I lay under, and the Discomposure I was subject to at Times, I would
have (...) remarked, that I read the said Apology beyond my Expectation, with
more Sedateness than usual, and a more quiet Composure of Mind: So that with
the Influence of the Almighty, or Providence, or both, I had also the Benefit
of that distinguishing Faculty of Man in the Change of my Opinion. O that I may
never forget the Lord's Mercy to my Soul, who had Compassion on me when I
wallowed in my blood, and who said to the dry Bones, Live. O that all such as
are visited by the chastising Hand of their Maker, would seriously lay it to
Heart, and consider their own Welfare and Salvation; I could with with all my
Heart, that such who labor under this Anxiety of Mind, would take
Encouragement to hope in the Lord's Mercy through their blessed Redeemer, by his
Kindness and long Forbearance with me. I am a living Monument of it now; and I
hope I shall be so, while he affords me a Being here. If these Lines should
come to the Hands of any that are afflicted and distressed as I was, I have an
effectual Remedy, through Mercy, to prescribe unto them; Turn your Minds inward
to the Grace of God in your own Hearts, refrain from your own Imaginations, be
still, and quietly resign your selves to his holy Will, so you shall and Health
to your Souls, Refreshm^nt to your Spirits, and the sweet Consolation of the
Lord in your own B^soms; you shall find your Mourning turned to Gladness, and
your Heaviness to Joy; this has been my Experience of the Go^dness of the Holy
One of Israel, who a^hor^ Si^ and Iniquity; therefore I recommend it to you,
and I think this is no mistrusting of the Cause for they are the sick and
wounded in Spirit, not the Whole, that need the Physician.

As for renouncing the Covenant which I and every Christian ought to be under,
of forsaking the Devil and all his Works, I am so far from entertaining one
Thought of neglecting that Duty, that I think my self wholly obliged to observe
it: And if I should affirm, that through the Grace of God, and his Assistance,
(for otherwise I am satisfied I cannot do it,) the Observation of it is
possible, I can find no Reason why it should ^e false Doctrine in a Quaker,
more than in a Churchman.

As for Deserting the Church and Ministry which the Son of God came down from
Heaven to establish, I am not conscious to my self thereof; for I say, Christ
himself is the Head of our Church, and by his Spirit and Grace the Ordainer of
our Ministry.

And as to the last Qu^ry my ingenious Acquaintance is pleased to propose, I do
let him know, that my former Despair and forlorn Condition has been, since my
adhering to that reproached People, changed into a sweet Enjoyment of the
Goodness of God. I could not conceal the Lord's Goodness, left he should
withdraw his Mercies from me.

I had no secular Interest to corrupt me in this Change, it is apparent to
many, I declined it; but as it was Peace with God my Maker, and Mercy to my
Soul I wanted; so having found the Pearl of great Price among them, I parted
with all to purchase it; or rather I was restored to all, I mean, the Enjoyment
of the Divine Goodness, and of my self, by setting a due Value upon it.


From this Account it appears that the Writer thereof aimed at nothing in his
Change of Religion, but the Quietness of his Mind, and the Salvation of his
Soul.

Now I am to mention, 1710
that the Queen in the Year 1710, in her Speech to the Parliament, The Queen
renews her Promise to maintain the Toleration.
having again declared that she would maintain the Toleration and Liberty of
Conscience, was addressed by many; wherefore the People called Quakers esteemed
it their Duty to show also their grateful Acknowledgment of this Favor, which
they did by the following Address;

To Queen ANNE, of Great Britain, etc.
The Humble and Thankful Address of the Queen's Protestant Subjects, the People
called Quakers, in and about the City of London, on Behalf of themselves, and
the Rest of their Persuasion.
WHEN we consider the Queen's Royal Regard to protect our Religious Liberty,
Quakers Address thereupon.
and the fresh Assurance from the Throne of her Christian Resolution, to
maintain the Indulgence by Law allowed to scrupulous Consciences, and her
^ender Care that the same may be transmitted to Posterity in the Protestant
Succession in the House of Hanover, we find our selves concerned gratefully to
acknowledge her Goodness therein, and the ready Concurrence of her great
Council therewith.

Taking this Occasion to assure the Queen of our Duty and Affection, and
peaceable Behavior under her Government, ^s is our Principle, and has always
been our Practice.

And we heartily desire our Fellow Subjects may ^ay aside all Animo^ities, and
in a Spirit of Love and Meekness, endeavor to outdo each other in Virtue and
universal Charity.

That it may graciously please Almighty God to defend and bless thee, (O Queen)
and guide thee by his Counsel in a long and prosperous Reign here, and
afterward receive thee to Glory, is the hearty Prayer of thy Faithful Subjects.

To this Address the Queen was pleased to answer;

I thank you for your Address, Queen's (...) ^aver.
and ye may depend upon my Protection.

The Animosities mentioned in this Address, did regard the Division, which
having been a good while among the Subjects, began to increase, as many thought
by the Change of the Ministry. But this being out of my Province, I will not
meddle with it.

In the Year 1712 died Richard Cromwell, 1712 Death of R. Cromwell
the Son of Oliver the Protector, about the Age of ninety Years. Great Changes
this Man had seen, having himself been the supreme Ruler of England, as has
been mentioned in due Place.

Although I do not intend to relate much more of any Occurrences, because I
hasten toward a Conclusion, yet I think it worth the while to add the
following Case;

In the Year 1713, 1713 Justice Penry prosecuted on the Act against Occasional
Conformity.
in the Spring, there was a Suit at Law; on the Act against Occasional
Conformity. It happened that one John Penry, a Justice of Peace of Ailborough,
in the County of Suffolk, going to the Parish Church, understood by the Way,
that no Service was to be done there at that Time; but hearing that there was a
Quakers Meeting there, he went to it. One Wall, the Bailiff of the Place, being
informed thereof, imagined that the said Justice might not go there, because of
the aforesaid Act, and therefore thinking that something might be gained by it,
got Witnesses to declare that the said Justice had been in the Meeting; and
said afterward in a boasting Way to him, Now I have book'd you. To which the
other replied, I Will stand to it. The Bailiff then entered his Suit in the Name
of one that lived thereabouts by Charity. When the Case was pleaded at the
Sessions, the Judge, who was Baron Salath^el Lovel, declared the Meaning of the
forementioned Act to be thus, viz. That it did not regard any who accidentally
went into a Meeting of Dissenters; but that it was against those who conformed
with the Church, thereby to qualify themselves for an Office, without changing
their Religion. But this was Quite another Case; for the Priest of the Parish
himself, gave a Certificate that the said Justice was a good Member of the
Church. From hence it appeared that this Suit was mere Malice; and the
Informers or Witnesses were brought to that Pinch, that they durst not expect
the Verdict of the Jury, for fear that they should have been condemned to pay
the Charges; and therefore they let the Thing fall. Being now entered into this
Year, I cannot omit to say, that a Peace between England and France being
concluded, and the Subjects from all Parts of the Nation congratulating the
Queen with Addresses, the Quakers did not omit also to present an Address;
being as follows;

To ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc.
The Humble Address of Her Protestant Dissenting Subjects, called Quakers, met
at our Annual Meeting in London, the 3d Day of the 4th Month, called June, 1713.
May it please the Queen,
WE having been sorrowfully affected at the Calamity which War brought on
Europe, Address on (...) Peace
cannot omit to express our Satisfaction and Gladness for the Queen's great
Care and Christian Concern, for establishing so long desired a Peace.

We are also under a dutiful Sense of the Queen's Gracious Government and
Compassion manifested toward tender Consciences at home, as well as noble and
Christian Interposition, in Favor of persecuted Protestants abroad.

And farther crave leave to assure the Queen, that we shall, as in Duty bound,
approve our Selves, in all Humility and Faithfulness, the Queen's obedient
Subjects, and though but a small Part of those that enjoy, under thy mild
Government, Protection in Religion and Civil Liberties; we cannot but earnestly
pray for, and desire the Quiet and Safety of our Country; which evidently
appears to be the Queen's Care to establish, in having done so much for
securing the Protestant Interest, and maintaining perfect Friendship with the
House of Hanover. That it may please Almighty God in his Mercy and Goodness to
assist with his Wisdom the Queen, in all her Councils, and give her long to
enjoy the quiet Fruit of lasting Peace in this Life, and in that which is to
come Joy, and Peace everlasting, is our hearty and fervent Prayer.

This Address, which chiefly contained an Assurance of Fidelity to the Queen,
yet was accepted favorably.

In the next Year, 1714
being that of 1714, the Queen was often ill, and there was much Division among
the People: For a Bill was brought into Parliament called, An Act to prevent
the Growth of Schism; and the Party that prevailed then was very active to get
this Bill passed. And since if tended to deprive the Dissenters from keeping
Schools, and to allow that Liberty to none but Members of the Episcopal Church,
or at least to no Body but who had License from them, it met with great
Opposition, and many Reasons against i^ were published; and the People called
Quakers offered also to the Legislature the following Reasons against it;

I. THe Church of England has frequently declared, Quakers Reasons against the
Bill to prevent the Growth of Schism.
by several of her Members, in a Clerical, as well as Civil Capacity, by those
who framed and espoused one or more of the Bills against Occasional Conformity,
That She is in Principle against Persecution, and for Preserving the Toleration.

II. The Promoters of this Bill may please to remember, that the Queen has
declared from the Throne, That She will Maintain the Toleration inviolable.

III. The Protestant Subjects of this Kingdom, who are Parents of Children, are
supposed to have preserved to them, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
the Natural Right if the Care and Direction of the Education of their own
Children; which Natural Right this Bill seems calculated to take away and
destroy.

IV. If the Governments, which are now either Heathen or Mohammedan, should take
into the same Policy, the Society which the Queen has incorporated for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, can have very little, if any good
Effect or Success.

V. May it not seem an Objection and Contradiction to the many Princely and
Christian Solicitations which the Queen by her Ministers has made at Foreign
Courts, on the Behalf of Protestants, against the violent Intrusions of Papists
into their Rights and just Privileges?

VI. It may be a Means to oblige the carrying out of large Sums of Money for
Foreign Education.

VII. It may probably do much Hurt to Charitable Foundations.

VIII. It seems not to be agreeable to that great Law of Christ, Matt. vii. 12.
Therefore all Things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even
so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.

But whatever was objected, the said Bill at length passed, and was confirmed
with the Royal Assent, which gave Occasion to the Quakers to add in the
Conclusion of the printed Epistle of their Annual Assembly at London, the
following Caution and Exhortation: There seems at present to hang over us a
Cloud, threatening a Storm. Let us all watch and pray, Isa xxxiii 1^
and retire to our Munition and strong Hold in our Spiritual Rock and
Foundation, which stands sure; that our God may defend, help and bless us as
his peculiar People, to the End of our Days and Time here, and the full
Fruition of the heavenly Kingdom and Glory hereafter.

About Midsummer this Year died Sophia, The Death of the Princess Sophia about
Midsummer And of Queen Anne on the first of the Month called August.
Widow and Electoral Princess of Brunswick Lunenburg, on whom the Succession of
the Crown of Great Britain was settled. Scarce two Months after her Demise,
Queen Anne deceased, who after having languished a long Time, at length was
taken away by Death on the first of August, the self-same Day that the Act
against the Growth of Schism was to have taken Effect.

The same Day George Prince Elector of Brunswick Lunenburg, was proclaimed King
of Great Britain; King George proclaimed Declares he will maintain the
Toleration.
who some Time after repairing to England, made his Entry at London on the 20th
of September. Not long after his Arrival he declared in Council, that he would
maintain the Toleration in favor of the Protestant Dissenters. Hereupon many
Addresses of Congratulation were presented to him, and on the Third of October
the People called Quakers also offered their Address, which was delivered by G.
Whitehead, and about Forty of his Friends, introduced by the Lord Townsend, one
of the Principal Secretaries of State. The Prince was not only present, but
many of the Nobles, and others also; and G. Whitehead presenting the Address to
the King, said, We are come in Behalf of the People called Quakers, to present
to King George our Address and Acknowledgement: May it be favorably accepted.
Being then presented, G. Whitehead said, One of us may read it to the King.
Whereupon he receiving it again, delivered it to Joseph Wyeth, who read it
audibly, being as follows:

To GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. The Humble Address of the People
commonly called Quakers.
Great Prince,
IT having pleased Almighty God to deprive these Kingdoms of our late Gracious
Queen, Address to K George
We do in great Humility approach Thy Royal Presence with Hearts truly thankful
to Divine Providence for thy safe Arrival, with the Prince thy Son: And for thy
Happy and Uninterrupted Accession to the Crown of these Realms; which is the
universal Joy of Thy Faithful Subjects, has secured to Thy People the
Protestant Succession, and dissipated the just Apprehensions We were ^^der, of
losing those Religious and Civil Liberties, which were granted to Us by Law, in
the Reign of King William III. whose Memory we mention with great Gratitude and
Affection. We are also in Duty obliged thankfully to acknowledge Thy Early and
Gracious Declaration in Council, wherein Thou have, in Princely and Christian
Expressions, manifested Thy just Sense of the State of Thy People, and which we
hope will make all Degrees of thy Subjects easy.

And as it has been our known Principle to Live peaceably under Government; so
We hope it will always be our Practice through God's Assistance, to approve our
selves with hearty Affection, Thy faithful and dutiful Subjects.

May the Wonderful Counselor and great Preserver of Men, guide the King by his
Divine Wisdom; protect Him by his Power; give Him Health, and Length of Days
here, and eternal Felic^^y hereafter. And so bless his Royal Offspring, that
They may never fail to adorn the Throne, with a Successor endowed with Piety
and Virtue.

To this Address the King was pleased to give this gracious Answer,

I am well satisfied with the Marks of Duty you express in your Address, His
Answer.
and you may be assured of my Protection.

The Address being read, G. Whitehead spoke to this Effect;

Thou art welcome to us, G. Whitehead's Speech to the King.
King George; we heartily wish Thee Health and Happiness, and thy Son the
Prince also. King William III. was a happy Instrument in putting a Stop to
Persecution by promoting Toleration, which being intended for the uniting the
King's Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection, it has so for that
Effect, as to make them more kind to one another, even among the differing
Persuasions, than they were when Persecution was on Foot. We desire the King
may have further Knowledge of us and our Innocence; and that to live a
peaceable and quiet Life in all Godliness and Honesty, under the King and his
Government, is according to our Principle and Practice.

G. Whitehead having thus spoken, his Name was asked; whereupon he answered,
George Whitehead. And having it upon his Mind to see the Prince also, and
intimating his Desire to a Lord who was Gentleman to the Prince's Bedchamber,
he made Way to it: And thus G. Whitehead, with some of his Friends got Access;
and they were introduced by one of the Prince's Gentlemen into a Chamber, where
the Prince met them; and then G. Whitehead spoke to him, the Substance of which
was as follows:

We take it as a Favor that we are thus admitted to see the Prince of Wales,
His Speech to the Prince.
and truly are very glad to see Thee; having delivered our Address to the King
thy Royal Father, and being desirous to give Thy self a Visit in true Love, we
very heartily wish Health and Happiness to you both; and that if it should
please God Thou should survive thy Father, and come to the Throne, Thou
may enjoy Tranquillity and Peace, etc.

I am persuaded, that if the King thy Father and Thy self do stand for the
Toleration for Liberty of Conscience to be kept inviolable, God will stand by
you.

May King Solomon 's Cho^ of Wisdom be thy Choice, with Holy Job 's Integrity,
and Compassion to the Oppressed; and the State of the righteous Ruler commended
by King David, 2 Samuel xxiii. 3, 4.
viz. He that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of God; and he
shall be as the Light of the Morning when the Sun rises, even a Morning
without Clouds, as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining
after Rain.

This Speech was favorably heard by the Prince.

It was not long after the King's coming over, Death of Dr. Burnet, Bishop of
Salisbury.
that Dr. Gilbert Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, the renowned Author of the
History of the Reformation in England, died. He generally had showed himself
moderate, and had written very plainly against Persecution in Matters of Faith,
especially in his Apology for the Church of England, first printed in Holland
in the Year 1688, and afterward also in England, wherein among other Things he
said, He had written against Persecution.
I will not deny but many of the Dissenters were put to great Hardships in many
Parts of England; I cannot deny it, and I am sure I will never justify it --
And I will boldly say this, That if the Church of England, after she is got out
of this Storm, will return to hearken to the Peevishness of some sour Men, she
will be abandoned both of God and Man, and will set both Heaven and Earth
against her.

The Year being come to an End, 1715 The Term of the Quakers Affirmation
I go on to that of 1715. In the Month called May it was moved in Parliament,
that the Term of the Act for the Quakers Solemn Affirmation was almost expired;
and thereupon it was resolved, that a Bill should be brought in to prolong that
said Term; and on the 7th of the said Month a Bill was accordingly brought into
the House of Commons, being near expired, the same is perpetuated, and extended
to Scotland, and the American Plantations for five Years.
read the first Time, and five Days after, the second Time, and committed. And
whereas the former Act was limited to a Term of Years, this Limitation was
omitted now, and consequently the Act was to be perpetual. The Bill thus far
advanced, was at length engrossed, and on the second of the Month called June,
after a third Reading, passed in the House of Commons, and was sent to the
Lords, from whence it was sent back with this Addition, That this Favor should
be extended also to the Northern Part of Great Britain, known by the Name of
Scotland, and to the Plantations belonging to the Crown of Great Britain for
five Years (for so far the former Act had not reached) and to the End of next
Sessions of Parliament.

This Amendment was agreed to by the House of Commons on the 13th of the said
Month, and on the last of that Month it was confirmed by the Royal Assent. Thus
the Quakers were protected anew against the heavy Shock which otherwise they
might have expected on the Refusal of an Oath. King George on all Occasions
having shown himself favorable unto them, they did not omit thankfully to
acknowledge his Kindness, as appears from the General Epistle of their Annual
Assembly, where they expressed their Gratitude in these Words;

The Lord our God, who for the Sake of his Heritage has often heretofore
rebuked and limited the raging Waves of the Sea, has, blessed be his Name,
mercifully dispersed the Cloud threatening a Storm, which lately seemed to hang
over us; which together with the Favor God has given us in the Eyes of the
King, and the Government, for the free Enjoyment of our Religious and Civil
Liberties, call for true Thankfulness to him. And humbly to pray to Almighty
God for the King and those in Authority, for his and their Safety and Defense,
is certainly our Christian Duty, as well as to walk inoffensively as a grateful
People.

Thus they signified their Thankfulness for the Favor they enjoyed. The
Rebellion at Preston, somented by some hotheaded Clergymen, suppressed by the
King's Forces
But seeing from the first Grant of an Affirmation instead of an Oath, the Form
then obtained was not entirely such as was desired, and many were not easy
therewith; They several Times applied to the Parliament for a more easy Form,
which at length, through the merciful Providence of God, and the Favor of King
George and the Parliament, was obtained in the latter End of the Year 1721. the
Form now being L A. B. do solemnly, sincerely, and truly (...) and affirm, etc
And as they did now enjoy Liberty and Quiet, so the other Subjects were also
maintained in their Rights under a gentle Government, so that none had Cause to
fear, who behaved themselves like peaceable Subjects. And yet in many Places in
England were great Convulsions and Tumults; and some hotheaded Clergymen were
not a little instrumental therein; whereupon an open Rebellion ensued; but the
Rebels were defeated near Preston by the King's Forces.

Before I conclude this Year, The Death of the French King Lewis XIV.
I am to say that the French King Lewis XIV. did not live to see the End of it,
but on the first of September, N.S. after having long languished by a malignant
Distemper, died in the 77th Year of his Age, having before appointed his
Brother's Son the Duke of Orleans Regent of the Kingdom of France.

This Death seemed not a little to have altered the Measures of the Pretender;
1716 The Pretender lands in Scotland, but is routed, and returns to France
nevertheless in the Beginning of the Year 1716 he came over from France to
Scotland in hopes to make an Inroad from thence into England; but his Attempt
miscarried, and his Forces were discomfited by those of the King. The common
Opinion was, that he chiefly relied on Assistance from France; but that was
denied him by that Court, though he seemed to have reckoned upon it. He also
lingered some Time in Great Britain, after his Forces were defeated; but seeing
no Way to invade the Throne he aimed at, he returned at length to France, which
Kingdom he has been fain to depart since, to the Joy of many Inhabitants of
England: For it was thought that the Rebel^ being deprived of their Chief, the
Disturbance would be at an End.

This Rebellion being thus happily quenched, induced the Inhabitants of Great
Britain to congratulate the King with Addresses; and these Congratulations
being become so general, the People called Qukers were not wanting to prepare
also an Address, to testify their Loyalty; and to express their Joy for the
Quelling of the Rebellion; and therefore in their Yearly Meeting they drew up
an Address, which they presented to the King on the last Day of the Month
called May, being introduced by the Earl of Manchester, one of the Gentlemen of
the King's Bedchamber, when G. Whitehead said in Substance;

That in their Annual Assembly held for the Religious Concerns of their
Society, G. Whitehead's Speech at the Delivery of an Address from the Yearly
Meeting on the Suppression of the Rebellion.
endeavoring to promote and put in Practice the Duties of Religion professed
by them, the Sense of the Great Deliverance had such a Weight upon their Minds,
that they were willing to express it in an Address to King George, whom God by
his Providence had brought hither and preserved, so that he could well say, he
was George by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, etc. And that as Men
carried that Saying stamped on the Money in their Pockets, so it was to be
wished it might be imprinted in the Hearts of the Subjects.

Hereupon the Address was presented, and read to the King, being as follows;

To GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc.
The Humble Address of the People called Quakers, from their Yearly Meeting in
London, the 26th Day of the third Month called May, 1716.
May it please the KING,
WE thy Faithful and Peaceable Subjects, The Address.
being met in this our Annual Assembly, do hold our selves obliged in Point of
Principle and Gratitude, rather than by formal and frequent Addresses, humbly
and openly to acknowledge the manifold Blessings and kind Providence of God,
which have attended these Kingdoms ever since thy happy Accession to the Throne.

And as our Religion effectually enjoins us Obedience to the Supreme Authority,
so it is with great Satisfaction that we pay it to a Prince, whose Justice,
Clemency and Moderation cannot but ^ndear, and firmly unite the Hearts and
Affections of all his true Protestant Subjects.

We are therefore sorrowfully affected with the Unhappiness of those our
Countrymen who have so little Gratitude or Goodness, as to be uneasy under so
just and mild an Administration: Nor can we reflect on the late unjust and
unnatural Rebellion, without concluding the Promoters thereof, and Actors
therein, were Men infatuated, and hurried by such an Evil Spirit, as would lay
waste and destroy both the Civil and Religious Liberties of these Protestant
Nations.

And as God, the Lord of Hosts, has most signally appeared to the Confounding
that Black Conspiracy, so We pray his Good Providence may always attend the
King's Councils and Undertakings, to the establishing his Throne in
Righteousness and Peace, and making his House a sure House.

Permit us therefore, Great Prince, to lay hold of this Opportunity to approach
Thy Royal Presence, with Our Hearty Thanks to the King and his Great Council,
for all the Privileges and Liberties We enjoy. To behold a Prince upon the
Throne, solicitous for the Ease and Happiness of his People beyond my other
Views, so heightens our Satisfaction and Joy, that We want Words to express our
full Sense thereof. And therefore We can do no less than assure the King, That
as it is our Duty to demean our selves toward the King's Person and Government
with all faithful Obedience, so we are determined, by Divine Assistance,
devoutly and heartily to pray the God and Father of all our Mercies, To
vouchsafe unto the King a Long, Peaceable and Prosperous Reign: And that when
it shall please the Almighty to remove from Us so precious a Life, by taking it
to Himself, there may not want a Branch of Thy Royal Family endowed with Wisdom
and Virtue to fill the Throne, till Time shall be no more.

To this Address the King was pleased to give this Gracious Answer.

I thank you for the Assurance of Duty and Affection to my Person and
Government, The King's Answer.
contained in this Address; and you may always depend upon my Protection.

Thus we again s;ee a Prince on the Throne, who solemnly assures the Quakers
so called, of his Protection; so that now they enjoy the due Liberty of
Subjects that behave themselves peaceably and dutifully under the Government
set over them, in like Manner as other Inhabitants of Great Britain: And
therefore they have not neglected to exhort one another to show their
Thankfulness to Almighty God, and to pray for the King, as it has been
intimated already, that this was recommended in one of the Epistles of their
Yearly Meeting. Now since mention has several Times been made in this History
of those Epistles of the Annual Assembly to the particular Churches, I have
thought fit to insert here one of them, viz. that of the Year 1717, 1717
which is as follows:

The Epistle from the Yearly Meeting in London, Held, by Adjournment, from the
10th Day of the Fourth Month, to the 14th of the same, inclusive, 1717. To the
Quarterly and Monthly Meetings of Friends, in Great Britain and elsewhere.
OUR Salutation in the Love of Christ Jesus our blessed Lord, Salutation to
Friends
is freely extended unto you, whose tender Care over, and Mercy to this our
Annual Assembly, we do humbly and thankfully acknowledge, in the Love, Amity,
tender Condescension and peaceable Procedure thereof, with Respect to the
Divine Power and Goodness of the Lord our God, and the Service of his Church
and People; sincerely desiring the Prosperity of his whole Heritage, even in
all the Churches of Christ among us, in his dear Love, Unity and Peace, to his
Eternal Glory, and our universal Comfort and perpetual Joy in the Kingdom of
the dear Son of God.

We are truly comforted, A general Concurrence among Friends
in that we understand there is such a general Concurrence and Union among
Friends, with our former earnest Desires and Council, for true and universal
Love, Unity, Peace and good Order, to be earnestly endeavored and maintained
among us, as a peculiar People, chosen of the Lord out of the World, to bear a
faithful Testimony to his holy Name and Truth, in all Respects; and that all
that is contrary be watched against and avoided; as Strife, Discord,
Contention, and Disputes tending to Divisions, may be utterly suppressed and
laid aside, as the Light and righteous Judgment of Truth require.

Oh! that all the Churches and Congregations of the Faithful, would be excited
by the Spirit of the dear Son of God, fervently to pray for the Prosperity of
his Church and People throughout the World, Excited to pray for the Prosperity
of the Church.
that Sion may more and more shine in the Beauty of Holiness, to the Glory and
Praise of the King of Glory.

The Friends and Brethren come up from the several Quarterly-Meetings in this
Nation, An Account of Truth's Prosperity.
have given a good Account to this Meeting of Truth's Prosperity, and that
Friends are generally in Love and Unity one with another, and by several
Epistles from Friends of North Carolina, Jersey, Pennsilvania, Maryland,
Barbados, Holland, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, which have been read in this
Meeting; as also by verbal Accounts, given by several Friends that have lately
traveled in diverse Parts of America, and elsewhere, we have received
comfortable Accounts of the State of Truth and Friends in those Parts; by which
we are encouraged to hope Truth prevails in many Places, and a Concern grows
upon Friends for the Prosperity thereof; and that there is an Inclination in
People, to hear the Truth declared.

By the Accounts brought up this Year, Friends Sufferings.
We find that Friends Sufferings in England and Wales amount to five Thousand
two Hundred and Ninty Pounds and upwards, chiefly for Tithes, Priests Wages,
and Steeple-House Rates; and that notwithstanding there have been four Friends
discharged the last Year, there yet remain twenty Friends Prisoners on these
Accounts.

We advise, Advice to be faithful in a Testimony against Tithes.
That a tender Care remain upon Friends in all Places to be faithful in keeping
up our Christian Testimony against Tithes, as being fully persuaded, it is that
whereunto God has called his People in this our Day; we seeing by daily
Experience, That such as are not faithful therein, do thereby add to the
Sufferings of honest Friends, and hinder their own Growth and Prosperity in the
most blessed Truth.

As touching The Education of Friends Children, A Concern for the Education of
Friends Children.
for which this Meeting has often found a Concern; We think it our Duty to
recommend unto you, the Necessity that there is of a Care in preserving of them
in Plainness of Speech and Habit, suitable to our holy Profession: And also,
that no Opportunity be omitted, nor any Endeavor wanting, to instruct them in
the Principle of Truth which we profess, that thereby they, being sensible of
the Operation thereof in themselves, may find, not only their Spirits softened
and tendered, fit to receive the Impressions of the Divine Image, but may also
from thence find themselves under a Necessity to appear clear in the several
Branches of our Christian Testimony. And as this will be most beneficial to
them, being the Fruits of Conviction; so it is the most effectual Way of
propagating the same throughout the Churches of Christ. And there being Times
and Seasons wherein their Spirits are (more than at others) disposed to have
those Things impressed upon them; so we desire that all Parents and others
concerned in the Oversight of Youth, might wait in the Fear of God, to know
themselves divinely qualified for that Service that in his Wisdom they may make
Use of every such Opportunity, which the Lord shall put into their Hands. And
we do hereby warn and advise Friends in all Places to flee every Appearance of
Evil, and keep out of Pride, and following the Vain Fashions and Customs of
this World, as recommended in the Epistle 1715.

And as we always found it our Concern to recommend Love, Concord and Unity in
the Churches of Christ every where, Love and Unity recommended
so as a Means to effect the same, We earnestly desire that Friends, but more
especially such as are concerned in Meetings of Business, do labor to know
their own Spirits subjected by the Spirit of Truth, that thereby being Baptized
into our Body, they may be truly One in the Foundation of their Love and Unity,
and that therein they may all labor to find a Nearness to each other in
Spirit; this being the true Way to a thorough Reconciliation, whenever there is
or may have been any Difference of Apprehension: Thereby Friends wi^ be
preserved in that Sweetness of Spirit, that is and will be the Bond of true
Peace throughout all the Churches of Christ.

And, A Geneva Contribution recommended
Dear Friends, the Friends of this Meeting, to whom the Inspection of the
Accounts was referred, made Report, That having perused the same, they found
the Stock to be near expended; whereupon this Meeting thinks it necessary to
recommend unto you, That a General and Free Contribution be made in every
County, and that what shall be thereupon collected, be sent (...) to the
respective Correspondents.

Finally, Exhortation to walk unblame able toward all Men.
Dear Friends and Brethren, be careful to walk unblameable in Love and Peace
among your selves, and toward all Men in Christian Charity, and be humbly
thankful to the Lord our most gracious God, for the Favor he hatn given us in
the Eyes of the King and Civil Government, in the Peaceable Enjoyment of our
Religious and Christian Liberties under them; and the God of Peace (We trust)
will will be with you to the End.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirits. Amen.

Signed in and on the Behalf, and by the Order of his Meeting By Benjamin
Bealing.


From this Epistle may be judged in some Degree of the others, which are sent
from the Yearly Meeting of the People called Quakers to the particular Meetings
of their Society every where. We see by it that they give Notice of the State
of their particular Churches, and that they earnestly recommend Love and Unity
among their Brethren, with other Christian Virtues and especially a good
Education of their Children, besides other Matters which they judge to be meet
and necessary. With this Epistle here inserted, Conclusion of the History.
I Will finish this Work, as having performed my Design and Intention, viz. the
giving of a plain and circumstan^ial Account and Relation of the Rise of this
Religious Society, which, as we have seen, sprung from mean Beginnings, to a
great ^^crease and Progress, and extended it self far, notwithstanding the
violent Opposition, and most grievous Severity, for suppressing and rooting
them out, so often put in Practice, and committed by their Enemies, but all in
vain, and they now enjoy an undisturbed Liberty to perform the public Exercise
of their Worship to God, since their Religion i^ permitted by Law; which
Liberty they in no wise have obtained by making Resistance, but by a
long-suffering Patience, a Peaceable Deportment, and a dutiful Fidelity to the
Government set over them; so that now they see clearly, that God does not
forsake those that don't forsake him, according to what the Prophet Azariah
formerly said to King Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. xv. 2. The Lord
is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you:
But if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Having thus performed what I
intended with this Historical Relation, I conclude it, to the Praise and Glory
of the most High, who has afforded me Lifetime and Ability, after a long and
difficult Labor, to bring this History to a suitable.

END.
ADDENDA.
The Author, toward the Conclusion of this History, having given some Account
of the Principles of the People called Quakers, thought fit in the Dutch
Appendix, (amomg other Things) to add the following Treatise in Latin
concerning the Light, written about the Year 1662. And since in this English
Translation, the subject Matters contained in the said Appendix, are informed
in the Body of the History, in those Places to which they prop^^y be^^^^ (...)
no Reference being made to This, but as mentioned in the Preface, it is thought
fit to subjoin it here, with the following Words of the Author prefixed to the
same,

IN the Preface to this History, Mention is made of a certain Book entitled,
The Light upon the Candlestick, published in the Name (as many supposed) of
William Ames, yet no ways writ by him, though it contains his Doctrine, but by a
certain Learned Man, unwilling to be known publicly, and as it seems to me
writ originally in Latin; which, though printed, being in but few Hands, I have
thought fit to reprint.

And the Original in Latin soon after the first Publication being translated
into English by B. F. was printed in the Year 1663, from which Translation take
it as follows, viz.

The Light upon the Candlestick.
THings are not for Words, but Words for Things: If therefore we understand
Things aright, and as they ought, by Words, it must be by such as are fit to
imprint the Things themselves in those to whom they should occur, and then it
were enough (to make known our Thoughts to others as we conceive them) only to
make use of such Words.

But forasmuch as we find the Matter in this Case far otherwise, and that two
Men speaking or writing the same Words, may nevertheless have different, yea,
sometimes contrary Thoughts, the Disability of performing this fitly by Words
or Discourse is clearly inferred. Nor may we at all wonder at it, seeing we
know to what a perpetual Change Languages are subject, even such, that the very
Words may be changed from their pristine Signification. And the Imperfection is
so great, that whosoever should have invented them, such as now they are in
Use, we should certainly believe that he had little or no Knowledge of those
Things that are thereby intended to be signified. So that if we would better
express Things unto another by Words and Speeches, we had need find new Words,
and consequently a whole new Language: But that would be a Toil and Labor
indeed.

In the mean while we see what a Sea of Confusion flows from hence upon all
Mankind: For although there should be none, who sometimes through Ignorance, and
sometimes by Subtilty or Wickedness might wrest or pervert Words contrary to
the Mind of the Speaker or Writer, in such Manner as themselves that so do
should think best for their own Ends, from whence consequently all this Deceit,
Slandering, Contention, and the like proceeds; yet so it is, that how uprightly
or prudently soever a Man goes to Work in this Matter, he nevertheless finds
himself liable to mislead, or to be mi^^ed.

But although the Case be thus with Words and Discourses at present in Use, yet
for all that, they are the most ready, and so far as I know, the fittest Means
to make known all our Thoughts unto others by: And for this Reason therefore,
though so much Confusion and Deceit happen to arise from hence, that no Man that
has any Experience can be ignorant thereof: Yet may we not (therefore) be too
much afraid of them neither, as many yet do manifest themselves to be, who
because they have some Experience hereof, are apt to believe we are about to
deceive them, especially if they be but forewarned thereof.

This, as in many Things, so it has chiefly taken Place in that which is
commonly esteemed for Religion: In which it is so with most Men, that they will
scarce give Audience to, much less take into Consideration any Thing held forth
unto them, by any whom they judge not to be of their own Opinion, as they
imagine, to avoid being thereby deluded.

Yet if they were thus toward their own Party, we might think it was an Act of
Prudence, and that they would see with their own Eyes: But no, in no wise, this
is too hard a Task: Whatsoever comes on that Side, is received with such
Partiality for good and current Coin, as if there were no Danger nor
Possibility of Erring: Whereas nevertheless it is all alike with the one as
with the other Opinion. It all depends but upon a Possibility of being nearest
to the Truth; And for the upholding every one his own Opinion, and defending it
against others, there is so much ado, so much Pains taken, so much Scholastic
Learning, Study and Disputing, that one would rather believe that there were no
true Religion at all, than that this should needs be it.

Seeing then it is thus at present, can we much blame the Common People, that
they despair of ever being able to solve this Difficulty, and are glad when
they can but find any that are greedy of the Work, upon whom they may cast the
whole Burden? Surely no: For he that sees but a little clearly, sees, that
there is always Contention behind, and no End till a Man grows weary of it: Nor
is the Conquest just his that has Truth, but that can best handle his Tongue.
A miserable Thing if it were thus to be fought and found! But it is not so with
the True Religion.

Go to then, O Man, whoever thou art, we will not draw thee off from one
Society of Men, to carry thee over unto another, it is somewhat else we invite
thee to. Lend us but a little Audience: Surely thou know thus much, That as
it is an Extremity to receive all Things without Distinction, that present
themselves to us; so it is no less to reject all Things without Judgment. We
invite thee to something which may be a Means whereby to attain to thy own
Salvation and Well-being: Be as distrustful, or rather prudent or foresighted
as thou will, thou can not in Reason refuse us thy Ear in this Thing: All the
Damage thou can possibly have by doing that which we exhort thee to, is only
to have taken a little Pains in vain, if that which is promised should not
succeed: Whereas on the contrary, if it should succeed, thou may come to the
Enjoyment of a Matter of so great Worth, that would not be exchanged for all
that is esteemed great in the Earth. Moreover, it is not far to seek, but at
hand, it is nigh thee, yea and in thy self. And there thou may experience the
Trial of that which we declare, which is the most certain and sure that can be
desired.

We direct thee then to within thy self, that is, that thou ought to turn
into, to mind and have Regard unto that which is within thee, to wit, The Light
of Truth, the true Light which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the
World. Here it is that thou must be, and not without thee. Here thou shall find
a Principle certain and infallible, and whereby increasing and going on
therein, thou may at length arrive unto a happy Condition: Of this thou
may safely adventure the Trial, But it thou dare not do so much, it is hard
to help thee. And if thou happenest to be one of those that would it know all
Things, before thou do begin, yea, even those Things which are experienced in
a Condition to which thou art so much a Stranger, that there is nothing in thee
has so much Agreement therewith, as to comprehend it according to Truth: Know
this, Thou do (therein) just as those that would learn to Read, without
knowing the Letters.

To desire to know all Things that we are capable of, is good and laudable: But
to go further, is Folly. There will be always something else to ask, and our
Knowledge will ever be too short. He that will not adventure till he be fully
satisfied, shall never begin, much less finish it to his own Salvation.

But we judge it needful, as much as in us lies, to open unto you that unto
which we do exhort you, that People may understand what it properly is.

We say then, That we exhort every ene to turn in to the Light that is in him,
(We give it rather the Appellation of Light, than any Thing else, otherwise it
is all one to us whether ye call it Christ, the Spirit, the Word, etc. seeing
these all denote but one and the same Thing:) Yet the Word Light being in its
natural Signification somewhat else than that which we intend thereby, we shall
therefore in brief endeavor clearly to express what we intend under this
Denomination,

The Light (then we say) is a clear and distinct Knowledge of Truth in the
Understanding of every Man, by which he is so convinced of the Being and
Quality of Things, that he cannot possibly doubt thereof.

From this Definition which is here given of the Light, it is clear, that it
must needs comprehend in it the principal Effect of showing us, and giving us
the Knowledge of what is Truth and Falsehood, what is Good and Evil; which
verify is a Matter of so great Concernment, that without it Men must needs
swerve up and down in continual Darkness. Opinion and Sin, neither knowing
Truth at all, nor doing any Good, but gropingly, by hap-hazard, without any
Certainty.

This Light then, The Light as to Man, what it is, defined.
Christ, the Truth, etc. is that which makes manifest and reproves Sin in Men,
showing him how he is strayed from God, accus^d (...) of the Evil which he
does, and both committed; yea, this is it (...) and condemns him. Again,

(...) is the Preaching to every Creature under Heaven, though they have never
read or heard of the Scripture. This is it which leads Man in Truth, into the
way to God, which excuses him in well-doing, giving him Peace in his
Conscience, yea, brings him to Union with God, wherein all Happiness and
Salvation do consist.

Moreover, seeing it is properly the Nature of this The Effect put for the Cause
Light infallibly to discover Sin and Evil, to reprove and convince thereof; it
can never possibly consent thereunto. And although it be true indeed, that the
Operations of the Light are not in all Men alike powerful, in whom it is
nevertheless; yea (though) in some Men (it) seems to have no Operation at all:
Yet this is occasioned only by those Impediments that do hinder it: For as the
Natural Light by the Interposition of other Bodies of Covers, may be hindered
from having its Operation there where else it would, were those Things which
impede removed, the Light (it self) still abiding in its self unchanged; even
so it is also with this Light whereof we speak. The Lett^ in this are manifold.
All whatsoever we meet with in this World seems to proclaim War in this Case.
What is there that has not a powerful Operation upon one or other of the
Senses of Man, through which passing over into the Soul, the Memory is so filled,
that nothing else can enter. The Eyes and Ears stand so perpetually open to all
Things, that they never want an Object to bring to Mind the Experience of that
which pleased the Body so well; And this stirs up the Desire to enjoy it, yet
all Without Satiety: The Objects they are multifarious, the Enjoyment can be
but single and transient, and the Causes incessant.

Now where this operateth in us after this Manner, by Education and Example in
Manners and Customs which are regulated by Opinion, and not by the True Light,
that Men live altogether therein; is it any Wonder that here (in these Men)
there is so little, or no Operation of the Light? Not at all.

We are so involved into the Desire of that which is high in the World, so
overwhelmed in Pleasures, that it is almost impossible for the Light to cause
one Desire after Good to spring or bubble up.

Where then these so contrary Operations to the Light are, there it can never
break through.

According to the Nature and Kind of every Thing, is the Operation thereof:
Where they are opposite, the one must give way unto the other, and that which
is most powerful prevails: from whence also the Effects thereof become most
visible. The LIGHT notwithstanding, abides always the same, and therefore
although Man by Sin, through his Love and Union to corruptible Things, comes to
perish, be damned, and miss of his everlasting Happiness, the Light
nevertheless which is in every Man that comes into the World, abides forever
unchangeable.

The Light is also the first Principle of Religion. For, seeing there can be no
true Religion without the Knowledge of God, and no Knowledge of God without
this Light, Religion must necessarily have this Light for its Principle.

God being then known by this Light, according to the Measure of Knowledge
which the finite and circumscribed Creature can have of the infinite and
uncircumscriptible Creator, Man has obtained a firm Foundation, upon which he
may build all firm and lasting Things: A Principle whereby he may without ever
erring, guide the whole Course of his Life, how he is to carry himself toward
God, his Neighbor, and himself, and all Things else, whereby he may happily
attain unto his Soul's Salvation, which consists only in Union with God. And
thus this Light is therefore the first Principle of Religion.

Without this Light, there is no Power or Ability at all in M^^ to do any Good.

This must first raise him and quicken him out of the Death of Sin. It Is Folly
to expect any thing, Where nothing is; there is no Effect with out a Cause:
There must be something then which must cause a Man to act, if he does any
Thing.

And this Cause must have in it whatsoever the Effect produced has in it: As
for Example, if the Effects of Light be produced, Light must do it, and nothing
else.

And therefore, is it not a silly Thing that all Men would have People do this
or that as Good, and leave this or that as Evil, because they tell them so,
without any more ado, or at best assigning only the accustomary Motives
wherefore, and think they have Reason too, just as if this were enough? Who can
see such Effects as are hereby required, included in this Cause? Not I, for my
Part.

Experience also teaches us the same; else how could it all pass away in a
Train and Custom, without any Fruit? These are therefore not the right Means:
But such we must endeavor to furnish People with. Means from whence Power may
issue forth to do that which they are exhorted to. Such is the Nature of Man,
that he is moved to choose that which he judges to be best, before the worst,
and is always willing to change for the best.

Now if it so happens (as for the most Part it does) that a Man chooses the
worst before the best, it is for want of Knowledge, and contrary to his Aim, and
so he erreth, not being led by the True Light.

Here then it should be begun; it is easy leading a Man to that which of
himself he is desirous of: If those now who make it their Work to teach others,
were but led themselves by the True Light, knowing better Things than those to
which the Multitude are linked so fast with Love, they would be able to hold
them forth clearly to others: And so making it their continual Work, it were
impossible their Labor should be fruitless; for People knowing better, would
do better. Who remembers not the Play of our Youth, how much we were in Love
therewith, and yet how ridiculous is it now unto us but to think upon it? And
why? Because we now know that which we judge better: Hence, not by Force, but
very lightly, and of it self, they came from Time to Time to be worn out, and
pass away, that there is now no Desire nor Motion, moving thereunto. How may we
think then it would be, if the Soul came but once to apprehend those Things
aright which are durable and uncorruptible, and which infinitely transcend all
bodily Toys in Worth? So far as those Things then should come to be esteemed
more glorious than all bodily Things, so much the more powerful would be the
Annihilation of those Things in which all Men, even to old Age, yea, Death it
self, do take so much Delight; and then we might hope and expect that those
Things which are (indeed) alone worthy to be known, would gain Entrance, and
being brought forth in the Light, would be also owned and received by every
one, according to the Measure in which they should stand in the same Light.

Hence from within, the Amendment and Conversion is to be waited for, from
within it must begin, if with a Foundation; the outward then will follow of it
self: The Weakest must give way to the Strongest, all depends but upon the
Knowledge of something better, to make a true and lasting Change. Therefore to
hold this forth to Men, is the best Thing we can give them.

This Light is the Inward Ear, by which alone, and by no other, the Voice of
God, viz. the Truth, can be heard.

By this alone must the Sense and Mind of him that would signify any Thing by
Words, or any outward Sign, be comprehended and understand. So that if the
Truth of God be presented to a Man who stands not in the Light of Truth, it is
impossible he should understand it, although he hears and comprehends the Words
after his Manner, yet he is still fenced off from the true Sense and Meaning
thereof.

Hence therefore it is, that among so many Hearers there are so few that have
Ears to hear.

He that hears Truth aright, that is, understands it well, must not stand out
of, but in the Truth it self.

Therefore neither is it any Wonder that all Men do not understand and conceive
those Things that are brought forth by the Light. Those only that stand in it
are alone (and no other) capable thereof.

The Case being thus, we see of how great Concernment it is continually to
exhort and excite Men to turn in to the Light that is in them, that so they may
go on to such a Condition and Measure therein, as to be fit to understand
aright the Word, that is, the Truth of God, because out of this there can be
nothing understood and concluded from the Words and Writings given forth from
the Light, but mere Opinions, and consequently Errors, This Light Christ, etc.
is the Truth and Word of God, as has been already said, and every where
appears by what we have hitherto laid down: For this is a living Word, and
translateth Man from Death to Life, is powerful, and enableth a Man to hear
witness of it every where.

This is also the true Rule according unto which all our Actions are to be
squared.

This has the Pre-eminence before any Writing, Scripture, Doctrine, or any
Thing else that we meet with from without. We are born into the World, and
brought up as every Body knows: From the very first we hear Differences, every
one pretends that he knows the Matter, and has Truth: One holds forth this,
another That to us: If now the Light which is in every Man that comes into the
World, shall not be Judge, whither shall we roll? To believe all, is
impossible; to reject all, no less: Who shall be judge here? Who else can be
but the Light within us? For whatsoever comes from without, is the Thing to be
judged of: Who then fitter? seeing this is infallible.

Again, is not this (the Light) that by which we must see and know God, and so
consequently that by which we must judge all Things Divine? Certainly it is:
Then it follows also, That we can judge of no Doctrine, of no Book that is
Divine, but by this Light; and judging it thereby to be divine, it cannot but
be truly so. As for Example, if we experience that the Book called the BIBLE,
in regard of tne Divine Doctrine therein comprised, has such an Harmony with
that in which God is known, that he must needs have been the Author of it;
there cannot rationally any more powerful Demonstration be demanded. With them
that are thus, the Scripture may become living and powerful, and not a dead
Letter, as it must needs be to those Men who have no Feeling of this Thing. And
from hence then it is apparent, seeing this Light must be preferred to all
Things whatsoever that we meet with from without, that then Man must first of
all be directed to this: For without it what Profit is there (I pray) to be
reaped any where by any external Sign but by it. Lay the Book of the Scripture
freely before any Man, let him also have all the Fitness (the Universities can
give him) to look into it in its proper Language in which it may have first
been written, what will all be without the Light? Nothing. The Letters, the
Words are not the Scriptures, but the Mind alone is the Scripture, and this
Meaning can never be truly and justly hit, but by those alone that stand in the
same Light, out of which the Scriptures proceeded.

These are they then to whom the Scripture is a Co-witness, and as a Seal of
their being Sons of God; while by Experience they (...) themselves, every one
according to his Measure, in the same (...) in which the Saints formerly were,
who spoke and writ all those Things comprehended in the Book of the Scripture;
these then have the true Understanding and Meaning of the Scriptures, not those
that imagine unto themselves a Meaning by Opinion and Guess, through a thousand
Imaginations, without the least Assurance of not erring; which becomes the very
Ground of all Jangling and Contention.

In fine, This Light in every Man is the Means to come to the Knowledge of God.
And seeing all external Signs must needs presuppose this Knowledge, therefore
itself must needs be immediate, without any external Sign: That Signs must
presuppose such a Knowledge, is undeniable: for these Signs must either be
Words or Effects, Works or Miracles.

If Words, we see at first an Impossibility in the Thing it self: For Words are
created and finite, and God who should make known himself by them, uncreated
and infinite: And therefore here is so infinite a Difference, that there is no
Manner of Agreement, nor any Thing in the Words by which they might be capable
to do it. But again, if you fly to the Meaning of the Words, as being fit for
such a Thing, then that which we say will more manifestly appear: As put case
for Examplesake, that GOD about to make known himself by Words, should say, I
AM GOD, and that this should be the Sign by which he would make himself known,
we see clearly, that it would be impossible for a Man at first to know God by
this; For if he should comprehend any Thing out of the Sense of the Words, he
must needs formerly have had the Signification of the Word GOD, and what he is
to understand by it: In like Manner, if God makes his Will known to Man, the
Knowledge of God (which has its Original from the True Light) must precede and
convince him, that that (Manifestation) can be from none but God alone,
whereupon he is then sufficiently assured.

If by Effects (or outward miraculous Works) it is the same Thing; for these are
no less created, no less finite: And though we might observe something in the
Nature of a Thing, which might be too difficult for the Power of any Creature,
which we know, to effect; yet this at the utmost would be but a Demonstration
taken from our Impotency and not from the Nature and all the Operations of it;
and this Kind of Demonstration cannot be certain and stable, till we were able
clearly and distinctly to see that there was not a Concurrency of many Causes
to produce such an Effect, but that it must needs have been caused by an
infinite and unlimited Cause, whom we call God: But who knows this? Or who
can declare it?

Add to this, That the Knwoledge of God in all Things must first be, before the
Knowledge of any Creature or particular Thing; so that no particular Thing
without this can be well known; and consequently is altogether incapable to
come to know God by, or certainly to make known himself to Man by.

Go to then, Without thy self, O Man, thou have no Means to look for, by which
thou may know God. Thou must abide within thy self, to the Light that is in
thee thou must turn thee, there thou will find it, And no where else.

God is, considered in himself, nearest unto thee and every Man. He that goes
forth of himself to any Creature, thereby to know God, departs from God, and so
much the further, an he comes more to admire the Creature, and stand in
Contemplation thereof, to mistake himself by it, This thou must then shun and
the contrary mind, viz. Mind the Light that is in thee, by it to work,
unmoveably and faithfully to persevere.

FINIS.
An INDEX.
Of some (amongst many) of the more remarkable Things contained in the
foregoing History.
Abraham's (Dr. Galenus) his Comparison of Ames and Stubbs, Page 134. Relates
somewhat very ^dd of Isaac Furnier, ibid, Disputes with G. F. and W. Penn, 539.

Account of Friends Sufferings published, and offered to the Parliament, 200.
Act against Conventicles, 313. Against Quakers Meetings, and such ^ shall
refuse Oaths, 317, etc. To suppress seditious Conventicles by Transportation,
403, etc. For restraining Nonconfarmists from living in Corporations, 442.
Against seditious Conventicles 471, etc. Act, that the solemn Affirmation of
Quakers shall be accepted instead of an Oath, 630. Renewed by King William,
645. Perpetuated and made more extensive by King George, 683. And afterward
more easy, ibid.

Adderton (Major General) a New England Perfecutor, his impious Sayings, 271.
And remarkable Death, 332.

Address of the General Court of Boston to King Charles II. to justify their
cruel Proceedings, 266. Answered by E. Borough, ibid.

Addresses of the Quakers on several Occasions. To King Charles II. 560. Of the
London Quakers to King James II. 579. Of the Quakers from their General
Meeting, 581. Another Address, 58^. Address of Congratulation to King William
upon Conclusion of the Peace, 1697, 639. Another Address to King; William on
Discovery of a Plot, 644, Is misrepresented by French News-Writers, 645.
Address to Queen Anne on her Accession to the Throne, 657. Address of Thanks,
for her Promise to maintain the Toleration, 658. Another from the Yearly
Meeting, on the Union, 670. On Renewal of her Promise to maintain the
Toleration, 678, On the Peace, 679. On King George's Accession, and Declaration
for Toleration, 681. On Suppression of the Rebels, 684.

Affirmation See Oaths.

Aldam (Thomas) begins to preach publicly, 50. Is carried by a Constable to
York, ibid. Imprisoned there for not paying Tithes, and has many Cattle taken
from him, 119. Foretells the Fall of O, Cromwell, after he had in vain
represented to him the Sufferings of Friends over England, 181.

Algiers, some Quakers Slaves there, 384. Are suffered to walk loose, and to
have their Meetings, ibid. Their Worship is commended by their Pations, ibid.

Ambrose Rigg, being convinced by G, Fox, is rejected by his Parents and
Relations, 79. Cast into Prison at Basingstoke, and cruelly used, 133. Being
released, travels thro'divers Places, till at Melcomb-Regis he is seized, and
cast into a nasty Dungeon under Ground, from whence he preaches, ibid Is set at
Liberty again, travels, and is cruelly whipped at Southampton, ibid. Imprisoned
at Horsham, and premunired, 316.

Ames (William) a Military Officer and Baptist Teacher, by the Ministry of E.
Borough and F. Howgil at Dublin, is convinced, 108. In Time becomes a
Minister, ibid. At Amsterdam Is banished the Town, 164. Kindly entertained by
the Elector Palatine at his Court, 198. Confined to Bedlam at Rotterdam, with
the Occasion, and his Dismission, 198, 199. He is taken up at London, and put
to hard Labor in Bridewel, 340. But being sick and near to Death, is
discharged, ibid. Goes to Amsterdam where he dies, 366. A short Account of his
Life, ibid.

Amsterdam, some whimsical People there pretend to be Quakers, but after leave
them, 169.

Anne, Princess, married to the Prince of Denmark, 561. Proclaimed Queen, 646.
Promises to maintain the Toleration, 658. Unites England and Scotland, 670.
Renews her Promise, 678. Yet passes the Act to prevent the Growth of Schism,
681. Dies on the Day it took Place, ibid.

Andrews (Thomas) Priest at Wellingborough, occasions the Imprisonment of W.
Dewsbury, J. Hutchm, M. Pattison, and J. Goodyar, 117, 119.

Anne Austin. See Mary Fisher.

Apology of the Boston Persecutors sent over to England, 264. Answered by E.
Borough in Print, 266.

Apostasy since the Apostle's Days, 52. Overspreading the Nations, obscures the
Light of Truth, 287.

Argyle (Earl of) taken in Scotland, and Executed, 570.

Armor^r (William) a Justice of Peace, several Instances of his Cruelty to the
Quakers, 450, 452. Account of his exorbitant Carriage printed, ibid.

Army opposes an Accommodation between King and Parliament, 19.

Association of the House of Commons, upon Discovery of the Plot against King
William, 636. The like is done by the Lords, and (...) followed by all
Corporations in the Kingdom (...) Testimony of the Quakers relating to the
(...) 637.

Audland (John) an Independent Preacher, convinced by G. Fox, 53. Becomes a
Publisher of his Doctrine, and gives back the Money received for Preaching at
Colton in Lancashire, ibid. His Character ibid. He goes to Bristol, where his
Testimony is recieved by many, 83. Brief Account of his Life and Death, 396,
397. And some Account of his Wife and more, etc. 668.

B.
Baily (William) a Baptist Teacher, convinced by G. Fox's Ministry, became
after an eminent Minister, 124 His Exhortation against Persecution, 417, 423.
He dies at Sea, coming from the Westindies, 509. His Character, ibid. He
married M. Fisher, who formerly visited the Grand Seignior, ibid.

Baker (Daniel) intending for England, is moved to go for Malta, 311. What
happened to him there and in other Places, till he came to London, where he is
imprisoned, and writes a Narrative of his Travels, 311, 312. Is illegally and
barbarously abused, 341

Banishment of the Quakers upon Pain of Death, enacted at Boston in
New England, 195.

Baptism, See Water Baptism.

Baptists, several of them convinced, 14. Others at Barrow in Leicestershire,
silenced by G. Fox, 22. Their Teacher at Carlisle convinced, 66. Another near
Colbeck in Cumberland, who gives up the Inheritance of an Impropriation of
Tithes, 73. At Krisheim, ^ear Worms in Germany, they receive the Truth from
William Ames, and afterward go over to Pennsylvania, 198.

Barbados the Quakers suffer much from the People there, b^ Instigation of the
Priests, 334. Law made there against Negroes coming to Quakers Meetings, 514,
Quakers send over a Petition to King William for Relief from their hard
Sufferings, 600. The King's Order thereupon, ibid,

Barclay (Robert) his Descent, Education, and Qualifications, 455. Disputes
with some Scholars of the University at Aberdeen, 507. Writes to the Here
Adrian Paets, concerning the immediate Revelation of the Spirit, 515. He writes
in Latin to the Ambassadors at Nimeguen, 544. His Death and Character, 600.

Barnardiston (Giles) educated at the University, made a Colonel, is convinced
by G. F. becomes a Minister and Sufferer, 373.

Barrow (Henry) with two more, put to Death in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, by
Instigation of the Clergy, 5.

Battledoor, a Book published by G. Fox, proving plain Speech to be the Usage
of all Languages, 281 Copies of it presented to the King, Great Men, and the
Universities, ibid.

Bailey (George) dies in Prison in France, 164.

Being, that a most perfect Being existeth, is a self-evident Principle, 522.

Belief, a large Account of the Christian Belief and Doctrine of the Quakers,
with a Postscript relating to the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment, 615, 621.

Bellevers are born of God, 17, 118, 591, 596.

Bellingham (Richard) Deputy Governor at Boston, his Cruelty, 157, 158.
Succeeds John Endicot the Governor, and ten Years after dies distracted, 333.

Bennet, Justice, an Independent, said to have been the first that scornfully
gave the Name Quakers to the People now generally so called, 24, 25. Strikes G.
F. with both his Hands, as he was kneeling down to pray for hi^.

Benson, a (...) ^onvinc'd by hearing G. F. before the Sessi^ Lancaster 62. His
Wife imprisoned at York brought to Bed in the Prison, 67. He is refused Leave
to visit G. F. in Carlisle Dungeon, 72.

Beraudin, a Martyr, speaks after his Tongue was cut out, praising God, 2.

Birkhead (Christopher) sent to Prison, 87. For speaking and writing against
the Popish Religion, is imprisoned at Rochel and after absolved, 163. Is
apprehended at Middleborough in Zealand, and examined, ibid. Confined to the
House of Correction, and after some Time released, 164.

Bishop (George) a Captain, receives the Truth at Bristol, 83, 104. Author of a
Relation of the Persecution in New England, 272. His Prophetic Caution to the
King and Parliament, 423. The same fulfilled, 431. From Bristol Prison he
writes an Exhortation to Stedfastness, ibid.

Bishops, their Zeal for Ceremonies, puts the Nation in a Ferment, 7. A witty
Turn upon one of them, 467. Cruel Saying of the Bishop of Peterborough, 486.

Blake, Admiral, sent by the Protector with a Fleet to the Mediterranean, 123.

Blanch Pope, a Ranting Woman, confuted by G. F. 368.

Blasphemers in Country Prison, who said they were Gods, confounded by G. F. 22.

Blasphemy often charged on the Quakers, but not proved, 138, 192.

Barbara Blaugdone receives the Truth by the Ministry of John Audland, and John
Camm, 83. Is imprisoned at Bristol, and afterward at Marlborough, where she
fasted several Days, 90. The Person that committed her, convinced, but not able
to endure the Cross, ibid. A Mastiff Dog set at her, halts, and turns away, 91.
Is imprisoned at several other Places, and after sent to Exeter Jail, where she
is cruelly whipped, ibid, At Basingstoke she procures Liberty for two Friends,
92. Arrives in Ireland after a great Tempest at Sea, 108. With Difficulty is
admitted to the Deputy; her Deportment and Message to him, ibid. Goes to Cork,
is every where persecuted, yet some receive her Testimony, 109. Returns to
Bristol, after to Ireland, and is imprisoned at Dublin, ibid. Set at Liberty
through Intercession of some Persons of Note, her Friends 110. Imprisoned at
Lamrick, 111. Committed to Bridewel in Bristol, 554.

Blome (Richard) Author of the Fanatic History, which seems chiefly designed
against the Quakers, 151.

Booth (Sir George) his Insurrection for K. Charles, 206. Is defeated, taken,
and sent to the Tower, 207. Is set at Liberty, 233.

Boston in New England, some Quakers arrive there, are ill treated, imprisoned,
and sent back again, 157, 158. A Law made to prohibit the bringing Quakers into
their Jurisdiction, 158. Cruelties practiced there, 168, 169. Barbarous Usage
of two Women, 190. Of a Woman and a Girl, ibid. See New England. The Country
for Twenty Miles about Boston, will not now yield Wheat, etc. though formerly
very fertile, 333.

Bourignon (Antonia) her Writings turned into English, and printed at London,
occasions the Writing of a Book chiefly against the Quakers, 640.

Bowing and Scraping prohibited to G. F. 18.

Bowing at the Name of JESUS, what it is, and who they are that do so indeed,
300.

Boys a Priest invites G. F. to his Pulpit, which he refuses, 45. He goes
along with G. F. 46. Refuses his Tithes from some who proffered them, 47.

Brend (William) taken up at Newbury in New England, sent to Boston, put in the
House of Correction, 191. Used there with unhuman Barbarity, 192.

Briggs (Thomas) convinced of the Truth by G. F's Carriage at the Sessions at
Lancaster, though formerly a great Opposer of the Quakers, 61. Becomes a faithful
Minister of the Gospel among them, ibid. Goes through Cities, Towns and Villages,
with a Message, 68. And suffers most cruel Usage at Warrington, Yarmouth, Lin,
and other Places, ibid. Goes to America, and dies after thirty Years spent in
the Ministry, 69. He foretold the Destruction of London, 445. His Death, 562.

Briscoe (William) a Justice, is so seized and struck by the Dread of the Lord,
that he recalls his Warrant for imprisoning R. Widders, 73.

Bristol, dismal Persecution there, chiefly by Sir John Knight and John
Helliar, 551. Meetings kept up by Children, of whom 19 sent to the House of
Correction, and Market-people at their Inns worn against for a Meeting, 554. R.
Lindy, a blind Man of 90, used severely, dreadful Death of J. Dennis their
Jailor, 556.

Brooks (George) a Priest, Chaplain of the Nightingale Frigate, turned out of
his Ship for his Immorality, 116.

Brown (Richard) Alderman of London, a short Character of him, 336. His furious
Behavior is exposed to public View, in a Book dedicated to himself, 337.
Instances of his Cruelty, 338, 339, etc.

Brownis^s, whence the Name, 5.

Bu^g (Francis) an Apostate, charges the Quakers with So^inian Notions, 621.

Bull and Mouth, a House in Martins le Grand, hired for a Meeting house, 83.

Burden (Anne) a Widow, comes to New England, and cruelly dealt with, 168.

Burial of the Dead, the Principle and Practice of the Quakers therein, 663.

Burn t, (Dr.) Bishop of Salisbury, his remarkable Sayings against Perfecution.
His Death, 682.

Borough (Edward) being first of the Episcopal, and then of the Presbyterian
Persuasion, is convinced by G. Fox, 54. His Character, ibid. He becomes an
eminent Minister, undergoing great Adversities, 55, 58. Comes to London in THE
Forepart of Summer, 80. Preaches in a Ring in the Fields, where some are
convinced, ibid. He is a ^ealous and powerful Preacher, 81. Goes with F. Howril
to Ireland, where they continue six Months, 108 Are banished thence, ibid, He
writes to the Protector of his Pride and Forgetfulness of his Vows, 120.
Another Monitory Letter of his to the Protector, 159, 162 Speaks to the
Protector of the Oppression of his Friends, and writes again to him about it,
ibid. Writes to him again, and again, 163. Offers him to answer whatever
Objections shall be made to the Quakers Doctrine and Practice, 181. Writes to
the Protector's Wife and Children, 184. He meets the Funeral Pomp of O.
Cromwell; his Zeal and Testimony on that Occasion, 189. A remarkable Prophecy of
his, 201, 202. Goes to Dun^irk, and why, 204 Writes in Apology for Quakers, and
against Persecution, 319, 323. Has the Foreknowledge of his own Death, 363. He
is taken up and sent to Newgate, where he continues about, eight Months, with
six or seven Score more on the same Account, ibid. The King sends an Order for
his Release, but it is stifled, ibid. His Death, ibid. His Elogium by F. Howgil,
364, 365.

C.
Calling, the Apostles left theirs to follow Christ, whither he led them by his
Spirit to preach, 118.

Calvin (John) acknowledges the Indwelling of God's Spirit in Man, 3, 4.

C^^m (John) a zealous Preacher, 58. He goes to Bristol, and is persecuted
there, 83, 84. A short Account of his Life and Death, 396, 397.

Canaan, the Country of the Children of God, and New- Jerusalem their City, 118.

Carlisle, the People tremble, and the Steeplehouse there seems to shake, so
that some were afraid of its Falling, at the powerful Preaching, of G. Fox, 67.

Caton (William) convinced by G. Fox's Preaching, 56. His early Piety when in
Judge Fell's Family, 99. He with the Judge's Son is instructed in Latin by a
Priest, ibid. Goes with him to a School at Hauxshead ibid. Weary of the Vanity
there, he stays at home, and is moved to go to warn People to Repentance in
public Places, 100. At (...) Years of Age leaves the Family, and travel, through
diverse Places, visiting Friends, ibid. Goes to London, where he meets with J.
Stubbs, ibid. They travel through many Places, declaring the Truth successfully,
101. They refuse to take Money when proffered, 102. At Maidstone they are sent
to the House of Correction, stripped of their Money, Inkhorns and Bibles, and
after put in the Stocks, and cruelly whipped, ibid. He went by himself to France,
103. And after with J. Stubbs to Holland, ibid. He goes to Scotland, 104.
Returns to England, ibid, Goes again to Scotland, and returns thence to
Holland, where traveling, he is secured at Middleburg, and sent to England,
134. At a Meeting in Sussex he quiets a desperate Rabble, 165. Goes to
Amsterdam, 197. Is six Months in Prison at Yarmouth, 385. His Death and
Character, 441.

Charity, that it does not impoverish, verified to the Quakers, 76.

Charles I. King of England, sets up his Standard at Nottigham, which is blown
down, 7. Fights with the Parliament's Fo^^es at Edge-(...), ibid. Is after
beaten by them, who take the City of York 8, His Army is broken, he goes to the
Scots, and is delivered to the English 11. Withdraws from Hampton Court to Isle
of Wight, and there is kept in closer Custody, 15. Negotiation with Hopes of
Accommodation with the Parliament, 19. Is broke off by the Army, ibid. He is
brought to Trial, arraigned of High Treason, sentenced to Death, and beheaded,
20.

Charles II. at Edinburgh proclaimed King of Great Britain, 20. The Scots send
to him in Holland, to subscribe the Covenant, 23. Are answered in general
Terms, ibid. He goes over to Scotland, makes his Entry into Edinburgh, 36.
Publishes a Declaration, in which he acknowledges that the Nation had been
wronged by his Father's Behavior, ibid. Having sworn to maintain the Covenant,
he is crowned in Scotland, 37. He is beaten by Cromwell, marches into England,
and being again beaten, narrowly escapes into France, 46. States General refuse
to take him a Volunteer in their Navy against the English, 65. He leaves
France, and goes to Cologn, 99. Comes to Zealand, but Matters not succeeding,
returns to Cologn, 123. A Law made to extinguish his Title to the Crown, 159.
He comes to Breda, where he gives out a Declaration, 235. Is proclaimed King,
arrives in England, and comes to London on the Anniversary of his Birthday,
237. His Death, 562.

Charters (Thomas) an Independent Teacher at Kilbride in Scotland, dies by a
Kick of his Horse at the Time appointed to excommunicate Alexander Hamilton, 93.

Cheevers (Sarah) See Katharine Evans.

CHRIST, he only enlightens and speaks to the Conscience, 12. His Appearance in
the Heart as a Resiner's Fire, 13 His (...) ^ampled upon, ib. He teaches
inwardly in the (...) 43, 44, 45, 51. The true Teacher, and the (...) Way to
God, ibid. The Counselor, the Shepherd, the Bishop, the Propher, 52. The Light
of the World, 55.

Christening of Children, no Scripture for it, 457.

Christison (Wenlock) banished Boston on Pain of Death, appears in Court there,
and is sent to Jail, 267. Brought again to Court, and what passed there, 270.
Receives Sentence of Death, 272 His Prophetical Speech, ibid, Is set at
Liberty, with 27 more of his Friends, ibid. The Reason of this sudden Change,
273.

Church; what a Church is, 16, 48, 51, 401. Which is the Mother Church, 458.

Churches, Places of Religious Meeting improperly so called, 58. What a Church
is, 250, 401.

Church-Faith, a Paper so called, ansewred by G. Fox, 187.

Church Government among the Quakers, an Account of it, 667.

Civil War in England, it is Original and Causes, 7.

Clarendon (Edward Earl of) his Saying of Oliver Cromwell, 186. Supposed to
propose Queries to the Quakers 240.

Clark (Mary) for warning against Perfecution i^^ New England, is cruelly
whips, and kept 12 Weeks in Prison in Winter, 160.

Clayton (Richard) at Bur^s in Suffolk, affixes some Queries to a Steeple-house
Door, 116. Is with two others taken up, examined, and whipped, 117.

Goals (Josiah) convinced by the Ministry of J. Audland and J. Camm, 83.
Committed to Newgate in Bristol, 87. With T. Thirstone he goes to Virginia, and
thence with T. Chapman, by Land, to New England, several hundreds of Miles,
through vast Wildernesses, 265. Writes a Warning against Persecution, 410. His
Exhortation to Constancy under Sufferings, 416. His Warning to the King, 447.
Answers a Popish Book, 453. His Character and Death, 462, 463.

Goals, Justice. though provoked, kindly dismisses R. Widders, 73.

Cock^n; here they assault G. Fox, with Pitch-Forks, Flails, and Staves, to
kill him; yet he is preserved alive; though so bruised that he can hardly speak,
60.

Colchester, cruel and bloody Persecution there, 372, 373.

College for Education of Ministers, designed to be erected at Durham, but the
Design is dropped, 172.

Coleman (Anne) with two more Women, sentenced to be whipped through eleven Towns,
324, 325. Seized again, and dragged about in a barbarous Manner, 325. She is
again cruelly whipped, with some others, 326.

Committee of Safety, set up by the Parliament, 206.

Conjurer, one so reputed, baffled by G. Fox, 39.

Conventicles. See Act.

Convincement, some convinced by dying Penitents, 653. Some by beholding the
weighty Frame of Friends in their silent Assemblies, 654. Others in other
Manners, 655.

Corbet (Counselor) gets great Reputation by his Defense of G. F's Cause, 501.

Council of State erected by the Parliament, 206.

Cranmer (Thomas) Archbishop of Canterbury endeavors a Reformation, 4. Is
martyred by Queen Mary, 5.

Creatures, Virtues of them opened to G. Fox, 17.

Crist (Stephen) convinced of the Truth by J. Parnel, 105. Becomes a public
Minister of the Word of God, 217. Goes to Scotland, ibid. A brief Account of
(...) 385. Goes to York, 431. (...) concerning the present and succeeding Tim^
(...) 450. Is Prisoner at Ipswich, 457. Decl^ (...) be made a Magistrate at
Colchester, in King James II. Time, 584. His Epistle of Advice to all the
Churches of Christ throughout the World, 601, 609. His Qualifications and
Death, with some of his Dying Expressions, 613.

Grisp (Samuel) a Clergyman of the Episcopal Church, his Letter to a Relation
after he became a Quaker, giving an Account of his Change, 672.

Croese (Gerard) some Errors of his History noted, 12, 25, 59, 281.

Cromwell (Henry) Son of the Protector, Deputy of Ireland, 108. B. Blaugdone's
Message to him, 109. Is much affected therewith, ibid. He is called back by the
Parliament and deposed, 206.

Cromwell (Oliver) made General in the Room of Fairfax, is sent into Scotland,
36. Edinburgh yielded to him, ibid. He beats the Army of Charles II. at
Worcester, 46. Strives for the Supreme Authority, and dissolves the Parliament,
64. Calls a New Parliament, and delivers to them the Supreme Authority, 72. His
Council of Field-Officers declare him Supreme Ruler, by the Title of LORD
PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, etc. 77. The Ceremonies of his
Inauguration, 78. He requires an Oath of Fidelity from his Soldiers and others,
79. His Speech in the Painted Chamber for Liberty of Conscience, 84. Yet
suffers the Quakers to be persecuted, 85. He makes Peace with the Dutch, 98.
Connives still at the grievous Persecution of the Quakers, 120. Sends a Fleet
to the West Indies, and another to the Mediterranean, 123. Calls a Parliament,
131. Is confirmed in the Title of Protector, receives the Ensigns of
Sovereignty, and takes an Oath to Rule faithfully, 159. His Design to assume
the Title of King opposed and laid aside, ibid. That of Protector confirmed to
him in Parliament, ibid. He breaks his Promise made in Distress, at Dunbar,
162. Discontent against him increases, 177. He is taken ill, 183. Vain
Presumption of one of his Chaplains, ibid. He names his Successor, and dies,
185. Lie^ in State in Somerset House, 186. His pompous Funeral, 188.

Cromwell (Richard) eldest Son to Oliver, proclaimed Protector, 186. E. Borough
writes to him and his Council, 189. He dissolves the Parliament, and the Long
Parliament is called again, 206. Is deprived of Power, and ordered to remove
from Whitehall, which he did, ibid. His Death, 679.

Crook (John) a Justice of Peace in Bedfordshire, convinced of the Truth by G.
Fox, 99. Is turned therefore out of Commission, ibid. A Yearly General Meeting
kept at his House, 173. He is apprehended at a Meeting in London, 338. Brought
to Trial, 347. Sentenced to a Praemunire, 358. His Advice to his Children and
Grandchildren, 641, 642. His Bodily Afflictions, Patience, and Support under
them, 643. His Qualifications, ib. Age and Death, ibid. His Letter of Advice
and Comfort to Isaac Pennington, 651, and seq.

Crown of England in Remainder settled on the Protestant Line, in the House of
Hanover, 644.

Cruelties exercised upon the Quakers on Account of their Religion in
New England, 168, 189, 190, 191, 218, 219, 323, 333. At Warburrow in Oxon, 486.
At Horsely-down, 488. At Long-Claxton in Leicestershire, 507. At Norwich, 512.
In Wales, 514. In Plymouth and Gloucestershire, 543. In Yorkshire, 544. In
Bristol, 551, 554. In Leicestershire, ibid.

Curtis (Anne) her Father, Sheriff of Bristol, was hanged near his own Door,
for endeavoring to bring in the King, 244. Has Access to the King, and obtains
her Desire in Favor of G. Fox, ibid.

D.
Deceivers; who are the greatest, 17, 18.

Declaration, of King Charles II. from Breda, in which he promises Liberty to
tender Consciences, and Freedom from Trouble on Account of Religion, 235, 236.
This Promise renewed to the Quakers, 250. The Substance of K. James the
Second's Declaration for Liberry of Conscience, 579.

Declarations of Fidelity and Christian Faith, to be subscribed by Quakers,
instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy 599.

Deputies from New England come to London, to defend their Cruelty to Quakers;
but some fearing Prosecution, soon get back again, 280.

Derby (Countess of) her Cruelty and Death, 387.

Desborough (Colonel) is against Cromwell's taking the Title of King, 159. He
complains of the Parliament, 207.

Dewsbury (William) immediately convinced of the Truth, in Unity with G. Fox,
43. Begins to preach publicly, 50. Is beaten till almost killed, but healed by
the Power of the Lord, 73. Is with others imprisoned at Northampton about half
a Year, and after brought to Trial there, 111. Examined by Judge Atkins, who
seems satisfied with his Answers, ib. 118. Yet is he continued in Prison, 119.

Was born near Hull in Yorkshire, 118. His Letter of Consolation to his
oppressed Friends, 557. A short Account of his Life and Convincement, 591. He
was 19 Years Prisoner at Warwick, besides other Places ibid. His Speech to some
Friends in his Sickness, 593, 596. His Death, ibid.

Difficulties, the greatest surmounted by the firm and lasting Patience of the
Quakers 62.

Disciple of Christ must forsake all, ^6.

Discord among those at the Helm of Government, 188.

Discourse; G. Fox has a long Discourse concerning Religion in the Town Hall of
Carlisle, with the Justices and Magistrates, 67. R. Hubberthorn's Discourse
with King Charles II. which he afterward published, 247, 250. G. Fox's with
some Jesuits. 281.

Dispute at Leicester of People of several Persuasions, 16. Another at Drayton,
which is twice resumed, 95. With a Jesuit at London, 173, 174. About the
Resurrection, and Christ's Body in Heaven, 461. About the Trinity, ibid.
Between the Baptists and the Quakers, 501, 505. At Aberdeen, where four young
Students are convinced, 507.

Distracted Woman quieted by G. Fox, and convinced of the Truth, 22.

Distress often made for two or three Times the Value, 374.

Doomsdale, a noisome Dungeon in Lanceston Prison, into which G. Fox, and his
two Companions were put, 129. A Friend offers to Cromwell to lie there in his
Stead, but is refused, 130.

Downer (Anne) the first Woman-Quaker that preached publicly at London, 82.
Goes to Lanceston to tend G. Fox and two Companions in Jail, 130. Is married to
B. Greenwell, and after to G. Whitehead, 577. Her dying Words and Death, ibid.

Drayton in Leicestershire, the Birthplace of G. Fox, 6. A Dispute there, 95.

Dreams, a People who rely much on them, are convinced and become Believers,
11. Remarkable Dream of K. Evans, under Expectation of being burnt in the
Inquisition at Malta, 305.

Dring (Robert) first Meeting in London held at his House, 80.

Drummer, a Priest, his rash Expression, 325.

Drunkard; a common Drunkard, and noted Whoremaster, who was a Poet, converted
by the Means of G. Fox, 17.

Drury (Captain) a remarkable Passage concerning him, 98.

Dundas (William) a Scotchman, an Account of his Convincement, 438. Is
Excommunicated, 439. He goes to France, and afterward returns into England, and
joins in Communion with the Quakers, 440.

Dungeon of Carlisle, in which G. Fox was confined for six Months, a
Description of it, 67.

Dyar (Mary) banished New England, 222. Returning again, is taken up, ibid. And
sentenced to Death, 223. Writes to the Magistrates of Boston, 244. Reprieved,
when ready to be turned off, 227. Her Character, 228. Returns to Boston, ibid.
Is sent for by the General Court, examined, again sentenced, and executed, 228,
229.

E.
Ears: John Copeland, Christopher Holder, and John Rouse, have their Right Ears
cut off, in the House of Correction at Boston in New England, and are
afterward whipped, 193, 194.

Eccles (Solomon) bold and zealous Actions of his, for which he is a Sufferer,
468. His Challenge, 469. Severely whipped at Cork, 489. His Sincerity, ibid.

Education in Universities not sufficient to make a Minister of Christ, 10, 12.

Election and Reprobation, 46.

Elizabeth, Princess of the Palatinate, (Daughter of Frederick King of Bohemia,
and Sister to the Princess Sophia, late Duchess of Hanover) her Letter to W.
Penn, 533. Her Answer to G, Fox's Letter from Amsterdam, ibid. Another to W.
Penn, 535. Another, 541. Another, 542.

Embden, Quakers persecuted there, 536. W. Penn writes to the Senate, ibid.
etc. Who invite that People to reside among them, 571.

Encouraging Letter of G. F. to suffering Friends, 188.

Endicot (John) Governor at Boston in New England, his Cruelty, 157, 264, 265,
269, 270, 326. His barbarous Ingratitude, 329. Dies of a loathsome Disease, 332.

Enemies; many enraged Enemies have become Friends, 61.

Episcopacy, abrogated in Scotland, 23.

Error, not to be conquered by the Arm of Flesh, and carnal Weapons, 151.

Evans (Katharine) and Sarah Cheevers, early visited Scotland, 92. They are
moved to travel toward Alexandria, 285. Embark for Leghorn, ibid. Arrive at
Malta, and have some Sense of their ensuing Trouble, ibid. Are some Time
entertained by the English Consul, ibid. Put into the Inquisition, and examined
by the Lord Inquisitor, 286. The English Consul grieves for being accessory to
their Confinement, 288. Their great Sufferings, Examinations, Warnings, and
Attestations of the Truth, 288, 296. They discourse with the English Consul, he
is much affected, and shortly after dies, ibid. Endeavors for their Liberty
prove vain, 297. They are not idle in the Prison, 299. An admirable Instance of
Friendship toward them in an Englishman, 300. They continue steadfast,
notwithstanding all possible Endeavors to pervert them, 301. Are at last set
at Liberty, after near four Years Confinement, through the Procurement of the
Lord D' Aubigny, ibid. Go on board an English Vessel, 304. Touch at Leghorn and
Tangier, and come safe to England, 305. Katherine is committed to Bridewel in
Bristol, 554. Her Death, 614.

F.
Factions; three several ones (...) England, 197.

Faith, who have the true (...) 288. It Is this only can preserve from vain
(...) sinful Conversation, 298. Not to be forced, 402. Its Genuine Effects,
458. Whether Faith comes by the outward Hearing, 526.

Faith Historical, how far essential to the Christian Religion, 516.

Fairfax, General of the Parliament-Forces, unwilling to go to Scotland,
voluntarily resigns, 36.

False Prophets, who are such, 56.

Fanatic History, writ chiefly against the Quakers, 151. Some notable
Citations in Answer to it, 151, 155.

Farmer (Ralph) a Priest, stirs up Persecution at Bristol, 83, 85, 87.

Farnsworth (Richard) and others convinced by the Preaching of G. Fox, 43.
Becomes a Minister of the Gospel, ibid. Begins to preach, and so powerfully,
that People are amazed 50. Writes against Muggleton and Reeves, 386. His Death,
454.

Fast, of a Woman in Lancashire, 13. A Letter of G. Fox concerning Fasts, 178.

Favor with God, how good Men know they are in God's Favor, 521. A Felon
convinced, 39.

Fell (Henry) taken out of a Meeting where he ministered to the People, and
whipped, 248, etc.

Fell (Margaret) Wife of Judge Fell, with most of her Family, convinced by G.
Fox's Preaching, 55. She is seized by an extraordinary Power, 50. Sends forth
an Information against II. P^rter, Mayor of Lancaster, 244. Goes to London, and
applies to the King, ibid. Acquaints him with Friends Sufferings, 254. She is
premunired, 434. Short Account of her Life and Death, 658. She writ the Call of
the Jews out of Babylon, and many other Pieces, 659.

Fell (Thomas) a Judge in Wales, 55. He entertains G. Fox, and is convinced by
him, 57. Offers his House for a Meeting Place, ibid. Defeats the Design of
Justices Sawrey and Thompson against G. Fox, ^0. A short Account concerning
him, 659. His Death, ibid.

Fifth-Monarchy Men make an Insurrection, 253. Their Design, ibid. They cause
great Troubles to the Nation, 254. Some are put to Death, but acquit the
Quakers of having any Hand in their Plot, ibid.

Fines; exorbitant Fines extorted from Quakers, 219. and in a great many other
Places.

Fisher (Samuel) being educated at the University, is Ordained a Priest, and
gets a Living of about 200 l. a Year, 1^1. Leaves, the Episcopal Church, and
becomes a Baptist Teacher, 1 2. On hearing of J. Stubbs, convinced, and defends
his Doctrine, ibid. Begins to speak before the Parliament, but is interrupted,
131. The Purport of his Speech, which he after printed, ibid. Goes to Dunkirk
with E Borough, what they acted there, 204, 205. Goes to Rome with J. Stubbs,
251. His Death, 431.

Fisher (Mary) a Maiden, with Anne Austin, come to Boston in New England, and
are barbarously used, 157, 158. And after Five Weeks Imprisonment sent back to
England, ibid. Mary Fisher travels to Turkey, delivers a Message from God to
Sultan Mahomet IV. in his Camp, 251. Which he favorably receives, and uses her
with Respect, ibid. She returns to England, 252. Is married to W. Bailey, 509.

Flesh and Blood of Christ spiritual, and necessary to spiritual Life, ^88.

Flesh and Blood of Christ by which the Saints are nourished, 524.

Fletcher (Elizabeth) so cruelly abused at Oxford, that she died not long
after, 89.

Fleetwood, ((...)) opposes Cromwell's taking the Title of K^ ^9.

Floyd (Morgan) (...) ^st of Wrexham, sends two Men into the North to enquire
concerning the Quakers, who are both convinced, but one of them falls off, 77.

Fox (George) His Birth and Parentage, 6. His Education, early religious
Inclination, and Employment, 7. Resolves upon a separate and retired Life,
fasts often, is diligent in reading the Holy Scriptures, 8. Solicited to go
into the Parliament Army, but declines it; in great Trouble of Mind confers
with several Priests, but finds no Relief, 9. Separates from the public
Worship, betakes himself to Solitude, and reading the Bible: his inducements
thereto, 10. Is still in great Trouble, but more and more enlightened in his
Understanding, 11. Travels up and down like a Stranger, 12. Leaves the separate
Preachers, loses Hope in all Men, to depend on God and Christ alone, ibid. His
Troubles continue, but with Intervals of sweet Comfort, 13. Begins to preach,
whereby some are convinced, ibid. Of what his Preaching at first consisted,
ibid. Others are convinced in a like immediate Way, as G. Fox, and meet
unaware^, 14. He has many Openings in Scriptures, ibid. A Prophecy of him,
ibid. Professors, Priests and People come to him, 15 Several enter into Society
with him, ibid. Goes to a Dispute in Leicestershire, where several are
convinced, 16. Increases in Knowledge, even of Natural Things 17. Is sent to
preach the everlasting Gospel, 18. Forbid to put off the ^at, etc, ibid. Many
join with him therein, and become Objects of Rage and Fury, 19. Powerful
Effects of his Preaching at Nottingham, where he is imprisoned, 20. Confounds
Blasphemers, 22. Is six Months in the House of Correction at Darby, 24. Writes
to the Priests, Magistrates, Justices, etc. 26, and seq. The Keeper of the
Prison, of a bitter Enemy, becomes his Friend, 29. A remarkable Passage of a
Soldier convinced by him, 37. Is offered his Freedom, and a Captain's Place,
but refuses it, 38. For which he is sent to a Dungeon among Felons, ibid. Here
he writes several Letters, and some are convinced by him, ibid. Is set at
Liberty after a Year's Confinement, 42. Comes to Yorkshire, is befriended by
Captain Pursloe, and Justice Hotham, 43 Speaks in Steeple Houses, and holds
Meetings, where many are convinced, among whom are Priests, Persons of No^e,
and some inveterate Enemies, 43, etc. At Patrington being refused Lodging, he
is forced to lie in the Fields, 47. Speaks in the Steeple-house unmolested, and
has a great Meeting, where many are convinced, 48. Is barbarously treated at
Warnsworth, Doncaster, Tichhil, 50. Malicious Reports spread of him, ibid. Near
Firbank Chapel has a numerous Meeting; many there convinced; the Teachers of
the Congregation in particular, 51. Many at Kendal convinced, 54. And at
Underbarrow, ibid. Preaches at Ulverstone, 55. At Ald^^ham, and at Ramside,
where Priest Lawson is convinced, 56. At Lancaster, where he is stoned, 58. At
Ulverstone is dragged out of Town, and barbarously abused, 59. Is wonderfully
preserved, 60. Accused of Blasphemy at Lancaster Sessions, where forty Priests
appear against him, 61. But nothing being proved, is cleared, 62. Foretells the
dissolving of the Parliament by Force, which fell out accordingly, 65. Preaches
at several Places with great Success, and at Carlisle convinces the Baptist
Teacher, 66. Is there, as a Blasphemer, committed to a nasty Prison among
Thieves and Murderers, where some become Converts (...) At length released, 73.
Travels through many Places of the North, 75, and seq. Disputes with seve^^l
Priests at Drayton, 95. Is taken at Whetstone, brought before Col. H^^ker, 96.
And sent Prisoner to the Protector at London, with whom he has a Conference,
97. Is friendly dismissed by him, but refuses his Entertainment, ibid. Writes
to the Protector concerning the Oath of Abjuration of King Charles, 120. Is
sent to Lanceston Jail, 125. His Trial at the Assizes, 126. Is fined and
recommitted, 128. And after great Suffering released, 131. Coming to London, he
speaks with the Protector on the Road, showing him the Evil of Persecution,
158. Goes with Edward Pyot to Whitehall, and talks with the Protector, 159. His
Success in Wales, 166. He travels in Scotland, 167, 168. Disputes with a
Jesuit, 173, 174. Writes to the Protector's Daughter Claypole under Trouble,
176. Speaks with the Protector at Hampton Court, is invited to his House, but
sees him no more, 183. Foresees the Restoration, 188. Travels through diverse
Places, laboring in the Gospel, 234, 235, 242. Exhorts King Charles II. 239.
Sent to Lancaster Jail, 243. What ensued thereupon till his Release by the
King, 245, 247. Taken again at London, 253. And released, 254. Discourses with
some Jesuits, 281, 282. Imprisoned at, Leicester, 313. Tried, and found Guilty,
yet released, 315. Performs many signal Services 368, ^. Again apprehended,
ibid. Brought to the Assizes, 390. And proves his Indictment erroneous, 391.
Again indicted, and brought in guilty, 392. Recommitted, 393. Writes to the
Emperor, Kings of France and Spain, and to the Pope, ibid. Prisoner in
Lancaster Castle, 434. Removed to Scarborough Castle, 435. Released by Order of
King Charles II. 445. His Travels in America, 491. Travels in England, 533.
Goes to Holland, ibid. To Hamburgh and Fredrickst^d, 535. His Sickness, Death
and Character, 609. His Character by T. Ellwood, 610. An Epistle of his left
sealed up, 611, 612. Another concerning his first Mission, 647, 648.

Fox (George) the Younger, is immediately convinced of the Truth, 43. Writes an
Exhortation to the Army, 217. And prophetically to the Long Parliament after it
was restored, 218. Is imprisoned at Harwich, 237. Sent for by the Parliament,
and committed to Lambeth Gatehouse, with R. Grassingham, 238. Who after
fourteen Weeks are discharged by the House, 239. Writes a Book while in Prison,
to the King; an Abstract of its Contents, ibid. It Is delivered to the King by
R. Hubberthorn, and after printed, 240. Writes to the King against Popery, 276.
Writes against the Abominations of the Times, 278. His Behavior in his last
Sickness, and at his Death, 279. Foresees approaching Calamities, 432.

France ( Lewis XIV. King of) acknowledges the Pretender as King of England,
and sets his Grandson on the Throne of Spain, 645. His Death, 683.

Franciscan Order: Quakers charged to be of it; 86. This Charge refuted, ibid.

Friends: Their great Sufferings, and on what Accounts, 186. Their mutual
Christian Love, 201.

Friends, the Name whereby the Quakers are called among themselves, 668.

Friars at Rome, acknowledge the Truth contained in Books given them by S.
Fisher and J. Stubbs, but dare not publicly profess it, 251.

Furnier (Isaac) a passionate, giddy-headed Man, Ringleader of some unruly
People, pretending to be Quakers, but disowned by them, 134. Turns Papist,
debauched and dissolute, 135.

G.
Gardner (Hored) a Woman, being whipped (with a Girl) kneels down and prays for
her Persecutors, 190.

Gibbons (Sarah) and Dorothy Waugh, two Quakers, kept six Days in the House of
Correction without Victuals, and whipped, 190.

Glin (Christopher) Priest at Butford, a Persecutor of the Quakers, is struck
blind in the Pulpit, 509.

Gl^n (Lord Chief Justice) has a long Discourse with G. F at his Trial, 126,
and seq.

God; some People who denied his Being, refuted and convinced by G. F. 16. God
teaches his People by his Spirit, 56.

Goldsmith (Sarah) testifies against Pride in a remarkable Way, and is sent to
Prison, 88.

Goodair (Thomas) and Benj. Staples imprisoned at Oxford, outlawed and stripped
of all, for refusing to swear, 315.

Goodridge (William) 13 Years a Prisoner, and suffers severely besides, 612.

Gospel not established by the Sword or Law of Man, but by the Might, Power,
and Spirit of God. 81.

Government and Governors, the Principles of the Quakers with ^^lation to them,
279.

Grace of God that has appeared to all Men, able to bring them to the Favor
of God, 18.

It brings Salvation, 285, 458. The Universality of it, ibid.

Grace Church Street, a Meeting house built there, 457.

Green (Thomas) a faithful Pastor, suffers severe Distresses on his Goods, 487.

Green (Theophilus) Servant to O. Cromwell, convinced by F. Howgil, joins with
the Quakers, 82. Set in the Stocks and severely fined, and sent to Newgate, by
Justice Hawtrey, with a remarkable Mittimus, 487. See his Sufferings, etc. 588.

Greetings; G. F. is forbid to use them, 18. The Principle of the Quakers
concerning them, 662.

Gwin (Paul) a Baptist, finds Fault with G. Fox, who soon puts him to Silence,
158.

H.
Hacker (Col. Francis) sends for G. F. 96. From whom he has a prophetical
Warning, 97. His Wife and Marshal are convinced by the Preaching of G. Fox,
120. He is hanged and quartered for High Treason, 252.

Hale (Sir Matthew) a religious Judge, discharges G. F by Proclamation, 501.

Halhead (Miles) a zealous Preacher, 58. He is beaten by the Order of Justice
Preston's Wife, 69. Two very notable Occurrences concerning her, 69, 70. At
Skipton in Yorkshire is beaten till he is laid for dead, miraculously healed of
all his Bruises, and in three Hours healthy and sound, ibid. At Doncaster he
meets with the like Treatment, bid. A remarkable Occurrence concerning his
Wife, ibid. At Stanly Chapel he is thrown over the Wall, and wonderfully
recovered of his Bruises, 71. Goes to Newcastle, is there imprisoned; and
released again, and many by him convinced, 72. Goes to Ireland with James
Lancaster and Miles Bateman, where they proclaim the Truth, 92. They return to
England, from thence with James Lancaster he goes to Scotland, ibid. Are in
Danger of being stoned at Dumfries, ibid. Visit several Places in Scotland, and
return to England, ibid. Miles is imprisoned at Berwick, where happen some very
remarkable Occurrences, 93. He tells the Question the Priest designed to ask
him, and answers it, 94. Is released and goes Home, ibid. Goes to London, and
from thence with T. Salthouse to Exeter and Plymouth, where he is much
persecuted and imprisoned, 111, 115. And remains so for many Months, 116. The
Fate of some of his Persecutors, 456. Has a long Conference with General
Lambert, 493. His Letter to G. Fox, 494.

Hamilton (Alexander) erected a Meeting House at Drumbowy, and Heads in
Scotland, and receives the Testimony of the Quakers, 92. Is one of the first
Scotch Preachers of that Persuasion, 93. A very remarkable Passage concerning
him, ibid.

Hammersly (Thomas) Foreman of a Jury without an Oath, 94. His Verdict
commended by the Judge, ibid.

Harris (Charles) joins with the Separatists, 559.

Harrison, a Priest in Dublin, assents to the Truth of B. Blaugdon's Speech to
the Deputy, 109.

Harwood (John) taken at Bures in Suffolk, examined and sent to Goal, 116.

Ha^ honor forbid to G. Fox, 18. Reasons against it, 19. Dis-used by W. Caton,
being convinced, 100. More Reasons against it, 127, 192.

Hawtrey (Justice) fines, and sends Theo. Green to Newgate, with a remarkable
Mittimus, 487.

Haydock (John and Roger) receive the Truth, and both become public Preachers,
455. The Death of Roger, and his Character by his Widow, 637.

Heavens (Elizabeth) and Elizabeth Fletcher's cruel Sufferings at Oxford, 80.

Helliar (John) and Sir John Knight, two violent Persecutors at Bristol, 552.

Heresy, what Punishment belongs to it, 276.

Herford, a Town in Germany, the Residence of Princess Elizabeth, 534.

Hide (Judge) an active Persecutor, 415, 416. Dies suddenly, 430.

Hide (Matthew) an eminent Opposer of the Quakers for about Twenty Years, dies
penitent, 510, 511.

Hignel (Jeremy) taken from his Shop, and sent to Prison without a Mittimus,
for being a Quaker, 87.

Hignel (Temperance) so violently abused that she died in three Days, 88.

Hire; those who teach for Hire not Ministers of Christ, 402.

Hirelings and false Prophets, preach for Wages, 95, 97.

History, the Design of this, 6. Is briefly to relate the most remarkable
Occurrences that came to the Author's Knowledge, and to stir up some others to
improve it, for the Benefit of Posterity, 62.

Historical Knowledge of Christ not commonly manifested to us but by the Holy
Scriptures, though God can impart it otherwise, 518.

Hodshone (Robert) the unheard of Cruelties practiced on him by the Dutch, (on
the Instigation of the English) in America, 220, 221.

Holder (Christopher) and John Copeland, cruelly whipped, imprisoned, and
inhumanly used at Boston in New England, 169. They with John Rous have their
right Ears cut off, and are afterward whipped in the House of Correction, 194.

Holland, the perpetual Edict published there, 456. Made void, 491. Peace
concluded with France, 638.

Hooton (Elizabeth) one of the first that came to be convinced of the inward
Divine Teaching, 13. Is moved to preach publichly, 35. Others before her had
preached in large Meetings at London, 36. She is cruelly used in New England,
326, 327.

Horns ( Anna Maria Countess of) intimate and resident with the Princess
Elizabeth, 534.

House of Commons pass the Bill of Exclusion, 550. Their Resolution against
executing the Penal Laws on Protestant Dissenters, ibid.

House of God; a Building of Lime and Stone absurdly so called, 59.

Hotham (Justice) entertains G. Fox in a very friendly Manner, 43, 44, and c.

Howard (Luke) at first averse, is after convinced by hearing W. Caton, and
yields his House for a Meeting Place, 100. S. Fisher, then a Priest, striving
to convince him of the Lawfulness of singing David's Psalms, is convinced by
him of the contrary, 101.

Howgil (Francis) first of the Episcopal Church, and then an Independent, sides
with G. Fox, being much affected with his Discourse, 51. A short Account of
him, 53. Becomes a Minister of the Truth, is imprisoned at Appleby in
Westmorland, 54. Goes to London, and is one of the first who preaches there at
a Quakers Meeting, 80. Goes to Court, and speaks to O. Cromwell, 81. And after
writes to him in a prophetical Spirit and Style, ibid. Is six Months in
Ireland, and after banished thence, 108. Writes a Paper for Encouragement in
Time of hot Persecution, 344. Is imprisoned for not swearing, 387. Appears at
the Assizes at Appleby, 394, 395. Is recommitted, 396. His Trial, 399, 403. He
is outlawed, and imprisoned, ibid. Dies in Appleby Jail, 464. His Advice to his
Daughter, ibid. 46^.

Hubberthorn (Richard) a zealous Preacher among the Quakers, 58. He with others
haled out of a Meeting, and left bound in the Fields in the Winter Season, 63.
Goes to Norwich, where he is imprisoned, and writes Epistles of Exhortation to
his Friends, 88. His Birth, Parentage, former Life and Character, 88, 89. He
has a long Discourse with King Charles II. 247, 250. Is violently haled from
Bull and Mouth Meeting, and sent to Newgate, 362. Where he dies, ibid.

Hut^^in (John) imprisoned without any Cause or Warrant, 119.

Humility and Meekness pretended to by some, who show what Spirit they are of,
when they are denied worldly Honor, 19: The surest Ground of Safety to a
Christian, 136.

Hus (John) his Martyrdom, 1.

Hutton (Thomas) entertains G. Fox, after he had been sorely abused, 60.

Hypocrisy of the Parliament reproved by G. Fox, 181.

J.
Jackus, a Priest, remarkably confounded by G. Fox, 62.

Jailor, of Darby Prison, enraged against G. Fox, 29. His Vision and
Repentance, ibid. Of Lanceston Prison, his inhamane Treatment of G. Fox, and
two Companions, 129. He is turned out and put into the Dungeon, where he ends
his Days, 131. Of Boston in New England, his barbarous Cruelty to W. Brend,
191. Of Lancaster-Castle, his Cruelty to G. Fox, soon after which he is cut off
by Death, 435. Of Ivelchester, Davis and Newberry, their miserable Condition,
569.

Under-Jailor at Carlisle, his Cruelty to G. Fox, 67. Is cast into the Dungeon
with him, 73.

James II. is proclaimed King, 562. The Dissenters petition him for Liberty of
Worship, ibid. By his Proclamation he puts a Stop to Persecution, 568. His
Order for Ease to Quakers at Barbados, etc.. 574. He publishes his Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience, 579. His Order to the Lord Mayor to admit Quakers to
Offices, 582. Suffers a Quaker to be covered in his Presence, 583. Admits the
Pope's Nuncio to a public Entry, ibid. Sends Seven Bishops to the Tower, 584.
His Proceedings cause a general Discontent, 586. He follows his Queen to
France, 597. The Throne declared Vacant, 598. He is driven out of Ireland by
King William, ibid. Prepares for an Invasion of England, 636. Dies in France,
644.

Ibbit (Thomas) denounces the Judgment of Fire against London, two Days before
it began, 445.

Jefferies, Lord Chief Justice, infamous for the many dismal Executions in the
West, 570.

Jesuit; one challenges the Quakers to dispute at the Earl of Newport's House,
some of whom accordingly met him, 173.

Jevans (Evan) his Account why he became a Quaker, 676.

Imprisonments; more than 4200 of the Quakers in Prison throughout England,
335. Many die in Jails, ibid. Account of the Number of Prisoners in the several
Counties, 567. King James sets all at Liberty, excepting for Tithes, 573.

Inclination; a State in which the sinful Inclination is subdued, attainable,
17.

Independents, differ with the Presbyterians, and several of them sit in
Parliament, 11. Leave England for Persecution, yet become Persecutors
themselves, 157.

Indian Prince, his Kindness to a persecuted Englishman, and Saying concerning
the English, 158.

Indictment, of several Person taken at a Meeting in Southwark, 345, 346. John
Crook, with some Remarks on it, 358, 360. G. Fox proves his erroneous, 391.

Informers, their Baseness and Cruelty, 477. The sudden Death of one of them,
ibid. Wicked Persons encouraged to become Informers against Dissenters, 489.
Sudden and remarkable End of one at Norwich, 545. Shad, an Informer, burnt in
the Hand, 561. Hilton committed to Newgate, 569.

Inhumanity, of Lanceston Jailor toward G. Fox, and two Companions, 129. Of
the Jailor at Boston in New England, 191.

Inscription on a Steeple-house Door, wittily altered by some Soldiers of the
Parliament-Army, 59.

Inspiration of the Spirit of God; by it we believe the Words and Writings of
the Prophets to be divine, 517.

John ap-John, sent from a Priest in Wales to enquire concerning the Quakers,
is convinced, becomes a Preacher, 77. And is imprisoned, 166.

Jury; a Trial by a Jury refused the Quakers in New England 193. Strange Advice
to a Jury on the Conventicle-Act, 410. Barbarous Usage of Penn and Mead's Jury,
483. Who are fined and imprisoned, ibid.

K.
Keith (George) concerned in the Dispute with the Baptists at London, 501.
Disputes with some of the Scholars at Aberdeen, four of whom are convinced,
507. Goes with W. Penn, etc. into Holland, 533, etc. Some Account of his
Apostasy, 612. Imbibes the Doctrine of Transmigration from Van Helmont, ibid.
Comes into England, 613. Preaches at Turners-Hall, 614. And at length conforms
to the Church of England, and is Ordained, ibid. Charges the Quakers with
Heterodoxy, his Charge fully answered, 631. Summons them to meet him at
Turners-Hall, which they decline for Reasons that read, 632. Charges Quakers
with such Points as he had notably defended, 635. Is much in favor with the
Episcopal Clergy, of whom he had formerly given a differing Account, 643. Is
sent to America, and returns with little Success; but gets a Benefice in
Sussex, 659.

King; Contrivance to make Cromwell King, opposed, and laid aside, 159. E.
Borough dissuades from it in a Letter to him, 160. As does also G. Fox, 176.

King William III. See Orange.

Kingdom of Christ is setting up by his own Power, 162.

Kings of France and Spain; G. Fox writes to them against Persecution, 393.

Kirby (Colonel) his Cruelty to G. F. 393.

Knight (Sir John) and John Helliar, two violent Persecutors at Bristol, 552,
etc.

L.
Labadie (John de) a noted Teacher in Holland, 535.

Lambert (Major General) dissuades Cromwell from assuming the Crown, for which
he is made to resign his Commission, 159. Is sent General by the Parliament
against Sir George Booth, whom he defeats, 206. He is tried and condemned, but
obtains his Life, and is confined to a small Island near Plymouth, 317.

Lampit (William) Priest at Ulverstone, opposed by G. Fox, 55. And put to
Silence by him, 57. Friends barbarously abused by his Hearers, 59. He with
another Priest are silent upon the entering of Miles Halhead into the House
where he was preaching, 71, 71. His Death, 511.

Lancaster (James) his Wife throws Stones at G. Fox, 60. Repents and becomes
one of his Friends, 61. He accompanies Miles Halhead into Ireland, and after
into Scotland, 92, 93.

Lanceston (Mayor of) a cruel Persecutor, 130.

Languages and Sciences make not a Minister of Christ, 172.

Laud (William) Archbishop of Canterbury, beheaded, 10.

Law, either Outward or Inward; this last, viz. the Law of God in the Mind
convinces of Sin, 15.

Laws designed originally against Papists, executed against Protestant
Dissenters, 255. An Abstract of them, interspersed with Cases, 256, 257.

Laws in Equity should extend no further, than there is Power in Man to obey,
433.

Laws made in New England against the Quakers, 190, 195.

Lawson (Thomas) an eminent Priest, by the Preaching of G. Fox, receives the
Truth, leaves off preaching for Hire, and in Time comes to preach Christ and
his Gospel freely, 56. Esteemed a skilful Botanist, ibid.

Lawson (Wilfrid) High Sheriff, a great Enemy to G. Fox when in Carlisle
Prison, 67.

Lawyers are without Justice and Equity, for want of having the true Knowledge
and Wisdom, 17. An Expostulation with them, 146.

Le Cler^ (John) his Constancy in Martyrdom, 2.

Leddra (William) taken up at Newbury in New England, and sent to the House of
Correction at Boston, 190. Is kept five Days without Food, and has twenty
Lashes with a Three-corded Whip, 191. Though banished on Pain of Death, he
returns to Boston, is taken up, and chained to a Log of Wood, Day and Night,
264. Is thus brought to Court, and examined, receives Sentence of Death, 266.
Writes to his Friends, 267. His Execution, 269, 273.

Leonard Letchford, a cruel Persecutor, his sudden Death, 316.

Liberty of Conscience, the Protector's Speech for it, 84. The pretended
Asserters of it persecute more fiercely than the Episcopalians had done before,
88. Promised by King Charles II. in his Declaration, 235. The Court seems
inclined to it, but it is obstructed by malicious Spirits, and cross Accidents,
253. A little Book ooncerning it presented to the King, 283. Expected from King
James II. 568. But is settled by King William in his first Parliament, 599.

Licentiousness of the Press, a Bill for restraining it brought into
Parliament, 639. Considerations relating to it offered by the Quakers, and
given to the Members, 640.

Light of CHRIST to be minded, by which evil Thoughts, Words and Actions are
discovered, 56. That of God in the Heart, gives Victory over the Corruption of
the Mind, 74. It leads to the Kingdom of God, 76. It lights every Man that
comes into the World, 96. Convinces of Sin, 99. Obedience to it, the Way to
Eternal Peace, and Rest, 111. It Is received from the Father, and is the only
Teacher, 162. It Is not a natural Light, 166. The Light on the Candlestick, a
short Treatise so called, 688, 694.

Lilburn (John) Lieutenant Colonel, reproves the Protector, 120. His Character,
121. Is imprisoned for Treason, but after discharged, ibid. Is again confined
in the Tower, and impeached of High Treason, but is acquitted, ibid. He is a
third Time taken into Custody, for charging the Protector with Falseness and
Tyranny, and impeached of High Treason, behaves himself with Undauntedness, is
again acquitted by the Jury, 122. Yet kept Prisoner during the Protector's
Life, 123. Is first in Part, and after entirely convinced of the Truth, ibid.

Lockhart, Governor of Dunkirk, 204. Sends for E. Borough and S. Fisher, and
discourses with them friendly, 2^6.

(...) (Charles) Elector Palatine, his kind Entertainment of W. Ames and his
Friends, 198.

Lee (Thomas) a zealous Minister of the Gospel, his dying Words, 460. W. Penn
convinced by him.

London; F. Howgll and A. Pearson, the first of the Quakers who held a Meeting
there, 80. They increase, and begin to have settled Meetings, several of which
are erected there, 82. Quakers are severely persecuted; 535. About 500 of them
imprisoned in London and Suburbs, (...) Many particular Instances of barbarous
Cruelties, 336^ 344. Pestilence increases, 430. Above Eight Thousand People die
in one Week, 431. The Fire breaks out, by which above 1320 Houses were burnt,
445.

Love; mutual Christian Love amongst Friends, 20^.

Love (John) travels to Leg^orn, Venice, Rome, where for his Testimony he is
put in the Inquisition, and dies, being dispatched in the Night, as some Nuns
reported, 250.

Lower (Thomas) Practitioner in Physic, is convinced of the Truth by G. Fox in
Lameston Jail, 130. Imprisoned with him at Worcester, and manifests singular
Love there to him, 493. Set at Liberty, pleads for G. F. and smartly reprimands
Dr. Cr^^^r, 496.

(...) (Valley of) Protestants there much persecuted, 1^7.

Lu^o^^ (Edmund) sent Commander in Chief instead of H. C^omwel into Ireland,
206.

L^^^ing (Thomas) of a fighting Sailor, becomes a peaceable Christian, 374,
3^7. Meets with many Troubles, by being pre^^ into the King's Service, ibid.
378. Is taken in a Merchant-Ship in the Medi^^r^^^an by an Algier Pirate, 379.
Retakes the Ship without Fighting, 381. Lands the Turks on the Barbary Shore,
383. The Story having been related to the King, he came in his Barge to the
Ship-side in the River, and discoursed the Master and Mate about it, ibid.

M.
Magistracy, the End and Design of it, 186. Its Degeneracy, ibid. The Quakers
Opinion concerning it. 249, 279.

Magistrates of Boston in New England, encouraged by the Priest in Persecution,
192. Make a cruel Order, which is cruelly executed, 194^

Magistrates good and bad, our Duty to each respectively, 249. How far their
Power exten^eth, 276.

Magna C^arta Proceedings against Quakers contrary to it, 341.

Malta, English Consul there, accessory to the putting two English Women in the
Inquisition, 286. His Death, 299. A dreadful Tempest and Earthquake there, 304.
K. Evans writes to their Rulers, ^03.

Mansfield-Woodhouse, People there fall upon G. Fox in the Steeple-house, and
strike him down, etc. A distracted Woman quieted, 22.

Marriage, the Principle of the Quakers relating thereto, 663.

Marsh^ ( --) Esquire one of the King's Bedchamber, a Friend to G. Fox, 253. His
extraordinary Respect for him, 444. Is made Justice of Peace, Continues kind to
G. F. and other Friends, 559.

Marshal (Charles) convinced, 83. Travels through the Nation in the Heat of
Persecution, yet none lay Hands on him, nor is he fined for Preaching, 456.

Marshal (Henry) a persecuting Priest, his presumptuous Saying from the Pulpit,
and sad Death, 453.

Marshal (Priest) spreads false and ^^^^erous Reports of G. Fox, 50.

(...)

Mary II. Queen of England, etc. her Character and Death, 626.

M^ss Houses, not the House of God, 59.

Meekness and Patience, a notable Example of them in J. Pa^el^ 105. Another
Instance, 372.

Meetings, the first great one kept in Nottinghamshire, ^15. (...) ordinary
Power appears in one at Ma^^field, so that the House seemed to be shaken, ibid.
Meetings of Professors and others, visited in several Places, 15, 16, 17.
Meetings settled, ^^, 5^ (...) in most places of the North of England, ^9.
Several Meetings erected at London, 83. Among which the Bull and Mouth, Ibid. A
General Meeting (...) 95. Another in Bed^ords^^re, 173. At Skipton, 243.
Apology for Meetings, (...) They are frequently disturbed at London, and (...)
where, and Persons cruelly abused, 335. Bea^^^ and grievously wounded, some
even to Death, ^^6. When kept forcibly out of Meeting-hou^^, Friends meet in
the Street, ibid Grace-(...) Meeting house built, 457. A Yearly Meeting at
London, 46^. Some convinced by Silent Meetings, 654.

Meeting house at Ratcliff pulled down, 477.

Message to the Rulers of England by E. Borough, 207, 217.

Military Employment testified against, 88.

Miller (Philip) a Volunteer in Persecution, disturbing Meetings without
Authority, 338.

Ministers of Christ are made by himself, who gives them Gifts, (...).

Ministers so called in this Nation, a great Grievance to it, 215.

Ministers of the Word, above sixty of them raised among the Quarkers go out in
the Service of the Gospel; the Names of several of them, 79.

Monarchy, a Jesting Saying of Cromwell concerning this Word, 159.

Monk, General of the Army in Scotland, writes to Lenthal the Speaker, 218.
Comes into England with Part of the (...) 233. Sends for the excluded Members
and the Lords to Parliament, ibid. Gives an Order against Soldiers disturbing
Friends Meetings, 235. By his Advice Charles Smart comes to Brada, ibid.

Monmouth (Duke of) lands in England, is defeated, taken, and being attainted,
is beheaded on Tower Hill. His undaunted Behavior, and remarkable Expressions
at Execution, 570.

Motions of the Body and Mind distinguished, 523.

Mountebanks Vanity, 2^.

Muggleton (Lodowick) and John Reeves, their monstrous Blasphemies, 386. R.
Farnsworth publishes a Book against Muggleton, ibid. To which he replies, ibid.

Murder, a strange Account of one at Dublin, 110.

Musgrave (Sir Philip) a Persecutor of Friends, and violent Prosecutor of F.
Howgil, 39^.

N.
Name of Quakers not assumed, but given, and how far used by them, 608. Among
themselves they are distinguished by that of Friends, ibid.

Naseby, the King's Army beat there, 10.

Naylor (James) convinced by G. Fox, 43. Becomes a Preacher, ibid. Reproved by
G. Fox, and Friends at Bristol, 135. His Birth and Education, ibid. Had been a
Soldier in the Parliament-Army, ibid. Acquits himself well at first, and is
esteemed by his Br^^h^en, 136. The Beginning of his Fall, ibid. His Procession
into Bristol, 137. Is taken up there, (...), and sent to London, to be (...)
the P^^^^ment, ibid. Their Resolution and Sentence, ibid. Petitions in his
Behalf to the Parliament, and the Protector, 139. Public Preachers prevail
with the Protector not to stop his Punishment, ibid. Sentence executed at
London, 141. He comes to a true Repentance of his Transgression, ibid. And
publishes several Books and Papers by Way of Recantation, 142, 150. The Fault
of his Crime not owing to the Doctrine of which he made Profession, 155. But to
his being exalted in his own Opinion, ibid. His dying Words, 156.

Newcastle (Mayor of) troubled for imprisoning M. Halhead, sets him at Liberty,
72.

New England, Persecution there, 157. Further Severities and Cruelties, 168,
169. Persecution is carried on and increases, 189. Cruel Laws made, 190. Other
Instances of their Cruelty, ibid. 194. Nicholas Davis banished New England on
Pain of Death, 222. Persecution continued, 218, 228. A further Account thereof,
264, 273. A Stop ordered to be put thereto by the King, upon the Application of
E.Borough, ibid. and seg. Their Deputies endeavous to defend them, but fearing
Dangers, skulk away hastily, 280. Persecution continued with much Cruelty, 323,
and seg. Impious, etc. Expressions of some of the Magistrates, 330. A Relation
of their Proceedings was published, 333. Persecution yet continues in
New England, 542.

Nimeguen, the Congress there. An Epistle, together with an Apology for the
true Christian Divinity, both in Latin, and wrote by R. Bar^lay, delivered to
each Ambassador, etc. 544.

Norton (John) Priest at Boston in New England, a fierce Promoter of
Persecution, encourages the relenting Magistrates, 192. He with other Priests
petitions for a Law to banish Quakers on Pain of Death, 194. His sudden and
remarkable Exit, 332

Norwich; R. Hubberthorn and G. Whitehead go thither, 79, 88. Whole Ministry is
so successful, that a Meeting is there settled, ibid.

O.
Oaths, Reasons why the Quakers refuse to take them, and that they may be
indulged with an Affirmation instead thereof, without Prejudice to the
Government or private Persons, 623. They present a Petition to the Parliament
for an Affirmation instead of an Oath, ibid. The Petition referred to a
Committee, who agree they ought to be relieved; yet is the Business retarded,
ibid. They obtain an Act that their solemn Affirmation shall be accepted
instead of an Oath, 630. This Act continued, 645. Made perpetual, and afterward
a Form more generally easy obtained, 683.

Oath of Fidelity to O. Cromwell, refused by his Soldiers convinced of the
Quakers Persuasion, who thereupon are disbanded, 79. Of Abjuration of the Pope
refused, and why, 113.

Oath of Supremacy, 256.

Oaths no Gospel-Ordinance, a Book writ by F. Howgil against Oaths, 465.
Doctrine of the Quakers concerning them, 661.

Oaths not absolutely necessary to Government, 400.

Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy tendered to Quakers, and by them refused,
the general Pretense for persecuting them, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 340, 371,
and in many other Places.

Oliver Atherton dies in Prison for Tithes, at the Prosecution of the Countess
of Darby, 387.

Oppressed, God hears them, and brings Distress on the Persecutors, 252.

Orange (Prince of) born in Holland, 36. Removed from being Stad^older by the
perpetual Edict, 456. Which is made void, and the Prince restored to the Honor
of his Ancestors, 491. The Glory of Rescuing from Persecution reserved for him,
509. He marries the Princess Mary, eldest Daughter to the Duke of York, 543.
Comes into England upon the King's Desire, and after a short Stay returns, 551.
He lands in England, and comes to London, 597. Is congratulated by the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, ibid. Advises with some Members of former
Parliaments, how to pursue the Ends of his Declaration, ibid. He with his
Consort declared King and Queen, and crowned, 598. Their Engagements at
Coronation, ibid. They are also declared King and Queen of Scotland, ibid. He
is the Glorious Instrument of establishing Liberty of Conscience by Law, 599.
Plot against him, and Association thereupon, 636. Is acknowledged by Lewis XIV.
of France, 639. By a Fall from his Horse he breaks his Collar-Bone, 645. Dies
at Kensington greatly lamented, 646. His Watchmaker, and Duke of Gloucester's
Nurse, Quakers, 639. His Character, 646.

Order, and Manner of the Meetings of Friends, 250.

Order, to the Jailor at Boston, to whip the Quakers in his Custody twice a
Week, beginning with 10 Lashes, and increasing by 3 every Time, till they would
work, 192.

Osburn (William) one of the first Scotch Preachers of the Quakers, 93. He from
a Lieutenant Colonel became a zealous Minister, 104.

Oxford; cruel and barbarous Usage of Elizabeth Heavens and Elizabeth Fletcher
there, 89. (...) the latter was in a painful Condition till (...), which fell
out not long after, ibid.

P.
Paels (Adrian) late Dutch Ambassador in Spain, his Argument against immediate
Revelation, 516. Answered by R. Barclay, 517, etc. With another Solution of the
same, 528. Solution of another Argument by another Person, 531, etc.

Page (John) Mayor of Plymouth, his unjust. Treatment of M. Halhead and T.
Salthouse, 112, 113. He excuses it in a Letter to General Desborough, 114. Who
is but little satisfied therewith, 115.

Papists fawn on Quakers in hopes to proselyre some, 281. Statutes made against
them executed against Quakers, 402.

Parliament, Difference betwixt King Charles I. and them; their Forces take
some strong Places, 7. Fight with the King's at Edgehill, the Victory
doubtful, 8. Beat the King's Army, and conquer York, 9. Beat them again at
Naseby, after which no decisive Battle, 10. Turn out Bishops, and endeavor to
settle the Presbyterian DIRECTORY, but cannot yet effect it, ibid. Insist on the
Abrogation of Episcopacy, and Command of the Militia, 15. Are jealous of
Cromwell's increasing Greatness, and by him dissolved after sitting nigh 13
Years, 65. A new one called by Cromwell, 72. They resign into his Hands the
supreme Authority he had committed to them, 77. Are dissolved after five
Months, 99. A new Parliament called, 131. In which it is agreed that there
should be two Houses of Parliament, ib.. Long Parliament restored, 206, 218.
About 1500 Officers of the Army cashiered by them, 232. The secluded Members
return, and the Lords are sent for, 233. House of Commons pass the Bill of
Exclusion, the Lords reject it, 55^. Parliament dissolved; a new one at Oxford;
that also dissolved, 151.

Parker (Alexander) an early Minister among the Quakers, 99. His Death and
Character, 600.

Parnel (James) a Youth, of 16, visiting G. Fox in Carlisle Dungeon, is
convinced, and after becomes a powerful Minister of the Gospel, 68. Born at
Retsord in Nottinghamshire, and trained up in Literature, 104. Imprisoned at
Cambridge, disputes with the Scholars, and is rudely treated, 105. Goes to a
Fast at Coggeshall, reasons with and confounds Priest Willis, being but about
eighteen Years of Age, ibid. He is sent to Colchester Prison, and thence 18
Miles chained Night and Day, with Felons and Murderers, to the Sessions at
Chelmssord, 106. Is indicted, fined and sent back to Colchester Castle, ibid.
Unparalled Cruelty exercised toward him here, proves the Cause of his Death,
107. Beyond which their Malice extended, ibid.

Pastor (Independent) preaching against the Quakers, falls down as dead,
brought again to Life, but never to his right Senses, 167.

Patrington; here G. Fox is refused Lodging and Victuals for his Money, and is
forced to lie in the Fields, 47.

Peace concluded between England, Holland, and France, 638. Artificial Latin
Distich upon it, to be read either fore or backward, 639.

Peace; the first Step thereto, is to stand still in the Light, that discovers
Sins and Transgressions, 56.

Pearson (Anthony) turned Quaker, 65. Refused Access to G. Fox in Carlisle
Dungeon, 72. One of the first of them that preached at London, 80. He and T.
Aldam go to most of the Jails, and get (...) of Friends Commitment to lay
before Crom^^^ (...).

(...) (House of) abolished, 20.

pembleton (Br^^^) a New England Magisstrate, Persecutor and Blasphemer, 330.

Penn (Wiliam) his Education and Convincement, 457. Publish^'s Book, for which
he is committed to the Tower, 462. He is tried with W. Mead at the Old Bailey,
477, 484. Goes to Holland, and travels into Germany with R. Barclay, 533. With
whorr he visits the Princess Elizabeth, and travels further in Germany, 534.
Writes to the Princess Elizab^th, the Countess of Horns, and to the Elector
Pa^^tine, ibid. Goes to Wiewert where he speaks with Anna Maria Schurman, the
Somerdykes, and ^eter Yo^ the French Pastor, 535. Goes to Embden where he
speaks with the Burghermaster Andre, 536. His Letter to him against
Persecution, ibid. 538. Revisits the Princess and Countess, ibid. Disputes at
Amsterdam, 539. Arrives at Har^ich, thence goes to London, 540. Wi^e^ to the
Princess, 541. Pennsylvania granted to him and his Heirs, by K. Charles II.
551. His Speech to King James II. at his delivering the Address from Friends
Yearly Meeting, and the King's Answer, 580, etc. Blames the turning out the
Fellows of Magdalen College, 583. Answers the Reflection of his being a Papist,
590. And presents an Address to Queen Anne, 658.

Penn (Admiral) sent by the Protector with a Fleet to the West Indies, 123. His
dying Sentiments and Advice to his Son, 551.

Pennington (Isaac) being, ^ Prisoner, wri^es to the K. and Parliament of the
Unreasonableness of Persecution, 432. A Question proposed by him to the K. and
both Houses of Parliament, 433. Short Hint of his Convincement, Death and
Burial, 545. His Relation concerning himself, 648, 6^1.

Pen^^ (Justice) prosecuted on the Act against Occasional Conformity, 679.

People of God; a Summary Account of God's (...) a People in this Nation, of
their great Sufferings, what God has done for them, and will do, with an
Exhortation to Patience, (...) ^^^edfastness, 259, 263, 432.

Perfection recommended by G. Fox, and defended against some Professors, 75.

Perrot (John) travels into Italy with J. Love, is imprisoned at Rome, and at
length released, 250. Gives way to vain Imaginations, 282. And at last abandons
his Profession, 283. His Answers to Alderman Brow^, 339, Said to be Author of a
Paper fathered by Roger's Party on E. Borough, 559.

Persecution at Bristol, 83, 87. In New England by those who had fled from it
in the Old, 155, 156. It Is contrary to Christ, his Apostles, and Christianity,
158. Inexcusable in the Professors of Religion, 178, 179. Protector and Council
warned against it, 181. At London and elsewhere, 187. Some Stop put to it by
Change of the Government, 255. Persecution for Religion destroys Trading,
Husbandry, etc. 283. Is very severe in London and all over England, 335. It
continues, 413, 423. Is at a Stand, 467. Which displeases some Churchmen, ibid.
It is renewed, 475. Rages in the Country, 477. Many Instances of it, 486. 487,
507, 512, 514, 548, 550, 562. A Stop put to Persecution, 569.

Persecutors, their dismal Fate, 456, 509, 556. Excellent Advice to them, 588.
J. Bat dies penitent, 628. Wretched End of Alexander Ruddock, 629.

Petition of the Quakers to King James II. 562 Two other Papers presented to
him, in one of which was the Number of the Prisoners in every County, 566, 567.
To the Parliament for an Affirmation instead of an Oath, 622.

Physicians should be in the Wisdom of God, by which the Creatures were made,
if they would know their Virtues, 17.

Pistol held by a Man to G. Fox's Breast, will not go off; and the Man goes
away trembling with Fear, 60.

Plain Speech required of G. Fox, 18. Reasons for using it, 19, 281.

Plays, Shows, Wakes, May-games, etc. testified against by G. Fox, 20.

Pope Innocent XI. two Letters to him by the Author, with Queries by G. Fox,
545, 548.

Popery, the Parliament advise the King to suppress the Growth of it, 507.

Popish Plot discovered, 544.

Porter (Henry) Justice at Lancaster, commits G. Fox to Lancaster Prison, 243.

Prayer, G. Fox's Paper concerning it, 578.

Preachers, in 1652, are 25 in Number, and every where meet with Opposition, 62.

Preaching of the Quakers, at first of what it consisted, 13.

Press; Quakers Consideration on the Bill to restrain it, 640.

Priston (Thomas) a Justice of Peace, his Wife makes her Servant beat M
Halhead, for passing by her without greeting, 69. She some Time after dies in a
miserable Condition, ibid. Her Servant much troubled at what he had done, three
Years after begs Forgiveness, ibid.

Presumption of the Church of Rome, 282.

Pretender threatens to invade Scotland, 670. Lands in Scotland, and is routed,
683.

Pretenses for imprisoning Quakers, groundless and frivolous, 114, 125, 126.

Pride, a Warning to young People against it, in the remarkable Repentance of
S. Whitrow, 653.

Priests endeavor to persuade People that a Possibility of being freed from
Sin in this Life, is an erroneous Doctrine, 24. How they had deceived the
People, 40. When they heard of G. Fox's Coming they would hide themselves, 45.
They possess not what they speak of to others, 55. Have not the Word of the
Lord, as the Prophets or Apostles (...), 58 Fruits of their Ministry, o^ They
(...) to Persecution, 83, 84, 187. Their (...) Practices disagree with their
Doctrine, (...) Why they are sometimes treated a little ^^^ghly, 116. Their
domineering Pride and Co^^^ousness, 438.

(...) (Thomas) Governor of Plymouth, his bar^^^^^ Expression concerning the
Quakers, 219.

P^^^^ple; some of the Principles of the Quakers, 2^^ Something further
concerning their Principles, (...), etc.

Prisoners, to lie long in Jail dangerous to their Moral^, ^^ Some very wicked
Ones are kind to G. Fox, and become Converts, 67.

Professors of the Light, Quakers were so called, before that D^nomination, 24.

Professors, some at Ducke^field and Manche^^^ the first preached to, and
convinced by G. Fox, ^^ Others are ^n^aged, and displeased at the Doctrine of
Perfection, ibid Which is proved by G. Fox, 26, 27, 28. Many of them are
without the Possession of what they profess, ^^

Prophecy of the Priests that the Quakers should be put down and gone within
half a Year, ^^.

Prophetical Warnings, Sayings and Passages. Of G Fox to Colonel Hacker, 96. Of
B Bla^g done to Judge P^pes at Dublm, 110. Of a Woman before the Parliament,
181. Of Cromwell's Fall by T Aldam, ibid By E Borough, 182, 189, 201, 21^. By
the same to the Rulers of England, 207, 21^. Another by the same to the
Parliament, 230. Of G Fox, Jun. to the Parliament and Army, 232 Of W Chri^^ison
to Capt. Adderton, 2^1. And to the Court at Boston, 272 Of G. Fox Jun. to his
Friends, 274. Of K. Evans, 286. Another, 296. Of F Howgil, 344. Of George
Bishop to the King and Parliament, 423.

Proselytes; Jesuits hope to gain Proselytes from the Quakers, but in vain, 281.

Protecto^. See Cromwell (Oliver.)

Puritans, when so called, 5

Purs^^e (Captain) rejoices for the spreading of the Truth, 4^, 4^.

Pyot (Edward) Fellow-Traveller with G. Fox, is taken into Custody at Ives,
125. Writes to Judge Glyn, 130. Was formerly a Captain, ibid.

Q.
Quakers so called in Scom, 6. Their plain Carriage and speech, 18, 19. The
Reasons of it, ibid. It proves the Occasion of very great Trouble and
Persecutions, ibid. Wonderful Power appears among them, some Priests, etc.
(...) thereby, 21. First so called at Darby, 25. (...) Original of that Name,
ibid. Are falsely charged with denying Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, 38.
Their first Meeting at Swarthmore in Judge Fell's House, 57. They meet with
great and grievous Suffering, 59, 60. By Patience surmount the greatest
Difficulties, and become a numerous People, 62. Twenty five Preachers of this
Persuasion in 1652, ibid. They never resist their Persecutors, in Imitation of
the primitive Christians, ibid. By what Means they became so numerous in the
early Times, 74. Why they went so frequently into Steeple Houses, and there
spoke to the Priests, ibid. Traders of that Persuasion at first lose their
Business, but afterward their Trade gre^tly increases, 76. Their Meeting^
settled in most Parts of the North of England, 79. Above sixty Ministers of the
Word raised among them go forth in the Service of the Gospel, ibid. They are
imprisoned, whi^t like Va^abonds, fined, and spoiled of their Good^ on various
(...) 82 Are branded for Witches, Ibid Many Books (...) against them, confu^ed
by E Bu^^^^ (...); All Manner of Insolence and Violence (...) against them at
(...) 83, (...). The Name (...) first given by the (...) dependents, 98. (...)
Character of them, ibid. Justices of Peace and other Officer^ upon owning of
them are displaced, 163. Offer to ^e in Prisons for their Brethren, but
repulsed, and threatened, 181. Their Ch^rity to the Poor commended, 24^.
Something of their Principles, 248. And why they meet together, 250 Some of
them heard before the House of Lords, 252 Seven hundred of them set at Liberty
by King Charles II. imprisoned on sundry Accounts, ibid Are persecuted afresh
on Occasion of the (...) on of the Fifth-Monarchy Men, 253 Are not detered from
their Duty by any Sufferings, 41^, 413 Stand firm, whilst other Dissenters give
way, 552. Suffer unmoved the Spoil of Goods, 612 An Account of their Belief as
to Religion, pointing to the Scriptures on which it is founded, 615, 621. A
Postscript to this Account, ibid. A shorter Confession of their Faith presented
to the Parliament, 622. Considerations on the Bill to restrain the Press, 640.
Their Perseverance and invincible Stedfastness, till they came to obtain
Liberty by Law, 656. Their Doctrine, 66^, 668 Reasons against the Schism Bill,
68^. Yearly Meeting Epistle, 685.

Queries, of E. Borough to the F^iers and Nuns at Dunkirk, 205.

-- Mostly Political, proposed to the Quakers by an eminent Royalist,
supposedly the Earl of Clarendon, 240. Answered by E. Borough, 241, 242.

-- To the Pope and Papists, writ by G. Fox, turned into Latin by the Author,
and sent to Rome, 545, 548.

R.
Ranters confuted by G. Fox, 94. Some of them convinced by him at Twy Cross, 95.

Rawlinson (Captain William) his Cruelty to M. Halhead, 71.

Rebellion at Pres^on and in Scotland, suppressed, 683.

R^^^less (John) Sheriff at Nottingham, convinced by hearing G. Fox, 21.
Preaches Repentance in the Market and other open Places, ibid.

Recreations; the Prin^^ple of the Quakers as to them, 663.

Ree (Richard) one of the first S^ot^h Prea^^^^ among the Quakers, 93.

Reformation, small at first, proceeds by Degrees, 1. The Reason thereof, 2.
Increases from Time to Time, ibid. Not perfected by the first Reformers, 4.
Began i^ England under K. Henry VIII. ibid. Advanced by K Edward VI. 5. Is at a
Stand in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, ibid. ^ further Reformation endeavored,
for which some are persecuted, and three put to Death, ibid. Its further
Progress, 6.

Regeneration, the Work of God's Spirit, 118. A Sermon concerning it preached
by William D^w^bury, 591, 596

Religion imposed by Force, fills the Land with Hypocrites, 1^6. Christian
Religion consists not only in the Historical Knowledge of Christ, 528.

Remorse of one on a Death bed, for cruelly smiting a Quaker, 68

Resurrection, the Belief of the Quakers concerning it, ^^

Revelation Divine, how it is known to be such, 52 Revelation by Dreams, 526

Revelation in the Minds of the Prophets by inward Inspiration, 525. And
certain, without any outward miraculous Demonstration, Ibid

Revenge not desired, but refused by the Professors of the Light, ^^^

R^^ (Robert) a Merch^n^ of London, writes to the Parliament, in Vindication of
J. Naylor (...) the Guilt of Blasphemy, 138. His Behavior to him at the
Execution of his Sentence, 141. Joins with John Perrot in his Extravagances,
and after quits his former Profession, 383

Ripan, Mayor of Lancaster, convinced by G. Fox's Speech at the Sessions there,
6^.

Robertson (Thomas) and Josiah Coa^^, sent to Newgate in Bristol, for
attempting to speak in a Steeple-house, 87.

Robinson (Justice) shows himself kind to G. Fox, 45.

Robinson (Colonel) a Justice of Peace, and cruel Persecutor of Quakers, his
dreadful Exit as he went a Fanatic Hunting, 368.

Robinson (George) a young Man, moved to travel to Jerusalem, his remarkable
Occurrence, wonderful Preservation, and safe Return, 170, 172.

Robinson (Thomas) refuse the Oath of Abjuration, is imprisoned* and cruelly
used, 133. Being released goes to Portsmouth, ibid.

Robinson (William) a Merchant of London, and a Teacher, taken up at Boston in
New England, cruelly whipped and banished, 222. Not leaving the Country, he is
taken up again, and imprisoned, ibid. Brought before the Court and receives
Sentence of Death 223. His Behavior and Execution, 226, 227. His and M.
Stephenson's dead Bodies used inhumanly, 228.

Rogers and Crisp Separatists, 559.

Rome (Church of) not led by the good, but by the evil Spirit, 282.

Rouse (John) has his Right Ear cut off in the House of Correction at Boston in
New England, and is afterward whipped, 194

Royali^^s, plot against the Protector, but are suppressed, 1^^. Again make a
Party, 197.

Rudyard(Thomas) a Lawyer, ^^violently prosecuted, for writing a Book showing
the Right of Juries, etc. and for pleading the cause of the Oppressed, 484.

Rulers, an Expo^clation with them ^o^ching their Duty, 145.

S.
Sacrament, that Word not found in Scripture, 249. Of Bread and Wine, the
Quakers Belief ^^ncerning it, ibid.

^^lo (Richard) so violently th^^^t into a strait Hole called Little-Ease, in
Wise C^aster Prison, that he soon after died, 201

Salt (William) imprisoned at St. le^s (so called) 125.

Salthouse (Thomas) travels with M. Hal^ead to Bristol, where they are
imprisoned, ^^^. The Causes of their Imprisonment, 112. Are brought to Trial,
113 Fined and sent to Bridewel, upon false or f^ivolous Pretenses, ibid.

Salutations See Greetings

Sa^d^^ (Mary) afterward married to Henry Stont, convinced, 82 The Protector^
Wife's Maid, 158.

Sarah Saw^er, at her House in A^erseate Street, was the first settled Meeting
of the Quakers in London, 82.

Sawrey (John) a Justice of Peace, the first Persecutor in the North, his
Cruelty to G. Fox,^^ Who writes a short and prophetical Letter to him, 63. He
is drowned, 64

S^arth (Philip) a Priest, convinced by G. Fox, becomes a Preacher among the
Quakers, 44.

Schism-Bill past, 6^^

Shurman (^h^a Mania) some Account of her Life, 535.

S^offer, (...) Judgment upon on^, 234 Others convinced, and (...)

S^t (Pa^lem^) a Girl of eleven Year^ old, sent to Prison, 219.

S^otch Priest, who had threamed G. Fox's Life, after some Time becomes a
Quaker, 44.

Scotland, visited by M. Halhead and J.Lancaster, as also by K.Evans and
S.Cheevers, ^2. Meeting^ settled at Dru^^lowy, Heads, Gars^ore Edinb^^gh, and
Aber^^^n, 93. The first Scotch Preachers of the Quakers, ibid. Stephen Crisp
goes thither, 217. Quakers persecuted there, 542.

Scriptures generally read without having at true Sense of them, 18. Not these,
but the Holy Spirit by which they were indicted, is that by which Opnion,
Religions and Judgments are to be tried, 21. They are the Words of Holy Men who
pleaded for Holiness, 29. To be understood by ^e inward Operation of the Spirit
of God, 6^. How they are known to be Truth, 249

S^al (peter) Mayor of Southampton, his Cruelty to ^. Rigg, soon after which he
dies, 134.

Sed^^rgh; a Meeting there of People separated from the public Worship, in
which G. Fox preaching, most of them were convinced, 51.

Seed of God, i. e. the inward Illumination, 184.

Semper Idem, a Popish Book so called, answered by E. Borough, 275.

Senses are either outward or inward, and the inward are either natural or
supernatural, 516, 52^ The outward Senses may be deceived, 516, 52^ They cannot
discern the Things of God, 5^^.

Separation, of Wilkinson and Story, the Rise and Progress of it, 558. Appears
first in the North, spreads, and at length vanishes, 559.

Separatists from the Church of England persecuted, become after Persecutors
themselves, 5.

Se^vel (Jacob Williamson) the Author's Father, and Judith Zinspenning his
Mother, convinced of the Truth by W. Ames, 165.

St^a^^^k (William) a Shoemaker at Boston in New England, haled to the House of
Correction, cruelly whipped and kept to Work, 190.

Sha^^ock (Samuel) banished New England on Pain of Death, 273. Afterward
carries the King's Mandamens to New England, to prevent farther putting to
Death, and corporal Punishment of the Quakers, ibid.

Sheriff of Lincoln, contending against G. Fox, is at length convinced, and
travels with him, 94.

(...); The Wickedness of making Spoil of them, 234. G. Fox writes against it,
ibid.

Sign: T. ^^^m a Sign to O. Cromwell, and a ^roken Pitcher to the Parliament,
181. R. Sale to Priests and People, 201. R. Huntington to (...) and
Independents, 252. An English Woman to the French Protestants at Diep, 439.
(...) to London, 445 ^ E^^les to Papists at Gall^^^, 468.

Sin; Freedom from Sin asserted by G. Fox, 24. For which he is put into the
House of Correction for six Month, ibid. Not the Guilt only, but the Power of
it taken away by Christ. 18^

Sin preached up by Priests for Term of Life, 24. Pleaded for by Professors, 28.

Singing of David's Psalms scrupled by G. Whitehead, 89. Reasons against it,
117. Quakers Principle concerning Singing in Churches, 667.

S^^th (Hump^ry) with several others, at a Meeting ^^dely abused, and haled to
Prison, 132. Had a Vision in 166^, concerning the Fire of London, 38^ Dies in
Prison, ibid.

Snake in the Grass an anonymous Book with chief^^ against the Quakers, 640.
Answered by G Whitehead and (...). 641.

Soldi^^ one at (...) den^ing that (...) (...) remarkable Passage of some of
them, 59 One at ^^^erstone cruelly beaten by seven Men for taking Part with G.
Fox, 60.

Somerdykes, Gentlewomen Followers of Labadie, visited by, and have Discourse
with ^^. Penn, 535

Somerset House; Protector's Body lies in State there, 186. And afterward an
Image of him, accompanied with Trumpets, 188.

Sophia (Princess) her Death, 681.

Souls, some who asserted that Women have none, re^ired by G. Fox, 11.

So^^^ck ( Lawrence and Cassandra) their Sufferings, 169. Two of their Children
ordered to be sold for their Fines, 218.

South^^ck (Josiah) his Christian Magnanimity, 323 Is cruelly whipped through three
Towns, and turned in to the Wilderness, 324.

Southwark, Meetings are disturbed there, 54^

Spirit of God wrought gloriously in the Martyrs at the Reformation, 2. His
Leading, Teaching, and Indwelling owned by them, and other Reformers, 2, 3, 4.
By Calvin, ibid. A Measure of it asto^ded to all Men, 18. It must be in those
that come to know and understand the Scriptures, 61. Who are guided by it, 118.
How to know if we are led by it, 148. Thereby we come to believe the Scriptures
to come from God, 527.

Staples (Benj.) see (...). Good^^^

State of Affairs distracted, ^06.

Stealing of Cattle, Goods, etc. not punished with Death by the Law of God, 38.

Steeple Houses, why the public Churches are so called by Quakers, 59. They
are improperly termed churches, 256. Why the Quakers don't go to them, 401, 402.

Stephens (Nathaniel) Priest of Drayton, 9. The People stirred up by him, full
upon G. Fox, and his Friends, and some them out of Town, 23.

Stephenson ((...)) taken up at Salem, imprisoned at Boston, and banished,
(...). Is again apprehended and imprisoned ibid. Receives Sentence of Death,
223. His Account of his Call to Boston, ibid. His Execution, 226.

(...) (Ames) a Captain convinced by hearing G. Fox, 16.

Sterdy (Tho.) resigns an Impropriation; his Suffering and pious End, 562.

Stranger (Hannah) a Women of high Imaginations, writes extravagant Letters to
J. Naylor, 136.

Stubbs (John) a Person skilled in the Learned and Oriental Languages,
convinced by G. Fox in Carltsle Prison, becomes a faithful Minister of the
Gospel, 79. Meets with W. Cat^n, 100. Travels with him to several Countries,
III. He and S. Fisher are at Rome, 251. J. Stubbs having been in Turkey,
returns to England, 312.

Sufferings of Friends represented to the Protector by G. Fox, and E. Pyot,
159. By E. Borough in a Lo^er, 160. Represented by E. Barrough to Richard
Cromwell, 186. Sufferings in New England unparalled, 189, 194. Relation of
Friends Sufferings since the Restoration, published and presented to the King
and Parliament, 549. In Barbad^^s, 627, 629.

Sultan Mah^m^t IV. favorably receives a Message from Mary Fisher a Maiden,
and dismisses her with Respect, 251.

Supper (Lord's) so called. See Water Baptism.

Swearing unlawful to Christians, 94, 113, 248, 390. Denied by the Waldenses,
and primitive Christians, 401. Arguments against it, 443, 444. A Representation
of the Quakers Case of not Swearing, which was given to the Members of
Parliament, 623, 620.

T
Tailor (Bishop) his Thoughts about Heresy, Drunkards, etc 284

Teachers of the World preach for Hire, 46, 9^ Dese^hed, and expostulated with,
14^

Temples of God, not Churches or Steeples so called, his People Hearts, 1^, 11,
45.

Thee and Thou to a single Person, 281

Time-servers no Ministers of Christ, 4 ^2

Tithes; R, Widders suffers much in his Estate for refusing to pay them, 74. As
do Thousands more, ibid. That they are now abolished, 95, 96, 116. For not
paying them about 100 Persons suffer, either by Seizure of Cattle and Goods, o^
by Imprisonment, 119. A Motion to take off from the Nation the Burden of
Tithes, 207. A Law concerning (...), 255 Doctrine of the Quakers concerning
(...), 662.

Tongues and Languages, the Beast has Power over them, 173.

Tongues of Quakers to be bored through with a hot Iron, for coming into
New England a third Time, 190.

Traveling to and fro, the Practice of Christ and his Apostles, in preaching
the Word, and doing Good, 118.

Tri^g (Hannah) a Maid of 15, sentenced to Banishment, dies in Prison, 414.

Trinity, tho Word not found in Scripture, 113.

Trooper, one at Darby convinced by G. Fox, speaks boldly among the Soldiers,
is wonderfully preserved, and lays down his Arms, 37.

Truth of the Scriptures, how known, 249.

Trut^^ Contingent, or Ne^^^ary, and how distinguished, 516.

Triers of Spirits, that know not of what Spirit themselves are, silenced by G.
Fox, 38.

Trials of John Cr^^k, 347, 358. Of many Prisoners at Wor^^ster, 374. Of G.
Fox, 389, 393. Of F. (...) 394, 396. Of the same 399, 403. Of Eight Friends at
Hortsord, 410, 413. Of W. Penn and W. Mead, 477, 484.

Tumults at Bristol, in which the Quakers suffer very great Outrages, 83, 84.

V.
Vane (Sir Harry) Chairman of a Committee where many Friends are tried, 187. He
is tried, found guilty, and after beheaded on Tower^^^^, 316.

Vickris (Richard) in Prison at Bristol 258.

Unfaithfulness, the Fruits of it, 330.

Union of England and Scotland, recommended to the Parliament by King William
before his Death, Commissioners being already appointed in Scotland, 646.
Accomplished by Q. Anne, 670.

U^^al (Nicholas) an Inhabitant and Member of the Church of Boston in
New England, gives 5^. a Week to have Liberty to bring Victuals to two Quaker
Women in Prison, 157. For speaking against Persecution, he is fined,
imprisoned, and after banished, 158. Kindness of an Indian Prince to him, ibid.

Usage of such as, for Conscience Sake, could not follow the ordinary Custom,
19.

W.
Wages, such as preach for them are ^^relings and false Prophets, 95.

Wald^nses denied all Swearing, 401.

Wales (Prince of, afterward Charles II.) comes with some Men of War from
Holland to the Downs, 19.

War, between England and Holland, 65 England and France at War with Holland 491

Ward (Captain) convinced by G. Fox, ^1,

Warfare of a Christian spiritual, 197.

Wars, whence they proceed, 38, 206. Doctrine of the Quakers concerning them,
661.

Warrants, 86, 113, 125, 324, 325.

Wastfield (Daniel) a close Prisoner 33 Days, not suffered to see his dying
Child, 87.

Water Baptism, Discourse about it, 124. The Practice and Principle of Quakers
with Relation to this and the outward Supper, 663, 664.

Waugh (Doctor) See S.Gibbons.

Weapons carnal, not used by Quakers, 197, 206, 254.

West (Colonel) G. Fox's Friend, 61. Refuses to write a Warrant for
apprehending him, but would rather hazard all, 63.

Whitehead (George) 80, 83. Goes to^ Norwich, 88. A short Account of his former
Life and receiving of the Truth, 89. At Bures in Suffolk is apprehended,
examined and imprisoned, 116. W^ites against Persecution, 410. Disputes with W.
Bur^^^ and J. Ives about the Resurrection, 461. And with T. Vincent^ a
Presbyterian Teacher, about the Trinity, ibid With others presents an Address
to King William, 645. Another to Queen Anne, 657. His Speeches to the Queen on
presenting an Address, 671. And again another to King George, and his Speeches
to the Prince, 682. Another to the King on suppressing the Rebellion, 684.

(...) ((...)) a young Maid, her warning to young People, 653.

Widd^^s (Robert) grievously abused at Coldback, dismissed by Justice Brisco^.
after a Warrant to carry him to Jail at Carlisle 73. Visits several
Steeple Houses, is sometimes imprisoned, and sometimes remarkably delivered,
74. His Death, 579.

William III. See Orange.

Wilkinson and Story. See Separation.

Wilson (Priest) his insolent Carriage at the Execution of W. Robinson and M.
Stephenson, 226. He makes a Ballad on them, 228.

De Wit ( John and Cornelius) their miserable End, 491.

Wits, a Caution to conceited ones, 651.

Witness of God within, awakens and reproves what is contrary to Gravity and
Sobriety, 99.

A Woman foretells the Dissolution of the Parliament, 181.

Women's Preaching, the Quakers Practice and Belief concerning it, 666.
Miserable End of a Woman that reviled W. Robinson and M. Stephenson at their
Death, 228. Rise of Women's Monthly Meetings, 442.

Word written and unwritten, asserted by (...) Papists, 174.

Work of the Lord not to be opposed, 71.

Worship, the Quakers reckon public Worship an indispensable Duty, 337. Their
Way of Worship 665. Worship, self-willed, barren and unprofitable, 74. The End
of true Worship, 400.

Wrath of God, how felt by profane Men a^ Fire, 522.

Wright (Ha^^ah) a Girl about 14 Years of Age, travels some Hundred Miles to
Boston, and warns the Magistrates to spill no more innocent Blood, 331.

Y.
Young (Edward) Mayor of E^^sham his Cruelties exercised toward the Quakers,
132. His barbarous Treatment of two Women for visiting the Prisoners, ibid.

York (Duke of) flies to Holland in Disguise, 19. He advises the King to
Severity against G. Fox the Younger, for his Letter, and the King's prudent
Answer, 278. He is proclaimed King upon the Death of his Brother, 562. see
James (...)

Z.
Zinspen^ing (Judith) the Author's Mother, comes to England 384. Speaks in
Public by an Interpreter, ibid. Writes a Book of Proverbs, ibid. Brief Account
of her Life, 423, 424. Her Death, 426. Her Epistle to the Friends of Truth,
427, 428.

The End of the INDEX.

