Fruits of Retirement: OR Miscellaneous POEMS, MORAL and DIVINE. BEING Some
Contemplations, Letters, etc. written on Variety of Subjects and Occasions.

By MARY MOLLINEUX, Late of Leverpool, Deceased.

To which is prefixed, Some Account of the Author.

And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he has Triumphed
Gloriously,

Exodus 15.21. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by Samuel Keimer, in the
Second-Street, 1729.

A Relation of some Passages, etc.
Which bears the Siguification following,

Even what the hungry Wolf in Field would do
To feeding Lambs, so will the Wretch to you:
The cruel Priest, fierce, covetous, unjust,
For Money, not for Souls, does cark and lust.
And so, in getting us into Prison again, the Priest obtained his Point; but he
missed of his Prey, and never got it.

Many were the loving, sweet and sensible Epistles, that she sent to me, when
in Prison; ever showing her free Resignation to the Will of the Lord, in all
her Exercises, which then were great; and with much Cheerfulness and Patience
she went through them. And since her Decease, I found these following Lines,
which she had written, viz.

Though some on furious Waves be often tossed,
And by the stormy Winds opposed and crossed,
And watched by Roving Pirates, surely they
Are kept by One whom Winds and Waves obey:
Though sometimes exercised, thereby to learn
Who guards and sits a Pilot at the Stern,
And with his Arm of Power does interpose
Betwixt his Children and their wondering Foes.
O who would not love, honor, and depend
On such a potent, such a constant Friend!
So she depended upon the Lord, and he preserved her.

In a Letter, Dated The 9th of the 12th Month, 1691. she sent to me in Prison,
these Lines, viz.

(1.)
Qui nocent Sanctis, Dominus locutus,
Hi sui tangunt Oculi Pupillam,
Sentient iram, quoque reddet istis
Praemia dira.
(2.)
Si Deo credis filioque Christo,
Quisquis es vir desipiensque rudis!
Cautus es ne tu Domino repugnas
Cordeque pugnis.
(3.)
Stultus at dixit sibi cord, nullus
Est Deus; spernens igitur doceri
Saepe protervus ruit in ruinam
Absque timore.
M. M. She signified her Haste in (...) writing of these, because the Bearer
staid for the Letter, and that she had not made any of such Quantities for
above Twenty Years before. They bear the Signification following, viz.

(1.)
The Lord, of them that hurt his Saints, does say,
They touch the Apple of his Eye; and they
Shall feel his Anger; he will them requite
With Dreadful Plagues, in Death's eternal Night.
(2.)
If thou believe God, and Christ his Son,
Whoever thou art, thou rude and foolish Man,
Beware, lest thou the Lord of Heaven resist,
And fight against him both with Heart and Fist.
(3.)
But in his Heart the foolish Man has said,
There is no God; and therefore not dismayed
To slight his Teachings: He in froward Wrath,
Runs fearless on in Ruin's dreadful Path.
Englished by H. M. About a Week before her last Illness seized her, she
desired me, being writing, to write these two Lines, viz.

Non quaerit laudem Virtus, sibi debita vera est
Gloria, quam frendens nequit hinc depellere livor.
Which I Translate thus; viz.

Virtue seeks not for Praise of Men,
True Glory is its Due,
Which fretting Envy never can
Dispel from Virtue true.
H. M. TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Miscellaneous Grove,
Was fruitful both in Virtue and in Love:
Read but the following Lines, and thou may find,
She was the Mistress of a Noble Mind;
A Soul of more than common Size possessed
Her (almost I had said) too narrow Breast.
True to her Friend, as plainly does appear,
In dealing plainly with her Friend so dear:
She used no gilded Baits, no Flattery,
No feigned Words, but plain Sincerity;
Which does bespeak her Love, and Virtue too,
Contended, one the other to outdo.
In Numbers sweet, her warbling Pen has tried
Unerring Truth from Error to divide:
Her Lines, thus measured, have successful been,
To turn the wandering Mind to search within;
Where that invaluable Treasure lies,
Unsought by most, discovered to the wise;
But yet concealed and hid from Vult'rous Eyes.
It Is not the common Way, I must confess,
To write in Verse, although it is ne'ertheless
(...) will give you Rest; take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest to your Souls; for my Yoke is
easy, and my Burden is light: And blessed be the Eternal Goodness, I have
witnessed it to be so, in Comparison of the Bondage of Corruption. And I here
insert my Exercise, for the Encouragement of the Sincere-hearted, that all may
depend upon the Lord, Heb. 11.6.
who is a good Rewarder of those who diligently seek him; and can give
Testimony, according to their Measure, Prove. 3.17.
that his Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace; therefore
let those, whose Feet are thither turned, hold on their Way, and persevere in
Righteousness and Purity; that so they may grow stronger and stronger, and be
able to lend a helping Hand to them who are weak; as this my dear Friend has
often done, both to me and others. And let all, who are yet seeking the Lord,
and his Truth, be encouraged in Faithfulness and Obedience to follow God's
Requirings in their own Hearts; Romans 1.19.
for that which may be known of God, is there manifest; Ephesians. 5.13.
and whatsoever does make manifest, is Light, (viz.) the Light of Jesus, which
enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World: This is that which truly
discovers God to Man, and Man to himself; yea, the whole Mystery of Godliness.
Therefore let none tire in their Search after Truth, Call. 6.9.
nor be weary in welldoing, for they shall reap in due Season, the Benefit
thereof, if they faint not, but hold out unto the End; as did the Author of the
ensuing Verses: Of whom I am willing to give the Reader some Account.

She was one, who in her Childhood, was much afflicted with weak Eyes, which
made her unfit for the usual Employment of Girls; and being of a large natural
Capacity, quick, witty, and studiously inclined, her Father brought her up to
more Learning, than is commonly bestowed upon our Sex; in which she became so
good a Proficient, that she well understood the Latin Tongue, fluently
discoursed in it; and made a considerable Progress in Greek also; wrote several
Hands well; was a good Arithmetician, Psalm. 90.11.
yea in the best Arithmetic; for she so numbered her Days, as to apply her
Heart unto Wisdom; as also to the Study of several useful Arts; had a good
Understanding of Physic and Surgery, the Nature of Plants, Herbs, and
Minerals; and made some Inspection into diverse profitable Sciences, delighting
in the Study of Nature, and to admire the great God of Nature, in the various
Operations of his Power and Goodness, the wonderful Harmony and Order of the
Creation, and the infinite Wisdom by which it is governed; of which she would
often speak: Admiring ^ow there could be an Atheist in the World; since the
Creation does so plainly assert the Being of a Deity. And as we have been
walking or riding together, would often discourse of the present Objects, much
tending to Edification; making many pretty Remarks, and comparing outward
Things with inward: As also upon all Occasions would draw such useful
Observations, as made her Company profi^able and delighting: For she was of a
thoughtful composed Temper, yet of a quick Apprehension, and ingenious; which,
being seasoned with Truth, (in which she had many sweet Openings) these meeting
in a Temper conversable, and concerned for the Good of others, made her
Conversation Improving and desirable. She was one who loved the Blessed Truth
(and they who walked according to it) from a Child, being early convinced
thereof; though she was not satisfiyed with a bare Profession of Religion, but
zealous for the Life of it, both in her self and others; also furnished with
good Arguments to defend it, being ready to give an Answer to every one that
asked a Reason of the Hope which was in her, with Meekness and Fear: Not
forward to begin a Dispute, yet sound in what the undertook, and never (that I
know of) foiled in an Argument; for she had an Eye to the Lord, and liked to be
satisfied that she was in her Place, and called by him to what she did for him:
Would often mention the Passage of Vzza, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. how Death was his
Punishment, for putting forth his Hand to take hold of the Ark of God, when the
Oxen shook it, being a Service not required of him.

Nor was she proud, or conceited of her Parts and Learning, but adorned with an
humble Modesty; having, I believe, meaner Thoughts of her self, than any one
else had of her, who knew her Qualifications.

Plain and decent in her Clothes, which she valued for Service more than Sight;
and slighted in Comparison of those better Ornaments of the Mind, which she
preferred above splendid or costly Apparel.

She was one who loved to read the Holy Scriptures, and such useful Authors, as
had a Tendency to Improvement; in which she spent much Time: God having
furnished her with an extraordinary Memory, to retain the same.

She delighted much in Solitude, and was often alone; setting apart some Time
of the Day for Retirement; and would frequently say to me, in the Evenings, Let
us go aside, and wait upon the Lord; we have daily need of daily Bread, and to
renew our Strength; and how can we expect it, if we do not wait for it? and
would recite the Passage of Elijah, 1 Kings 18.36. that at the Time of the
Evening Sacrifice, the Lord answered by Fire; with other pretty Remarks, too
tedious to insert, which she abounded in, upon all Occasions, to promote that
which was good. In these Times of Retirement, Verses would come up in her Mind,
which she after wrote: Many of these, herewith printed, being Meditations
according to the Frame and Exercise of her Spirit, when thus composed.

Neither did she neglect public Opportunities to worship God; for she was
diligent in frequenting religious Meetings, not being ^pt to omit any, unless
upon extraordinary Occasion. Nor did she suffer her Eyes to vander, which the
Mind too often accompanies, but the Composedness of her Coun^enance showed the
Sedateness of her well-exercised Mind: And the good Improvement she made of
public and private De^otion, her innocent and Christian Life did ^early
discover; which she well began her ^^rly Years, and manifested her Progress
^erein, by her Constancy and Perseverance the End, which crowns all; for it is
he at endures to the End that shall be saved: This ^e had a Regard to, more
than the fading enjoyments of this uncertain World; and I believe, she was in a
good Condition when she ^t it, and laid down her Head in Peace ^th the Lord,
leaving a good Savor behind

She was one who willingly and cheerfully sufferted for the Truth, encomaging
others to do the like, both by Precept and Example: One just, honest, and true
to her Word, temperate and selt-denying; keeping within the Limits prescribed
for Health, which she regarded, more than to gratify a luxurious Appetite;
solid and grave in her Carriage, mixed with an innocent Cheerfulness; not
formally austere; yet rather reserved, than overfree; bashful, than bold.

To conclude, she was one whose Modesty, Charity, Friendship, and religious
Conversation, came not short of her excellent Writings; to which I refer the
Reader, for a fuller Character of their Author, than I am capable of giving;
her own Pen having discovered the rich Treasure of her pious Mind. But what I
have written, is from an experimental Knowledge of her; and no one, I believe,
knew her better than my self: For she was as much without Reserve to me, I
think, as one Friend could be to another for we loved entirely, communicated
ou^ Minds and Exercises to each other freely advising with one another on most
Occasions: And great was our Nearness and Unity of the Spirit, in the Truth;
yea, great her Concern for my Welfare, which she zea lously labored for; as
the many Letters, both in Verse and Prose, to me writ, and here with printed,
largely demonstrates.

And though Verse is not so commonly used in Divine Subjects, as Prose, and but
too much abused by the extravagant Wits of the Age; yet the, like a skilful
Chemist, had learned to separate the purer Spirits, and more refined Parts of
Poetry, from the earthly, worthless Dross; and made use of her Gi^t, rather to
convince and prevail upon the Mind, to affect and raise the Soul upon Wings of
Divine Contemplation, than to please the any Fancy with Strains of Wit, and
unprofitable Invention, which she was ever careful to avoid.

And though living Testimonies to the Truth are numerous, yet few extant in
Verse, which has an harmonious delighting Faculty in it, that influences the
Minds of some more than Prose, especially young People, and is more apt to
imprint it felt in the Memory: Therefore, her Subject being divine, and so
sensibly and solidly managed; as it has been of Service to those few who have
had the Perusal of it, so, I hope, will be attended with a General Benefit.

And having reaped no small Advantage thereby my self, could do no less, than
recommend her worthy Labors, and examplary Life to others, as a Pattern well
worth following. For her Acquaintance may say of her, as was said of Ruth, The
City of my People does know that she was a virtuous Woman. And being a good
Instrument in the Hand of the Lord to me, having also been much comforted,
encouraged and refreshed by her Verses, my Desire is, That the Lord may so
bless them to Posterity, that many may reap such an Advantage by them, as may
tend to the Promotion of Truth, and the Good of Souls in general.

Which is the sincere Desire of an universal Well-wisher to all Mankind.

Frances Owen.
Rigate, the 20th of the 3d Month, 1701.
A Testimony concerning my dear Friend, Mary Molineux.
AS concerning my dearly beloved Friend, Mary Molineux, I have more to testify,
than I shall commit to Writing, having had intimate Acquaintance and Fellowship
with her above Sixteen Years; in all which Time, her grave, virtuous modest
Life and Conversation, deserves singular Remembrance; because and Deportment,
was always solid sensible, and tender, mixed with a feeling and sympathizing
Love to her Friends, in all Exercises and Afflictions: She was one to whom I
could freely impart my Mind and Concerns, in any Exercises; as I often have
done, to my Comfort and Refreshment. My Heart is moved, in the Remembrance of
her Faithfulness and Integrity, from the Day that I was first acquainted with
her, with Sorrow for the Loss of so near a Friend; who, although she was
plentifully endued with many worthy Gifts and Parts, both natural and
Spiritual, yet I never knew her lifted up in any of them, nor exalted above her
Measure; but rather reserved than in any wise forwardly divulging her Gifts to
the public Censure, without weighty Consideration; so that she would not cast
her Pearls before Swine: Yet not so much reserved, but that to her near
intimate Friends, whom she knew in the Fellowship and Bond of Truth, she was
very free and tender. I remember, that several Years ago, when she was a single
Woman, upon the Perusal of some Copies of her Verses, which she gave me, I felt
such Unity of Spirit with them, that I said, I thought they might be of
Service, if made public in Print; but she was not then free, that her Name
should be exposed; she not seeking Praise amongst Men, but to communicate the
Exercise of peculiar Gifts amongst her near Friends and Acquaintance: But now,
since it has pleased the Lord to remove her out of the Earthly Tabernacle,
into Everlasting Rest, in which, I am well satisfied, she is for ever blessed,
I think it would be ungrateful to her Memory, and also a wronging of others, to
keep such worthy Things unpublished; with which I believe, the most that are of
open Understandings, and unprejudiced Hearts, will have (in some measure)
Unity. I desire and hope, they may truly tend to the Benefit of all moderate
Readers, and to the Praise of him, who is the only Author of every good and
perfect Gift.

And so I rest, a Well-wisher to all Mankind; but more especially to the
Household of Faith.

Trial Rider.

IS Worthy Mollineux now fallen asleep,
In true Contentedness, and Silence deep?
Her noble, blessed Soul yet lives above,
In The Everlasting Bliss, in the Father's Love;
Where she does rest, whilst we our selves bemoan
Our Loss of her, in Virtue so well know.
And still her Memory remains alive
In The Hearts of all her Friends, which do survive;
Who knew her virtuous Mind, Life, Words and Way,
That from her tender Youth, she did not stray
From Wisdom's Voice and Dictates in her Heart,
Whereby she was enabled to impart
Some Fruits thereof, while she was very young,
To such as saw to what it did belong:
The tender Noble Seed of Grace and Truth
Did freely spring, when she was in her Youth;
And grew in her, as she increased in Years,
Bringing forth Fruit, as by her Book appears:
Of which, a Testimony rests behind,
As they that read her Lines may fully find.
She did not strive, nor glory, to appear
In Gifts or Parts, but still to live in Fear;
Whence Wisdom's known to have a true Beginning,
And in the same she made a faithful Ending.
A Testimony concerning my late Wife, Mary Mollineux deceased.
COncerning my dear, loving, and late deceased Wife, Mary Mollineux, formerly
Mary Southworth, whom I took in Marriage on the 10th Day of the 2d Month, 1685.
I was first acquainted with her at Lancaster-Castle, where we both, at one
Time, were Prisoners for being at peaceable religious Meetings of the People
called Quakers, in the Year 1684, (though we had seen each other before.) In
which Imprisonment, I believed that she should be my Wife; but never intended
to express any thing thereof, whilst we were both Prisoners, there; and after
she was released, I saw her and was in Company with her several Times, before I
expressed any thing of my Concern to take her to be my Wife; several
considerable Men having before attempted to prevail with her on that Account:
And during the whole Time of my Acquaintance with her, which was above Eleven
Years; her Life and Conversation was serious, innocent, sweet and savoury; and
she was very loving, diligent, tenderhearted, and kindly affectionate toward
me and our Children; and generally loving and tender toward all People,
especially such as were in any Distress, Sickness, or Affliction, though never so
poor; and the Lord blessed her Endeavors, as well in Advice, as Administration
of Remedies, to several; so that they have acknowledged their Recoveries to
have been thereby, through his Blessing: And what she did therein, was free. She
was very careful, that nothing of Evil might get a Place in her Children, or in
any with whom she was concerned: And therefore good Advice and Admonition she
frequently gave, which many received in Love and good Esteem of her. The Lord
opened her Understanding, and enlarged her Capacity, in a great Degree, upon
several Accounts; yet her Mind was not lifted up thereby, so as to glory in her
Gifts or Parts; but, learning of Christ the Truth, to be lowly in Heart, she
chose rather to appear little to Men. She was very constant and cordial to her
Friends, and true in concealing of Secrets. She was often concerned to make
Peace amongst them that were at Difference, and often prevailed therein. She
was plain and free in speaking to the Faces of any, but abhorred to reproach
any in secret. Her Heart was inclined toward God, therefore she was just in
her Dealing with all People, with whom she had to do. She was convinced of the
Way of Truth in her Youth, by the Light or inward Appearance of Christ in her
Heart, which she loved; and therefore (she retaining her Integrity to the End
of her Time) a Crown of endless Life and Glory, I believe, the Lord has
bestowed upon her. She was very noble in suffering Persecution for the
Testimony of Truth, and in enduring hard Exercises, occasioned by my several
Imprisonments for the same Cause, whilst she was my Wife. And through several
Sicknesses and Afflictions the Lord supported her, to persevere in Patience,
Faithfulness, and Constancy to him. She was very punctual in Performance of her
Undertakings, and quick, discreet and diligent in her Business; yet still she
used to take a Time for private Retirement in Evenings alone, (except I was
with her) to wait upon, and feel after the Lord, in the Gift of his Light, Love
and Grace in her Heart; and to see that, with the wise Virgins, she had Oil in
her Burning Lamp, that it might not go out; but that she might be ready to
enter into the Marriage-Chamber, whenever the Lord, the Bridegroom of her
Soul, came. She was also very diligent, in attending the Assemblies of the
People of God, called Quakers, with them, to meet in the Name, Power, Light and
Spirit of the Lord, to wait upon him, to be opened by him, and to receive
Refreshment, Strength and Comfort from him, and to feel the Renewings of his
Love and Goodness in her Soul. And that Day-week next before her last Illness
seized her (after a more than usual Manner) she said to me, That the feeling
and enjoying of the sweet eternal Love of God in her Heart, was more precious
to her, than all other things that could be enjoyed, etc. She was concerned in
her Spirit, that many, with her, and all that are faithful to God, might come
to taste and see how good the Lord is; and upon that Account, her Words,
Writings, and Conversation, were acceptable, prevalent and serviceable, to the
Invitation, Convincement, Strengthening and Encouragement of some to seek after
the Lord, and his bleised Way and Truth, inwardly revealed, and to be revealed;
wherein many have found great Satisfaction, and Cause of rejoicing. And that
many more may receive Benefit by her Writings, I am desirous and concerned to
publish them, and refer all sober Readers, in the Fear of God, to peruse them;
not doubting but such may receive Advantage thereby; though she was not free to
commit them to public View in her Lifetime, yet she had nothing against the
publishing thereof afterward.

And now I shall give a brief Account of what I was, and am a Witness of,
concerning her last Illness; and some of the sweet, sensible and precious Words
which she spoke in the Time thereof, being very sensible to the End; so that
she spoke no impertinent or unsensible Word therein, that I know of, who
constantly attended her.

Upon the Eighth Day of the 10th Month, 1695. she was seized with violent Pain
and Sickness, which continued, sometimes more, and sometimes less: And one
Morning, soon after, she said to me thus; I have had such a Dream, as I have
seldom had; it is an Emblem of my Life; and then she told it me thus; viz. She
dreamed, that she was going at the Side of a pleasant broad River, and
sometimes she came to Breaches; which, Brooks running into the River, or the
like, had made upon the Shore of it; which Breaches she passed over, but
sometimes with Difficulty, and then ran fast on still, till she came to another
Breach; and having passed several Breaches, some greater, and some lesser, at
last she came to a Breach which was greater than any of the rest, and she said
within her self, How shall I get over this Breach? But she went on, and passed
through it, and it was fair on the other Side; and she awaked. Now, as she looked
upon this Dream to be an Emblem of her Life, so I cannot (nor could not since
she told it me) expound it otherwise than thus; viz. That the pleasant broad
River signified the Lord her Creator, (who is to his People a Place of broad
Rivers, Isa. 31.21.) and the Shore thereof, upon which she walked, signified
Time, and the Breaches, which she passed over, were the Difficulties and
Afflictions which she passed through in her Time; and the last and greatest
Breach, which she came to, and passed over, signified her last Sickness and
Death. From which Dream (as a significant Parable) all may learn and consider
how fast they are hastening or running toward their last and greatest Breach;
even the Death or Dissolution of their earthly Tabernacles; and none knows
how near they are to it. About Nine Days after her said Illness began, she said
to me thus, viz. I am well content, if the Lord see meet, that he take me away
by this Distemper, rather to be in this Pain; for my Pain is great, and I know
not what is in this World I can desire, to stay to enjoy, except it is my Love,
and my little Lads; meaning me, and our two Children. Of whom she then said
thus, I would rather have my Children enriched with the Fear of the Lord, than
with all Manner of Worldly Riches. About the same Time, she said, I am thinking
of honest Richard Johnson, (who was a near Friend to us) that slept much of the
Time of his Illness, before his Departure; methinks it seems like an easy
Passage. And soon after that, she began to be inclind to Sleepiness, and slept
more and more, till the End; yet, at her awaking, was still sensible and
cheerful: And though she was daily weaker and weaker, yet she would still sit up
five or six, or more Hours in the Evenings, and discourse freely and
cheerfully, till within five Days of her Departure. I often desired her to to
accept of the Advice of some Physician, but she was still averse thereto, in
this Illness, though in others she had complied. On the 20th Day of her Illness,
in the Evening, discoursing very freely (as formerly) she told me, She was well
satisfied, that if the Lord took her away by that Distemper, she should be
eternally Happy; with many other sensible and comfortable Expressions: Though she
was so weak, that the same Evening, about the eleventh Hour, I thought she had
been departing; but in a little Time, recovering her Breath, she spoke
cheerfully and slept. At her awaking, that Night, I asked her, How she was? She
answered, Through Mercy, indifferent. And after a little Pause, she very sensibly
said, Amictum iri, vet Amiciendum esse; which is in English, To be clothed
hereafter, in two Expressions of it: Whereby I understood, that she was
minding, how the Lord would cloth her hereafter, when her Mortal Clothing was
put off. Then I desired her in English Words, (for they that were present,
understood not Latin,) that if she had any thing in her Mind, either concerning
her Children, or any other Thing farther to communicate to me, that she would
do it; but she, (as if all outward Things were then out of her Thoughts)
quickly replied in Latin, Why speak thou such Things? Do not thou
understand me? I answered in Latin, Yes, I very well understand thee, and that
thou speak of Spiritual Things: She answered, Yes, but she had nothing
concerning outward Things, farther to communicate to me. The next Morning,
about the Ninth Hour, I again thought she had been departing; but after a
little Time, somewhat recovering her Breath, and seeing me express, to Friends
that were present, something or my Concern for her, she said to me, Ne nimis
solicitus esto; that is, in English, Be not thou overmuch careful, or troubled;
which Advice took Impression in my Heart: And that was the last Latin Sentence
that she spoke, that I know of; and she never spoke in Latin, in this Illness,
that I remember, except when Company was present, that she would speak only to
me? A little after, most of the Company being gone out, I asked her, how she
was? She answered, Drawing nearer and nearer. And many sweet and loving
Sentences she spoke to me that Day, and the Day next after; but afterward was
scarcely able to answer to any Question, but continued mostly sleeping, as it
were, sweetly and quietly: And on the Third Day of the 11th Month, 1695, in the
Evening, she departed, without any Noise, Sigh, or Groan.

And so, though the Lord, who in his Love, joined us together, and gave us for
Blessings to each other, and blessed us with the abundant Increase of his Love
in our Hearts, even to the end of her Time, has seen meet to take from me her
Company, which I valued above all other Temporal Enjoyments; the Loss whereof
is great to me: Yet being satisfied, that she is entered into Rest, in the Bosom
of God's Love, with him, to live in Peace and Happiness for ever; and also,
being clear, in that, through his Assistance, according to the Understanding
given me, I have endeavored fully to discharge my Duty of endeared Love to her
in every respect, in her last (as well as former) Exercises; therefore I am, in
the Love of God, comforted, and can cheerfully and freely say, The Lord's Will
is worthy to be done in all things, and his Name to be blessed, praised and
magnited, over all, for ever,

By Henry Mollineux.

A few Words more, in Remembrance of my Dear Wife, M. M.
THOUGH it may seem to some that read my Lines
As a delightful thing, because their Minds
Still their Enjoyments have; yet they must know
No lasting Joys remain in things below.
The Scythe of Time, Death, parts Friend from Friend,
But to true Friendship cannot put an End;
Though Friends surviving, Exercise may find,
Whose Friend's removed, whilst they remain behind.
My Friend, my Friend, my dearest Friend, my Wife
The greatest Joy and Comfort of my Life,
In Visibles, is now removed from me:
Though, as one destitute of Hope, I see
No Cause to mourn for her; but sure I may
Be, for my Loss, concerned: Yet this can say,
The Lord has given, the Lord has took again,
High Praises still be to his glorious Name,
Though mine is the Loss, hers is the endless Gain.
Although to me my Loss to bear is hard,
Yet am I from repining quite debarred;
The Lord does with his Goodness so supply,
My Soul shall ever praise him, till I die.
Blessed be the Day, wherein my Love abounded,
At first to her, and Friendship firm was found,
In our united Hearts; my faithful Friend!
Friendship 'twixt thee and me shall never end.
She was my Wife for full Ten Years;
Short Time!) which we in tender Love did pass alas,
Endearingly, which in our Hearts was sown
Some time before, by the Eternal One;
Which, living in our Bosoms, did increase,
Until the Time of her deplored Decease,
And now is as fresh as ever. Surely she
Who wrote of Friendship, Love's extreme Degree,
(Although with Life, her Pen was much sublimed,
Yet) did not, as her Bosom held it, find
Words, half sufficient, fully to declare
The faithful Love she to her Friend did bear.
True, tenderhearted, in Affection kind,
Exceeding diligent, and much inclined
All for to serve in Love; but much more me,
To whom she had complied my Wife to be.
She to the Age of thirty-four Years stayed
A modest, chaste, reserved, ingenious Maid;
Who did not only write of Modesty,
(In Words profound) and spotless Chastity,
But in Example was, as well as Words,
A Pattern in the same; wherein accords
Her Life, Works, Writings, Words, true, lovely, sweet,
Which in concinnate Harmony did meet.
And as she wrote of Worship, Truth and Zeal,
With Courage bold for God, she did not fail;
Being by his Arm upheld, when deeply proved,
To stand a faithful Witness: For she loved
The Praise of God, more than the Praise of Men;
Therefore was more to him, seemed less to them
That did not choose his Fear; wherein she found
Wisdom to stop their Mouths, their Wits confound;
Though of the chief in Babel's Learning, they
Stood as amazed, and knew not what to say.
A Bishop of two Counties Diocese
Her Questioned, she Replied, He proved this:
His Chaplain then (the Master's Cause to mend)
Attempting to dispute, was foiled in the the End;
Whose Brother (being a Lawyer) present cried,
Her Learning made her mad, when she replied,
He, as ashamed, and speechless, turned aside.
Thus three great learned Men, of subtle Wit,
(To Silence put) did in One Hour submit
TO a little Woman crowned with Wisdom's Bays,
Who, in God's Fear, did celebrate his Praise;
Declaring boldly against that Worship, which
God never set up, that makes its Merchants rich.
She loved the precious Truth (placed in her Heart)
For which she was imprisoned; but the Smart
Its Adversaries felt: For Joy to her
Thereby accru'd, who did its Cause prefer
Before all Transitories. And, when I
Was Prisoner for the same, it was ^^y Joy
That she great Exercise did nobly bear,
Therein rejoicing in God's Holy Fear:
Though for her sake Grief pierced often my Mind,
Where I the Sense did of her Suffering find
So deep, that from mine Eyes my Sleep withdrew,
And secret Tears did frequently pursue:
Yea, without outward Notice, once was I,
When she was, by Distemper, like to die,
Made sensible thereof, though in the Goal,
Distant near forty Miles, and did condole;
And for her to the Lord I prayed, whose Ear
Was open, and through Prison-walls did hear;
And he released her from her Malady,
And me from Prison, her again to see;
Though then confined, as firm as Men could tie;
Praises be to God's Name Eternally.
She sweetly wrote of Charity Divine,
Which in her Heart and Life did clearly shine
More bright, than in her Words, which did extend,
In her, to poor and rich, to Foe and Friend:
To all in Plainness she, with due respect,
Would freely show her Sense; but to reflect
Against any being absent, did eschew;
Charity taught her better things to do.
To any, in Affliction, she was free
Advice to give, or help with Remedy,
Where her Endeavors could; which God did bless,
Remarkably, with the desired Success:
Yea, sometimes, when Physicians had been tried,
Much Money paid, and still the Cure denied
To their Performance, she in Freeness gave
What from Distempers dreadful, proved to save.
But Charity in her did farther move
Her tender Heart, in Sympathizing Love,
To use her Tongue or Pen, a Word to give
To Minds in Exercise; which did relieve,
Convince, or satisfy, and strengthen some,
The Race of Virtue in their time to run:
For which, some have good Cause to bless the Name
Of God, from whom those Words with Virtue came.
This is not writ to magnify her Praise,
The Praise belongs to God, who first did raise
Her Mind from things below, to seek his Truth,
Hid in her Heart, in time of tender Youth;
Which, truly sought, she found, and prized more
Than Ophir's Gold, or Pearls of Indian Shore.
This taught her to discern the way of God,
From ways of Men; this made her love his Rod;
This gave her Knowledge of her Duty right
Unto the Lord; this gave her also Sight
Into the Properties of needful things,
Of many kinds, that Mortals Comfort brings:
This gave her, in her tender Years to see
The frail Estate of poor Mortality;
The Sense whereof she daily did retain,
Striving, with earnest Diligence, to gain
The precious Pearl of Immortality,
As if she knew how short her Time should be;
In Hope of which, when painful Death assailed
Her Mortal Part, her Courage never failed;
But did (with Sense as ever) show
Her true Content, and Satisfaction too,
To leave this World; of true Felicity,
To be possessed to all Eternity.
O may with me, her Offspring still remain
In God's pure Fear, Eternal Life to gain,
Then, this short Time once past, we may in Peace
Live with the Just, where Joys shall never cease,
Where we, with her, may living Praises sing
For ever, to the Lord, the Heavenly King.
Henry Mollineux. The following Relation, touching some Discourse that (upon
Occasion) she had with Doctor Stratford (so called) Bishop of the Diocese of
Cheshire and Lancashire, etc.
Given forth and Attested by my Kinsman, Henry Mollineux, who was there
present, viz.
UPon the 18th Day of the 12th Month, 1690. I and another Neighbor were taken
Prisoners, and brought to Lancaster- Goal, upon a Writ de Excomm. Capiend. for
not appearing at the Bishop's Court in Chester; though willing to appear, but had
no Citation showed us, nor Lawful Notice given: Of which Proceedings (it being
witnessed under the Hands of several who were present when such Notice was
pretended to be given) she acquainted the said Bishop, he being at Ormskirk,
near our Dwelling, in the Sixth Month, 1691. and it was so evidently manifested
to him, that he seemed satisfied of the Truth thereof, and said, they who
should have given the Notice, were to be blamed, etc. And moderately
discoursing with her, he said, If she would come to his Dwelling House in
Wigan, within two or three Weeks, when he had conferred with his Chancellor, if
he could find out any way to do it, he would do any Kindness therein, that ^ay
in his Power for her. Now that which she desired was, that the Prisoners might
be admitted in his Court, to put in their Appearance; for Want of which they
were imprisoned. So, upon his Advice, on the 24th Day of the 6th Month, 1691.
she went to the Bishop's House in Wigan, to receive his Answer; where he again
discoursed with her, and seemed willing that the Prisoners might be admitted to
put in their Appearance; but his Chancellor's Deputy there concluded, that they
could not be so admitted. Then the Bishop asked her, Why they would not pay the
Church-Dues (for that was the Cause for which we were prosecuted) she answered,
they could not pay them for Conscience Sake. He required her to show him some
Scripture for it; then she asked him to show her any Precept or Example in the
Scriptures, that the Jews, or any of the People of God, ever offered to compel
any other People to pay toward the upholding of their Worship or
Worship-houses, or T^mples? The Bishop replied, though he could not do that, yet
what Scripture have you for it, said he, that you cannot pay to ours for
Conscience Sake? She answering, said, I will offer thee Scripture for it, and
it is this; It is said in the Scriptures, Come out from among them, (my People)
and be ye separate, faith the Lord, touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Rev. 18.4. Now (said she) if we had believed that
you

(...) Fruits of Retirement: OR, Miscellaneous POEMS Moral and Divine.
Of the Fall of Man.
THE Holy One did, by his Word, create
Man in a blessed innocent Estate;
Gave him a righteous Law, whereby he might
Live in eternal, pure, unstained Delight.
But the Serpent, the most subtle Beasti'th' Field,
Soon with a Lie our Grandmother beguiled,
Through a vain Hope; and to Iniquity
^^slav'd poor Man, breaking the Unity
Betwixt him and his Maker; leading him
Fondly to seek a Satisfaction in
Self-hood, and Transitory Things below
The chiefest Good; whereby Man came to know
Sad Disappointments, whence he could not be,
By Power in Self ever ransomed or set free.
But ah, the Bowels of eternal Love
Did then, with Pity and Compassion, move
Toward his Creature, that he promised,
The Woman's Seed shall bruise the Serpent's Head:
And, in the Time appointed, freely gave
His Darling Son a Sacrifice, to save
Perishing Mankind from that dreadful State,
Which was so miserable desperate;
So that believing in the Heavenly Power,
He comes to know his Lord and Savior,
Redeeming him from Sin unto Salvation,
And to eternal Reconciliation.
Written 1663.
Of a Sinful State.
MY Sins are numberless, more than the Hair
Upon my Head, yea, more than I can bear.
O how my Soul does languish in Distress,
Because polluted with Unrighteousness!
Ah, how my wretched Heart has often been
Ensnared with Folly, and enticing Sin!
Sin, seeming pleasant, subtly betrays
Poor doting Mortals; but its cursed Ways
Leads to Death's Chambers, and like Poison sweet
Lulls on the Soul into a lasting Sleep.
Lord, rouse me from such Slumbers that arise
That I may this deformed Sin despise,
And quite forsake all Earthly Vanities,
Which me into Temptation, thus has brought,
That I (instead of Wisdom) Folly sought.
O that I were at Peace with thee, and could
Truly lament my sins, so manifold!
My sins, which will, except thou grant Relief,
Oe'rwhelm me with intolerable Grief.
Awake, awake my Soul, do not remain
^n Slothfulness and Sin; but turn again
To him that made thee: Do not still transgress
His holy Law; but, whilst he calls thee, cease
From Evil, learn his Precepts, follow him,
Who freely gave his Life thee to redeem
From this vain World, from Sin and Slavery,
That brings to endless Woe and Misery:
He bought thee dear, with his most precious Blood,
Shed on the Cross for thine and others good.
But, ah, how often have I despised true Joys,
And placed my Heart on transitory Toys?
How often did I the glorious Pearl refuse,
Vile empty Husks, that nourish not, to choose?
Look down upon me, and commiserate,
Most gracious Lord, my lamentable State;
And tenderly lead thou me back again
unto the Land of Promise whence I came
unto this Land of Darkness; where, alas,
thus was brought to Bondage and Distress:
For, ah, thou King of Kings, it thou reject me,
Pharaoh's pursuing Host would soon afflict me,
And if thou help me not in this Distress,
Then should I perish in the Wilderness.
^n what Aegyptian-Red-Sea straights am I?
Whither, or to what Refuge shall I fly?
But unto thee? In whom alone I must
Repose my Confidence, and chiefest Trust
Renew my Strength (dear Lord) that so I man
Overcome my great Temptations Day by Day
And so support my Soul, that I may bear
The World's Revilings with a thankful Ea^
And that I truly may in thee rejoice,
Great Spring of Light and Life, in Heart and Voi^
Confessing thee, the only Savior,
Who sav'st thy People from the Dragon's Pow'^
And with thy Blood do wash and purify
Our Souls from all Sin and Iniquity:
Who art indeed the good Samaritan,
That cast an Eye of Pity on us, when
The Priest passed by, and Levite turned asid^
And (as it were) Relief and Help denied;
But thou had Wine and Oil, to purify
Supple and heal our grievous Malady.
Thou, thou alone, the true Physician art
The Consolation of a contrite Heart:
O say, Be whole; say likewise, Sin no more,
Lest worse Afflictions happen than before
Say also, if it please thee, gracious Lord,
(Who what thou will, effectest by thy Worcester
Thy Sin's forgiven, thy Iniquity
Is covered; and beget true Faith in me,
That I may praise thy Name eternally,
1664.

And mourn for her, as for that City was,
Through whose sad Streets our Savior did pass
Bearing his Cross) may now be found? For they,
As did the Jews, contemn the blessed Day
Of Visitation; hate the Heavenly Light,
That shines in Darkness; daily do Despite
Unto the only Author of all Good;
And trample under Foot the precious Blood
Of Holy Jesus, by the Father sent
A Just High Priest, a blessed Covenant
Unto the People: Him do they despise,
And on their Beds do Wickedness devise
Against the Just and Innocent; for they,
That live uprightly, make themselves a Prey.
Alas, both Priests and People now are bent,
With one Accord, God's Heritage to rent:
But he observes them, and the Day draws near,
Wherein he will surely meet them, as a Bear
^ereaved of her Whelps; and then he will take
^engeance, for his afflicted Israel's sake.
And though the Priests Peace unto many cry,
They know not Peace; but such as do deny
To feed them with the Fat, they rent and tare,
^ike those of Old; yea, Cruel War prepare
against them. Thus, for all their Learning, they
^now not the Scripture-Record, (which does say,
^ouch ye not mine Anointed, neither harm
My Prophets; for I Will guard them with the Arm
^f my Salvation) nor the Power of God,
That will chastize, as with an Iron-Rod,
The proud rebellious Ones; who shall be known
To be but Hirelings, whom he will nor own.
These are they that for Gain do prophecy
Devices of their Brain, and speak a Lie
To People; yet dare say, Thus says the Lord,
When As they do not rightly know his Word,
That Is as a Fire and Hammer, to destroy,
Consume, and batter down Iniquity.
People, observing Priests to count their Gain
Their Godliness, rush into all profane
Abominations and Impurity;
Counting Religion a mere Policy
To overawe dull Souls, whilst some enjoy
All the Delights wherewith Earth can supply
Their soaring Fancies. Thus, alas, they run
The Road to Ruin, swift to be undone:
If Heaven prevent not with a gracious Hand,
They Will soon draw down sad Judgment on the Land
On the Fruitless Fig Tree.
THE Fig Tree, though it flourished, did afford
No Fruit, as was expected by the Lord
Therefore 'twas cursed, did wither and decay
No Fruit producing from that very Day.
But unto Mankind, O most gracious Lord!
Great are the Mercies, which thou do afford
Tho slothfully they hide, sometimes deny
The Talents given by thy Majesty;
Thou do not in thine Indignation thus
Pass so severe a Sentence upon us;
Although we, of our selves, so barren be,
And often more fruitless than that blooming Tree,
Thou prun'st us, and with sweet refreshing Showers
Art pleased often to renew our weakened Powers:
Yea, long thou spar'st us; and at length, who proves
Fruitful, thou cherishest, and freely loves.
But if thy great Fortbalance, Lord, should be
As 'twere frustrated by a fruitless Tree,
Thou justly may the Vine-dresser require
To cut it down, and cast it into the Fire:
Though there was frequent Intercession made,
As when the Dressers of the Vineyard said,
Lord, let us try it yet another Year,
And then, if any Fruit thereon appear,
It Is well Forbearance has thereto been shown;
If otherwise, it is Time to cut it down.
When thus the Lord has long Time Fruit expected
From Men, and yet is carelessly rejected:
Though waiting still, he is pleased to condescend
Line upon Line, with Patience, to extend;
And Precept upon Precept, did dispense;
And likewise promised a sure Recompense
Of durable Reward, eternal Joy,
To those that, ceasing from Iniquity,
Would unto his most sacred Will resign
Themselves, and all: Then would he with Divine
Sweet Heavenly Showers bedew, and always bless.
Them, that they might be Trees of Righteousness
But if such should resist, they will come to be
Like Heath in the Desert, or the fruitless Tree:
And if against them the Decree be sealed,
To cut them down, how can it be repealed?
Ah! prize the present Day of Visitation,
And dare not to provoke his Indignation;
That through Distillings of his Heavenly Love,
You fertile Plants unto his Praise may prove.
1666.
On Israel's Rebellion.
O House of Israel, why will ye die?
O House of Israel, why shall not I
Be King over you? said the eternal One,
When their Rebellions came before his Throne
Rouzing his Justice: Why do ye refuse
Me to be King, another King to choose?
Incline your Ear, and hearken to my Voice,
Lest you too late repent your hasty Choice
Have I not gathered you, that ye might be
A pure, peculiar People unto me?
Did I not bring you out of Egypt's Land,
And set you free from Pharaoh's cruel Hand
Did I not guide you safely through the Sea,
Leading you with a glorious Cloud by Day
And with a Pillar of bright Fire by Night,
Conducted you in pleasant Paths of Light?
Did I not Jordan's flowing Streams divide,
Whist you passed dry-shod to the further side?
Yea, without humane Art, I caused to fall,
Down to the Ground, proud Jericho's high Wall.
Could any Mortal Prince do thus for you?
I gave you Being, Life, and Conquest too.
Why do you then rebel against your God?
Do you not fear him, nor his Iron-Rod?
Remember how, in Love, I nourished
Thee, like a tender Child, with Angels Bread;
With Water from the Rock I did supply thee,
Although I knew 't was good sometimes to try thee.
Thine Enemies I did for thee subdue;
Yea, Great and mighty Kings I overthrew,
When they oppressed or opposed thee:
But, ah, what Guile, or what Iniquity,
Have your Fore-Fathes ever found in me!
Or in my righteous Statutes? Yet have they
Delighted rather in a crooked Way,
Than in my Law; whose Path is perfect Light,
In which the Wise and prudent take Delight.
Though they perversely often turned aside,
As you their Children, who have now denied
Me to be King: It Is me that you forsake,
To choose a Mortal, who will from you take
Your Sons and Daughters, for his Offices,
For Horsemen, Cooks, and other Services
Your Vineyards, Fields, Cattle, and other Treasure,
As he thinks fit, he will call for at his Pleasure.
Stiff-necked People are ye then, to choose
Man for your King, but stubbornly refuse
Me, your Creator, that ye may hereby
Be like your Neighbors; whose Idolatry
You also dote upon: Though my Command
Was to destroy the Idols of the Land;
Which to extirpate utterly, I did
All Converse and Affinity forbid
With those Inhabitants; whom therefore I
Since they the Land with gross Iniquity
Had long defiled, determined to expel,
And give them for a Prey to Israel,
To root them out, not imitate: For they,
By ill Example, soon would lead astray
From my pure Precepts. Yet you rather be
Inclined to hearken unto such, than me,
And t'imitate the Nations round about ye,
Who, should I but withdraw, would quickly rout ye
Take now your Choice; but know the Time will be
In your Afflictions, ye will seek to me:
For they will prove as Thorns to vex and grieve you
And there is none but I that can relieve you
For it is not Man can give you Victory
Over your Opposers: No, it is only I.
And had you still obeyed my just Command
I Would quite expelled your Foes from out the Land
Meditations in Trouble.
O How is my distressed Soul perplexed
With overwhelming Sorrows! Ah how vexed
With daily Troubles, hurried to and fro!
I know not where to stay, or where to go,
Fo find some Ease, or to avoid my Grief;
From this false World I cannot find Relief.
Alas, alas, that which afflicts me,
Is Thoughts, how I have often rejected thee,
Most gracious Lord, when thou invited'st me,
With other wearied ones, to gives us Rest,
And Consolation at thy tender Breast.
But ah, incline thine Ear to this my Cry,
Grant me thy quickening Presence, or I die.
Though in Obscurity I have been hid,
And as in crooked Paths often wandered;
Some Glimpse of Light is surely broken in,
Which gives to see the Loathsomness of Sin:
Yea, through thy Goodness I begin to know
Thour't rich in Mercy, and to Anger slow:
Lord, speak the Word, that so I may be healed,
Knowing thy holy Life in me revealed.
Ah, let thy heavenly Fear always in me
Abound, Salvation is alone of thee.
For, though thy righteous Law I have transgressed
And often despised Knowledge, like the Beast,
That has no Understanding; thou did please
To engage thy self, That if a Sinner cease,
From his passed Wickedness, and fervently
Do unto thee Great King, for Mercy cry,
So that thy holy Precepts he obey,
And walk sincerely in thy living Way;
Thou, by thy Prophet, Lord, wer's pleased to give
Thy Princely Word, He shall not die but live
Encouraged hereby, my panting Soul
Cries unto thee, that thou would make me whole;
Thou only Author of true living Faith,
That haft subdued the Power of Hell and Death,
And overcome the World: Ah, lighten me,
That I may know thy Way, and follow thee;
Bearing the Daily Cross, and find that Power,
Which is to the Redeemed a Resuge-Tower;
And so enjoy eternal Peace with thee,
Thou taking up thy blessed Abode with me,
That I may sing thy Praise eternally.
A Meditation.
THOUGH Zion fit in Misery,
And do in Ashes mourn,
And all her Foes, as they pass by,
Do her deride and scorn.
Though like the spotless Turtle-Dove,
That in the Rock does dwell,
Wailing the Absence of her Love,
Whose Grief no Tongue can tell.
The earnest Breathing of my Heart, and vail
Thy Beauty overlong, lest Doubts prevail:
Let gently teach me always to suomis
To what Chastizement thou, my Lord, think fit;
That a more intimate Acquaintance may
With thee be known, and thy eternal Day
shine forth, as when the Moon's Light must beo^ me,
As the bright quickening Luster of the Su^;
And so the Splendour of the Sun increase
Is the united Light of Seven Days.
^n then, what cause of stumbling can there be
To the redeemed Souls, that follow thee,
(...) true unseigned Love! Thou only art
Worthy to have sole Interest in the Heart:
It Is thou alone, who do our Foes subdue,
And, with kind Invitations, long pursue
^ebellious Souls, too apt to turn aside,
^r to forget thy Kindness, if thou hide
Thy Face a little; or like Israel,
When Moses tarried in the Mount, rebel:
For, ah, distrustins Thoughts do presently
Object the fad Impossibility
Or finding thee again, whereby we might
Be overwhelmed in Egyptian Night;
And with our borrowed Jewels, form and make
(...) Golden Call, and wretchedly forsake,
For new Inventions, thy most righteous Law,
(...) Moses, for a Season should withdraw;
Willing and running to our own Destruction,
When we should wait on thee to gain Instruction.
Ah, let thy tender Care preserve and keep
Us, with an Eye that is not apt to sleep,
But always guards thy little Heritage,
From all their Adversaries, in this Age,
As formerly: though the Unfaithful are
Osre^ surpised, and cast into a Snare:
But though thou cry'st thy true depending Ones.
Thou still protect'st them as Beloved Sons.
Ah! prove me, but support me; my Desire
Is, with resigned Will, to pass the Fire
Of Trials and Afflictions, till thereby
I be refined from all Impurity.
For those whom thou have thoroughly purified,
And in the Furnace of Afflictions tried,
Thou bear up in the Arms of thy Salvation,
And suckles at the Breast of Consolation,
That they may speak thy Praise, and run the Way
Of Life and Peace, in thy eternal Day.
1678.
The first Epistle to Cousin, F. R.
MY Heart (dear Cousin) thy eternal Good
Truly desires, and that Life's saving Food
Thy Soul may taste and feed upon; that so
Thou may unto a perfect Stature grow
In Jesus Christ, the blessed Emmanuel,
And with him in pure Heavenly Places dwell;
That in Sincerity, thy Heart and Mind
May to this Loyal Lover be resigu'd:
Then will it it not be grievous unto thee
To wait to know his Will more frequently;
Which, when made known, be careful to o^^y,
That thou may travel in his holy Way;
Not still resisting, lest he cease to strive,
Who by his potent Love preserves alive.
O prize this Love! and see that, with Disdain
Thou do not recompense this Love again:
Plead not for Flesh, nor Fleshly Vanity,
Lest thou be plunged into Iniquity.
Thou know, thou have a Talent to improve,
^ea, more than some: O do not grieve, or move
^o Indignation, Him that does extend
His tender Arm of Love thee to defend
From the devouring Dragon, that with Wiles
And sluggard Poisons, subtly beguiles
Unstable Souls, that sell the precious Truth,
And in vain Pleasures waste their Prime of Youth,
But be not thou as they, who for mere Toys,
^ontemn and sell their Souls eternal Joys:
^or be ashamed (dear Friend) I thee entreat,
^o honor Him that did thy Soul create,
And Body too; although the World should scorn,
^or Jesus sake; thou know thou wast not born
To seve the World, the Flesh, not Satan neither
Therefore; although all these conspire together,
Give Christ thy Heart, and he will give the Strength
To overcome thine Enemies at length.
But if thou be, before the Sons, of Men,
Asham'^ (...) own thy self his Servant, then
He Will (...) ash^n'd of thee before his Father,
An ^ever-blessed Angels; therefore rather
D^^y thou all for Him, than Him for any
F^^ though there be pretended Lovers many,
Let this the chiesest of Ten Thousand be;
For surely so he will prove himself to thee,
If thou can but believe, and not exclude
Thy lelf, through Sin and vile Ingratitude.
O set thy self to seek him, that seeks thee,
With his endeared Love, to set thee free
From the Oppression of the Enemy,
Thee to adorn in spotless Purity.
Though Troubles, Gr^ess, and Grosses, do attend
Thee many times, thou have a Bolom-Friend
To whom in secret thou may tell thy Grief
Who will not fail to grant thee true Relief
Come then (dear Cousin) in Humility,
Prove, and thou wilt find this Friend's Fidelity
Who will undoubtedly from Griefs divert thee
And unto Holiness and Peace convert thee?
His Grace sufficient is, He only can
Effect what seems impossible to Man.
My Heart is full, and fluent to indite,
My hand is therefore thus engaged to write
Much more than at the first I did intend,
And yet I scarce can freely make an end.
Third Month, 1678.
The Second Epistle to Cousin F. R.
SHall I (endeared Friend) e^^ect (...) vain
Thy Promise answered, and not yet ^^tain
The Joy of better Fruits of vacant Hou^^
Which we are not assured long to be ou^^?
Alas, the Time will come when some will^ay,
O that I had as yet another Day!
What, to add Sin to Sin, and to retire,
If once washed clean, to wallow in the Mire!
No, no; but diligently to improve
Their Time, that they might treasure up above,
In Heavens Exchequer, that which will endure;
Gold tried in the Fire, resin'd and pure,
With Garments of Salvation, which will bring
Into acceptance with the eternal King.
These are the Robes of Righteousness, that can
Procure the Favor of both God and Man.
O come! Consider, let all Vanity
Stoop to Concerns of such Importancy:
And let none say, I hope it is well with me,
Because I yet no Condemnation see,
Nor feel I Judgments: If such yet retain
A fond Delight in transitory, vain,
And fading Toys, their Treasure lies below,
Which soon corrupts; such reap, even as they sow
Sad Disappointments. Sion's Converts must
Redemption know by Judgments true and just.
Alas, the Hope of Hypocrites shall fail!
In Times of Trial, what shall it avail?
But those that singly leave all things below,
Shall in themselves the Hope of Glory know;
A Living ^^^e, a Hope that will endure.
This ^^rifies the Heart, as he is pure,
That ^raiseth up the same in Men, that they
May be encouraged in the good Way,
That leads to Life, to everlasting Peace,
In Joys Eternal, which shall never cease.
Ponder these things (my Friend) thou have indeed
Engaged thy self (although thou yet proceed
But slowly to perform) with Diligence,
To render humble due Obedience
To what is made known, by him that from above
Draws tenderly, by his Long-suff'ring Love:
O let it not so soon forgotten be!
Which, as desired, will more increase in thee
Its sweetning Virtue, its enlivening Power;
That unto thee will more and more discover
Iniquity, and for the same reprove
Thy Soul in secret; but will gently move
And lead thee, by his Strength-renewing Hand
With Cheerfulness to answer his Command,
And fully recompense thee: O be wise!
Learn thou to fear, but do not now despise
The Day of small things; Ah, believe, that she
That Faithful in a little is, shall be
Made Ruler over much: Commit thine All
^o Him, that does in Love so often call,
Some unto me! And know, if thou abide
^aithful in servent Zeal, when-thou art tried,
^houl't in thy Bosom find a sweet Increase
of an admired overflowing Peace;
Which, rightly known, will more esteemed be,
Than all those Objects carnal Eyes ca^^ see.
But know, that mighty Works were never ^one
Amongst them that would not believe the Son,
The Lamb of God; such from a near Rel^^,
Excluded were, because of Unbelief:
^et unto one, not conscious of that Guile,
^e it unto thee even as thou will,
Was graciously proclaimed, whereby she found
Her meek Petition fairly heard, and crowned
With a desired Grant; although to try
Her Faith, at first the Answer did imply
^ather Repulse than Favor, when 'twas said,
(...) is not fit to take the Childrens Bread,
And give to Dogs: She answered, Truth, yet Lord,
^hese lick the Crumbs that fall beside their Board.
Here Is wrestling Faith indeed, which as expressed
(...) fervent Meekness, from a panting Breast,
Admiredly prevailed with Him; whose Name,
Whose matchless Love and Goodness, is the same
^or ever. Faint not, but go supplicate
^or Grace, to him that is easy to entreat
By all, that in true Lowliness of Mind,
Make their Addresles: Seek and ye shall find,
Is the Authentic Warrant to begin
To seek the glorious Pearl that is lost within
Look not abroad, but light thy Candle there
Seek thou at home, and thou shall find it near
There or ^^e deem thy Time, and meditate
How ^^st thy Promise thou may yet complea
Verity, what thou say^st, cannot avail
To justify, if thy Performance fail;
Nor is there Strength in Self: Therefore endeavor
To know that Hand, which helps to persever
Unto the End; and if thou faithful be,
A Crown of Life shall be bestowed on thee
1678.
A Remembrancer.
COnsider well some by past Days,
On former Times reflect,
And see if thou in all thy Ways
Art truly circumspect.
'Twas said in Scripture's true Record,
The People well have spoken,
Had they an Heart to serve the Lord,
And not so falsely broken
Their sacred Vows, whereby they did
Engage in holy Fear
(...) undone what he forbad,
(...) ^^ey might know him near,
(...) ^^ng to do what he requires,
(...) ^^^p Humility)
(...) begetting new Desires,
(...) Name to magnify:
(...) Promise is to dwell within
^^^n in the humble Heart,
(...) wholly to redeem from Sin,
(...) and of his Grace impart;
^^^t we may know his just Command
^^eveal'd within, and done;
^^^d all destroyed, that would withstand;
Then shall his Kingdom come;
Which does consist in Righteousness,
In Peace, and Heavenly Joy
^^th' Holy Ghost, where Blessedness
Abounds eternally.
1687.
A Second Epistle to Cousin E. S.
When I remember thee (dear Friend) I find
My Heart thus to advise thee, is inclined;
thou can hear in Calmness, and subdue
^ll peevish Passion, which in open View
(...) sober Pershns, justly merits Blame,
and manifests the Ground from whence it came
^en let this Counsel find a Place in thee;
^op low to Truth, and learn Humility.
This thou wast once acquainted with;
Lest Strangeness interpose, and learn to,
Know thou not what true Wisdom said
Man's greatest Foes are of his own Ho
And true it is, not outwardly alone,
But inwardly; for greater there is none,
Than those, we can encounter with; for they
Lurk close within, and secretly betray.
Therefore take heed, for though there do appear
Had Precedents, and ill Examples near,
They Will not so soon infect a solid Mind,
Which unto Watchfulness is still inclined:
And then, though Trials frequently attend,
There is an Arm of Love that will defend
From all Assaults of Man's grand Enemy,
As it is leaned to, in Simplicity.
O let us remember this, lest we should prove
Unmindful of our First, our chiefest Love!
Or lest a second Love should so engage
Our Hearts and Minds, in this infectious Age,
As wholly to lead captive, and betray
Us to a treacherous, fawning Delilah,
A subtle Bosom Traitor; such prevailed
Over one, whose Strength and Valor never failed,
Vatil he doted on a Stranger's Love.
O may such false Enticements never move
Our Hearts to turn aside, lest we may lose
Our Strength and Stay, and frequently expose
Our selves to Snares and Dangers! Surely we
Are always bound to wait in Fear, to be
(...) ^^rend may thou be yet more wise,
(...) Mind find better Exercise;
(...) may it learn, with Diligence, to wait
(...) He Springing-Life regenerate
^^^al; whereby thou wilt know no greater Trial
(...) ^et us here, than daily Self-denial:
(...) ^e must, if we expect to reign
(...) christ, (or else our Expectation's vain)
(...) ^^ows, as in Joys, participate.
(...) He never came to consecrate
(...) for us to true Felicity,
(...) curious Trims, and Silks of Princely Dye:
(...) Path is not bestrew'd with golden Crowns,
^^^n Coats of Arms, and Scepters of Renown:
Or yet with Oriental Gems, that be
^^ch dazzling Sparks unto the carnal Eye:
^o, no; it is through the Cross we must obtain
^he Crown of Glory; other Hopes are vain.
This, Men of Understanding knew of old,
And prudently disdained that Idol Gold:
Wise Solon told King Croesus (when he sat
In Gaudy Pomp upon his Throne of State)
Doting upon his Wealth, in lofty Pride,
Expecting almost to be deify'd)
That Peacocks with their spreading Plumes express
A greater Luster in their natural Dress,
Than He in all his Glory; which, though he
Disdained to own, whilst in Prosperity,
Except with Frowns, nor cared (...)
So deep a Sentence: Sudden cha (...)
Thereto constrained, and taught h^^^ (...)
It Is neither Wealth nor Honor, that (...)
Man's Heart with true Content; but (...)
Betray, and bring to Misery and Wo^ (...)
Therefore delight not in these fading (...)
Which suddenly may vanish as on W^^^ (...)
But let true Wisdom teach thee, (no (...)
Avails to plead for precious Time's a^^ (...)
That with an humble Spirit thou art (...)
Thy self: This is a Robe will never d^^ (...)
No outward Ornament can beautify
As Lamb-like Meekness, inward Purity.
Now, though for what thou sensible do (...)
In thy Condition, thou of true Esteem
Art no less worthy, Love does here constra
With Heart and Pen, to be thus bold and pla^
And that because thy Soliloquies do
Express, what Truth obliges thee unto,
The deep Engagements of thy Soul: O then,
Take heed, lest that alone with Tongue or Pen
Thou honor him, and Heart be far removed;
Or thou be found perfidious, being proved:
It Is not because I evidently see
The Symptoms of such Consequence in thee
But ah, the Stratagems and Subtilty
Of the Deceiver, our grand Enemy,
Are but too prevalent with some, except
True Watch and Ward within be always kept
That thus my Exercised Heart indites
Unto thee; and my Hand, thus guided writes,
With true Dependence on that Arm of Power,
Which is to Israel's Seed a Refuge-Tower.
And therefore since thou have in measure known
Engagement from above you are not thine own,
But purchased with a Price to serve the Lord,
The Price of Blood; therefore obey his Word:
Then shall he teach, instruct, and strengthen thee
To follow him in true Sincerity;
And thou shall daily know the blessed Increase
Of sacred Solace from the Prince of Peace:
And as thou hunger'it, daily may be fed
With finest of the Wheat, and Heavenly Bread;
Yea Honey from the Rock and drink new Wine
Distilling from the true and living Vine;
And in its sweet Refreshing Shade sit down
^n Rest and Peace, ascribing all Renown,
Honor, and Glory, unto Judah's Lion,
The meek, the spotless, holy Lamb of Sion.
1678.
To Cousin P. S
LOVE, that inviteth all Men, has (L see)
Extended its Engaging Hand to thee,
Dear Child! Consider and incline thine Ear,
Bow down in Meekness, and thou wilt quickly hear,
The still small voice which does behind thee say
Come follow me, this is the Heavenly Way,
Walk in it: Travel here, thou wilt not be weary
(This Path leads on to Sion's Sanctuary;)
But diligently waiting, shall renew
Thy Strength in him, that is Holy Just, and True
The blessed Prince of Everlasting Peace,
Who, as obeyed, will plenteously increase
His daily Favors in thee, and reveal
His Holy Will, and strengthen to prevail
Against thine Enemies, that do surround
Thy Soul with Snares whereby thy Grief abound
This is indeed the good Samaritan,
That binds up broken Hearts, and only can
Heal the afflicted; but he loves to see
Jacob bow down in deep Humility:
For then is the Time of Love; He then extends
His Love to contrite Hearts; such he defends
With his Indwelling Presence: Therefore fea^
Always; for he delights to appear
To those that fear his Name, and faithful b^
To what is made known; in small things, they shall see
Dominion over much, if they forsake
The Flattering World, and Self, for Jesus sake
Who Suffered for us, and despised the Shame
He Is only worthy over all to Reign.
Stoop therefore to the Cross, and do not fea^
What Earth can do though Mortals scoff and jeer
And prosecute, as those have ever done
That stubbornly Rebel against the Son
And Heir of Glory: Him they buffetted,
Reviled and scorned; and on his Comely Head
They tauntingly did set a Crown of Thorn,
Whose Head the Crown of Glory does adorn.
It Was He, that for his Foes resigned his Breath,
And by his Suffering conquered Hell and Death:
Therefore lets suffer with him, that we may
Live in his Presence in the Approaching Day;
When all his Adversaries shall become
But as a Footstool to be trampled on.
1679.
Contemplation.
ESTABLISHMENT in holy Fear,
That I may know my Darling near,
Is more to me
Than all the Pleasures Earth can boast
Which are but Pleasing Pains at most,
And fading Vanity.
O thou prevailing Prince of Peace!
Reveal still more the blessed Increase
Of thy Authority,
And Government, that shall remain,
But never end; that so thy Reign,
In Dread and Majesty,
May be Exalted over those
That would thy Conquering Arm oppose;
But to the Joy
Of all that humbly wait in fear,
And love to see thee, Lord appear
In perfect Purity.
1679.
An Epistle to M. J.
BEloved Friend, thy Welfare ever Day.
And Preservation in Truth's holy Way
Is heartily desired; and that in Fear,
And holy Dread, thy Soul may persevere
To travel Sion's Path in Purity,
Learning to dwell in true Humility.
Ah, let us both, in lowliness of Mind,
Bow to the Power by which the Heart's inclin
With true Sincerity, to stand and wait,
In Silence of all Flesh, at Wisdom's Gate;
Until the Heavenly Lawgiver appear,
And in the Heart reveal his Counsel near;
Who teaches Meekness; never to repay
Railing for Railing; but in Love to pay
For those that do despitefully accuse us.
And with Revilings frequently abuse us.
When Spotless Innocence was by Men
Accused, and Truth condemned; O did he the
By Verbal Arguments with them, assay
To justify his upright Cause, or say
The least Reviling Word? Nay, surely Nay
How then dare any, whom his Boundless Love
Has once engaged, if he be pleased to prove
Their Faith by Trials, as in secret say,
We'll follow him in a more easy Way?
Can we, without the Cross, expect the Crown
Of Everlasting Glory and Renown?
Nay verily, except the Cross do kill
The Self-hood, and subdue the General Will,
How can we hope Eternally to Reign
With him, who by his Suss rings overcame?
It Is not restraint from gross Iniquity,
But Self-denial, inward Purity,
And Holiness made perfect in his Fear,
That finds acceptance, when he does appear
To Judge the Secrets of all Hearts, and bring
Into the Presence of the highest King.
Then it is the pure in Heart shall see the Lord,
And sing Eternal Praise with one accord;
Because they know that holy Name, whereby
They were Redeemed from all Iniquity;
The Righteous enter Everlasting Joy.
1679.
Meditations.
O Love! Thou Substance of the Royal Law
Let thy sweet Influencing Power draw
Our troubled Hearts, in true Humility,
To wait on thee with holy fervency:
For thou our Souls have often visited,
That we might, by thy render hand, be led
From Darkness unto Light; from Enmity,
Strife and Contention, unto Unity,
In Undefiled, in Unfeigned Love;
Which, though it may in Gentleness reprove,
Or otherwise instruct, it covers all
Faults and Offenses; yea, if any fall
Through Weakness, it bears up with ready Hand
And lends a Shoulder, till such learn to stand,
And walk more strongly: For it joys to see
Brethren to dwell in perfect Unity,
Only Contending who may most be found
In Low liness, that Love may more abound.
But, ah, it is Hatred, Wrath, Revenge and Strife
Discovers Faults, strikes at the very Life;
Provoking often one seeming Friend or Brother
To bite, despise, if not devour another,
For empty Trifles; so that Vanity
Becomes Vexatious, and Perplexity
Of Spirit: For, as well observed by one,
All things are Vanity below the Sun;
The Sun of Righteousness, which when it shines
With its Resplendent Conquering Ray, refines
The drossy Nature; rightly purifies
The Heart, consuming all Impurities;
Whereby, at last, the Enmity is slain,
And Love exalted over all to Reign.
Great Prince of Peace! Instruct our Souls to wait
To be Established in this happy State;
Where Joys abound, and Enmity does cease,
And Charity withal does still increase;
That, with my dear Redeemed Ones, we may
Walk Hand in Hand in Sion's blessed Way;
Where no Iniquity can ever be found,
Nor Love wax cold, but more and more abound
Yea, Love that thinks no Evil, but does seek
The Good of all, and teaches to be meek;
Not easily provoked, but in Peace
With all: Here Happiness shall still increase.
Then may our cheerful Souls triumph, and sing
Pure, holy living Praise to Salem's King.
1679.
The Fifth Epistle to Cousin F. R.
WHEN I (endeared Cousin) meditate,
How Heaven has blessed thee in thy tender State,
Reading thy Lines, by Wisdom's Dictates penned
Which thou (by mutual Love engaged) did send,
And weightily reflect upon the (strange
To Flesh and Blood! but) truly happy Change
That Is wrought in thee, by that Eternal Power,
That (as a Father) leads to Sion's Tower,
The Rock of Ages, Us, that went astray,
Wandering like Pilgrims, that had lost their way
In some vast Desert, where the Savage Bear,
And other Savage Beast, range here and there,
To seek their Prey: Yet by a sacred Hand
They Are brought t'a happy Habitable Land.
Methinks we are bound to say with one accord,
Who, can enough admire thy Goodness Lord!
O how can such but much esteem their Guide!
Who, had their careless Steps but turned aside,
And frowardly left the Discovered Way,
Had certainly become a wretched Prey
To those Devourers: Ah! Such was our case,
Had not the Eternal led us by his Grace:
Which, let us never forget but Praises sing
To our most gracious Guide, dear Sion's King:
Who by his holy (the Light within
Revealed) redeems Believing Hearts from Sin;
And the Obedient to the Lord's Command,
Shall eat the Good and Sweetness of the Land;
The Land of Promise, given them to possess,
(Though Murmurers fall in the Wilderness)
Then shall they feel that Life, which as with Nerves
And Joints, unites, and tenderly preserves
As Members of one Body; so to give
Due Ser^^er to the Head, in whom we live,
By distribution of that precious Blood,
Which to the Body is both Life and Food;
And though at may ^^tire, yet soon again
It circulates and slows through every Vein;
Renewing Warmth, enc^easing Strength, whereby
The Body flourishes in Unity.
As doubtly thus engaged, methinks I prize thee
Much more than Pen and Ink can advertise thee:
Then how can those, who feel the Streams of Love
And Life, but prize each other far above
Outward Relations, yet rejoice to see
Them to partake of this blessed Unity!
Thus thou to me art now become more near
Than formerly Related; yea, as dear
As Children of one Father, mutually
Obliged to Breathe for the Prosperity
And Welfare of each other, in the pure
Eternal Love, which makes Election sure,
And seals Salvation to us; yea, I find
My Soul, in Sympathizing Love inclined,
As for itself, so to desire for thee,
That we in Faithfulness may ever be
Preserved; though Tribulation should attend,
^manuel, Almighty to defend,
^s near; yea nearer than our Hearts expect,
Though often undiscerned through our neglect;
He Is Omnipresent, tho not always ^^en,
For interposing Clouds may from us skreen
His Countenance: This he permits, to try
And prove our Love, our Chaste Fidelity
But still he leaves us Pledges of his Love,
That, ah, methinks, nothing should ever move
Our firm engaged Hearts! Yet we, poor we,
Are weak, and subject to Infirmity;
Apt to forget his Favors, multiplied
Toward us daily; apt to turn aside,
Did not his Blessed Arm, protect defend
And still renew Engagments to depend
Only on Him, who loves unto the end.
1679.
The Sixth Epistle to Cousin F. R.
CAN I but frequently remember thee,
Endeared Friend, when I such dangers see,
That dai^y meet the Travelers that set
Their Faces Sion-ward? Can I forget
To Recommend thee to that Arm of Power,
That keeps Worm Jacob, as a Fenced Tower?
Nay, nay; Can any Heart but break or bleed,
To view the Afflictions of the holy Seed,
Which in that * Careless City is oppressed, City
Like to a tender Babe kept from the B^east? Chester
An! Dreadful is the State of those, that lay
Such Stumbling Blocks, to hinder from the way
That leads to Life, and by a bare Profession,
Discourage them that seek the true Possession.
O! Can Lukewarm Laodicea be
So Justified? No, no, the firm Decree,
Without Repentance, may not be Repealed:
What Is done in secret, soon shall be Revealed:
Ah, let their Stumblings and Backslidings be
A Caution, but no Stumbling Block to thee!
Wait in the Deep, to know Love's Streams distill
Like the refreshing Dew of Hermon's Hill:
Then, as thou travel st in the Valleys low
Where Shilob^s Sacred Rivulet does flow,
Thou may st be, by its quickening Influence,
Preserved in an holy Living Sense
Of Heavenly Things: Which blessed Privileuge,
The Rage or Strength of Men can never abridge
Us of. Nor yet can I unmindful be
O^ my own State, whilst I admonish thee;
But, sensible of Weakness, pity those
Whom great Offenses frequently oppose,
To hinder them, if possible, that they
Might not persist to travel Sion's Way.
And as the wicked Spies, that falsely told
Discouragements to Israel of old,
Excluded both themselves, and likewise those
That, with them, did by Unbelief oppose
The Heavenly Promise; though the faithful were
Conducted safe, and took Possession there,
Even in the Land that did with Sweetness flow;
So do the Sloathful and the Careless now
Raise Doubtings, and Distrust of Victory,
In all that do not, with true Fervency
Press forward Cheerfully, with holy Fear,
Knowing their Captain or Salvation near.
O let the Love, which set the Heart on Fire
To follow him, increase a true Defire
In thee to persevere unto the End;
For Isr'els King for ever will defend
All that upon Him faithfully depend.
1679.
Meditations in Trouble.
ALas, when my distressed Mind,
Through secret Drawings, is inclined,
Great King! to wait on thee;
O how the subtle Enemy
Presents fond Fancies, to entice aside
My Heart from true Stability;
So to despise true lasting Joys,
And encertain vain transitory Toys,
Which never can satiate the Soul, when tried.
O how would Sloth entice mine Eyes!
My weary Eyes to Sleep,
That had more cause to Weep,
Because the Solace of my Soul seems gone,
And lest my Heart alone,
Surrounded with a Troop of Enemies.
O whither he gone? Or where
Shall I go mourn, 'till he appear,
Who is my Life, my Love?
Alas, how shall I move
Him to return, that is secretly retired;
Like unto one displeased,
Who, till he be appeased;
My Heart cannot be eased;
He is one lovely, and to be admired!
How long, alas, my Love, my Life,
Will thou withold the Influence
Of thy Enam'ring Countenance,
The Light of Life, Bow down thine Lar
To an afflicted Heart, and hear
Its Cries and Groans, and grant Relief.
Without thy Presence all is in vain;
Alas! How long shall I complain?
The Cause of Grief is not trom thee.
Is there not some Iniquity,
That keeps thus at a distance from my Love?
Or art thou pleased to shroud
Me thus, as in a Cloud?
How long, Lord, shall it be
Before thou please to answer from above?
It Is none but thee, thou Holy One!
It Is thy Prevailing Light alone
Can rend the Vail, and all these Clouds remove;
It Is thou that grieves for me,
And makes my Soul in Sympathy,
Thus pant after thee, thou God of Love.
1679.
Concerning Trials.
ALas, How hard a thing
It is to bring
Into a true Subjection, Flesh and Blood
Quietly to entertain
(And not complain)
Those Exercises that attend for Good!
My Life, my Joy, my Love,
If thus thou please to Prove
And Exercise my po^r pe^plexed M^nd,
Teach me to want ^n Fear,
That I may learn to bear
What Trials may attend, of any kind:
And, guarded by thy Ray,
Walk in the Way,
That leads directly to the Throne of Grace
Where, in Humility
Poor, I may be
Admitted to sit down in the Heavenly Place:
And there to thee discharge
My Griefs at large,
As to a Bosom-Friend, that bears with me,
And often passes by
Faults of Infirmity:
Alas, I cannot bear too much for thee!
Then work thy Blessed Will,
So to fulfill
Thy Sacred Counsel, for a further Trial;
All Trials work for good
(Though cross to Flesh and Blood)
To them that follow thee in Self-denial;
Bearing the Cross; for so
Thine come to know
We have a just High Priest, that is pleased to b^
(Although he dwells above
What Grief can move)
Touched with a sense of our Infirmity.
Ah, let us never forget,
When sore beset
^ith Tribulation, or when Snares surround,
Hamoly to ean to thee!
T^en shall we see
^he Joys of thy Salvation to abound.
So living Praises due
(Thou Holy, Just, and True)
^o thee, thy dear Redeemed may proclaim,
And in Sincer ty
May Magnify,
With Heart and Tongue, thy great Eternal Name.
1679.
Amen.
A Meditation in Retirement.
O Thou, great King of Kings,arise and reign!
Except thy Virtue springs, all Worships vain;
Except thy Quickening Life be felt to rise,
There Is none can offer up a Sacrifice,
That finds acceptance with so great a King:
And then, who dare into thy Presence bring
The Blemished, the Maimed, or the Blind,
Which with an Earthly Prince could never find
any Regard; but rather for the same,
^evere Chastizement, with Rebuke and Shame;
O let thy holy Power operate
Within thy Temple, thou Immaculate
Holy, High Priest! O let thy Hand prepare
The Sacrifice! Then Israel may not fear
To find admittance to the Royal Throne;
Thou Wilt smell the Sweetness and accept thy own:
We'll wait in Patience, and depend on thee,
Thou only can rebuke the Enemy;
That old Deceiver, Satan, though he stand
Among thy Children, as at the right Hand
Of Joshua; it is thy own Arm alone
Can save the Brand plucked from the Fire, or none.
It Is thou that take the silthy Garment from us
And in thy Love art pleased to put upon us
Thy Royal Robe of Righteousness, whereby
We find access before thy Majesty,
To touch thy Glorious Scepter, and appear
Before the Throne of Grace; where over Fear,
Love sweetly has prevailed: Yet shall there be
An holy Awe in all that worship thee,
An humble (deep-engaged) Filial Fear,
As to a tender Father, from his dear
Obedient Offspring; watchful to attend
Has holy Precept; fearful to offend,
For very Love; not as in Slavery,
Dreading the Laws of just Severity
But as by Love engaged, which fills the Breast
With Satisfaction, not to be expressed
With Mortal Tongue; as thou wast pleased by
The Apostle, whom thou loved, to signify.
We Are now thy Sons, Great King! but who can tell
What we shall be hereafter, when we dwell
With thee in Glory? Can the Hand of Man
Measure the Fullness of the Ocean?
Then may a Finite Engine testify
The Boundless Splendour of Eternity.
1679.
Of MODESTY.
SOme covet to be decked in Rich Attire,
With Gold and Pearl, that others may admire,
Esteem, and honor them; and that they may
Advance a Beauty, that will soon decay.
^f Imperfections did not lodge within,
What mean these Deckings of the fading Skin?
They in whose noble Breast true Virtue dwells,
^eed not so much t^adorn their outward Shells;
^or Modesty does many ways express,
^o all Observers, innate Comeliness:
Modest Attire, and Meekness, signify
(...) Mind composed of Native Purity.
^eeds no Appendices for to set forth
(...) Jewel of a more admired worth,
^han Indian Mines can boast; those beautify
(...) Sepulcher, and make it fair to the Eye;
^ut this shows Innate Worth, and adds thereto
^uch Luster, those alone could never show:
^or where there is a Chaste Retired Mind,
^h' Apparel Gesture, Speech, and Looks confined
Within the Bounds of Modesty, proclaim
^n Upright Heart kept clear from Spot or Stain:
This both adorns the Gravity of Age,
And does in Blooming Years timely presage
A right Heroic Heart; where Liberty,
That Is inconsistent with true Modesty,
In not desired: Such study to behave
Themselves Discreetly, Modest, Meek, and Grave;
But if a Smile appear, such as a Child
Reflects oft's-Mother, in Love undefiled,
It Is guarded with such simple Innocence,
As gives no just occasion of Offense.
For Modesty in Covenant does bind
The Eyes, est they prove Traitors to the Mind
But never Instruct the Hand to plant a Snare,
Lay Nets with gaudy Garments, plaited Hair,
Or other Golden Superfluities,
To captivate vain Hearts, and wandering Eyes:
No, it abhors whateven seems to be
A Blemish unto Chaste Simplicity:
Yet proves it self a far more potent Charm,
Than wanton Looks; but daunts approaching harm
Like some strong Fortress, whence the Enemy
Retreats, despairing of a Victory
Thus Modesty, and Spotless Innocence,
Is often to its serra sure Defense.
This is the Virgin's Omament, whereby
Beauty's adorned; for this does Beautify,
Where fading Colors flourish not, and may
Be termed a Dower, whose Worth shall never docay
Sure Men, as Men, cannot forget to prize it;
Though some, as brutes, not minding it despise it;
Else would their Words and Gesture rarely be
So Poylonous, with gross Impiety;
Obscene Discourse, that horrid Smoke that fumes
From scorching Darkness, that within consumes
Some Broyl'd tormented Hearts cannot proceed
From a Chaste Breast; no Rose brings forth a Weed.
For this does always constantly retain
Such an abhorrence of all frothy, vain.
Absurd Expressions, that 'twill manifest,
The sad Resentment of a troubled Breast.
In Crimson Colors; which do often appear
In modest Blushes, when the unwilling Ear
Is made partaker of such words as be
A bold Affront to Spotless Modesty.
Although there does no inward Guilt upbraid,
Orbring Indictment; yet, with Looks dismayed,
They signify Disgust, and seem to fear
They should be Censured, being present where
Such Words were utte'd (though injuriously)
As one with them in the Conspiracy.
Some say, It Is Treason but to lend an Ear
To Treasonable Speeches, and forbear
T'Accuse, or else to leave the Company:
Thus Chaste Clitomachus, through Modesty
Quickly departing, showed that he abhorred
The needless Guilt of an Uncivil Word,
When'er he heard it; and 'twas worthily
Recorded, to instruct Posterity.
For though the Dictates in each Humane Breast
Would, if observed, teach all Men to detest
Such Criminal Expressions, as declare
Their Owners odious to a Modest Ear;
Yet Precedents of Virtue may be found
Of good Effect, when those of Vice abound.
Nor let it seem to any sober Mind
A Paradox, that Modesty should find
A place in either Sex, although it be
Ascribed to the one peculiarly.
Reason, that honors Mankind more than Beast
Gives forth its Laws and Dictates in each Breast
Virtue should therefore in both Sexes dwell;
Some may in these, and some in those excel:
Yet this, with many more are not confined
To either solely; but the prudent Mind
In both embrace it; for it Regulates
Deportment both in high and low Estates:
For where she dwells, insulting Arrogance,
Or any unbecoming Confidence,
Must not remain, lest the^e defile and stain
The Heart where Virtue should prevail and reign,
That Modesty may, by its Influence,
Hide and avoid occasion of Offense.
As Scripture-Record to Posterity,
Does Chronicle the Virgin Modesty
OF Shim and Japhet, who went back to hide
The Nakedness their Brother did deride;
On whom the Curse became thereby entailed
To after-Ages, but a Blessing sealed
To them, and to their Progeny whose, Name^
(Like to a precious Ointment, that retains
Its fragrancy) shall still inherit Praise,
And be a Precedent to latter Days.
For though the Memory of some does rot,
Virtue shall live, and never be forgot:
The Wise in Heart esteem it, and thereby
Order their Conversation prudently;
And would not an unseemly Act commit,
Though Mortal Eye should never discover it:
For Modesty, that in their Bosom reigns,
Detests and loathes whatever spots or stains;
Restraining from all Rudeness, it inclines
To Gravity and Meekness, and resines
The Language; intimating, that we should
Be swift to hear, but never over-bold
To speak though Eloquent; and then take heed,
Lest Words extravagantly may exceed
A mild and civil Tone; for spoken loud,
They seem to Summons-in the listening Crowd:
Nor should they savor of Scurrility;
For these are not the Effects of Modesty,
Which never can delight in Calumnies,
Abusing others with Tongue-Injuries,
Although reviled: Civility disdains
To vie in Folly, where no Prize pertains
Unto the Victors; the true Noble Mind
Conquers a Wrong by Patience, is resigned
For Virtue's sake to bear, that Reason may
Be Re-enthorn'd, and Passion pass away.
The Examples, which the Ancients did affard
Hereto, are many, left upon Record;
For Civil Nature's dictates in each Breast,
Do far exceed what here can be expressed.
1679.
Meditation
ALas, Alas! This Day
Seems almost past away;
What shall I say? My Love
Does hide his Face from me,
Who sorrows in Perplexity:
Ah, shall not Sighs and Groans prevail to mov^^
Unto Compassion? Shall
My drooping Spirit call
And cry but find no Ear,
No Entrance, no Access,
To ease my Heart in great Distress?
Ah Lord! How long can thou forbear to hear
Great Dreadful Majesty,
Whose Omnipotency
Is Omnipresent! Does not Love
Always abound with thee?
Yea surely, through it be
Thine holy Pleasure thus sometimes to prove
Especially when we
Have slighted thee,
Or to thine Enemy inclined,
Or have not kept retired,
Nor fervently defir'd
Thy Presence with a right composed Mind.
Yet, O my Chiefest Love!
Thy rolling Bowels move,
And thee to Pity now constrain,
Thy Condescending Ear
Could not forget to hear,
Nor shall Worm Jacob's Seed for Want complain
Worthy art thou to be
Sought to in Fervency;
The Careless Ones shall not prevail:
Thou, Gracious Prince indeed,
Favors the Wrestling Seed;
This, in its Expectation, cannot fail.
Thy sweet Encouragement
In season does prevent
All Doubtings and Distrust that can
Arise, if faithfully
Our Hearts depend on thee;
Thou waits to manifest thy Love to Man.
O teach my Soul to wait
At the Posts of Wisdom's Gate,
In holy Fear! So to be found
Prepared to meet with thee
In true Sincerity,
In whose sweet Presence Heavenly Joys abound.
1679
On ELIJAH
O How the Eternal Goodness from above
Diftils upon his Children showers of Love.
And in the midst of Trials manifests
Supporting Solace in their Panting Breasts;
Engaging those, whom chiefly he designs,
To let for Witnesses in Trying ^^^es;
Refreshing, feeding, strengthening (...) directing
Safely, with his indulgent Arm pro^ecting,
And hiding in the hollow of his Hand,
Those that are faithful to his just Command.
Thus was that holy Prophet of the Lord,
Elijah, shelt'red from the threatening Sword
Of cruel Jezabel, whose raging Breath
Had vowed, by all her Idols, sudden Death
Unto this Man of God (although in vain)
For seeking to lead Israel back again
Unto the Lord, who then were gone astray,
And wandered in a dark forbidden Way:
The Almighty's sacred Power did surround
And guard him, but his Enemies confound.
Now, though Elijah thought himself alone,
Surviving all true Prophets, and that none
Were left but him, there was Seven Thousand more
Preserved alive, that only did adore
The God of Jacob, would not bow the Knee
Unto, or worship Baal's false Deity.
This Heaven revealed unto him, when he sat,
As ^^ne in Sorrow, in dejected State;
Because the Sacred Name was then reviled
By Priests of Baal, the holy Prophets killed:
For thus the Lord does in his Wisdom try
The utmost of Man's Wrath and Cruelty,
As may conduce to the Honor of his Name,
But the remainder shall his Arm restrain.
And though that be permitted to extend
Affliction to the Body, put an end
To poor Mortality, here is Man's Rage
Confined; whilst from a weary Pilgrimage,
The Immortal Soul released, arrives with Joy
Unto the Haven of Felicity,
Where the more Noble Soul lives to survive
Those short-lived Sorrows, and forgets to grieve;
Whose Everlasting Glory does transcend
Expression, or what Man can comprehend:
Yet when the Eternal pleases to oppose
The base Designs and Stratagems of those
That would destroy, or wickedly suppress
His faithful Ones, whom he intends to Bless,
He soon can blast their Projects, and confound
Their chiefest Agents; with a Word, surround
His own, as with a bright Celestial Host
Of Seraphims. Let not the mighty boast
Themselves in Strength: Can Man resist his Hand?
The Thorns and renting Briars then may stand
In Battle, to oppose Consuming Fire.
Let Israel bow before him, and admire
His mighty Arm, and magnify his Name:
He guardeth whom he will; his Pow^r's the same,
Which formerly the holy Prophet fed,
And by the obsequious Ravens sent him Bread;
Yea, Bread and Flesh, early and late, they brought
Him, who his Maker's Glory chiefly sought;
And for his Drink, Brook Cherith did supply
With Water; which, for want of Rain, grown dry
Unto Zarephta, by Command, he came,
Where a poor Widow (tho to entertain
A Guest, but meanly furnished) did receive
The Prophet; and, through Faith, she freely gave
Part of her small, her almost wasted Store,
Which she had thought a little time before
To dress for her, and for her Son, thereby
To be refresn'd and shortly after Dye;
Not knowing of so strange Increase, until
The holy Man, that knew the Heav^nly Will
Did, by Divine Authority, proclaim,
That till the Lord was pleased to send down Rain,
(Which then withheld, for the Iniquity
That did abound, had brought the Extremity
Of Dearth and Famine) her small Stock of Meal
And (...) Cruise of Oil, should never fail;
Which she believing, from the Holy Word,
Lived to admire the Wonders of the Lord
Upon her Son, whom, when deprived of Breath,
^lijah did prevail to call from Death,
^y fervent Supplication to that Power
That can the Dead to Life again reitore;
That unto her it might not seem to be
^ard Measure for her Hospitality.
Thence, by Commission from above, he came
To bring glad tidings of long-sought-for Rain;
That Israel might yet again incline
^o seek the Lord, who by his Power divine,
^ives or withholds a Blessing; and might learn
^y those and other Wonders, to discern
^he Living God from Idols, who alone
^nswers by Fire from his Imperial Throne,
^s then 'twas proved, to their Amaze and Shame;
^et when some sought the Prophet to be slain,
^e to the Wilderness again retired,
There, though he, as in Agony, desired
^he Lord to take away his Life; yet there,
^o comfort him, an Angel did appear;
^ho, touching him, bad him arise and take
that he found ready there; which was a Cake
^k'd on the Coals: O who can but admire
^ow there the Cake was baked on Coals of Fire!
^or which he took no Care; and for his Drink,
Cruise of Water set! Ah, who would think
^he King of Kings should be concerned for these
shall Matters for poor Man! who, if he please,
Can well support, without the Strength of Bread
As then he did that holy Prophet lead
Through the sandy Desert Forty Days, until
He came to Horeb's Mount, the sacred Hill,
Where, resting in a Cave, the great Comman
Then given to him, was, Go forth and stand
Before the Lord, his Wonders to admire;
The rending Wind, the Earthquake, and the Fir^
Passed by, but he in none of these did see
Such Soul-amazing dreadful Majesty,
As in the still small Voice; then, as with Drea^
And Reverence, his Face he covered,
Or wrapped in his Mantle, stood to hear
What more the Lord was pleased to declare,
Or to command him; that he humbly might
Obey his Precepts, which was his delight.
Thus was he treated by the Holy One,
And afterward caught up unto his Throne
As in a Fiery Chariot, where, above
All Grief, he Joys in pure Eternal Love:
Yet who dare say, that for his sake alone,
Such great, such glorious Wonders then were done
(...) not the Eternal Wisdom signify
(...) Boundless, his all-Conqu'ring Love, thereb^
(...) all his ^a^^hful Servants? Ah, can He
^^^le to be Gracious, or Unmindful be
(...) afflicted tribulated Ones?
^^y surely, he has owned them for his Son
^^d for his Daughters; and if they be ^ound
^^ithful to Death, they shall with Life be Crowned
For he delights to glority his Name
Amidst the Heathen: Therefore it is in vain
For Men to Curse whom he designs to Bless,
Or by their Laws to hinder Righteousness
From running like a Stream; though formerly
They pleaded Law, whereby the Just must dye;
Who now, and ever, lives sole King of Kings,
To whom the Angels Hallelujah sings.
Of CHASTITY.
Virtue's its own Reward; and Innocence
Where ever it dweds, a Fortress of Defense:
And in the Confines of pure Chastity,
The Heaven-born Soul finds joyful Liberty,
And pleasant Freedom; far surpassing all
The Latitude of base, luxurious Thrall
Wherein the captivated Heart's inclined
To dote on Trifles, where it cannot find
True Solace, suiting the Nobility
Of that which sprung from Immortality
Then why should any, styled Rational,
So slight their Princely Great Original,
As to sit down content, to equalize
Themselves to Brutes, and sordidly despise
Enjoyments more sublime, which gratify
The Noble Intellectual Faculty,
Proper alone to Creatures Rational?
To be preferred before those Criminal
Polluting Pleasures, which do so incense
The injured (if not seared) Conscience,
As much allays their present seeming Joys,
And feeds the gnawing Worm that never dies;
Whilst prudent Minds delight to contemplate
The Wisdom of that Power that did create
And form the Universe: The Mystery
Of Nature's scarce observed Harmony,
And that intrinsic Virtue, that is found
In some familiar Concretes to abound,
Brings a Delight inferior to none,
Save the Indwelling of that Lord alone,
That gives the Knowledge of them, and did frame
Them to the Glory of his holy Name:
The sweet Experience whereof, I find,
Is, by a Noble and ingenious Mind,
Acknowledged; asserting it to raise
The Heart, to celebrate their Maker's Praise.
Why then should so much Time, Expense and Cost
Be on some vain deluding Objects lost?
Which, as with Chains, do bind in Slavery,
And overwhelm, in gross Impurity,
Some doting Mortals, whose depraved Sense
Can taste no Pleasures, not derived thence.
But where unstained Chastity does reign,
The Mind kept pure, is apt to entertain
Joys more refined; and then, if any rude
Disturbing Thought would secretly intrude,
It Is soon expelled, and banished from that Breast,
Where Chastity has taken up her Rest:
For here the Thoughts, the Words and Actions be
Well seasoned, with an awful Gravity;
The good Effects of an internal Law,
Which does, by its prevailing Precepts, draw
Unto Obedience; whose Recompense
Does far surmount all transient Joys of Sense:
Yet, ah, how many make it their Design,
TO entic^ the Soul, and lead beyond the Line
Of innate Law, through pleasant Considence,
Bringing at last to boundless Impudence;
That Enemy to Virtue, that profane,
Preludium unto a Tragic Scene,
Which does by Heart-beguiling Pastimes bring
The yielding Captives to the wounding Sting
Of inward Horror, a tormenting Pain
That frets their Hearts, involved in lasting Shame;
Whilst Peace and Honor evermore remains
To them, in whose chaste Breast true Virtue reigns.
Both Sexes are adorned by Chastity,
For, as recorded to Posterity
Great Heroes, for their Valor much renowned,
^f in their Princely Bosoms this was found,
As by a Law to limit; such did gain
A more enobling Luster to their Name:
But those, from whom great Armies conquered,
That by a wanton Heart were vanquished, (^^d,
Though Fortitude is not to be forgot)
This to their Names is a perpetual Blot.
Who conquers Self, Virtue more Noble calls,
Than he that overthrows the strongest Walls:
Then for the blushing Sex, what Tongue can tell
The Infamy that on her Name shall dwell,
That wants the Ornament of Chastity?
It Is a Reproach unto her Memory:
But she that keeps her Mind retired and chaste,
Her Praise shall flourish; Fame nor Envy's Blast
Can never blemish it; that happy Peace,
That in her Bosom lives, shall never cease.
This therefore is to some a Pearl as dear
As Life; and such do less regard or fear
The Loss of Life, and all, than once to stain
Their chaste reserved Souls, with Guilt and Shame.
Thus fair Matilda rather chose to die
A Martyr to her spotless Chastity,
Than with a gnawing Guilt and Horror live
In all the Pleasures that a Court can give;
Who, though with Mortals she be ceased to dwell,
She lives where Joys Immortal do excel
All Vanities on Earth; and here her Name
Does still in Honor and Esteem remain.
Virtue bes^^ws a Crown of endless Praise
On all that to it consecrate their Days.
1679.
Of a FRIEND.
IF I to Love would be inclined,
And, without seeking, knew to find
One, whose unbl^mish'd Outward Case,
Princely Deportment, Comely Grace,
Might unto each observant Eye
Denote the true Nobility
Of an Heroic Heart and Mind,
From sordid Vanity sublimed)
^incerely Pious, Loyal, Chaste,
And with such inward Peace possessed,
That blustering Storms could never prevent
True Inward Solace and Content
Whom prosperous Lot exalts not high,
Nor can a cross Adversity
Much discompose; observing well,
That all Things here are mutable;
Who rightly knows to prize a Friend,
Without a base sinister End.
And though a Competency here
Of needful Things, without much Care
Enjoying, knows Treasure laid up,
Secured from Theft, and Moths corrupt;
Yet here, in Visibles, can see
The Wisdom of Eternity;
And knowing Rule, and Ruling know,
^n true Dominion Things below;
Meek, though Majestic; Valiant, and
That Self and Passion can command:
Rich in all Virtues, to complete
A Noble Heart, more Good than Great;
It Is such an one as this shall be
Much Honored, and esteemed by me.
A Meditation.
AH, Lord! Why hid'st thou now thy Face from me?
My Soul expects no Comfort but from thee;
No Joy, but Grief; no Solace can be found,
But Soul-distracting Sorrows still abound
Within my troubled Breast; if thou retire,
Or hide thy Face, all my Delights expire.
How can I Live, except thy quickening Breath
Breathe on me, and subdue the Power of Death?
Ah, let my Heart thy Holy Ghost receive,
That so a Resurrection from the Grave
I may not only know, but be renewed
In Strength, to press even through a Multitude
Of Tribulations, Lord, to tollow thee!
Which if they sometimes as a Trial be
To prove the Love, whereto thou do engage
My Heart and Soul, in this backsliding Age,
Let many Waters never quench the same,
But rather be as Oil poured on the Flame;
Which quickens, not extinguisheth, the Fire;
So may these Trials rouse my dull Desire
Still more and more in Fervency to move
And tend to thee, thou pure eternal Love:
^or, ah, the warmth of thy enlivening Ray,
Proclaims the Dawning of the eternal Day;
Which secretly encourages to bear
These light Afflictions; for the Day draws near,
Wherein shall be a Glory, (far transcending
These Griefs) reveal d, a Glory never ending:
But, Lord, (support me; there is no Trial can
So far perplex, that on the outward Man
May be imposed; no Sorrow that can be
Like the with drawing of thy self from me:
Thou only art the Solace of my Soul,
To thee let my distressed Heart condole
Her Troubles; for there is none like that, when thou
With Frowns beclouds the Brightness of thy Brow;
Or secretly withholds the glorious Ray,
Which is my Sun and Shield, my Strength and Stay,
My chiefest Counselor, mine All: Ah, then
How can my Troubles be deserib'd by Pen!
The Threats of this vain World shall not afflict me,
Except the Darling of my Soul reject me:
For its thine Absence is the greatest Grief,
Thy loving Presence is a true Relief.
O it is my longed-for Joy, mine only One!
This Blessing therefore grant me, Lord, or none.
O it is thy Love that thus engages me,
To wrestle with, and follow after thee!
And though to prove me, thou may tarry long,
Preserve in Patience, let me never wrong
Thy Favors, so as once to entertain
Another Lover, or to turn again
In Heart to Egypt: Can her Garlic be
Of any pleasant Savor now to me,
Or any other Soul, that once has fed
On Manna-Delicates, or Angels Bread?
Which even in the Desert thou affords
Abundantly, as Holy Writ records
Thou did of Old: No, no, 'twas Penury
Enforced (in that Land of Slavery)
To feed thereon. If thy indulgent Care
Provide, and feed my Soul with better Fare,
Teach me to prize thy Love; it is now the same
To Israel's Seed, thou say not, Wait in vain
But thou appear'st, who always do regard
Thy breathing Babes, and with thee thy Reward
Of inward Comforts known, with an Increase
Of Joy, and Earnest or Eternal Peace,
To those that keep thy Covenant; to them
Thy Promises are all Yea and Amen.
1680.
Of the Rainbow.
O How Stupendous are thy Wonders, Lord
Which thou effectest by thy Living Word
How Gloriously presented every where,
Do they to the discerning Eye appear!
Which, as it views the Outside, may discover
The inward Wonder, by the Shell veiled over
Has not each Visible a Mystery?
Does not each Herb proclaim a Deity?
Which, with so sine an Essence, gave it Birth,
Out of the gross dark Bowels of the Earth.
If these familiar little Creatures be
Such cause of Admiration, what may we
Observe in this vast Concave of the Sky,
So full of Wonders to a searching Eye?
Do not the Heavenly Orbs declare thy Glory,
Great King, as in an Universal Story?
Sun, Moon and Stars do, by their Light, proclaim
A Power divine, and magnify thy Name:
Can then this curious Semicircle, decked
With such pure undy'd Colors, but affect
Our Hearts with Dread and Wonder? can a Sign
Of such Concern and Glory (by Divine
Authority placed in the Firmament,
To signify that Gracious Covenant,
Which, for thy Goodness, for thy Mercy's sake,
Thou, in thy tender Pity, pleased to make
With poor Ungrateful Mortals, that thereby
They might believe, Floods should no more destroy,
All Animals) pass unobserved? Though Man,
Through his ambitious Ignorance, began
Soon to insult, although in vain; his Power
And Policy, both failed at Babel's Tower:
Yet have thou not removed this signal Token
Of thy endearing Love; nor rashly broken
Thy lasting Covenant; but thereby do show,
That thou alone art Faithful, Just and True.
O can this great Memorial to the Nation,
The Rainbow, but excite our Admiration,
When it appears! Were not the Signs in Heaven,
And Wonders in the Earth, ordained and given
For more sublime Designs, that only be
Looked at, and gazed on, by Mortality?
Did not the great Apostle once attest,
That things invisible are manifest
By those that do appear? Did not hereby
Some of the Gentiles learn Divinity?
Why may they not as well excite and raise
Our Hearts, to celebrate the Author's Praise
1680.
Of CONTENT.
WHo secks a Prize where it is not to be found
Makes his Confusion but the more abound:
So they that dote on Riches that have Wings,
Or any other transitory Things,
Do but with great perplexing Cares prevent
That which they most pretend to seek, Content.
Where may it then be sought? Behold it lies
Hid, as a Treasure, from the Vult'rous Eyes:
Yet there is a Garden where this Plant does grow,
Which who desires to find, must learn to know
A Heart that is well resin'd and purity'd
From high-aspiring discontented Pride;
Disdaining to admire that Idol, Gold,
But can, as with undazled Eyes, behold
Its Earth-bred Luster; knowing how to use in,
Nor hoarding it to rust, that is to abuse it;
That cannot for vile Pleasures prostitute
The noble Soul to grovle with the Brure;
That cannot be so bound to humane Fashion,
As to be over-sway'd with Furious Passion:
But does, as with a well-composed Mind,
Hear Self reviled and scorned; yet not melin'd
Unto Revenge, but still refers the Wrong
To Him, to whom all Vengeance does belong;
And can in inward Purity rejoice,
Though Virtue's branded with the Name of Vice;
That does in Joy such equal Temper know,
That Sorrow cannot make it stoop too low,
Nor be afraid, although the World should frown;
Nor yet forget himself, through vain Renown;
That counts an Injury worth no Reward,
Save only this, a Noble Disregard;
That Is unto slavish Fear so much a Stranger,
That it undaunted meets approaching Danger;
Yea, high and low Estates can calmly bear,
Without Disturbance, or distracting Care;
That honors Virtue, though in Poverty,
Rather than Vice, puffed up with Dignity;
Whose equal Justice cannot vex his Foe,
Nor spare his Friend, if that his Cause says No;
Who, though in Power, would not inflict a Wrong;
Nor yet can see the Oppressed suffer long,
Without Relief; but cheerfully does lend
A Helping-Hand to Enemy or Friend;
Whose Word's more binding than a Golden Chain,
Who steadfast to his Promise does remain;
And will perform it, though no Ear attend,
To testify betwixt him and his Friend;
Who, in great Multiplicity, can find
A calm and wisely-recollected Mind;
Knowing that Heaven did never This ordain
A Slave to Earth, but over it to reign:
And having Treasure, which no Rust can rot,
Does use the World, as if he used it not:
And cheerfully submit to Providence,
(Not by Constraint) in what it does dispense;
Whether in Storms or Trials; for he knows
That promised Comforts appertain to those
That mourn; or if his Lord and Master please,
Can Joy in Sunshine, or more prosperous Days;
Knowing the Eternal, Wisdom never errs,
Therefore sincerely in his Thoughts prefers
That Will before his own; so comes to learn,
Wisdom and Love in all things to discern;
Who need not boast what Ancestors have been,
When all their Virtues shine more bright in him;
Which is a greater Honor than to be
The Refuse of some famous Pedigree;
This knows such Peace the World can never prevent,
Here Is that much sought-for, durable Content.
1680.
An Epistle to M. R.
THis Opportunity did me invite,
Dear Cousin, (though with Scribbling Pen) to write
These Lines unto thee, thus to manifest
I have not yet excluded from my Breast
The Remembrance of thee, neither Time nor Place,
Though far remote, should cancel or deface
The Monument of Friendship in that Mind,
That is to the Everlasting Truth inclined.
O may this always our Instructor be!
Then shall we live in constant Amity:
Let Truth in the Inward Part be always dear
Unto thee, then thy Counselor is near;
Who will instruct thee, how thou may behave
Thy self at all times, modest, meek, and grave;
That thou may find that Peace, which does excel
All Visible Enjoyments, and so dwell
^n Undefiled Love, that will attend
The truly humble Heart unto the end.
An Epistle to Consin J. R.
COuld pious Paul desire that dreadful State,
To be anathemiz'd, or separate
From Jesus Christ, his high esteemed Lord,
For Isr'elites, to whom the Heavenly Word,
The Promises and Law, did appertain,
The People unto whom the Cov'nants came,
His Kindred in the Flesh? Then how can I
Be unconcerned for thee, my near Ally?
No, no; for Love, the Universal Love,
Which tenderly does visit from above,
Desires the good of all; takes no delight
That Sinners die in Sin; but does invite
All to return to him, and Live; for he
Has promised their Iniquity shall be
Forgotten; they in Righteousness shall live;
And He, to them that overcomes, will give
A Crown of Life; yea, they shall splendidly
Be clothed with Robes of Immortality.
Consider well these things, my Friend, and learn
To know what chiefly is thy great Concern;
That Noble Offspring of the Deity,
Why should it be seduced with Vanity?
O come, and in true lowliness of Mind,
Receive Instruction! Seek, and ye shall find,
Is a Sufficient Warrant to begin
To seek the piece of Silver, hid within
The House, thy Heart; Redeem thy precious Time,
And find it out. O let thy Mind incline
Unto the Voice, that dorn in secret say,
As one behind thee, This is Wisdom's Way,
Walk in it; this will lead to lasting Joys;
Despise them not for transitory Toys.
Aim'st thou at Honor? Know, a sudden Puff
Elasts it, and often leaves a Stinking Snuff.
Ah, see thou not, that here all vain Renown
Is dashed and disannulled with a Frown;
Seek Honor from above, and fear the Lord,
And hearken to his holy living Word,
Hid in thy Heart, that frequently reproves:
Wisdom rebukes, and chastens whom she loves.
But where there is no Reproof, there is cause of fear
Lest that the Holy One cease striving there:
Such may too late bewail themselves, and say,
O that I might be spared another Day!
What can a wounded Spirit satiate,
When Soul and Body must be separate?
Whilst therefore Time does unto thee remain,
Take up the Cross, and own that holy Name,
Christ crucified and risen from the Grave,
Whose Life's the Light of Men, that comes to save.
But what avails to read the History!
In silence learn to know the Mystery:
For inwardly the Heart's defiled with Sin,
Therefore Salvation must be wrought within,
By that which humbles, and that boweth down
To Judgment; first the Cross, and then the Crown.
The Word is as a Fire to purify
The Heart of Man from all Iniquity,
Before it be a Word of Consolation,
And bring the Soul glad tidings of Salvation.
All this ( I hope) thou know; but he that knows it,
Is not thereby approved, but he that does it:
The Doer of the Word is Justified,
Because he by the same is Sanctified.
Slight not the day of small things, left there be
Greater withheld and concealed from thee.
Was it not said, when Ephr'im was a Child,
I loved him (that is lowly, meek, and mild?)
O be not high and lofty, but come down,
With quick Zacheus, if thou wilt gain the Crown
Of Life and Peace! Hark, does not Jesus say,
Salvation's come unto thy House this day!
If thou wilt receive it, cast it not away.
1680.
An ELEGY.
THe fairest Flowers are not secured from Blasts
The strongest Towers must unto Ruin yield,
Each Visible unto its Period hastes,
And by Retreat all called to quit the Field;
Both Animals and Vegetables fall,
Nature to common Change exposes all:
None can secure himself. Man, though possessed
Of that great Faculty, styled Rational,
May plead no Privilege above the rest,
But stoop to the Fate of the meanest Animal:
Yet herein does a Mystic Grandeur lie,
He has a Nobler Part can never dye.
Although removed from Converse with his Friend;
Relations and Acquaintance, are deprived
Of his Society, Words cannot extend
T'unequal Objects; some are therefore grieved
Thus to be separated each from other;
From a dear Father, or a tender Mother.
O can their Offspring be so unconcerned,
As not a little to Breathe forth their Grief,
Where Sympathetick Bowels often yearn'd,
Yet cannot now administer Relief
To either side! Survivers may complain,
Mourn and lament their absence, but in vain.
But yet we may a little ruminate
On by past things, impressed on the Mind,
And (though with grief) revolve that former State,
When each in others Joys did Solace find;
And let their Virtues flourish in each Breast,
And Mem'ries live, though they are gone to rest.
Ah, he is gone, who was a Father dear
Unto his Offspring, with a tender Eye,
Waiting for good; though seemingly severe,
When careless Crimes enforced Severity:
As famous Judges often Sentence give
With Tears, so he with the Chastised did grieve.
This dear Paternal Love did more engage
His Childrens Hearts, than here may be expressed,
Alluring (as it were) our tender Age
To his advice; Love's Conquest is the best.
Let others boast their forced Authority,
Reigning like Tyrants in their Family.
Nor did he count it as his chiefest Care,
To gather for them Superfluity,
Knowing that Earth-bred Wealth is often a Snare.
Whereby the Heart's engaged to Vanity:
His Generous Spirit rather was inclined
To furnish them with Treasures of the Mind.
And though, in outward show, he did appear
Less forward in professing things divine,
His Heart was not without an holy Fear;
Light in his youthful Days began to shine,
And show to him the empty Vanity
Of Rome's seducing Soul-Idolatry.
For when (...) was, by a Related Friend,
Solicited their Fancies to entertain,
Who urging (when his Life seemed near its end
To dye a Catholic, 'twas all in vain:
The sacred Precepts of the blessed Truth
Began to spring up in his Blooming Youth.
So that for all the Favors he received
From that Relation, or great hopes of more,
By promise due, he would not be deceived
To own those Principles he knew before
Were Men's Inventions: Thus Heaven secretly
Did shroud and keep him from such Subtilty.
And in succeeding Days did plainly show
A Way more excellent, a blessed Way;
Whereby he, to his Satisfaction, knew
That Path, wherein Fools walking cannot stray:
Now, let his Weakness be forgotten quite,
And with his Dust be buried out of sight.
His second Self by him was well beloved;
Who, though she for a season did survive,
That she by future Trials might be proved,
And by renewed Sorrows learn to grieve:
A second Love she never entertained,
But a chaste Widow may Years remained.
And if Affliction and Chastizement be
Undoubted Characters of Fathers Love,
Whose Prudence often in Severity
Does, for Instruction to his Children, prove
A greater Favor than they apprehend;
She had her share, and found it in the end.
Nor may her dear Affection be forgot
Unto her Offspring, whom she taught the Law
Of Filial Duty; yet delighted not
So much through Fear, as Love, to keep in awe:
Austerity may gain a slavish Fear,
But natural Affection more endear.
She likewise (as her Consort did before)
Delighted much to gratify her Friend,
If any her assistance did implore,
She freely would reach forth a helping Hand;
Thus studying good, she sometimes grieved to see
Relations for small Trifles disagree.
Yea, she would rather bear an Injury,
Than recompense it; rather reconcile
Dissenting Parties, through her Lenity,
Than seem to incline to either for a while:
But these her Exercises now must cease,
And she rejoice in Everlasting Peace.
Alas! that those who knew her well, might learn,
By her Example, to become more mild,
And not account Revenge a just Concern,
Nor study to Revile, because Reviled;
Such would more inward Consolation know,
Than from a angry Breast can ever grow.
Well, though both He and She be gone to rest,
And cannot with our Sorrows now be moved,
Nor with the Frownings of this World oppressed,
Wherewith some may as yet be further proved,
Their Names, engraven in our Hearts, may not
Be razed, or canceled, or in Time forgot.
Nor shall we study high Hyperboles,
So to perpetuate their Memory,
Or raise a Monument of common Praise,
Which cannot add to their Felicity;
For they were what this insufficient Pen
Cannot describe unto surviving Men.
1682.
AN EPISTLE.
IS Friends fled, or Love grown cold?
Do frozen Walls of Ice withold
Its pearly Streams? O let the Sun,
That gave it being, shine upon
The brittle Fence! Or in some Skreen
Injuriously set up between
The gentle Spring, and that bright Ray
Which, conquering Night, brings joy full Day?
Remove that Obstacle away:
Then, though with Grief I may consess,
In Wintertime the Effects be less,
Because of Distance, or cold Air
Prevailing in our Hemisphere,
And interposing (For Sol's Power
Is still the same each Day and Hour)
It will dissolve the Frost in time,
If its warm Ray there-on may shine;
Though vacant Clouds do interpose
Its pure refulgent Beam, and those
Inferior Concretes that have Birth
From the gross Element of Earth.
But stay! Methinks a Spring should be
From Winters chilling force, more free
Than to be Frozen! Inbred Heat
Is then, with purest Springs, more great;
And with its Current soon does glide
Through Ice besetting either side.
Let Love spring up, that we may see
The same Effects, dear Friend, in thee.
1682.
The Seventh Epistle to Cousin F. R. being then under some Exercises of Mind.
IN Love's pure Sympathy, endeared Friend
I know that secret Trials will attend,
And raise some Conflicts in thy render Breast
Such as by Pen cannot be well expressed:
But all things shall (as left upon Record)
Convene for good to them that fear the Lord
Some latent cause, from Carnal Eye concealed,
May bring a Satisfaction, when revealed
By that refulgent Light; whose sacred Ray
Leads on the Meek in Sion's pleasant Way;
Whose Paths are Peace to them that persevere
To follow Jesus with an holy Fear;
Jesus, the spotless Lamb, whose Power surrounds
His Babes, when Tribulation most abounds:
Lean on his Bosom, for his Love extends
Abundantly unto his Bosom-Friends;
Who, though He in true Wisdom please to prove
Our Faithfulness, our Fervency of Love,
Is he sees good: Yet there is never just
^ause or Occasion of the least Distrust
Of Loyalty in him; who when as we
Were Strangers in a State of Enmity,
^ay, in a poor, defiled, polluted State,
Objects more likely for Disgust and Hate:
Did cast an Eye of Pity and of Love
^n Us, who had no Comeliness to move
The least Affection, till his Gracious Hand
^ad Washed, Swadled, had Anointed, and
^dorned with his Robe of Righteousness,
And put upon us his own Comeliness;
And by his sacred Covenant, engage
^ur Hearts unto him in our tender Age:
^^is, this is Love indeed! O let it never
^word quenched in our Hearts, but live for ever!
^his, this is Love worthy to be admired!
(...)! this is He alone to be desired.
Therefore contend not in the Carnal Will,
Tread Self-hood under Foot, wateh and be still
For all Additionals shall added be
By him, who knows what is best for thee and me
In Resignation let us wait to know
His Will fulfilled, and living Praises flow
Unto his holy ever-blessed Name,
Who only's worthy in our Hearts to reign
For evermore, Eternally. Amen.
Ninth Month, 1682.
The Eighth Epistle to Cousin F. R.
SHall Transitory Toys, vile Chaff and Dross
Ever be esteemed and prized above the Cross
The Cross of Christ, the Power of God, whe^^ b^
The holy Men of Old did crucify
The World and Self-hood; and thereby obta^^
A Crown of Glory, over all to reign,
With Sion's King, in Everlasting Peace,
Where joys abound, but Griefs and Sorrows cea^^
Ah! Shall that precious Seed, that has been so^^
In Ground prepared, so soon be overgrown
With Briars and Thorns? Or must the scorchi^^ R^^
And parching Heat of Trials, cause decay
In that once green (though tender) sprouting Pla^^
Has it but little Root? or does it want (...)
Retreshing Showers, or early Dews? O see
Why thus it seems to droop! Why should
So long neglected? It may sprout again
If cherished with first and latter Rain;
Which Bounteous Heaven will not too long deny,
If Disobedience and Idolatry
Do not provoke thereto: That Gracious Hand,
That planted it, can make a barren Land
More fertile for its sake; and if he please,
Can make a fruitful Land a Wilderness.
Ah! let our Breathings for each other be,
That since we were from the wild Olive Tree
Removed and separated, that we might
Be grafted in the Good, we may not slight
The Hand that planted, nor the Root that bare us,
Lest we decay; for can the Pruner spare us,
That spared not Natural Branches, if we be
Unfruitful, but divide us from the Tree?
But that we ever may, as we depend
Upon the Root, feel Life and Sap ascend
Into our Branches; that pure Praise may spring,
And Fruits of Righteousness to Sion's King.
A Letter to Cousin F. R.
IN secret Yearning for thy Preservation
Endeared Friend, I send the Salutation
Of Love unfeigned, and heartily desire
Its pure refining Flame may never expire,
Or be extinguished: For 'twas said of old,
Iniquities abound, when Love grows cold.
Now, though thy silent Pen does testify,
There Is some (yet latent) Cause of Jealousy:
I Will not my Rival envy, if it be
One worthy to be entertained by thee,
Without Detraction from that innate Worth,
Whereto (I hope) thou art by second Birth
Entitled. But can Affairs so crowd
Or interpose, no Hour must be allowed
To send some welcome Evidence of Love,
Which did so mutually engage and move
Our Hearts and Pens so frequently t'express
Their Quondam Sympathy? Well, ne'ertheless
What Is charactered in my poor pausing Mind,
I send unto thee, as by Love inclined;
Wishing thy Candid Aspect on the same,
Or else annihilate them in a Flame.
3d of 7th Mo. 1683.
A Parable to Cousin F. R.
ON Shiloh's fruitful Banks, in Valleys low,
A pleasant Garden flourished, where did grow
And spring, with early Dews, each curious Plant,
Some rich in Beauty, some in pleasant Scent:
Among the rest, a Lilly budded forth,
Which flourishing a while in Native Worth:
One Time looked out, t'observe and take a View
Of some strange Plants, which in the Highway grew,
To her a Scarlet Poppy then resorted,
And with fine Accademick Phrases courted;
Yea, did with florid Subtilty invade
Her Innocence, and charmingly persuade
To quit that close Confinement, and become
An Object more admired and gazed on:
The Lilly seemed to listen, till thereby
She was almost seized by a Lethargy;
Scarcely regarding, that in unfenc'd Land
She might be nip'd by some rash careless Hand,
Or that she in the enclosed Garden might
Flourish, secured from Storm both Day and Night;
And know the precious Dew of Hermon's Hill
Daily upon her tender Leaves distill.
A Neighboring Plant observing this, dismayed,
Unto the Master of the Garden said,
(In Sympathizing Bowels) Dearest Lord,
Be pleased to send thy pure prevailing Word,
To guard thy Lilly; let it not remain
Without thy Fence: Ah, with thy early Rain,
Bedew and quicken! Let it know that there
Is Blasting and Decay, but Safety here
Within thy Walls, which are Salvation round
About thy Garden, for it is holy Ground.
3d of the 7th Month, 1683.
SOLITUDE.
HOW sweet it harmless Solitude?
What can its Joys control?
Tumults and Noise may not intrude,
To interrupt the Soul
That here enjoys its self, retired
From Earth's seducing Charms,
Leaving her Pomp to be admired,
By such as court their Harms;
While she on Contemplation's Wings,
Soars far beyond the Sky,
And seeds her Thoughts on heavenly Things,
Which in her Bosom lie.
Great Privileges here, of old,
The wise Men did obtain;
And Treasure, far surpassing Gold,
They dig d for, not in vain.
The Tincture of Philosophers
Here happily -- they found;
The Music of the Morning Stars
Here in their Hearts did sound.
Moses, that meek and prudent Prince
Of Israel, did with Joy,
By the burning Bush, experience
This sacred Mystery;
When in Retirement he withdrew
And led his tender Flock
Beyond the Desert he might view
The Wonders of the Rock.
So Heaven's high honored Favorite,
Did often choose to dwell
Less for a Refuge, than Delight
Upon the Mount Carmel:
For in the incensed Justice, he,
From Heaven called down Fire,
To curb vain Man's Authority,
That did by Force require
The holy Prophet to submit
Unto their proud Command,
Or to come down, till Heaven thought fit
Thereto to condescend.
There Is neither Stateliness of Court,
Nor any frantic Mirth,
Deluded Mortals childish Sport,
Nor Glories of the Earth,
Can counterpoise that inward Peace,
Which in her Bosom dwells;
Joys here abounding, Sorrows cease;
Delight all Grief expels.
Here may the Soul, secured from Noise,
In Calmness meditate;
And waiting, hear the still small Voice,
Which makes the Mountains shake.
But consolates the Soul and Mind,
As with a sweet Repose,
Which here, as from its Dross refined,
Participates of those
Diviner Joys, whereto by Birth
She has a sacred Right;
Which far transcends all Joys on Earth,
In spotless true Delight.
But those that covet to enjoy
The Sweets of Solitude,
Must bid Adieu to Vanity;
Not let the World intrude,
Like an alluring Delilah,
Into their P^^^^cy;
For her Design is ^o betray
By subtle Flattery:
Which, who by Watchfulness does learn
Discreetly to repel,
Such, to their Solace, shall discern
Where perfect Peace does dwell:
And in Recirement, always find
Such innocent Delight,
As fully satiates the Mind,
And plenteously requite
Denial of all Earthly Things,
Which never can satisfy
The noble Soul, whose Solace springs
From Immortality.
The glorious Joys of Seraphims;
For which each daily sings
High Praises, and melodious Hymns,
Unto the King of Kings.
A Meditation.
CAN I forget that Hand, that first did lay
My mean Foundation out of Dust or Clay?
Can I forget the Breath that did inspire
My lifeless Mass with pure eternal Fire?
Can I forget the Word, that first said Live;
And with its Virtue, Life did to me give?
Can I forget that Eye, that guides me
With heavenly Brightness through Obscurity?
Can I forget that holy Arm of Power,
That guards and keeps me safe as in a Tower?
Can I forget that sweet Celestial Bread,
By which, when hungry, I am nourished?
Or can my Soul ever unmindful be
Of those refreshing Streams that slow from thee?
Thou great eternal Fountain of all Good!
Whose Name by Mortals is not understood;
Nor can, by Letters, Words or Sencences,
Be rightly comprehended as it is:
For thou art All in All; And who can say,
He can remember thee another Day?
Except thy holy Spirit still abide,
And lodge with us, to teach, direct and guide
Our Hearts and Thoughts, and quicken good Desires,
Whereby we long for thee, when thou retires
To thy Pavilion, to thy secret Place;
So that we rest not, till we see thy Face:
For thou alone prepares true Rest for thine;
Though furious Men against the Saints combine,
Their Habitation they can never destroy,
By all their hostile Arts and Policy:
For it is founded on the Rock that shall
Abide; and, though Waves beat, shall never fail,
As faithful they remain to thee, that art
Author of Faith, that Shield from every Dart,
Ah, why should any doubt? Thy Arm's the same
As ever; all sufficient to restrain
The Wrath of Man, though (as a flowing Tide)
It seems resistless: If thou please to guide
Our feeble Footsteps in thy Path, we shall
Not be dismayed, but follow thee through all
That would oppose; thou art our chiefest Guard
Yea, thou art our exceeding great Reward.
Ah! take up thy Abode with us! For we
Can find no Resting Place, except in thee.
1684.
Meditations on Persecution.
Cold hungry Seamen, though they often endure
Day-dark'ning Storms and Tempests, to procure
The winged Treasures of this sading World
Although they run the Hazard to be hurled
On wrecking Rocks, or quick-devouring Sands
Or cast as Captives on some foreign Lands,
To spend their wretched Days in Misery,
Instead of what they sought for to enjoy,
Abounding Wealth, if to their wished Shore
They safe arrive; ven^^^e again, yet more
Undaunted than at first, in Hopes to be
With more Success, kept from those Dangers free;
Then why should such faint-Heartedness appear
In Israel's Camp that ought of Right to fear
None but the Lord! Can any doubt that have
The Word of an Almighty King, to save
Them to the uttermost? what! though he seem
To tarry long, his own appointed Time
Is always best; in greatest Straights, we do
Wholly depend on, and acknowledge too,
Salvation only from above; for then
We find, it is vain to hope for Help from Men.
Ah! was not Israel thus beset? Could they
Encounter furious Pharaoh's Host, or the Sea?
Yet was Deliverance near; the Sea must be
A Path to them, a Grave to the Enemy:
Pharaoh might follow to his own Destruction;
Whilst Israel is proved, to gain Instruction:
That these may learn whom they should chiefly fear
And whom to trust, when Tribulation's near.
Ah, then in this our Gospel Dispensation,
Why should the Children of this Generation
Seem so far wiser, or more valiant, than
The sacred Offspring of Jerufalem?
Those hazard Life for transitory Toys;
And shall not these, for everlasting Joys,
Resign up Visibles, yea, Life and all,
To him that gave it, if he please to call
To such a Trial? Can we baulk the Way
Wherein he leads, ^^ept we run astray?
We must through Exercises overcome,
And bear the Cross, (if we would wear the Crown)
And fully follow him; the Recompense
Will far exceed, when we are parted hence.
But who art thou, that art so loath to give
Up an Estate? A Thief may soon deprive
Thee of a greater Share, than he requires;
Some suffer more by Carelessness and Fires;
Which justly Heaven permits, to let them see
How vain these poor, these trifling Treasures be.
Or do thou fear Confinement Heaven may send
Grievous Diseases, which Physician's Hand
Cannot remove, and to the uneasy Bed
Make thee a Prisoner, when thy Health is fled.
But if thou be confined for Jesus sake,
He will a Prison much more pleasant make,
Than any spacious Palace: For he will be
Fullness of Joy, and saving Health to thee.
Now, though some shun the Cross as worldly wise,
And from the Path of Truth apostatize,
And yet the Judgments do not soon ensue,
(Although they be in dreadful Vengeance due)
So that the wicked did of old aver,
Surely the Lord his Coming does defer:
Yet shall they not have Peace, but feel the Rod
Of a displeased, of a jealous GOD;
Whose Word can never fail, although he try
Some with Long-suffering, and great Clemency.
Ah, kiss the Son, lest that his Anger be
Incensed! for he alone can comfort thee:
And let not any faint, or start aside,
Heaven will support his faithful Ones when tried.
1684.
On DANIEL.
WHEN Babel's Grandees, by unjust Decree,
With Royal Signet, surreptitiously
Obtained, had feal'd an Edict, That none should
Exhibit a Request, or be so bold
To make Petition, save unto their King,
In Thirty Days; in hopes thereby to bring
TO inevitable Ruin, and destroy
The Prophet Daniel, whose Sincerity
Was well approved: Can we find, that he
Was ever so startled at the rash Decree,
As to omit what formerly he knew
Was an incumbent Duty, or to show
His Zeal for Israel's God? but every Day,
Did he not, with his Window open, pray
As formerly, and boldly supplicate
For Israel's Seed, in their afflicted State?
Now some may say, What, Daniel, could not thou
In Heart, and in the private Closet bow,
And make Petition in his Ear, that hears
Deep Sighs and Groans, as well as louder Prayers;
But indiscreetly thus thy self expose
A sought-for Prey unto thy watchful Foes?
No, no, he stood not to consult his own
Security, as knowing GOD alone,
Whom he adored, was able to restrain
The Wrath of Man, and in his sacred Name,
Support his faithful Ones, though Trials should
Be heaped on them, even Sevenfold;
Or else would give the sweet Experience,
Of a desirable Deliverance.
Thus noble Daniel, when Spies attended,
He, as a Criminal, was apprehended
And cast, by Sentence of malicious Men,
Into the (now more gentle) Lion's Den;
Whither, approaching in the Royal Robe
Of spotless Innocence, the eternal God,
That holds the Lives of Creatures in his Hand,
Muzzled the Lions Mouths, with a Command
Of Abstinence; and whispered in their Ear
Such Dread, that they durst not approach to tear
The Angel guarded Prey; but still must wait,
Though Hunger-bit, for other courser Meat.
But Babel's King could not be unconcerned
For upright Daniel: Ah, his Bowels yearn'd
For this his faithful Subject! So that he
Could take no Rest, but early rose to see
What was become of him; or if the Power
Of Isr'el's God, whom Daniel did adore,
Was able to preserve him from the Paws
Of those Devourers, and their ravenous Jaws:
Whereof, when Babel's King was satisfied
By Daniel's Answer, who the^e testified
His Loyalty to Heaven, his Innocence
Toward the King, he is soon removed thence;
Whilst his Acculers must become a Feast
For them that durst not touch the sacred Guest;
The Eternal Arm's the same, his Love's the same;
To those that trust sincerely in his Name.
But those that doubt when he is pleased to prove,
And saw such signal Tokens of his Love,
Are now but rarely seen, our Foe prevails
Too much against us, whilst our Courage fails;
We by Distrust and doubting often, I fear,
Prevent those Wonders, which might else appear.
Alas! it is Faith that conquers; he believed,
And doubted not, and therefore was relieved:
For he resisted even unto Blood,
Therefore the Lord brought all about for Good.
Shall Man prescribe a Way for him, whereby
His glorious Name, he best, may magnify?
A prudent General does not permit
Such to appear in the Front, he knows unfit
To bear the first Assault of the Enemy,
But valiant Hearts, that cannot yield nor fly:
Can then the everlasting Counselor,
The King of Kings, be more unskilled in War?
No, no; for He, the only wise Commander,
Though of his meanest Soldier truly tender,
Yet honors them in higher Place, that be
Free to encounters Dangers cheerfully.
And though proud Gog and Magog arm for Fight,
Destruction from his Sword shall stop their Flight:
They shall not 'scape from his all-seeing Eye;
His Wrath shall overtake them suddenly:
He and his Saints must have the Victory.
Then why should any weak and faint appear?
Though great Goliab glory in his Spear,
And monstrous Stature, little David shall,
Without Soul's Armor, make the Giant fall;
And bring Deliverance to Israel's Host,
Though the Philistines long against them boast:
And tho Worm Jacob's Seed be often proved
With Fribulations, he is still beloved,
And for his sake great Kings shall be reproved.
The Lord of Lords will get himself a Name,
He Will overturn, and overturn again,
Until he come, whose Right it is to reign.
1685.
Meditations concerning our Imprisonment Only for Conscience Sake, 1684. in
Lancaster-Castle.
THOUGH the Eternal Wisdom, Sion's King,
Be pleased to try his Babes, by Suffering;
Though some departing from the Sinner s way,
And walking Sion-ward, become a Prey;
Although through Tribulations Israel must
Enter the promised Land, yet Heaven is just,
And tenderly supports his patient Ones,
Although he chasten his Beloved Sons;
And though in Prisons outwardly they be
Confined, the Son of Love does set them free,
And leads in verdant Plains of Liberty:
The fresh fat Valleys, where sweet Shiloh flows,
Upon whose fertile Banks the Lilly grows;
Where, though he by some Exercises prove,
He sollaceth with Flaggons of his Love.
Then why should any murmur? Jesus thus
Extended Signal Favors unto us.
Here are we with the hidden Manna fed,
Though with Transgressors we be numbered:
Here can we Prospects from our Tower survey,
With much more innocent Delight, than they
That range at large; yea, here we may descry
The pleasant Path, hid from the vult'rous Eye:
Wherein the righteous follow Christ, their King
And tender Shepherd, to the living Spring
Of Joy; and to his Name, high Praises sing.
Nor can the proudest Walls (though never so nigh,
The Monuments of Grave Antiquity)
Be terrible to spotless Innocence,
That knows the Rock of Ages a Defense.
Though some be from their Families removed,
Here Mary's choice may better be improved:
And Christ takes Care for his, although they sit
As unconcerned, weeping at Jesus Feet:
He Will be a Father to the Family
Of such as, for his Name, in Prison lie;
And fill their Hearts with everlasting Joy
These rugged Walls, less grievous are to me,
Than those bedecked with curious Arras Be
TO a guilty Conscience; to a wounded Heart,
A Palace cannot palliate that Smart:
Though drunk with Pleasure, dull with Opiates,
Some seem as senseless of their sad Estates,
Till on their Dying-Beds Conscience awakes.
But though the righteous be in Bonds confined,
They inwardly sweet Satisfaction find.
Neither can stately Roofs, Gates, Bars, nor all
The Art of Man, suppress the Cries and Call,
Or Supplication, or the poorest Sigh,
Of Isr'el's Seed; for his Redeemer's nigh;
Who will regard the Cries, and hear the Groans,
Of his afflicted, tribulated ones;
And will, in his appointed Time arise,
Utterly to confound his Enemies:
Although by them he for a Season prove
His Chldren dear; he will yet in Time remove
The Scourge, and cast the chast'ning Rod aside,
When Isr'el's Faith and Patience he has tried.
Now, though some rage, because we cannot bow
Unto their vain Traditions, since we know
The blessed Truth, which has engaged to give
Our Hearts to Him, in wi^^m alone we live:
Yea, though for this, some fret, and storm and rage,
And study to afflict God's Heritage;
Their Wrath's restrained by one, that if he please,
Can curb the surious, rolling, raging Seas,
A^^^na Moment; and upon the Wave,
Teach his to walk, and by his Presence save
From sinking, as of old: His Arm's the same,
Eternal Praises to his holy Name.
He is our Shield, our Sun, that penetrates
Our closest Rooms, and sweetly consolates
Our waiting Souls; and with his quickening Ray,
Changes black Nights of Sorrow into (joyful) Day:
So that it is not the Terrors of the Night,
Nor darts that fly by Day, that can afright
The righteous Souls, who walk in holy Fear;
They know their Captain of Salvation near,
The blessed Prince of Peace, their Joy, their King,
The only Fountain, whence true saving Comforts spring.
6th Month, 1684.
Another Letter to Cousin F. R.
AS Winter's tedious Nights to weary Eyes,
As nipping Cold to chirping winged Flocks,
Until the welcome Day Star does arise,
And lights the Trees to shake their dow Locks;
Or as a Door close locked, to limit thee
Even thee, to whom I send these hasty Lines,
Such was thy tedious Silence unto me,
Till now of late a better Aspect shines.
For from thy bounteous Hand I have received
What I esteem more than the Miser's Gold;
If I for lieu of it should be bereaved
Of the dear Interest which in thee I hold;
Surpassing that of Consanguinity,
Which scarce obliges, but in Complements;
But Cordial Friendship's lasting Unity,
Hearts by endearing Virtue so cements,
That Distance, though remote, cannot separate;
Though interposing Business prevail,
To hinder mutual Converse, and create
Those Exercises which sometimes assail:
That Adage, clouded to the World in Mists,
Is in thy Converlation verity'd;
Honor with true Nobllity consists,
And nothing more ridiculous than Pride.
Pride in Deportment, and in gaudy Dross,
Indulged by some to obtain a Monarchy,
Is shunned by thee; thy Empire ne'ertheless
Extends further, than desired by thee.
Thou to the World in Plainness bravely shows,
Thou covet'st not the Troubles of her Noise;
Yet unawares obligingly subdues,
Far more than they that court her Vanities.
Pride's gaudy Captives strive to dazzle Eyes,
But thy sweet Gravity affects the Heart,
Yet such sometimes gain Conquest by surprise;
But whom thou overcomes, own due Desert.
Yet were thy Virtue and thine Honor less,
If such Ambition found a place in thee,
As frequently attends the gaudy Dress,
TO insult over those taken in Captivity.
But though thou can not totally redress
Such Expectation, as some seem to have,
Yet by a prudent Mein and Gentleness,
Would loose the Fetters, that so far enslave,
And innocently ever do extend
Such candid Favors, as may best agree
To those whom thou vouchsafes to own thy Friend,
And yet keep from reflecting Censure free.
But thy great Zeal for true Religion shines
In Life and Conversation, even as far,
Above what others talk these cloudy times,
As the Day-Ruler does a twinkling Star.
For in thy blooming Years, thy tender Mind
Was inf^^enced with such warm Desires
Of Holiness; and so to Good inclined,
As Love, and Power Divine, alone inspires.
Nor did thou take Religion upon Trust,
But wisely sought to know its Basis; and,
Noble Borean-like, so wise and just,
To search the Records of Divine Command:
Which, having proved, thou beard'st, and then obeyed;
And with a right composed Heart and Mind,
Bowed to the Truth; so Truth its Scepter swayed,
And thou therein do Peace and Solace find.
And though at first the frowning World assayed,
By Scornings and Revilings, to have deterred
From Goodness, thy great Soul was not dismayed,
But this, before her Vanities, preferred:
So things that once seemed difficult, became
More easy; and the glorious shining Light,
That first but glimmer'd in the dark, the same
Broke out more bright, and overspread the Night.
Thus what seemed once impossible, appeared
To thy great Satisfaction; and thine Heart
(Thy Understanding being fully cleared)
Enjoyed the Choice of Mary's better part,
Which from the righteous may not be removed;
They know Salvation near, Truth is their Choice;
And though such be with Exercises proved,
They have the Earnest of eternal Joys.
1690.
On FRIENDSHIP.
A Among the many Records I have read,
And Transcripts, through the World much scattered,
I Have met with several Hints and Whisperings,
Of an abstruse Grand-Property, that springs
From some interior, hidden, innate Cause,
In Noble Breasts, uncircumscrib'd by Laws,
Styled Friendship, which of such a Nature is,
That many think they know it when they miss.
But it is supposd of such sweet Innocence,
Of so Divine and Sacred Influence,
When it does in true tender Hearts prevail,
That when occurrent Troubles would assail,
It guards, as does a Bulwark, either Breast,
Where it resides, and takes up its rest.
But O! this treacherous World knows little of it,
Except it be in Name, whereby to scoff it.
For now, though some affected with the Name,
Would be supposed touched with its Noble Flame,
They scorn its Dictates, and will not regard
A troubled Friend, except some fair Reward
Appear in view; their Business or their Pride
Engrosses all; Sell may not be denied.
O when will Mortals raise their Eyes to see,
That all things here are only Vanity!
1691.
On the Three Holy Children.
WHen conquering Babel's Foes were subjugate,
And fair Jerusalem depopulate,
King Nebuchadnezzar triumphed in Pride,
And his Concerns of War seemed laid aside;
Who glorying in his Strength, not in the Lord,
Formed a Golden God to be adored.
Now this great Image, made by mortal Hand,
Must worshipped be (such was the King's Command)
Though senseless, helpless, though he never could bless
Their warlike Enterprises with Success:
But it is the King's Decree, and then who dare
Resist, but such as do a Greater fear?
The Sentence is, The Fiery Furnace must
Consume the Rebel's Body unto Dust.
Yet there were captive Jews of Royal Blood,
Who, in their Zeal for Israel's God, withstood
That cursed Edict, that vain Law reject,
That strict Decrce with them had small Effect:
Then the Informers, that observed the Jews,
And fought for an Occasion to accuse
The Innocent, (as some do now) drew near;
And first, to gain acceptance in his Ear,
Said, Live, O King, for ever! Thou have made
A firm Decree, which some have not obeyed;
Even Three conceited Jews, who neither thee
Regard, nor to thy Gods do how their Knee.
O how his Fury does at this arise!
That any should his Golden God despise:
His Visage does its native Features change;
His Eyes, with sparkling Rage, proclaim Revenge:
Therefore, at his Command, they all in Haste
The Persons of the innocent arrest;
Called Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego,
And they before the wrathful King must go
To prove the Matter; and, it seems to try
It they would bow: Which, when they still deny,
As knowing, He alone that did create
The Fire, and all things else, could soon abate
Its Violence; and from the threatening Hand
Of Babel's King, deliver them that stand
In Awe to none but him, and fear not Man;
But dread the living God, who only can
Kill and destroy, or save and keep alive;
For He to Man does Life and Being give.
This they believing, did not study how
To answer; but resolved not to bow
To any, but the Lord: Although the King
Seemed in his Wrath, to count it as a thing
Impossible, that any God could be
So potent, to withstand his fierce Decree.
But Great JEHOVAH did that Law confound;
For when all Three were in their Vestments bound,
And cast into the furious fiery Flame,
The Eternal Word did pow'rfully restrain
Its proper Quality, and so surround
Them with Defense, no Harm on them was found:
Yet did the Fire retain its former Vigor,
And manifest it with resistless Rigor,
Against those Men, who bold to execute
The King's Command, the Just did persecute:
Which, when Nebuchadnezzar saw, dismayed,
He rose in haste, and to his Nobles said,
Were not three Men cast bound into the Flame?
They answered, True: The King replied again,
Now, in the midst thereof, behold, I see
Four Men walk loose, and from their Fetters free;
Whereof the Fourth seems clothed in Majesty,
As Son of the Immortal Deity.
Thus was the Lofty forced to confess,
There was a Power above him, and to bless
The God of Israel; set his Servants free,
That, trusting in him, would not bow the Knee
Unto, or serve another, than the Lord,
Their only God; but, as with one accord,
Did yield their Bodies to his Will, that they
Might magnify him in their Trial-Day.
Consider now, had they not faithful been,
The Captive Seed of Israel had not seen
That great Deliverance, so signally
Wrought for them, that, in true Simplicity,
Resigned themselves, their all, unto the Lord,
Who is alone worthy to be adored:
Nor Babel's Monarch been constrained to bless
His holy Name, who reigns in Righteousness;
Deposing Kingdoms unto whom he sees
Most fic, and changing Man's perverse Decrees.
Lord, may thy Wisdom, in these latter Days,
Limit, or turn Man's Wrath unto thy Praise!
Put thou an Hook into the Jaws of those,
That study politickly to oppose
Thy Works of Love and Wonder, in the Land,
And with their Subtilty seek to withstand
The Progress of despised Israel,
In their Return toward thy Holy Hill,
Sion, the sacred Mount of thy Renown,
Which Babylon has sought to batter down,
But never shall prevail; although she seem
To sit in Pomp, like to a stately Queen,
That sees no Sorrow; all her Pride is vain;
For fall she must, and never rise again;
The Times's appointed. Then shall Sion rise,
And triumph over all her Enemies.
The Conclusion of a Letter to Cousin F.R.
Never let the Prospect of a great Estate
Dazzle those Eyes, which I presumed of late,
Could from on High, with brave Disdain, look down
On this World's fading Glory; since a Crown
Of Life is promised for a Recompense
Of hearty, true, sincere Obedience,
Unto the faithful Soul, whose strong Desires
Are centred in that Joy that never expires.
Ah, let enough suffice! Could Poverty
Be Advocate, 'twould plead Excuse for thee:
But if we grasp at Riches that are vain,
Then bow is our Religion strong and plain?
A MEDITATION.
LORD, teach me patiently to follow thee,
Through thy sore Travels, through thine Agony,
Which thou so meekly did endure for me,
Amongst such unworthy Worms as wounded thee,
Piercing the fresh with our Iniquity:
Teach us to suffer till we reign with thee.
Amen
To her Friend, M. J.
LET us, my Friend, all peevish Self withstand,
And in the Meekness of the spotless Lamb,
Lead one another gently by the Hand,
And travel forward to the Holy Land,
Where the Redeemed, on Mount Sion stand,
With Harps of Living Praises in their Hand.
A MEDITATION.
ETernal Love, before whose glorious Face
All Times art present, filling every Place;
Uncircumscribed, Unexcluded! Can
Thy boundless Mercy to forgetful Man
Be told? Or can thy long Forbearance be
Enough admired? Great dreadful Majesty!
Ah! let my Soul, in a true living sense
Now raminate on the sweet Influence
Of that abounding Goodness, which from thee
Did freely reach to such a Worm as me!
The Beast that cleaves the Hoof, and cheas the Cud,
Was by the ancient Law proclaimed Good:
And as you are pleased to enjoin thine Israel,
In humble due Acknowledgment to tell
Thy mighty Wonders, each one to his Friend,
Whereby thou brought' st' em to the promised Land;
So' among the many Favors, Lord, of thine,
May I now call to Mind that doleful Time;
Wherein, as pondering of my State, I found
(Though Life and Virtue does with thee abound)
My self as one of those dry senseless Bones,
Which lay in the open Valley, which thou once
Did show thy Prophet, all exceeding dry,
Until thou pleased to cast a tender Eye
Of Pity on them, and the Answer give
Unto that great Demand, Can dry Bones live?
By breathing on them, when thy gracious Hand
Had gathered them, and by thy blessed Command,
Clothed them with Flesh: Great King! thy Powr's the same
It was of Old, and cannot move in vain.
Thus, though at first my miserable State
Seemed unto me doleful and desperate,
How soon thou, in the Bone, did broach a Spring
Which to my Soul did sweet Resreshment bring.
Friendship tried.
THOUGH it surpasses Winter's Skill,
TO Impede the flowing Tide,
Which from the Spring in Hermon's Hill
Each Moment is supplied:
Though Icy Walls cannot immure
Its Crystal Streams that run secure;
Nor yet the scorching Fiery Beams
Of Summer's Heat exhale,
Or to drink up those purling Streams,
With all its Drought prevail;
Which ever flowing, freely bring
Their Pleasures from a Living Spring.
Yet have I seen a pretty Well,
Derived from Showers of Rain,
Which into Nature's Cistern fell,
And did some Time remain,
By Summer's Drought, exhaled away,
And vanish in a scorching Day.
So little Brooks and Torrents flow,
While they have fresh Supply
From the distilling Clouds,
But grow (when most they are wanted) dry
Like Cherith's Brook, whole pleasant Stream
Ceased when the Drought was most extreme,
So common Kindnesses may flow
In some Sinister Hearts,
And petty Favors seem to grow,
Whilst sometimes they impart
Renewed Bribes, in hopes to obtain
The Stock, with Interest, back again.
But then, if any Fret arise,
Or Disappointment come,
How soon Upbraiding testifies,
True Friendship found not room
Within those narrow bounded Breasts,
The Lodging of Self-Interest,
True Friendship, that from Virtue springs,
Does so enlarge the Mind,
It cannot be blocked up with things
Of such a servile Kind,
As makes dull Misers fret and rage
In this our mercenary Age.
It Is not the nipping stormy Winds
Of sharp Adversity,
Nor Winter's Frost, can chill the Minds,
Or stop the Sympathy,
Which with unfeigned Love does flow,
Where Friendship does sincerely grow.
A Meditation.
HOW long will Man forget himself,
And be so much inclined
To treasure up that sordid Pelf,
Which he must leave behind?
And seek these Vanities on Earth,
Which quickly come to naught;
A little Jollity and Mirth
Is often dearly bought:
Fools for the Belly sell away
Their Birthright to the Wife;
What Is this Inheritance? Cry they:
Thus they for Trash despise
That Treasure, which no Thief can steal,
No Canker-worm, nor Rust
Can ever corrupt: And it is by Seal
Confirmed to the Just;
Who, though they here may suffer Loss,
Is shall become their Gain,
If patiently they bear the Cross,
They shall the Crown obtain.
But those that choose their Portion here,
Shall wail in Misery,
Because such would not lend an Ear
To the Voice of Wisdom's Cry;
Who called, to lead them in the Way,
Where no Destroyer's found,
Nor any hurtful Beast of Prey
Can tread this holy Ground:
The Vulturous Eye here cannot spy;
But yet the humble Mind,
That seeks in crew Simplicity,
This pleasant Path may find;
And, though Unlearned, cannot err,
Led by a sacred Guide,
Unto a Habitation, where
True Comforts are enjoyed.
Then why should Men unmindful be
Of their more Noble Part,
The Offspring of Eternity,
As wholly to invert
The sole Use of their Intellects,
To gain a fading Toy,
This faithless World; while they reject
True Everlasting Joy?
They snatch at Shadows here, and slight
The Substance that remains
For ever: Thus they, in the Night,
Walk on to endless Pains;
If they persist to wander there,
And carelessly contemn
The springing Light, that does appear
Thence to deliver them:
Then, why, alas, should they destroy
Their Hopes of lasting Treasures,
And rest contented, sordidly
To share with Beasts in Pleasures?
Since Wisdom has prepared a Feast,
Her Tables furnished,
That Fools may now become her Guests,
And feed on Heavenly Bread.
Indeed the wise in their own Eyes,
Are filled with vain Conceit;
Such will the Honeycomb despise,
Yet shall the Hungry eat,
Till satisfied, and with Delight,
Walk on in Wisdom's Way;
Knowing the Light expels the Night,
And brings in perfect Day:
Whereby they see things as they be
And so are taught to choose
Eternal Life in Purity,
But Sin and Death refuse.
There Is no abiding City here;
Seek one that shall remain:
To Wisdom's Counsel lend an Ear;
True Godliness is Gain.
Where the contented Mind is known,
There is a sweet Increase
Of Solace, where the Soul lies down
In Everlasting Peace;
True Peace and Joy, not to be found
In vain Terrestrial Things:
Pure holy Praises then abound
Unto the King of Kings;
Who from on High, with tender Eye,
Looked down, and pleased to send
Wisdom to call, whose Voice and Cry
Does unto all extend.
Of a Happy Life.
SHall we exclude from a sedate,
Sweet, happy and contented State?
The honest Man that lives in Health,
Enjoying still sufficient Wealth,
Though not from an Inheritance,
But sure Supply from Providence,
Estate by Industry can find,
But treasures Goodness in his Mind;
Though boasting no Nobility,
Nor Honors, from a Pedigree;
But rather can, with Ego meis Majorihus V^rtute praeluxi.
Tully tell,
He does his Ancestors excel;
Yet is not over-clogg'd with Care,
Can Time for Mind and Body spare;
Can feed and sleep in Season, free
From superfluous Luxury;
That has an equal Loyal Spouse,
An handsome habitable House;
Inherited, or purchased, that
He need not fear the sullen Threat
Of griping Landlord; but if nor,
Finds true Content in any Lot;
Since in the Closet of his Mind
Dwells Solace not to be defined,
Has a just Friend, that cannot be
Transformed in Adversity;
And what is more happy, yet more strange!
He Is always ready for a Change.
On David and Jonathan.
ARE learned Pens solicitous to express
Idle Chimeraes in Romantic Dress?
And shall the Fame of these Heroic Friends,
Be thought a Theme unworthy of such Pens?
Where a more Princely Pattern can we find
Of Loyal Friendship, and a Nobler Mind,
Than shines in Jonathan, Readiness famous Son?
Whose Heart to David, since the Conquest won
From Great Goliath, was so firmly knit,
That no Self-Interest could ever alter it:
Such potent Love sprang in his Royal Breast,
That he disrobed himself, to cloth his Guest;
And gave his Garments, Girdle, Sword, and Bow,
Whether he did, by sacred Instinct know
He should his Father in the Throne succeed:
(Can Man divert what Heaven has decreed?)
And though the Kishite politickly told,
Whilst Jesse's Son survived, He never should
Establish his Dominion, or advance
His Royal Scepter: Yet since Providence
Had so disposed it, He with Pious Mind,
Serene from Envy, had in Heart resigned
His Kingly Power to David: For had he
Been false in Heart, some Trick of Treachery
Had broken forth, his Honor to obscure;
Yet David otherways been kept secure.
But O his brave Heroic Soul disdained
Ignoble Projects; yea, a Crown so stained
With Breach of Friendship! Ah, how did he plead
With furious Saul, and nobly interceed
For absent David, till he did provoke
To (had it hit) a sad and fatal Stroke
Against himself? then meekly he withdrew,
And at the appointed Season went to show
This unto him, whose Life seemed to depend
On the Fidelity of such a Friend;
Who (pre-advis'd) did privately attend
The Prince's coming; where, with mutual Grief,
Leave to depart, was then the sole Relief
Time did afford; with Tears, and great Increase
Of Sorrow, David is dismissed in Peace.
But David, truly worthy such a Friend,
Rememb'red this, when Heaven had put an End
To Rivalty of Rule, and called away
The noble Prince; lest here his longer Stay
Might seem to eclipse his great renowned Name,
Had he survived to see another Reign:
David yet grateful (when with watery Eyes,
He had bewailed his dear Friend's Exequies,
And grieved that he was by Philistines slain,
Against whom his Sword was never drawn in vain,
Until that dismal Day, that Heaven's Decree
On wretched Saul must executed be)
Sought out Occasion how to manifest
The Effects of Friendship in his Kingly Breast;
And to the Offspring, gently did extend
The Favors due to his deceased Friend;
Mephibosheth, though Readiness Posterity,
( Readiness, that was of such noted Enmity
To David) being Son to Jonathan
Must dwell at Court, the King will entertain
Him at his Royal Table, gives Command
For the Surrender of Readiness State and Land.
Was David valiant? Did he, void of Fear,
Assail and slay a Lion and a Bear,
And with undaunted Courage overcome
The Warlike Gathite with a little Stone?
But, which preferred him more than all the rest,
An upright Heart he bore within his Breast.
Was not his Friendly Rival, Jonathan,
Renowned sor Valor too? The only Man,
That, with his Armor-bearer, overthrew
The proud Philistines, ere his Father knew
With whom he left the Host of Israel,
Whilst the proud Garrison before him fell,
With Dread and Trembling; Israel, mean while
Amazed, made Haste but to pursue and spoil:
Yet did he not out-brave his Loyal Friend,
But by Majestic Meekness recommend
That true Nobility of Mind, that brings
A greater Honor than the Name of Kings.
For though his Sword many Philistines slew,
And Israel's Foes he bravely did subdue;
Yet did that Love and Friendship in his Breast,
Embalm his honored Name above the rest
Of his renowned Virtues, and engage
Immortal Fame in each succeeding Age.
On Modesty and Chastity.
O How is this luxurious World beguiled!
That Spotless Modesty seems quite exiled;
And Chastity cathier'd, or banished hence,
Lest her prevailing powerful Influence
Should tincture humane Hearts with holy Awe,
And deeply there engrave the Royal Law;
Which few regard, though of a vast Extent,
Although its Precepts teaches to prevent
The sad Effects, Grief, Shame, and Obloquy,
That still attend them that slight Modesty.
For Chastity, sits as with awful Grace,
Enthroned in the Heart, and sweetly in the Face
Holds forth its Ensign, Modesty, as 'twere
A Flag of Peace, which, when it does appear,
It bids Defiance to the voluptuous Mind,
Although to Hospitality inclined;
And does with Friendly Treatments entertain
Those that converse therewith without a Stain,
Or base Extravagance of wanton Look,
Wherewith deluding Sirens bait their Hook,
To catch unstable Hearts with seeming Joy,
Though the Design is chiefly to destroy.
No, here is a pure, though far more potent Charm,
That, as a Castle, daunts approaching Harm
With simple Innocence, whose chiefest Care
Is to prevent, rather than plant a Snare.
Then why should either Sex claim Liberty,
Beyond the Confines of sweet Modesty?
It seasons Words, and fairly regulates
Deportment, both to High and Low Estates:
It crowns the Man with Comeliness: But she
That wants it, deserves Shame and Infamy.
RETIREMENT.
O Whither is my Love withdrawn! and where
Shall I direct my Steps to find him near,
And fear no prying Eyes, nor listening Ear?
Ah! whither shall I now repair to find
A Solitary Place to ease my Mind,
To him that can my Foes in Fetters bind?
Ah, Lord! withhold not those resplendent Beams,
Nor stop the Current of those Cristal Streams,
Which would both heal my Wounds, and cleanse my Stains,
Spring! Spring! O Fountain of Felicity!
And let sweet Shiloh's Stream flow forth, that I
May drink, and be refreshed; or else I die.
Appear, thou great High Priest of Israel!
Who in that vast Eternity does dwell,
Whose perfect Beauty, Tongue can never tell.
O can my Soul but much affected be
With those enam'ring Rays that dart from thee,
Great Spring of Light! O teach me fervently
To wait for thee! whose Love is still inclined
To favor Israel's Seed, whose Heart and Mind
Is unto thee unfeignedly resigned.
Though Mortals cannot see thy Face, and live;
Yet to thy Royal Seed you are pleased to give
This Princely Favor, this Prerogative.
Lord, cast thine Eye upon a Worm, whose State
Is even like a Widow desolate!
Remove, consume, all that would separate,
Or interpose betwixt my Love and me:
O rend the Vail throughout, that I may see
My Soul's chief Darling! Ah, thou, thou art He,
That stands behind the Wall, and there do wait
To show thy self, when thine do supplicate
To see thee near; then do thou satiate
The pure in Heart: Although thou please to try
Their Zeal, their Fervor, their Sincerity
To thee; whose Presence Lord, is always nigh.
On Solomon's Requests.
GReat Solomon, to whom Heaven was pleased to give
A soken of his Favor, when required
To ask and have; it was not that he might live
To number rous Years, or Riches he desired,
Nor yet the Fame of outward Victory,
But that his Heart true Wisdom might enjoy.
Who, when he had this great Request obtained,
Esteeming it above the finest Gold,
Other more mean Enjoyments also gained;
He learned by this, Enigmaes to unfold;
And saw by this, all things below the Sun,
Were Vanity, and must to Period come:
And while to this he rightly was inclined,
His Steps were guided in the Path of Peace;
His understanding Heart and Princely Mind
In Wisdom's Secrets daily found Increase:
He then expe imentally could tell
Her Price all glistring Rubies did excel.
For this alone gives true Nobility,
Rightly instructing Princes how to reign,
As with a righteous Scepter: It Is hereby
The Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain,
To punish or protect; but knows to extend
Mercy and Justice with impartial Hand:
Therefore a Terror only unto them,
Whose Acts and Deeds are own, but ^^^ane
To Wisdom's Children Thus the ^^^^M
Of Princely Solomon gave forth such Rays,
As dazied the Beholders: M^^^tly
Shined in his Wisdom to each won dring^^^,
Much more than in the Plenty of his Gold,
Or sparkling Gems, common to other King;
'Twas none of these, when niggard Fame had ford
His Name in Soeba's Court, that from ^^^a brings
That famous Queen, whose Heart (...) or on Fire
To prove the Truth, his Wisdom to admire.
Where secret Wisdom dwells, at her right Hand
Are Length of Days and Peace where with (...) bless
Those that attend on her, and always stand
As at her Door, the Gate of Rights on mess:
With Wealth and Honors her right H^^^ ^^^^ses
Those whom she is pleased to own her ^au^^^ des.
But Words, alas, cannot enough set forth
Its Excellence, nor Tongue of Man declare
True Wisdom's Price, according to us Worth:
She dwells in the humble Heart, that is filled with car
Of the Almighty; and all those that have her,
Find Substance that remains, yea er^^^^s Treasure.
A MEDITATION.
O Who would think all outward Foes might be
Suppressed and conquered, much more easily
Than that insulting Tyrant in the Heart,
Which there usurps, and acts the Traytor's Part!
For though a Man externally reform
His Actions, so that strictly he perform
The Precepts of the Law; it is all in vaia,
If he the accursed Achan entertain
In his polluted Breast: This will expose
Him to the Fury of all outward Foes;
Whom otherwise he might with Ease repel,
Did not this Traitor in the Bosom dwell.
We'll therefore wait to feel the searching Power,
By its enlightening Influence, discover
This cursed Achan, that the Camp may be
Entirely sanctified, to follow thee,
Israel's victorious King, who truly do
Watch with a tender Care over Israel's Host,
For it is a Task, surpassing humane Skill,
Rightly to govern and direct the Will.
Let therefore Heart and Will be still resigned
To thee, with a free, fervent, humble Mind.
Contemplation.
GReat Prince of Peace! When I incline
To wait on thee,
Thou say in secret, Thou art mine;
Thou'st purchased me!
Not with Corruptible or Fading Things.
But with a Price that far exceeds the Gowns of Kings.
Ah, Lord! who can enough admire
Thy Boundless Love,
Which does so far surpass Desire,
Yea, often prove
Beyond what might expected be by me,
Unworthy of the smallest smiling Glance from thee.
O Gracious Love! Thy Sweets excel
All things below:
Alas! Earth's Beauty cannot parallel
Thy meanest Glimpse, I know;
For one's an Earnest of never fading Joy;
The other's an ensnaring Soul deluding Toy.
Thy smallest gentle Ray invites
Our Souls to taste
Those never fading fresh Delights,
Which always last;
And, as desired, more increase,
Unto the humble holy Child of Peace.
Mark how the Tape's feeble Light,
With Glimmering Ray,
Gilds as it were the Shades of Night,
Instead of Day;
But what is its Luster, when the Sun appears
T^llaminate our doseful Hemispheres!
So, though Earth's Pleasures sometimes do,
With seeming Joys,
Allay small Sorrows, mitigate a Woe,
That from her Toys
Proceeds, and vex the grovelling Soul that feeds
Upon her empty Husks, and noisome Weeds.
Yet when the Brightness of thine Eye
Does from above
Discover dark deluding Vanity,
And with its Love
Invite; how less than nothing then are those
Fondly ensnaring Toys, and fiatt'ring Shows,
Which only by Reflections do
Produce Remorse
In the injured Conscience, to increase the Woe
That will with Forte
Fall upon those that dote on Fading Toys,
But slight the Light that leads to endless Joys?
Ah then, who can enough admire
Thy Love, thy Light!
Who can but long, with strong desire,
For such Delight!
This is the Light of Life, fades not away,
But shines more bright unto the perfect Day.
Of FREINDSHIP.
Virtue is the right sacred Spring whence flows
Those Crystal Streams, whereby true Friendship grows;
That dear Affection, that firm Unity,
That interwoven free Community;
Which so engages Hearts and Minds together,
No stormy Sea, nor utmost Lands, can sever
These willing Captives: For the generous Mind
Is not by Place, though far remote, confined.
True Friends, when they by distance are bereaven
Of Verbal Converse, have their Names engraven
In one another Hearts, which cannot be
Cancelled or rased by Earth's vain Obloquy:
Yet, lest the same should, as a glimmering Spark,
Seem to expire, as buried in the Dark,
There is by Mediums (if the Place deny)
Them, viva voce, free Community)
Reciprocal Reflections of its Beams
Unto each other, couched in sable Streams;
Though the abounding Solace does increase,
When Friends converse together Face to Face;
Then freely they unbosom their Requests,
And treasure Secrets in each others Breasts,
As in firm Cabinets, close locked, where none
Can find the Key, but only each his own.
Is one oppressed with Grief? He lays a Share
Upon his Friend, that he may help to bear:
Swims one in Solace? Finds he cause of Joy?
It Is then re-doubled by Community:
Mourns one? the other mourns: Does one rejoice?
His second Self then, both in Heart and Voice
Does lymphathize: True Friendship may not be
Without an inward secret Sympathy.
But jawning Parasites, though they pretend,
In Complement, to be each others Friend,
For mere Self-Interest, or some close Design,
Become, if not proud Enemies in Time
Absoluce Strangers; and so manifest
True Friendship never was grounded in their breast
Although there was some formal Show, whereby
Some were deluded, through Hypocrisy,
TO impart their hidden Secrets, which are now
Made Proclamations, with a scornful Brow;
Nor are Reproaches, caunting Calumnies,
Bachbicing, Railing, other Injuries,
Withheld, as Opportunity affords
Th^^ venuter for Wrath, with either Tongue or Swords
Surely, because such do not rightly know
That innate Spring which makes true Friendship grow:
For this, by Covenant, does so engage
Their noble Hearts, that no Self-wounding Rage,
Can here prevail, or once dissolve the Knot
Friendship has tied: Mistakes are soon forgot,
If any interpose, or would present
Some Crime, to cause a Frown in Discontent,
There Is Charity in Friendly Breasts, that heals
Such Sears, whereby true Love, not Rage, prevails:
And when it is unto Perfection grown
In both their Hearts, such Scars are seldom known.
Gentle Advice, whereby one may reclaim
A Friend from Error, does not wrong the Name,
Or make a Breach in Friendship: None may be
Rightly esteemed a Friend, that if he see
His Neighbor lose his Way, will not direct
Unto a better; or that will reject
Good Exhortation, fancying Reproof
A greater Crime than he is guilty of.
Selt-hood is often blind; therefore a Friend
Is not prohibited to reprehend,
So he proclaim not Faults. But they that would
Sin uncontrolled, and hug their Errors, should
Never contract a Friendship, lest thereby
That sacred Name be stained with Infamy.
Is any wise, that when Distempers do
Begin to seize, would not desire to know?
Diseases known, are sooner cured; but they
That would indulge and hide them, that they may
Thereby increase, do frequently expose
Themselves, as a Derision to their Foes.
True Cordial Friends, without Offense, can bear
Kind Admenition, though it be severe.
The faithful Wounds of Friends are like Incision,
Made by the skilful Hand of some Physician,
To let out noxious Humors that invade,
The afflicted Part, and stubbornly impede
The hoped Cure; which afterward with speed
Does, by some suppling Olntment, well succeed,
Thus, by this needful Freedom, Friendship shines
With greater Luster; but its Light declines,
Where this is limited. Who can but grieve
To be so overpow'r'd; not to relieve
A Friend arflicted; that may not apply
A precious Balm to heal his Malady?
But there is rejoicing, when with equal Mind
Exchanging Thoughts, they may in any kind.
Express their Sentiments, and signify
Reproof or Approbation faithfully.
Thus still persisting in the sweet Increase
Oh Love unseign'd, and firm abiding Peace:
Here innocent Delight more freely springs,
Than may be found in Churis of mighty Kings.
But as true Virtue's rarely to be found,
So Friendship grows not up in every Ground:
He that would cheese a Friend, should prove and try;
Before the Knot be knit, none should unty,
While either Frimas remains; for Friendship must
Though one be separated unto Dust
If poor Mephibosheth survive, extend
To the Posterity and Name of Friend;
Else that is imperfect, which should racher be
A little Ray of Immortalicy.
Have thou a Friend, whose Ingenuity,
Well guarded with a right Simplicity,
Can both esteem what thou wilt communicate,
And of his own richly retaliate
The hidden Treasures of a knowing Breast,
Whose Cordial Love (too great to be expreis'd
By feigned Speeches) freely can reveal
His Secrets in thy Ear, but thine conceal
Close from all others; whose Fidelity
Will never desert thee in Adversity,
Although the World frown on thee, but remain
In Offices of Love, the very same,
Or more endeared, than in Prosperity?
If likewise thou retain Integrity;
Or if you are overtaken by Surprise,
And have transgressed, can deeply sympathize,
(If thou forsake thine Error, and accept:
Or Counsel, that Advice may take Effect)
And, as in secret, mourning over thee,
Can with Love's Garment, wi^cly cover thee
From the Eyes of others; yet it Suvidals should
(When raised by others) in his Ear be told,
Will still thy true Intelligencer be;
Yet boldly guard thy Name, and plead for thee,
When thou art absent: Know, that he expects
Friendship should have in thee the same Effects;
Yet hates Vphraiding, or a slanderous Tongue:
What can to Friendship be a greater Wrong?
But those that flatter thee in prosperous Times,
And, subtly indulge thy darling Crimes;
Will not endure a blustering Storm, but flee,
And with thy Riches, haste away from thee.
This is a Friend indeed, that cannot be
Bribed with thy Welath, or lost in Misery:
O grant him in thy Heart a worthy Place!
And see, as in a Glass Face answers Face,
Thou answer him; yea, prize him more than Gold
Of Ophir; for his Worth cannot be told.
It Is but the wise and honest Heart, from whence
Deceit's exiled, that is Friendship's Residence.
A Letter to a Friend.
Sometime this Query risoth in my Mind,
Can Friends be to each other so unkind,
Thus to perplex, and yet not show the Cause
Why Friendship should admit so long a Pause?
Has Graneur sturisy'd thy fertile Quill,
Or Mammon metamorphos'd thus thy Will?
So condescending formerly, and kind,
As if to Love and Friendship most inclined.
Methinks ahundance of such outward Store
Should never abridge our Time, but gain us more.
Not that Wealth can add Number to our Days;
But Time (wherein the Indigent may raise
Some Stipend, to procure their daily Food)
Might be improved, as for a mutual Good,
By such as have obtained a full Supply;
Or else wherein does the Advantage lie
Betwixt the Rich and Poor? Heaven still extends
Bread, to sustain each to their latter ends.
Then should not those, that greater Mercy share,
Some Time for Friendship's Privileges spare?
But should my Grief by Words be thus expressed?
I Will cease to write, and only Sigh the rest;
For since my Letters may not answered be,
I may conclude, that all is Vanity.
Another Letter to a Friend.
MY hasty Pen, about to write Unkind,
(When interrupted by my zealous Mind)
Again admits of dear Marcaria; though
Thy tedious Silence gives Affront unto
True Cordial Friendship, which in every State
Sweetly delights to communicate
Pure Streams of Love, as Opportunity
Permits, to manifest its Sympathy;
Which seeming now to cease, gives Cause of Doubt,
Some new Concern has jostled Friendship out,
From that fair Bosom; where, if yet it dwell,
'Twill by its influencing Power dispel
Whatever would stop its Current: For we see
That standing Pools often times corrupted be,
When smaller Brooks, whose Streams do gently glide
Along their Banks, are purged and purified.
A las, that Love that burns with Fervency,
Is frequently perprex'd with Jealousied
Then why so silence? Why so straugely mute?
Must I indeed not only find my Suit
Ungranted, but disdained? And must I be
Therefore unanswered, for a Penalty
To be imposed, as for a heinous Crime?
Though I forgot once a Request of thine,
I did not wholly throw aside my Pen;
But, as full fraught with other Matter, when
In hopes of sending, though I did omit
To answer each. Punctilio, yet I writ,
(Grateful or not:) For my officious Quill,
As formerly engaged, is ready still
To write to thee. --
Ah! Can thou think what Doubtings do attend
Whether sad Sickness, or some rival Friend
May now so long restrain thy careless Pen,
As if it would not deign to write again?
Or must that Friendship in Oblivion lie,
That seems immortal? Then send Reasons why:
How should I else resent this Injury?
Upon parting with a Friend.
1.
AND can the affects of Cordial Friendship be
So apt to raise a Tumult in the Mind?
Or so injurious to my Friend and me,
To make us to each other seem unkind?
'Twere then but weak; nay Weakness surely must
Be challang'd ours: Friendship is always just.
2.
May we not innocently then rejoice
In the Society of Bosom-Friends?
Yea; yet we cannot always have our choice,
Since things below unto Mutation tends.
True Friends must part of mere necessity;
Best Titles here are but uncertainty.
3.
Yet might the Ocean cease to ebb and flow,
E're I should once ungratefully deny
Those Obligations deep, whereby I owe
Much more to thee, than my poor Company
Could ever retaliate in many days;
But I might suffer Losses other ways.
4.
Whilst she, obliging she, might never want,
What was so much desired, Society;
There Is many too ambitiously would grant
That which themselves would so much gratify.
Why should she then strive for a thing so mean,
And scarcely worth the Labor to obtain?
5.
Then why should too too furious fiery Zeal,
Usurp a place in such a Noble Heart,
Where only Love should evermore prevail,
(As knowing best to act true Friendship's part)
Which thinks no evil, but does tenderly
Heal, or conceal and hide Infirmity?
6.
They that are unengag'd in Wedlock, seem
T^ enjoy a Privilege or Liberty,
To a^ Spontaneously, and may redeem
Time to enjoy a Friend; yet frequently
Such can plead urgent Business to withdraw,
And think it is no Breach of Friendship's Law.
7.
When such as are by nuptial Tie confined,
Should not be censured in Sarcastick Strains,
Lest some seem Cruel, when they would be Kind;
And so change mutual Pleasures into Pains:
Therefore let Heats and Animosities,
On Friendship's Score, no more among us rise.
A Letter of Invitation to a Friend.
IF to the Country I my Friend invite,
It Is but to do languishing Friendship right
What to a Friend can be a greater Wrong,
Than that the Second's absent overlong?
Now, though our Cottage be but mean for thee,
Make it more pleasant by thy Company.
For though we think we have an Interest,
Firmly secured in each others Breast:
Yet if it cease to circulate and flow,
'I will sooner stagnate, than increase and grow.
Never let it be like that adored Gold,
Possessed by wretched Misers, (that of old
Concealed and hid it) useless, lest we seem
Quite to reject and lose that just Esteem
Due to the Root, from which true Friendship springs,
Which to the Heart, immortal Solace brings
Indeed in high-flown Panegyric Verse,
My Pen is not accustomed to rehearse
Praises incredible, nor to commend,
In deep Hyperboles, a worthy Friend;
Yet she that treasures Virtues in her Breast,
Shines in those Robes, wherewith it does invest
The trule noble Soul, whereby each Eye
Something of innate Luster may espy.
Then may such well assert, like Sheba's Queen,
When she great Judah's King and Court had seen,
One half had not been told; So may it be
Affirmed by many that have heard of thee:
Why then should this mean Pen pretend to tell
Half of those Virtues that in thee excel?
A Meditation.
1.
WHY should the pure immortal Mind,
That cannot circumscribed be
Within the Bonds of Flesh and Blood,
Seem to fallacious Toys inclined;
Neglective of the chiefest Good,
And only true Felicity,
The never-fading Joys of vast Eternity.
2.
Where wretched Infants naked hurled
Upon the Banks of sullen Cares,
To beg the Favors of the World,
And only be involved in Snares,
And suckled at the Breasts of Misery
Unless in all things they comply
With Earth's imperious Nods, and fordid Tyranny?
3.
No, no; that all-discerning Eye,
That with a strict observant Look
Survey the Corners of the Universe,
And Tokens of his Power disperse
Therein, who now and ever took
Care of the Helpless, cannot pass them by,
Since the young Ravens wants he does supply.
4.
But an instructive Lesson's learned hence,
That helpless Man might look unto
The all-preserving Hand of Providence,
From whom alone all Blessings flow;
To whom alone our humble Eye
Should always in Sincerity
Be lifted up, for he will regard our earnest Cry.
5.
Though Infants many Days do more
Regard the Pap than her that gives it,
They learn in Time both to implore
Help, and to acknowledge who relieves it;
And, though they do not want the Breast,
Would with their tender Mother's Bosom ever rest.
6.
Thus is not both our Heart and Mind
Taught with Magnetic Influence
Or Sacred Love and Sympathy,
That we thereby might be inclined
To soar above the Sphere of Sense,
Of perishing Mortality;
Yea, with unwearied Fervency,
Seek the sublimer Joys of bright Eternity?
Another Meditation.
OH! if my Mind,
Should be inclined
This would increase my Fear,
Lord, from above,
Thou God of Love,
Reveal thy Counsel near;
That I may know,
That I may do
Thy ever-blessed Will:
Ah! thine alone,
And not mine own,
Great King! Do thou fulfill.
Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbis.
WHat a Succession of Delusion's here,
Whilst righteous Reason is dethroned?
Shall Darkness thus cover our Hemisphere?
Ah! Must no other Law be owned,
But a depraved Will that still inclines
To choose the worst, and leave the best;
Disdaining to observe the Sun that shines
Within the Conclave of the Breast?
Why, both in former and more modern Days,
Should Virtue, as an heinous Crime,
Be prosecuted! Lest its conquering Rays,
Through the whole Universe should shine,
And thence dispel the the horrid Shades of Night,
That does surround poor Mortas, so
That till this, rising, undeceive the Sight,
They wound their Friend, and spare their Foe:
Striking at pure unspotted Innocence,
Condemning true Sincerity,
As Malefactors, guilty of Offense;
Whilst Barabbas has Liberty
Granted by common Suffrage: Birds of Prey
And Rapine, may uncensur'd tear
The harmless Doves; and who dare that gainsay?
But unto these, (Oh) how severe!
Yet have some few been raised in every Age,
Led by a Spark of Light and Love
Divine, which, in secret, did engage
To plead a little for the Dove;
At least, to manifest their Discontent,
As none of the Confed'racy;
That they might either limit or prevent
The progress of such Tyranny;
And like the wise Gamaliel, intercede
With sober Caution, to beware,
Lest some thereby the Prince of Heaven invade,
And cast themselves into a Snare;
Yea, launch thereby into the sad Abyss
Of endless Woe and Misery;
Except, reclaimed by such Advice as this,
They learn to show more Clemency.
A Letter to Cousin F. R.
[Written after her Marriage.]
DEar Cousin, thine is safely come to Hand,
Whereby I may thy Welfare understand;
Which is right pleasant welcome News to me,
As the like Notice here of mine to thee:
For mutual Love, where it abides, does joy
In Friends, as in their own, Felicity.
O may it ever have Pre-eminence!
Then shall we not be apt to take Offense,
Nor wilfully offend; but in each Breast,
Where it prevails, believe and hope the best:
This still indulgeth Amity and Peace,
But causes Animosities to cease;
Distance of Miles can never quench the same,
It lives a warming, not consuming Flame:
In which I re-salute thee, and remain
Thy constant Friend, not changed but in Name.
Another Letter to Cousin F. R.
NO doubt, ere this, Rejoicing Friends are come,
Congratulating thy Arrival home;
And with the kindest Welcome, signify
Their Expectation, to renew the Joy
They Would formerly in thy Society.
But sure, a watchful Heart may never be
Lost (though engaged) in multiplicity;
But eyes the Rock, which, when in rolling Waves,
Is safe to Anchor on, and firmly saves,
As in a Cliff, or secret hiding place,
Free from the dangers of Tempestuous Seas;
Wherein, as any does securely stand,
Such cannot be unmindful of a Friend
That does in such like Habitation dwell,
But can delight by Tongue or Pen to tell
Their Exercises, with Endearments free;
Love circulating thus in Sympathy.
But scarce had these my Musings finished,
With many more quite lost and scattered,
For want of Penning, when thy Letter came,
And proved my hopes deferred were not in vain;
Therefore in curtale Lines herewith I send
My Sentiments thereon to thee, my Friend.
A Third Letter to Counsin F. R.
CAN I be silent, though I seem to intrude
Amongst such a thronged important Multitude?
Can I forget that Heart, that seemed to me
Firmly engaged in mutual Sympathy,
And Bonds of sacred Friendship, which were then
Supposed Immortal? Can my sluggish Pen
Forget its useful Office, though it want
That influencing fair Encouragement,
Which once was wont so freely to distill
In copious Lines, from thy more pregnant Quill?
Nay, nor although I own Realities,
May I in curled Strains Hyperbolize,
That innate Virtue, which in thee does lie,
Needs no such varnishing, vain Sophistry:
This naught avails, but, like Adventures, tossed
On boistrous Seas, may well be reck'ned lost,
If no Return be made: Yet may there be
A better Trassick 'twixt my Friend and me,
If she will but deign to step from out the Crowd
Of those Incumb? rances, which so be-cloud
And intercept that Converse, which should be
Not too too long confined in such as thee;
Who, by Example and good Converse, may
Lead on Associates in an happy Way.
Should then this fading World again ever find
So great a place in that Heroic Mind,
Which heretofore so prudently denied
Its Grandeur, Pomp, and all its swelling Pride,
To treasure up a far more Noble Prize,
Than can be well observed by common Eyes.
Which dote on Toys, and can admire the Blaze
Of transitory Honors, but soon daze
At the Appearance of that glorious Light,
Which to the Immortal Soul gives perfect Sight
And Prospect of the New Jerusalem,
Where the Redeemed wear the Diadem
Of endless Glory, and rejoice to sing
Melodious Songs of Praise to Sion's King?
Should then this World's inferior Trifles be
Of such Regard, as to prevail with thee
To look aside: Ah! nay; for thou have learned
To pass by all her Triumphs unconcerned.
Now therefore, persevere, my worthy Friend,
In that where Friendship never knows end.
M. M. UPON SILENCE
Written by another Hand.
1.
WHat Muse so soft, or who is fit to sing
Thy Praise, thou mighty Passive Thing?
Who can define thy Genealogy,
Thou Product of the Deity?
For before any thing, thou had thy Place
Extended through the wide and empty Space.
2.
The Inhabitants above, in that bright Sphere,
Acknowledge thee a Being there,
When they their Hymns and Hallelujahs sing
To their High and Heavenly King,
In a most reverend Frame, make Use of thee
To magnify the great Solemnity.
3.
When Horeb's Mount was topt with Fire and Smoke,
And with a Dreadful Trembling shook;
To add unto its Horror and its Wonder,
The Rocks and Mountains split asunder:
Yet ne'ertheless, JEHOVAH was not there,
But in the Silent Voice he did appear.
4.
Though Voice and Speech alone was given,
To worship Him, whose Throne is Heaven;
Yet in an awful Reverend Silence, He
Admits of a Discovery;
For to his Ears, Words uttered without Noise,
Are louder languag'd, than a Vocal Voice.
5.
What Praise is due to thee, thou calm Abode,
Thou Rest of Souls, that worship God
In thy Recess; the Spirit does convey
To Man the Knowledge of the Way,
That leads to where Desires terminate,
Where more enjoyed than Mortals can relate.
6.
Though some confess the Pleasure of thy Loves,
Thy nightly Walks and silent Groves,
Thy sweet Retirements, and thy pleasant Shades,
Where neither Wind nor Storm invades;
Where Pleasure's free, unmixed, and unconfined
Always attend upon a quiet Mind.
7.
Yet very few there are, that really be
Fully satisfied with thee:
Therefore thine Artless Altar neglected lies,
For Want of holy Votaries;
Whilst No^se, thine Enemy, ascends the Chair,
And Crowds, her Praises echo through the Air.
W. A.

FINIS.

