Mr. WILLIAMS's SERMON On Divine Grace.

Divine Grace Illustrious, IN THE Salvation of Sinners.

A SERMON Delivered in the Audience OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE Colony of
Connecticut, At New Haven October 22. 1727. In the time of the Sessions There.

By Elisha Williams, A.M. And Rector of YALE COLLEGE.

Published by Order of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

N LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY,
1728.

Divine Grace ILLUSTRIOUS IN THE SALVATION OF Sinners.
EPHESIANS II. 8. FOR by Grace are ye Saved, through Faith; and that not of
your selves: It is the Gift of GOD.


IN the preceding Chapter the Apostle endeavors by various Arguments, to
Confirm the Ephesians in the Belief of this great Truth, That Divine Grace
alone Challenges the Glory of the Salvation of Sinners. In this, he Amplifies
the Riches of it, from the Consideration of the state such are in, before they
are Quickened with Christ: And this he tells them in the first Verse, is a state
of Death; Ye were dead in Trespasses and Sins: Not only Judicially dead,
because obnoxious to Death, but really Spiritually dead, alienated in their
Hearts from GOD; which is properly Spiritual Death. This their Spiritual Death,
he proves from the Effects or Fruits of it; when he tells them their Life had
been in Sin, a Walk, or Course in Transgression, relishing only what was
Carnal, under the Influence and Dominion of Satan; who before their Conversion
had ruled in them, as he always does in the Children of Disobedience, in the
second Verse. And to show them that Divine Grace was as Conspicuous in the
Salvation of others, as of them, he observes that such a condition as he had
been describing, was not peculiar to the Ephesians, but common to all, till
Renewed by the Spirit of CHRIST even including himself, (who elsewhere speaks
of himself as being Blameless, as to the External Righteousness of the Law) in
the third Verse; Among which Sons of Disobedience, says he, in whom Sin Reigns
and over whom Satan Lords it, we all had in Time past, our Conversation also,
in the Lusts of our Flesh, fulfilling the desires of the Flesh and of the Mind;
and more by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as others. No one by Nature,
having in this respect any Excellency above another. To be delivered from such
a Miserable State as this, To have a Spiritual Life Communicated from CHRIST,
and made to grow up in Him to the fullness of the Stature of a Perfect man, and
to be raised up together and made to sit together in Heavenly Places in CHRIST
JESUS; which though not seen with our eyes, but is hid in the Christian's Hope,
and of which he may be said to have already Possession in CHRIST. This as is
observed in the Context must needs carry their thoughts, to a Mercy Infinite in
its Riches, and to an Infinite Astonishingly free Love as the spring of it; and
to make the Conclusion with the Apostle in the Text, That Grace alone may Glory
in their Salvation. For by Grace are ye Saved, etc.

WHERE may be observed;

1. THE true Cause of our Salvation asserted; By Grace are ye Saved. Grace is
sometimes used for the Free Favor of GOD; and sometimes for the Effects of
that Favor in us But it is here used in its Primary acceptance, for the Free
Favor, Love, or Good will of GOD, as the Fountain whence all Gifts flow to us.

SALVATION, may be Considered either as Begun, or Complete; both which are
Included in his assertion, as the Context abundantly proves. From Grace it is
begun and completed.

And Secondly,

2. A falsely supposed cause of our Salvation Rejected. Our selves. A
Disposition to advance Self in opposition to Grace, in its method of saving
Sinners, is deeply rooted in us; every one naturally sets up a Righteousness of
his own, something he imagines he finds in himself, or something he has done as
a ground of his acceptance, or at least as what moves the exercise of Divine
Compassion toward him, This the Apostle entirely Rejects, Not of your selves.
It is not for any thing in us that Salvation is bestowed, or for any works we
do, which he adds to confirm this Truth, and subjoins the reason, because works
as they stand not with Grace, so they are Enemies to the Glory of it, inasmuch
as they set up Glory in our selves, Lest any man should Boast. So that nothing
is to be attributed to Self, as Causal of this Salvation; No, for although it
be through Faith, yet we cannot challenge any thing; for Faith Renounces all
Works, Wisdom, and Worthiness of our own, and brings us empty to GOD, receiving
CHRIST for Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Nor is it
from any strength in us by which we do this, but the LORD gives this; and
therefore the Apostle adds, It is the Gift of GOD.

Whence the DOCTRINE is,

THE Salvation of Sinners, is, in every part of it from the Grace of GOD.

ALL the Good that ever the fallen Creature can have, must issue out of GOD's
free Love; which is a motive to it self for the doing good to the Sinful and
Miserable Creature. GOD is Kind and Merciful to it because he will be so. He
acts most freely herein, and the reason of it is not to be looked for out of
Himself.

IN handling of the Doctrine, I shall endeavor briefly to Evince the following
Proposition.

I. IT is from Grace, That CHRIST was given to be a Savior.

II. IT is from Grace, That this SAVIOR is made Known to any.

III. IT is from Grace, That any are Effectually prevailed upon to Believe in
Him, or to accept of Salvation by Him.

IV. IT is from Grace, that such as do Believe in Him, are made to Persevere in
Faith and Holiness.

V. THAT their Salvation is Consummated in GLORY, is also from Grace.

I. IT is from Grace that CHRIST was given to be a Savior.

MAN was Capacitated and designed for a glorious Service, the Knowing, Loving
and glorifying his MAKER, and by an abundant Goodness was encouraged thereto;
Yet did act so Unworthily toward Him in violating his Laws, disowning his
Authority over him and renouncing his Dependence upon Him and Obligations to
him, That when it is seriously Thought of, we may justly be filled with Wonder
that Vengeance did not pursue him with Everlasting Punishments. It must force a
Conviction in us, that he is destitute of a Plea for favor from a Justly
Incensed DEITY, and that no Injury is done him if he is everlastingly left
under His Frowns. Relief can arise to him from no Spring but the mere Mercy of
GOD; From That and no other Fountain, could the amazing Gift of a SAVIOR flow.
Had the good Will, the Grace of GOD suspended its act of giving the SAVIOR,
all Mankind would have been left in a state of Sin, and Wrath; and that act
might have been suspended, might not have been, if it had seemed good to the
Most High so to have Determined. If that act could not have been suspended, it
was then a matter of Necessity, what must, and could not but have been
Antecedent to any act of GOD's Will about it. Which will suppose, Absolute
Freedom, subject to Constraint that indeed there is no such thing in GOD as
Absolute Freedom. And as there was no necessity from the nature of the thing,
so there was no necessity lying upon GOD with relation to his own Perfections,
to give his SON as a SAVIOR to the World. Not on the account of Glorifying
Himself this way by the discovery of His Mercy. It Is certain He always acts for
his own Glory, because there is none greater than Himself. But that he should
Glorify Himself by the discovery of His Mercy, in providing a SAVIOR for
Sinners, He could not be Necessitated to, since if he had seen fit he might
have glorified his Justice and Power in their Destruction. There could be no
Necessity upon GOD in point of Justice to do it, for Man by breaking the Law,
righteously deserved Death. So that Man would have had no Injury done him by
GOD, if that Sentence had been Executed upon him, Nor could there be any
Necessity from the Infinite Mercy and Compassion of GOD. GOD has; Mercy large
enough to Relieve all his Creatures that may be in Misery, but there is no
necessity in the nature of Infinite Compassion to Relieve them: If there were,
it must extend it self in a like manner to all in Misery, and so it were
Impossible that any of his Creatures should render themselves finally
Miserable, by any Sin. The Contrary whereof we are assured. The exercise of his
Mercy is under the Command of his Will, and why it is exercised toward one in
Misery and not toward another, is only because it is His Pleasure: So that
this Act of giving his Son to be the Savior of Mankind, might not have been,
if it had seemed good to him not to have done it; and so all Mankind had
Eternally and Justly Perished. From no other Fountain therefore but Sovereign
Grace, does flow this glorious Gift of a Savior. This Gift was made to a
Sinful World because it pleased GOD so to Manifest his Love 1 John 4 9. In this
was Manifested the Love of GOD toward us, because that GOD sent his only
Begotten Son into the World, that we might Live through him. Joh. 3 16. GOD so
Loved the World, that he gave his only Begotten Son, that whosoever Believes
in him, might not Perish, but have Everlasting Life.

II. IT is from Grace, that a SAVIOR, and a way of Salvation by Him, a made
Known to any.

THE Gospel is not a Debt to any Nation; for as GOD owes no Mercy to any
Sinner, Not the giving of a SAVIOR, So not the Revealing of Him to any People;
All are equally unworthy by Nature of such a Benefit; being equally Sinners,
they are equally Children of Wrath. Not any one more than another deserves it,
nor any one at all; therefore that any one has it, is an act of mere Grace.
That one Man or one Nation is passed by and suffered to dwell in Ignorance, and
another enjoys the Gospel Light, is from the good Pleasure of the Divine Will.
Why was it that GOD passed by the rest of the Nations of the World, and chose
ISRAEL to be a peculiar People to Himself? Not because they had more to commend
them than any other Nation; but because it pleased GOD to separate them from
others; who being equally LORD of all, might single out whom He would to be the
Subjects of his Favor; might overlook others, and Choose them: or have passed
by them, and Selected others. His taking them to be a peculiar Treasure to
himself above all People, He asserts himself to be an Act of his Sovereignty,
and the Reason of such a Dispensation to be resolved into that; For all the
Earth is mine (says he) Exodus 19.5. So Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. Behold the Heaven and
the Heaven of Heavens is the LORD's thy GOD, the Earth also with all that
therein is. Only the LORD had a Delight in thy Fathers, to love them and he
chose their Seed after them, even you above all People, as it is this Day.

AND it is evident there was nothing in them as the Ground of it, from their
Froward and Rebellious Carriage under all the Kindness and Mercy showed them.
This GOD foresaw, and told them before hand, they would be Rebellious from
their youth; to prevent their entertaining such an Imagination. Isa 48.4 -- 8
Because I knew that thou art Obstinate, and thy Neck is an Iron Sinew, and thy
Brow Brass' -- I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; -- For I
knew thou would deal very Treacherously, and wast called a Transgressor from
the womb. All appearance of Merit in them of such a distinguishing Favor, must
be utterly discarded, and the Resolution of it must be into the free Favor of
GOD. He loved them because he loved them. This is the Reason he himself
Assigns, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you,
because ye were more in Number than any People, (for ye were the fewest of all
People) but because the Lord Loved you. And since the Jews for their Unbelief
have been disowned of GOD for a People, the Gentiles have been called in. But
why, since they were covered with gross Idolatry? This was the good Pleasure of
his Will, to call in, and reveal a way of Salvation to those that sought not
after it. Romans 10.20. I was found of them that sought me not; I was made
manifest to them that asked not after me. And in the Context the same Apostle
shows that the exceeding Riches of GOD's Grace is manifest in calling such in,
that were far off, Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, and having no hope
and without GOD in the World; In the 7 th. 12 th and 13 th ver. And why any
Nations now lie in gross Darkness and Idolatry, and we enjoy the Gospel
Revelation, is not owing to any Motive, rather to be found in us than in them.
Our being called and not they, is to be resolved into the Gracious purpose of
GOD. 2 Timothy, 1.9.

III. IT is from Grace, that any are Effectually prevailed upon to Believe in
CHRIST, or to accept of Salvation by Him.

THE great Gift of the SAVIOR was perfectly free. The External discovery of
him to any, is perfectly free. So also is the overcoming any to whom the Gospel
is sent, to receive this SAVIOR from the free Grace of GOD.

IN this Particular Three things are Implied and may be distinctly Spoken to.

1. A Saving Faith in CHRIST is not the Product of Man's natural Powers.

But,

2. THIS is wrought in the Soul by a Divine Power.

And,

3. THIS is done Freely.

1. A Saving Faith in CHRIST is not the Product of Man's Natural Powers.

MAN in his natural Condition has not a Power sufficient to Produce in himself
a Saving Faith in CHRIST; so that it can never be from himself that he has
Saving benefit by him, though He be set forth as a SAVIOR before him in the
Gospel. For, although his understanding, may have such a conviction of that
great Truth, That JESUS CHRIST was the Sent of GOD to take away the Sin of the
World; and that the way of Salvation revealed in the Gospel, is every way
becoming the Glorious Perfections of the Great Author of it, as that he cannot
deny his assent thereto; and this be also as much within the Compass of his
Natural Powers, as to understand any Truth in Nature that may be proposed to
him. Yet such a sight of the Glory of GOD, in the Gospel in the Face of his
Son, as makes the Soul to receive the Gospel on a Divine account, to take
CHRIST for Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and
Transforms it into the Divine likeness, renews us in the Spirit of our mind,
and makes us to put off the Old Man, As the Apostle describes Regeneration and
the fruits of it, in Ephesians. 4* 22, 23, 24. This is not from the strength of his
own reasoning Powers. The supposal of a sufficiency of Strength in men's Powers
to raise the Soul to this height, seems Inconsistent with the design of the
Gospel, which is to exalt Grace and abase the Sinner, strip him of every thing
whereof to Glory, to level every high Thought and Imagination with the Dust,
and as it were to Nullify Self. To this Truth also Experience gives in its
Evidence: When the Soul faithfully looks into, and views it self, what will it
find but the Image of Satan upon it, in its Unregenerate state? a very Hell of
uncleanness in it self, full of deep and unsearchable Deceit, and Wickedness,
full of Impenitency, Infidelity and Disability to Good; and hearkens not, nor
will be subject to the Law of GOD. But is full of Enmity thereto, as Joh. 8.44.
Jer. 17.9. and Romans 8.7* And this Spiritual Death of the Soul, its Inherent and
Universal Pravity, such are especially sensible and distinctly Convinced of, to
whom the Commandment has come with Power, As the Apostle speaks Romans 7.9. And
whose understandings are opened to conceive the Spirituality, Penetration, and
Compass of the Holy Law, which measures the frame, and every motion of the
Soul. They abhor themselves, and adore the Mercy that will save; and the Power
that quickens them with a Divine Life.

AND this Truth is abundantly Confirmed by the Scriptures, in the account it
gives us of Man in his Lapsed state, Romans 3* 9, -- 18. Both Jews and Gentiles,
They are all under Sin. There is none that Understands or seeks after GOD.
None that does good, no not one, etc All are Conceived in Sin, and shapen in
Iniquity. Psalm. 51.5. And go astray from the Womb, Psalm. 58.3. Every
Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart is only evil continually. Genesis 6.5.
Every Action of the mind, is only Evil, not one of its Motions being Pure, for
it is every Imagination of the Thoughts, that is said to be only Evil; and at
no time otherwise, for it is Continual, not a Habit contracted by Repeated
acts, but is so from his Youth, as Genesis 8.21. Every act being Evil, proves the
Frame and Temper of the Soul to be so, whence the Actions spring, otherwise
every motion would not be irregular; whence it seems no way possible, that his
recovery from such a state, should spring from himself: that such a Soul so
depraved can any more Determine it self to Holiness, than an evil Tres, bring
forth good Fruit; or a bitter Fountain send forth sweet waters, Mat. 7 18. Jam.
3.11, 12. Thus the Apostle says Expressly, 1 Cor. 2.14. That the Natural man
Receives not the things of the Spirit of GOD: for they are Foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned. Where he
seems manifestly to Denominate Men from their better part, and to intend, not
those that would drown their Reason with their Lusts, but such rather as
improve their Reasoning Powers in all Kinds of Learning; Whom he just before
calls Wise Men, Scribes and Disputers, That he might exclude every thing of
natural or acquired Perfection; by which Humane Reason, by its own Strength,
might arrive at this spiritual discerning of Divine Things; and Such says the
Apostle, Reject the things of the Spirit of GOD; because they seem Foolishness
to them, nor can they know them, he Adds; which denotes not the fault of their
Sloth, and Negligence, as Though they might understand them, if they would
exercise the Powers of their own Reason; but the Impotence it self, their
Powers Labor under, to understand them.

AND as they thus speak of the Natural Man, so they ascribe his Renovation to
the Spirit of GOD, which is a full proof of this Truth of man's spiritual
Impotency, Which brings us to the Second thing. Namely,

2. THIS is wrought in the Soul by a Divine Power.

THIS Truth is asserted here in the Text, that Faith is the Gift of GOD. Not of
our selves is our Salvation, nor our Faith, but as the Salvation, so also the
Faith (which is indeed a part of our Salvation) is the free Gift of GOD* It Is
not said a Power only to believe, it is the Faith, the Believing it self that
he is said to give. Man has not Faith before GOD gives it, otherwise it would
not be GOD's Gift. If GOD gives it, then there is a Reception of it, i. e. The
Soul is caused by GOD to believe; for Giving and Receiving relate to, and
necessarily suppose each other.

SO also in Phil. 2 13. For it is GOD which works in you, both to will and to
do of his good Pleasure. This speaks not of a Power merely to do, but of an
actual willing wrought by GOD. For it is said, GOD works in us to will and to
do. If GOD works the willing; then it is not we work it. Nor have we it, till
he works it. The kind of working here ascribed to GOD, is such as actually
produces the Effect of willing; not such a one as brings the Soul only into a
kind of Indifferency or aequilibrio; that it may will, or not will* For GOD
cannot be said to work Efficaciously, or to Effect (as Energone, the Word there
used, signifies) the willing in us; unless the willing be Effected by him. Such
an Exertion of the Divine Power upon the Soul, is here plainly asserted as
Causes it to will; willing is certainly and necessarily supposed to follow;
else nothing is wrought, and that something should be wrought, and yet nothing
done, is a Contradiction. Nor does this offer Violence to the Soul, as being
Inconsistent with its proper freedom, that GOD should so exert his Power upon
it, as that its believing, or willing, should necessarily follow upon it. Since
Freedom of will in the Rational Creature, consists in a Power of determining it
self according to its own Perceptions. It follows that if it be made to
apprehend justly of its chief good, (of GOD as such) it must choose it, and
rest in it, with the greatest freedom and yet greatest necessity. To suppose it
Possible for it to remain in aequilibrio, or to reject it, is to destroy that
very Power which is freedom it self. A Power to Determine Contrary to its own
Perceptions, (as this would suppose) Infallibly destroys the essential
Constitution of the Souls Operation.

NOR will this Efficacious exerting of Divine Power upon the Soul, any ways
suppose that the actual willing, or believing is not Man's, for the willing is
ascribed to Man in the Text, and the Causing of him to will, at the same time,
is ascribed to GOD.

OUR Savior's words to Nicodemus, are also Express in this case, in Joh. 3.3
-- 8. Where as our SAVIOR informs him, of the Outward way of admission into
His Visible Kingdom under a Gospel Administration, was to be by Baptism, being
born of Water; so He lets him know that more than this, Even his being born
again of the Spirit, was necessary in order to his being a Subject of His
Invisible Kingdom; where CHRIST Reigns in the Hearts of men by His Grace, which
in the most appropriate sense is His Kingdom. Except a man be born of Water and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD. That which is born of
the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. The wind
blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not
tell whence it comes and whither it goes; so is every one that is born of the
Spirit. In the last Verse, our SAVIOR confirms the Truth of the Doctrine of
the New Birth, or Spiritual Change of the Soul, about which Nicodemus
haesitateth, and expressly asserts it to be an Effect of the Sovereign Agency of
the SPIRIT; as much as Sound is an Effect of the Winds blowing. And as our
Ignorance of the manner of the Production of this sensible Effect, is not made
use of by us as an Argument against either the Thing it self, or its Cause; so
neither may our Ignorance of the manner of the Spirit's Operation, be improved
by us as an Argument against the truth of such an Effect, or the SPIRIT's being
the Cause of it. The Wind blows where it lists, and men hear the Sound of
it, and thereby know such a Thing is in motion; though they know not how it
moves or what becomes of it. So is every one that is Born of the Spirit, i. e.
The SPIRIT works this Product of the New Birth in whom soever and when soever
it pleases Him; and he in whom it is wrought, finds by the Change and Effects
in himself, of the Operation of the Spirit, that such a Thing is done, though he
knows not the manner of that Agency, or what its Progress may be. Man is
excluded any share in so Noble a Production; It is here by our SAVIOR expressly
ascribed to the HOLY SPIRIT, Which therefore is sufficient to Establish the
Truth before us.

3. THIS is done Freely.

IT proceeds from the Mere good Will and Pleasure of Him that works or gives
it, without any respect to any thing done, or deserved by the Receiver. There
is no Obligation lying on the Giver, nor any attractive virtue in him that
Receives it. Nor is there any thing can be done by Man in a way of Recompense
for it, that can be considered as a Motive to an Infinite GOD to do it. That
Incomprehensibly Great and Glorious Being, who has all Perfection and
Blessedness in himself Independently and Eternally so, can want nothing from
Man; or what has the Creature, which it did not receive from Him, when it can
have nothing of excellency, but he must first give it? If he deals out Favors
they must be free acts of his good Pleasure. And how destitute of a Motive to
such a Gift is Man on whom it is conferred; a Wretched, Impure, and Guilty
Creature, vile beyond the reach of our thoughts, in as unpitiable a state as
can well be conceived of, such as no Created Eye can find a Heart to pity,
Ezekiel. 16. begin. What can the Sinner deserve from GOD, or have in him of
Motive, to persuade to the bestowing any Blessings upon him? The Apostle
declares them in the Context deserving of Wrath; and what but Incentives of it,
are or can be found in the Sinner; It must be astonishing Grace that shows
Kindness to a Sinner; that changes his Heart, that destroys the Image of Satan
in it, and draws there the Image of GOD. Let Man put forth the utmost of his
Powers in this case, yet still he is deserving of Wrath. He is notwithstanding
all he can do, an Impure Creature, under the Reign of Sin, an Enemy to GOD, To
draw such an one to CHRIST to believe to the saving of his Soul, is admirable
Free and Rich Grace. It is rich Mercy, and from his Great Love wherewith he
loves such, that they are Quickened, As in the 4 th. and 5 th. verses of the
Context. And thus our SAVIOR resolves it, Mat. 11.26. Even so, Father, for so
it seemed good in thy sight. And the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1, -- 9.

IV. IT is from Grace, That such as believe on CHRIST are made to Persevere in
Faith and Holiness.

THERE are Two things Implied in this Proposition, which may be distinctly
spoken to.

1. THAT such as believe shall Persevere in Faith and Holiness.

2. FREE Grace is the Fountain of their Persevering.

1. BELIEVERS shall Persevere in their believing to the End. The Grace that any
Creature has, considered in it self, is defectible, and may be totally lost. It
depends upon the Original of it for its continuance; and by the Great Author of
it may be continued; and by Him will be so in every Believer. The Being of it
may be, and is continued in the Soul, although there may be frequent
Intermissions, and Interruptions, with regard to the actings of it. It is a
living Principle in the Soul, which GOD suffers not to dye, but is as our
SAVIOR speaks of it, Joh. 4.14. A Well of Water, springing up into Everlasting
Life.

THIS Truth of their Perseverance in Faith and Holiness, may be confirmed by
Two Considerations.

[1] THAT of their Election.

[2] OF the Promise of GOD, made to such.

[1] THEIR Perseverance may be argued from the Decree of their Election. Such
as are Elected are Chosen to Eternal Life. They are chosen to Salvation,
through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth, 2 These. 2.13.
And being Elected to That, they will not fail of it. They are Elected to be
made Holy, as well as Happy: to be brought to Everlasting Happiness in a way of
Holiness, and every Individual Person thus Elected must needs Persevere.

THE Consequence of the certain Perseverance of Believers in Faith and
Holiness, being evident from the supposition, of their being Elected before of
GOD thereto: and That alone being the thing capable of a Question in the
Argument. A Word or Two may be offered to establish that supposition, viz That
Believers are Elected to Everlasting Life. Believers Indefinitely, is not
intended, but Individual Persons, who are chosen out of the rest of the World
by GOD, and Ordained to Eternal Life.

AND this is Evident;

(1) FROM the Nature of the Divine Mind; To which every thing, and its own
Resolves, are Eternally and Unchangeably Present. Infinite Knowledge is a
necessary Perfection of the Divine Mind: it sees all things at once in one
Comprehensive view. There is no more, nor can there be any more of an Addition
to, or Alteration in his Knowledge than in any other of his Perfections. The
Ideas, or Perceptions of the Divine Mind, are not there successively, as in the
mind of the Creature. There are no more Ideas in the Divine Mind, at one time,
than at another. (If I may so speak, though in truth Succession belongs not to
the Divine Being) all his Ideas, or Perceptions are equally present and
Eternally so. His Knowledge is ever One and the same, Simple, Uniform,
Unchangeable Perception of every thing. The Ideas therefore of all things which
he saw fit to make, with all their Circumstances, (particularly Men of which we
are now speaking) all their possible Relations, and every Action that would be
performed by them In a word, every thing relating to his Government of them,
and the particular manner, of his Manifesting the Glory of this, or the other
of his Perfections, in and about every particular Person, were Eternally
present in the Divine Mind. And the Determinations of the same Infinite Mind,
with respect to every Individual Person, or the manifesting of any of his
Perfections in any way whatsoever relating to any, and every of them, are as
Eternal, and Unchangeable, as his Perception about the same. The Contrary would
suppose a Change in the Divine Perception, inconsistent with the nature of the
Divine Mind. Which therefore demonstrates, that he Resolved from Eternity, to
whom in Special he would discover the Glory of his Grace; where he would bestow
his Benefits, whom in particular he would prepare for, and bring to an
Everlasting Inheritance in the World to come. Such as he did foreknow, them
also he has Predestined; and whom he Predestined, them he also Called; and
whom he Called, them he also Justified; and whom he Justified, them he also
Glorified, Romans 8.29, 30.

(2) THIS Truth, may be also Argued, from the absolute Certainty there was from
Eternity, of the accomplishment of the End of CHRIST's Death. The End of
CHRIST's Death, was to bring Glory to GOD in the Salvation of Sinners. It would
be a great Reflection upon Infinite Wisdom, to suppose that GOD would send his
SON into the World upon any Possible uncertainty, whether ever that end would
be answered, or not. Of Necessity then, the design of that great Work must have
been Absolutely, and in the Firmest manner secured, so that it could not
possibly fail. For if it was possible for it to fail, then it might have
failed, and so CHRIST might have died in vain. There being then the highest
Certainty of the Accomplishment of this End, even equal to the Certainty of
CHRIST's Death it self. It was then absolutely Determined by GOD; as it was
that CHRIST should be a Savior and that by his Death. as 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. If
then the end of GOD in CHRIST's Death, by his determination, be most firmly and
certainly Secured; it also thence follows, that the Salvation of some, a number
of the fallen Race of Adam, is by his determination most firmly Ascertained;
their Salvation, (or GOD's Glory in their Salvation) being this very design, so
certainly secured. If therefore by a Divine Resolve the Salvation of some is
absolutely ascertained: Then there is a Designation of the very Particulars
that make up that Number, in the Divine Mind, to Faith and Eternal Salvation.
For since this Salvation in every part of it is the Gift of GOD: there could
not have been this Certainty from Eternity, of their being Possessed of it,
unless by a Resolve in the Divine Mind of so bestowing it. Which Resolve must
necessarily Relate to the Individuals, on whom he will bestow it; Since every
Act of his, upon the Creature, supposes a preceding Resolve; and every Resolve
of GOD is Eternal and without Change.

(3) THIS Truth is declared abundantly in the Scriptures. Thus Mat 20.16. Many
are Called, but few are Chosen. So Acts 13 48. As many as were Ordained to
Eternal Life, Believed. That had been appointed, or assigned. So ( Tetagmenoi
esan) the word there used signifies. And in a like signification is it
constantly used; as by other Writers, so by* the Sacred Ones, As Romans 13.1. The
Powers that be, ( Tetagmenai eisin) are Ordained, Constituted of GOD. Mat.
28.16. The Mountain ( Ou Etaxato) where he had appointed or assigned. And is so
used particularly by St. Luke, which ought therefore to Determine us here As
Luke 7.8 ( Tassomenos) Set or Constituted under Authority. Acts 15 2. ( E^axan)
They Decreed or appointed, etc. Acts. 22 18. ( Taxamenoi) When they had
appointed or assigned him a Day, etc. So in the 22. Chap. and 10 ver. GOD bids
Paul go to Damascus and there it should be told him. ( Tetaktat) what was
appointed for him to do. The 14 th ver. Explains this and tells us, GOD had
Chosen him to know his will, etc. Which points us to understand that word in
the 10 th. ver. in this Sense, of a Divine Designation. Nor will the sense of
the words in this place so well allow of any other meaning, as this now given
to it. In Joh. 6.37 39 Our SAVIOR speaks expressly of a Number given him by the
Father, Antecedent to their Coming to, or Believing in Him, which necessarily
refers us to this Eternal Designation of GOD. All that the Father gives me,
shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, etc.
This is also plainly pointed out by our SAVIOR, in His Prayer for such as GOD
had given Him out of the World, whom he thus distinguishes from all the rest of
the world; concerning whom his will is that they should be where he is. Joh.
17.6.9.20 24. So Ephesians. 1.4. According as He has chosen us in Him, before the
Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy, and without Blame before him
in Love. Which plainly asserts an Election of some, not of Believers considered
as such, or because they were so; for it was before all Time, and it was that
they might be Holy. So in the 5 th. ver. Having Predestined us unto the
Adoption of Children, by JESUS CHRIST, to Himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will.

THE Election then of particular Persons to Salvation through Sanctification of
the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth, being certain; their Perseverance in Faith
is also certain. This secures them that they shall Persevere; for this Decree
of GOD cannot fail, He will fulfill in them all the good Pleasure of his Will,
and the Work of Faith with Power unto Salvation. 2 These. 1.11.

[2] THE Perseverance of Believers is certain from the Promises of GOD.
Whatever their Imperfection is, and liableness to loose their Grace considered
in themselves. Yet if GOD engages to preserve the Being of Grace in their
Souls, and to carry it on, it shall be Done. And thus he has seen fit to do:
Jer. 32.40. I will put My Fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from
Mr. CHRIST expressly assures us, Joh. 4.14. That whoever Drinks of the Water
that he gives, shall never Thirst: But it shall be in him a Well of Water,
springing up into Everlasting Life. Where he shows the Preferableness of the
Water he gives, (which is the Spirit of Holiness in the Believer, as is evident
from Joh. 7*38, 39.) to the Water used for the refreshment of the Animal Life:
that whereas the Virtue of that was soon gone, and the Thirst returned. This
that HE gives so allays the Thirst, that he who drinks of it never Thirsts
more, and abides a Permanent, and Everlasting spring. He not only expresses
the tendency of the Spiritual Life he gives, but assures us that it shall
spring up into Everlasting Life. The Work which GOD has begun in a Believer He
will finish it, Phil. 1.6. He will Confirm them to the End, 1 Cor. 1.8. The
LORD is Faithful, who shall Stablish you, and keep you from Evil. 2 These 3 3.
So CHRIST speaking of Believers, Joh. 10.28 under the Appellation of Sheep,
Promises so to preserve them that they shall not fail of Eternal Life. And I
give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never Perish, neither shall any
Pluck them out of my Hand. His assuring them that they shall not be Plucked out
of his Hand, is a full assurance to them that their Grace shall be preserved in
them; since the loss of that, would necessarily suppose their being Plucked out
of his Hand. The Believers Perseverance in Grace is by these Promises secured,
they are put in Absolute Terms, and don't leave the matter at the uncertainty
of their Will. If they don't contain Perseverance in them, the matter is yet to
seek, what they do contain. For if they must be understood Conditionally (as
some would understand them, viz.) That while the Sheep keep close to CHRIST, no
Devourer shall be able to annoy them, or pluck them from CHRIST's Hand,) there
seems to be nothing at all in them: For, if they do keep close to CHRIST, (or
which is the very same thing, Persevere in their Faith,) then they do so. And
without this Promise it would have been as true, If they Persevere that they do
Persevere, And if it be not by Virtue of any Grace secured to them in this
Promise that they do Persevere, they have nothing at all by it. And it
unavoidably throws us into the Absurdity of making Perseverance a Condition of
it self. For here is a preservation promised to the Believer, so as he shall
never be plucked out of the Al-powerful Hand of CHRIST, and this Interpretation
(of its being Conditional,) supposes the Believers closely adhering to CHRIST,
(or which is the same thing, this preservation it self) to precede what this
Promise secures; So that his following CHRIST is not by Virtue of what this
Promise does for him, for that which is Consequent affords no strength to a
preceding Act. So that it necessarily supposes, he must first do the thing it
self promised and that then he shall have the thing Promised; which is most
absurd. This and the Promises then of the like nature, secure Perseverance it
self to Believers, that the being of Grace shall be preserved in them. So that
they shall never be plucked out of CHRIST's Hand.

2. FREE Grace is the Fountain of this. It is from Grace that Believers are
what they are, and are kept to his Kingdom. It is he that begun the work in
them that Carries it on. As Free Grace was the Spring of its beginning, so also
of its whole Process and Perfection. Those Acts of GOD by which this is done
were wholly at his Pleasure: The Security which they have from the Election and
the Promise of GOD, points them wholly to the Good Pleasure of GOD. For what
more free than the Act of GOD singling them out, and appointing them to Eternal
Salvation? It was wholly at his Pleasure to choose them or not. There was
nothing of motive in them to it. It was not because of their Faith that he
chose them, but he bestows Faith according to his Election. Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
According as he has Chosen us It is Impossible there should be any good in men
before GOD gives it to them. And inconceivable then that they should have any,
except he willed it, or that any thing in them should be the reason of his
willing it to them. So that his Free Election of them, is the Spring of all the
Grace they have. So also is the Promise free. This was his Gracious Pleasure to
make such a Promise to them: the Sovereign Rich Grace of GOD is what Saints
adore as the Fountain of all the good that is derived to them, of their
Security, and Preservation from all their Spiritual Enemies, unto the Eternal
Kingdom of GOD. It is only in GOD they Glory, and Cry Grace, Grace.

V. IT is from Grace that the Salvation of Believers is Perfected in GLORY.

GOD does not begin a work in us, and leave us to our selves, but goes thorough
with it. He that begins will finish, Phil. 1.6. Working all our Salvation of
his Grace. When we were Enemies to him. Romans 5.10. He found out a way of
Reconciliation. When we were Dead in Sin, and could Not be Subject to him, he
did Turn us to him, and begin in us this Salvation. The Inheritance is of
Grace. When we Grieve him by Sin, and are ready to be driven out by our
Spiritual Enemies; even then the LORD does keep us by his Strength, unto the
Salvation he has prepared. And as Believers have Adoring thoughts of the Grace
of GOD in those beginnings of Salvation they have here: So they are Raised
higher, and lost in wonder at the Incomprehensible Rich Grace, that has
provided, and will bestow such a Glory upon them in the other World, as the
Complete Assimilation of their natures to the Divine Being, and Enjoyment of
him so far as the Capacity of their natures will admit of: Such a Glory as
neither Eye has seen nor Ear heard, neither has entered into the Heart of Man
to conceive how great. 1 Cor. 29.

MANY are the Inferences this Truth will yield to us, some of which I shall
mention.

I. HENCE GOD is no way Unrighteous, in not making the Gospel Light to shine
upon all Places.

THIS Doctrine Vindicates the Justice of GOD in leaving so many Nations of the
World without the Knowledge of a SAVIOR. He is Righteous in such a
Dispensation, since the Sinners Salvation is of Grace. It was an Act of
Sovereign Grace, to send a SAVIOR into the World; It must also be an Act of
mere Grace the Publication of it to any of the Sons of men. There is no people
on the Earth to whom this in a way of Justice is due. It is of Grace, as has
been shown, that a SAVIOR is made known to any. The Challenging of it as a
Debt is Inconsistent with its being merely of Grace. It is an Arbitrary
Dispensation, depending purely upon the Pleasure of GOD; and therefore no Wrong
is done to those that are suffered to Live in the world without hearing of a
SAVIOR. Nor will they be able to Plead at last, it was a hardship, or any
thing Unequal, that they were Left without the Knowledge of a way of obtaining
Pardon and Life; which was granted to Others that were Sinners as well as they.
For it is most Equal GOD should be Acknowledged LORD of his own Goods; And that
He may make a difference in giving out Favors to those that are equally
Unworthy. None can Claim, nor find fault therefore if all are denied. Nor can
some therefore have any Reason to Complain that they go without, if GOD pleases
to manifest a Free Mercy to Others. He may surely do what he will with His own*
Shall their Eye be evil because His is good? Mat. 20 15. They will Perish
Justly who have Sinned without the Law, that never had this Revelation made to
them, Romans 2.12.

II. HENCE we may Learn, That every thing we are, or do, is to be Renounced, in
regard of Resting in it as the Cause of our Salvation.

IF our Salvation be wholly of Grace, how can any thing of Self come in, as a
Cause or Motive thereto; or any thing we are or can do, be a ground why it is
bestowed? They will Exclude one the other. If any Thing of ours be the Cause,
Motive or ground of Salvation, then it is not wholly of Grace: And if it be
wholly of Grace, then all of Self is wholly Excluded, As the Apostle shows, If
it be of Works, then it is not of Grace; but if it be of Grace, then it is not
of Works. Otherwise Grace were no more grace. It being then wholly of Grace,
Self must be wholly renounced. Grace, can have no Partner. This means not to
countenance Spiritual Sloth; That because persons cannot Earn their Salvation in
a way of Doing, that therfeore they may be Excused from taking pains in the
matter. To this they are bound, To strive to Enter in, to offer Violence to the
Kingdom of Heaven, is what they are particularly directed to: And without which
they have no Encouragement, that Divine Grace will appear for their help. But
none of this may be rested in. This Doctrine, That Salvation is wholly of the
free Grace of GOD, gives no countenance to any to flatter themselves, that
because they have done this or that, taken a great deal of pains in Religion,
and with their own Hearts, that therefore GOD will not deny them Pardon, and Life:
But beats them, from looking upon any thing they are, or do, as what can any
ways move GOD or bind him to give Grace. For, if it is of Grace. If he gives
it, only because he will give it, Then not because they do any thing; not
because of what they are, or do. Every thing of their own is nothing, as to the
Motive of GOD's giving. Therefore every thing of our own is to be wholly
Renounced, as any ways commending us to the Sovereign Mercy of GOD. The best we
do in the matter of our Salvation should be accounted by us, as menstruous
Rags, and the entire Glory given to free Grace, that raises us from the most
filthy and Miserable State. Persons though they will professedly disclaim any
dependence upon themselves, and resting in any thing they do for Salvation; and
flatter themselves they do not. Yet how common is it that something of their
own, or something they have done, or are doing, which Terminates in Self, is a
ground of their Confidence. It Is directly contrary to Corrupt Nature to
Renounce Self; and to own all its Salvation depends upon the Mere Pleasure of
GOD, and must spring from pure Mercy; and therefore is trying many ways to
bring GOD as it were under some Obligation to grant it. By various methods
natural Men attempt to bring GOD under some Tie or Inducement to bestow
Salvation upon them, which Evidence they don't Renounce Self, and their
loathness to it. Some may be just hinted at:

SOMETIMES they are ready to persuade themselves, that what they do inclines
Infinite Mercy to Pity them. He is abundant in Mercy and full of Compassion,
and they hope he will be ready to Pity them in Misery; that their Confession,
Sorrows and Cries will come up before Him, and incline him to exercise
tenderness toward them, as they Isa. 58.3. They were ready to wonder, why GOD
did not observe what they did and Pity them. But the Heart of GOD is not moved
to exercise Mercy from what Men (...). He does it freely, because it Pleases
Him.

SOME Persons by endeavoring to make their Hearts better, hope to Induce GOD
to exercise Mercy toward them. They Imagine if they could get some good
dispositions in their Hearts, that GOD would be pleased with them. But though
Sinners may get their Hearts greatly affected with sorrow for their Sins, and
have many Religious affections, yet their Hearts are really no better than they
were before. There is nothing but Sin there, in its full Reign, and this
lifting up of themselves, upon their* Religious frames, evidences the Pride of
their Hearts, and their opposition to the free Grace of GOD. For That moves of
it self freely, against all desert of the contrary in us.

SOME hope to gain the Favor of GOD by the Services and Duties they do in
Religion. Many fancy the Anger of GOD toward them may be Pacified in this way,
and if they are Constant in Duties and Religious Services, that they shall in
time move GOD toward them and procure his Grace. But this is still bringing
Self as a ground, or motive, for Free Grace to act upon, Which finds nothing
without it self to move it: Self and every thing relating to it is therefore to
be renounced, GOD is Gracious always of his own accord, Nothing of ours
procures him to be so, and any kind of resting in Self, stands in direct
Opposition to it.

III. HENCE Such as are made Partakers of Saving Grace, are strongly bound to
Gratitude, and to ascribe all to Grace.

THIS is freely given, what shall such Glory in but the LORD? They had nothing
of their own, to Commend them to the Mercy of GOD. He wrought his own good
Pleasure in them freely: What but a Superlative Rich Grace, have they to
acknowledge therein? Not unto us not unto us, but to His Name be the Glory. It
is matter of shame, and humiliation that there is so much of a Disposition in
us to forget, where this is due, and so withold from Free Grace its just
Tribute. What was it first looked upon us, but the Eternal rich Grace of GOD?
And what has it done for us? Even that which Infinitely Transcends our
thoughts. When we had made our selves Slaves of Sin, and Satan, and Children of
the Curse it gave a Redeemer, the Eternal Son of GOD, to Ransom us from
Destruction: to break in pieces the Policy, and strength of Hell; and Rescue us
from the vilest Servitude, and the greatest Misery. Not because he wanted us;
for his Glory would not have Faded, if we had lain Eternally in our Ruins. Nor
was it any Betterness in us, that gave us the preference; nor because there was
any greater Readiness in us to Comply with the offers of his Grace. The like
Sinfulness, the like Opposition to his Grace, the like Unbelief was found in
us, as in others. This was his good Pleasure to look toward us; Astonishing
Grace! When we were in our Blood, and no eye Pitied us, not our own; then was
the time of his Love. He saw our wretchedness, and hellish Ingratitude, the
Filthy, Loathsome, Guilty state, Sin had brought us into; and what it would cost
for our Ransom. A Price of Infinite worth He saw how the Love that paid down
that Price, would be despised and trampled on by us: And the Opposition of our
Hearts, to that Pardon, and Happiness, so Purchased and designed for us: and
that after all he should never be Advantaged by us. Yet that amazingly Rich
Grace, delighted in designing, and accomplishing the work of his Grace in us.
What can all this deserve, and call for? All we have and can do is Infinitely
below it. And what is the least, but a Thankful Admiration of it. What GOD
expects is that we own it: That we be willing he should Save us Freely. This is
the Thankful ackowledgment it Obliges to, That we accept of this Grace, and own
that as the Immediate Fountain of our Happiness and Continue therein, learning
that Lesson, which this Grace that brings Salvation teaches, to Deny all
Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this
present World. Looking for that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the
Great GOD, and our Savior JESUS CHRIST. Who gave himself for us that he might
Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify unto himself a Peculiar People, Zealous
of good Works, Tit. 2.11.12.13.14.

IV. HENCE, Sinners are directed to go with a Sense of their Unworthiness, to
GOD, through CHRIST for Salvation.

IF Salvation be totally and in every part from Free Grace, then we learn how
Sinners must come to GOD for it; with all their Sinfulness, Blindness,
Wretchedness and Guilt. For it is Grace only must Save them, which looks for
nothing of Recommendation in the Sinner. It Triumphs over all his Vileness,
Baseness and Guilt, and will have the sole Glory of Saving of him. Such then as
are concerned for Salvation, and find they have a Load of Guilt upon them, and
would fain have Security from the Wrath that is to come; see here what they
have to do, to fly to the Free Grace of GOD in CHRIST just as they are: Such
Vile, Miserable, Guilty Wretches as Sin has made them. You are in your selves
utterly Lost and Undone; You hear of CHRIST whom GOD has sent to save Sinners;
and this CHRIST, doubtless, you think must Save you, or you are Eternally
Miserable. But here is your Misery, you will not go to him as you be; but
labor after something to Commend your selves to His Favor, You attempt to
better your selves that you may not be so Vile and Loathsome when you come to
CHRIST, You would prepare your own Souls to Entertain CHRIST in them, or at
least get something that may move his Favor toward you, and strengthen your
Confidence in going to Him for Pardon and Acceptance. You are afraid to go with
such Hearts as you now have, lest he will not Accept you. This is the Pride of
your Hearts that must be brought down, Every such high Thought must be levelled
with the Dust. This Doctrine assures us, that Free Grace lays hold of a Sinner
in all his Deformity, Unworthiness and Nakedness; and therefore with this, and
a Sense of all this he must betake himself to Free Grace in CHRIST. It is to
free Grace we must be beholden for all that we want. And what does our staying
away show? But that either we imagine, we have not so much need to be beholden
to it; or are unwilling to be so much obliged by it. What enemies are our
Hearts to our own good? How averse to the Glory of free Grace? That has
provided all for us in CHRIST; an Infinite fullness is there Treasured up: And
Free Grace tenders it all. All we want may be had for going for. This is the
Proclamation to us; If any man Thirst, let him come to Me and Drink, Joh. 7.37.
He every one that Thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money;
come ye, Buy, and Eat, you, come, Buy Wine and Milk, without Money, and without
Price, Isa. 55.1. Here are Treasures of Infinite value set before us, without
any Price; so is it expressly, Come and Take without Money. We must know we have
nothing to bring, and are nothing. We must become nothing in ourselves; all
that Righteousness, and Strength, we vainly fancy in ourselves, must be parted
with; for there is nothing in us, but Impotency and Guilt; nor are we to Labor
to get our selves in a better Dress, that our Filthiness, and Nakedness may be
covered. Such an attempt is vain. But in that very State Sin has brought us
into, and in a sense of it, be it never so Wretched, and Miserable and Poor,
and Blind, and Naked, Rev. 3.17. Are we to come, and receive all at the Hand of
a Sovereign rich Grace in CHRIST. Such a one is the Subject on which Sovereign
Grace gets Glory to it self.

V. THIS Doctrine abundantly Encourages Sinners that are Enquiring the way to
Life, and Distressed in their Souls, under a Sense of their Guilt and need of
Pardon.

THIS should Encourage them, because the Sovereign Rich Mercy of GOD has the
sole Honor of saving Sinners* Salvation is to be had freely; It is free for
one, as for another, and free to all that are willing to have it* Therefore,
however your Sins may stare you in the face and fill you with fears, that the
Wrath of GOD has been kindled by you so that it can never be Quenched; This
should Support and Encourage you, That Mercy is free. And this should remove
the Objection that many have against the Offers of Mercy proposed to them; That
they cannot see how GOD can find it in his Heart, to bestow Salvation on such
Vile Creatures as They are: -- For, Salvation is Freely given; for the Glory of
Free Grace. And GOD is Gracious, merely because He will be Gracious. He is not
Gracious to this Person because he is less Guilty than another, but because He
was Pleased to be Gracious to him: And that is ever the Reason why He is
gracious to any. So that you have as much Encouragement as any e^se have had;
and as much as a Sinful Creature can Expect. For you are to come Empty, that
Free Grace may give all

AND for your Encouragement then to Accept these Offers of Grace, Consider;

1. GOD can be willing to bestow Salvation upon you notwithstanding all your
Sins.

THERE is nothing can hinder Him from being Merciful if He will be Merciful
None of your Sins are so great, but that Free Grace can Pardon them; there is
no Mercy you want that Grace cannot bestow And what do all His gracious Offers
of Salvation speak, but that He is willing as well as able?

2. THE Grace of GOD can Overcome all Difficulties in the way of His Mercy.

OUR Pride and Unbelief are what stand in the way of our Good. These he can
Conquer. And GOD shows us how he can and is willing to remove all our
frowardness, and opposition to his Grace: Isa. 57.17, 18. -- He went on
Frowardly, in the way of his Heart. I have seen his ways, and will heal him.
GOD waits that he may be Gracious, He prevents you with his Warnings, Calls and
Repeated Convictions.

3. GOD can take Delight notwithstanding all the Contempt and Dishonor you
have cast upon him, in Pardoning and Saving you.

THE Salvation of Sinners is Called the Pleasure of the LORD. He is delighted
in bestowing Mercy upon Sinners, in Renewing His Image in them, and bestowing
upon them the Privileges of His Children. Mercy is his Delight, Mi^ 7 18 What
reason have you then with a sense of your Sin and Guilt, and Wretchedness to
fall down at the feet of Sovereign Grace and accept of Salvation freely
Offered? And never think to find a reason for that in your selves; which flows
alone from Sovereign Grace: And whose Right it is to have the Sole Glory of
saving the Sinner.

FINIS.

