The LIFE of Dr. Cotton Mather.

THE LIFE OF THE Very REVEREND and LEARNED COTTON MATHER, D. D. and F. R. S.
Late Pastor of the North Church in BOSTON. Who Died, Feb. 13. 1727, 8.

By SAMUEL MATHER, M. A.

Mal. 1.6. -- A Son honoreth his Father.

NPIOS OS IT IS TON OIKTPOS
OIONON GONEON EPILATHETAI.
SOPHOC. Electra. BOSTON, New England: Printed for SAMUEL GERRISH, in Cornhill.
MDCCXXIX.

SENATUI Academiae Glasguensis ILLUSTRISSIMO S. P. in JESU DOMINO.
Honoratissimi, Piissimi, Doctissimi.
AB America remota, in seipso vix notatu dignus, sed minime vulgaris ex
Origin, Juvenis, SENATUI vestro perfecta Reformatione spectabili clarissimoque
has exaravit Literas, vestra solummodo Humanitate ac Beneficentia animatus, non
Audacia excitatus ^uvenili.

SUMMU^, quo meum, exomastis PARENTEM, Honos Academicus, inspe^atus illi omnino
contigit, adeoque gratior; pro Cultu itaque vestro ad extremum usque Spiritum
Ecclesiae Fratribus Scoticanae inservire summa semper fuit A^bitio, omnesque
illos obligandi Occasiones laetissim^ arripuit.

QUAN^^QUID^M (...) PATER ille (...) immortalis Vi^am hanc reliquit inferiorem,
^^^is;que non possit ampliu^ resolvere Debita; idcirco, qui a long sequitur
semper adorans Vestigia, FILIUS ejus unicus, prou^ in Repub. literaria
constitutus ejus Procurator, ingentem Dedicationis hujusce Libertatem sibi
arrogat, ut residuam Paterni Nominis part^m expediat.

VITA, quae vobis, SENATUS celeberrime, a Filio PATRIS dignissimi quam
humillime dicatur; partim ex Monimentis Paternis, partim ex notitia mea
aliorumque colligitur; absque vero ullis iniquis indebitisque Laudibus. In mea
etenim Sententia, sicut et PLINII; Historia non Ostentationi, sed Fidei
Veritatique componeretur, nec debet egredi Veritatem; honest enim factis
Veritas sufficit. Verum igitur quod fuit per totam PATRIS Vitam perquam
religiose sum contemplatus and ad amussim observavi; ac revera cum HIERONYMO
dicam, Tester JESUM -- Christianum de Christians vera proferre. -- MELCHIOR
CANUS dolenter dicat -- Multo severius a LAERTIO Vita^ Philosophorum esse
scriptas, quam a Christianis Vitas Sanctorum: sed hi^ non locus datur huic
Querelae.

NEMINEM vestrum, Viri optimi, praeterit; Vitas Memoriasque Virorum illustrium
dulces esse pariter ac utiles; debitas esse mortuis; Posterisque valde
necessarias, modo ut praestantia prae Oculis Virtu^^s Exempla habeant, adeoque
illos, qui per Fide^ and Patientiam haereditario obtin^^t Jure Promissiones,
prosequantur.

AC pro ce^to habemus, qu^^ sicut Exemplum Affectiones vehementer commovet, vix
etiam quicquam ad emendandos Mores, et in Ordinem redigendo^ plus habet
Efficaciae. Non tantam persuadendi Vim possidet Oration vel elegantissima, quam
Vita been morata: Sic multi censebant Veteres. Cum itaque apud HOMERUM Rex
Hominum TIDYDEN ad Praelium stimularet, TYDEUM fuisse Patrem admonuit ^ Hinc
quoque AENEAS, apud VIRGILIUM, ad Molimina praeclara ASCANIUM provocan^, in
hunc adhortatur modum, -- Te Pater AENEAS and Avunculus ^xcitet HECTOR.

VITAE Rationem PATRIS ad Exemplar ^^ti, vobis, Viri lectissimi, ho^^e exhibet
Opus: Utcunque vero a meo deprimatur Labor; libere tamen fateor and asserere
non vereo^, Opus natura sua praestantissimum esse atque utilissimum, ac forsan
GLASGUENSIUM Oculis haud omnino indignum. Ac si vobis ita liquido const^t, been
mecum agitur: Alii nostra impugnent, nos nostraque lividi in Odio habeant; Sed,
si vestrum consequamur Favorem and Patrocinium, Superiores evademus.

HIC, SENATUS Academiae praestantissime, vestrum enunciarem Veritatis Amorem,
Regimen severe bonum, Charitatemque satis extensivam; sed, pro more Scriptorum
hodiernorum, vestras non eloquar Lauds; vobis enim non gratae forent, licet
sincerae; atque aliis supervacaneae: caecus est etenim quisquis non videt.

VESTRA Academia, Viri omnige^^ Doctri^^ and Pietate referti, fub JACOBO
Scotiae secundo fuit funda^^, ab illius ad GEORGII Secundi clementi^^imi adhuc
floruit Regnum; atque ad Secundum DOMINI Dominorum Adv^^tum efflorescat ac
vigeat!

CUM praegrandi Veneratione atque Ardore inex^ingui^^^i subscribo,

SENATUS Illustrissime, Vester obsequentissimus et humillimus Servus SAMUEL
MATHER.
Dabam, Bostonae Nov-Anglorum, Call. Januarii, 1728, 9.
THE PREFACE.
DR. COTTON MATHER, though Born and constantly Residing in this remote Corner of
AMERICA, has yet for near these Forty Years made so rising and great a Figure
in the Learned World, as has attracted to Him while alive, the Eyes of many at
the furthest Distance; and now deceased cannot but raise a very general Wish to
see the Series, and more especially the Domestic part of so Distinguishing a
LIFE exhibited. His printed Writings so full of Piety and various Erudition,
his vast Correspondence, and the continual Reports of Travelers who had
conversed with Him; had spread his Reputation into other Countries: And when
about Fourteen Years ago I traveled abroad; I could not but admire to what
Extent his Fame had reached, and how inquisitive were Gentlemen of Letters to
hear and know of the most particular and lively Manner both of his private
Conversation and public Performances among us.

AND indeed, as a REVEREND FATHER with us has agreably observed The Rev. Mr.
COLMAN in his Funeral Sermon.
. -- His Printed Works will not convey to Posterity, nor give to Strangers a
just Idea of the real Worth and great Learning of the Man. His Works will
indeed inform all that read them, of his great Knowledge and singular Piety,
his Zeal for GOD and Holiness and Truth, and his Desire of the Salvation of
precious Souls: But it was CONVERSATION and Acquaintance with Him, in his
familiar and occasional Discourses and private Communications, that discovered
the vast Compass of his Knowledge, and the Projections of his Piety, more I
have sometimes though it than all his Pulpit Exercises. Here He excelled, Here He
shone; being exceedingly communicative, and bringing out of his Treasures
things new and old without measure. Here it was seen how his Wit and Fancy, his
Invention, his Quickness of Though It and ready Apprehension, were all consecrated
to GOD, as well as his Heart, Will and Affections: And out of his Abundance
within, his Lips overflowed, dropped as the Honeycomb, fed all that came near
Him; and were as the choice Silver, for Richness and Brightness, Pleasure and
Profit.

EVERY one who intimately knew the DOCTOR, will readily subscribe to this
Description. By his learned Works and Correspondence those who lived at the
greatest Distance might discover much of his superior Light and Influence: But
they could discern these only by a more mediate and faint Reflection: They
could neither see nor well imagine that extraordinary Luster of pious and
useful Literature, wherewith we were every Day entertained, surpised and
satisfied, who dwelt in the directer Rays, in the more immediate Vision.

GREAT Abilities, and insatiable Thirst for all kinds of Knowledge, an
extraordinary Quickness of Apprehension, Liveliness of Fancy, with a ready
Invention and Active Spirit, seemed to be the chief Ingredients of his Natural
Genius: And all these being sanctified in his early Days, endued with a divine
Bias and turned to the noblest Objects; He became inflamed with the most
ardent Desires to amass unto Himself from all sorts of Writings, an unbounded
Treasure of curious and useful Learning, and to find out all imaginable Ways of
employing it, for the Glory of GOD, the Good of Men, and the Advancement of his
own Perfection: Tha^ (...) grew in Knowledge, He might increase (...) and
Usefulness, and become a greater (...) extensive Blessing.

So much Erudition, such high Degrees of Piety, and such an Active Life in
doing Good, united in the same Person, are very rarely seen among the Sons of
Men. By a transient Acquaintance with Him, one would think, that being
sanctified from the Birth, He had made the utmost Improvement of his Time in
the PURSUIT OF KNOWLEDGE: But upon a further View of the Social Part of his
Life, the continual Resort of Visitants, with his gentle and easy Entertainment
of 'em at all Hours, and how He would scarce let the Meanest or Youngest pass
Him without Instruction; It seemed as if almost all his Time were swallowed up
with CONVERSATION: And yet, being let into a more intimate Discovery of his
numberless and perpetual Contrivances and Labors to do Good in the World; one
would then be ready to conclude that he could have no Time left for Either, but
must have spent it all in ACTION.

HAVING made Himself an Early Master of the Learned Languages, One of the
special METHODS by which he so well improved his Time and acquired such a vast
Extent of Science seemed to be; that though for his Progress in Divine
Literature, He kept to the constant Study of the SACRED ORACLES in their
inspired Originals, yet for Other Writings he cared not to trouble Himself with
any but those that were likely to bring him something New, and so increase his
Knowledge. In two or three Minutes turning through a Volumn, he could easily tell
whether it would make Additions to the Store of his Ideas. If it could not, He
quickly laid it by: If otherwise, he read it, passing over all those Parts
which contained the things he had known before, perusing those Parts only that
represented something Novel, which he Pencil'd as he went along, and at the End
reduced the Substance to his Common Places, to be reviewed at Leisure; and all
this with wonderful Celerity. So short a Course he took to universal Science --
that as he increased in Years, the less Time he had occasion to expend in
running through an Author; till at length there were but few Books published that
would take him much to read, and many that were celebrated for their various
Learning he found had little in them but what he had been acquainted with
before.

NOR were his Common-Places the only Treasuries of his rich Ideas: They were
but more Securities that He might not lose them: And He used to have them at
command on the most sudden Incidents, and in common Conversation, which had
therefore always something new, and was ever entertaining and instructive. By
this means it was that He had the most agreeable and effectual way of Reproving
a Friend for what appeared amiss, or of Exciting to a neglected Duty, that I
ever met with. Instead of doing this directly, which might have been too
Offensive, He would rather bring some History or Observation in the Form of a
pleasant Narrative, which He had ready at hand for all Occasions; and being
extremely suitable, would leave his Friend to the most pungent Application.

AND his glowing CHARITY and PIETY spread a further Luster on his other
Excellencies. His burning Zeal for GOD, and fervent Benevolence and Love for
Men, were continually working in Him, employing all his Talents, Tho'ts and
Cares, by Night and Day, and Breaking forth into numberless Projections, and
intense Endeavors, which wasted and consumed his Life. He was an utter Enemy
to religious Tyranny and Imposition: He was of very Catholic and Comprehensive
Principles: He never valued any particular Forms of Worship, unless they were
of Divine Appointment: But it was the Spirit, the Power, the Practice of the
great Duties of Religion in the CHRISTIAN Institution that his Heart was set
on: And this He was for Propagating, by convincing and moving Arguments, warm
Persuasions, bright Examples, and by every winning Way that could be that of,
agreeable to its truly primitive and noble Simplicity, and to Humane Liberty.

THE following Draughts will give the Public an entertaining Specimen of his
wonderful Improvement of Time, and the various and surprising Methods He
invented and pursued for the Advancement of this vital Piety, both in Himself
and Others. Though deliberate in Speech, yet expeditious in Inditing; and having
the Pen of a ready Writer, that knew not how to faulter in its swift career; He
continually preserved Records of the several Rules and Schemes He formed for
his own Direction, and of his diurnal Prosecutions of them. He has by this
means left a great Abundance of excellent Materials for his more private
History: And the Accounts that follow being extracted chiefly from them, are
also agreeable to that Part of his Life which fell under the Observation of
those who were acquainted with Him; and so nearly answered to these latent
Rules now published, that we could not but conclude He had them always in his
Eye, though we had never seen them.

HIS Son, the Compiler having these great Advantages, can have therefore no
Occasion to invent any Additions to his Dear Father's History. He has rather
aimed at Brevity, and to write as little upon every Head as possible. And
indeed, if He had Published all that his Written Memorials would have enabled
him, or that himself and others have been Witnesses of, He had not only swelled
the Volumn to too large a size for the present Age to bear, and thereby hurt
its Usefulness; but he must have also given such a full Account of this
extraordinary Person as would have exceeded the Belief of those who were
Strangers to Him. The very ^^re Narration would have rather looked like the
celebrated Life of CYRUS, and be disputed by Posterity whether it were designed
and drawn for a mixed Romance, or a real History.

THE native Fondness of a filial Mind for a Father's Honor, may give Occasion
for the Reader to suspect, in such a case as this, an (...) of Praise. But if
some other Pens had been employed i^ ^^^wing the Description of (...)
Character, I am very certain they would have given themselves a greater
Liberty, as not being quite so cautious of exceeding as a natural Relative. And
for other things, the ingenuous Reader will rather indulge the blooming
Offspring of so Great a Parent; Especially, when the First Fruits he
co^secrates to the Public use, are so rich and salutary as these before us.

BUT now, Methinks, I have need of some good Apology for my own Presumption to
Preface the Life of such a Man, and recommend it to the World. I have none but
this, -- That the now Blessed Subject of it having been pleased to admit me
into an happy Intimacy with Him, upon my Return to this my Native Country; I
have been thereby too highly obliged -- to deny the Desires of his Orphan Son,
that I would introduce him thus into the Public view, and from my own
Experience say so much as may in some measure move the curious Passenger, to
turn aside and look into this reflecting Mirror, and with pleasing Wonder
contemplate the Great Original.

AND to say no more, -- I cannot think to wish a richer BLESSING in the present
State of the Prophetic System; than that the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh,
would in my own dear Country, and every Other, raise up Numbers of such
Ministers as this, and prosper this Superior Example for the forming and
animating of them: That they may burn and shine as He, and prepare the World
for the most illustrious Appearance of the GREAT GOD our Savior JESUS CHRIST,
that SUN of Righteousness, -- the boundless and flowing Source of all the
infinitely lower Excellence and fainter' Brightness we in every Place and Age,
admire in Others.

Boston, Feb. 27. 1728, 9. Thomas Prince.

A LIST of the SUBSCRIBERS.
HIS Excellency WILLIAM BURNET Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in and
over His Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire in
New England.

The Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire Lieut. Governor of the Massachusetts.

The Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH Esquire Lieut. Governor of New Hampshire.

A.
THE Rev. Mr. Hull Abbot, of Charlestown. Mr. Moses Abbot. Mr. Abijah Adams.
Mr. Eliah Adams, Merchant. The Rev. Mr. John Adams, of Newport. Mr. John Adams.
Mr. Matthew Adams. The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Allen, of Bridgewater. The Rev. Mr.
James Allin, of Brookline. The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Appleton, of Cambridge.
Edward Arnold of Duxborough, Esquire The Rev. Mr. John Avery, of Truro. Mr.
Nathanael Airs.
B.
The Hon. Edward Bromfield Esquire Seven Books. The Hon. Jonathan Belcher, Esquire Two
Books. The Hon. Melatiah Bourn, of Sandwich, Esquire Mr. Stephen Badger, of
Charlestown. Mr. John Baily, of Marblehead. Mr. Samuel Bayley. Capt. John
Ballantine. John Ballantine jun. Esquire Mr. John Barnard. The Rev. Mr. John
Barnard, of Marblehead. Mr. William Barnsdel. The Rev. Mr. Samuel Barret, of
Hopkinton. Mr. Alden Bass. Joseph Baxter, jun. M. A. Andrew Belcher, M. A.
Merchant. Two Books. Jonathan Belcher jun. B. A. Mr. Jeremiah Belknap, Two
Books. Mr. Nathanael Belknap, Bookseller, Fourteen Books, The Rev. Mr. Thomas
Blowers, of Beverly. The Rev. Mr. Joseph Bourn, of Sandwich. Capt. Thomas
Bowen, of Rehoboth. Mr. Thomas Boylston, Seven Books. Dr. Zabdiel Boylston, F.
R. S. Zabdiel Boylston jun. M. A. The Rev. Mr. Daniel Brewer, of Springfield.
Thomas Brintnal, B. A. Three Books. Mr. John Brock. Mr. Edward Bromfield jun.
Madam Rebekah Brown. The Rev. Mr. Richard Brown, of Reading. Mr. Jeremiah
Bumstead. Mr. Samuel Burril, Seven Books. Mather Byles, M. A.
C.
The Hon. John Clark Esquire deceased, Seven Books. John Callender, M. A. Mrs. Mary
Campbell. The Rev. Mr. Ezra Carpenter, of Hull. Mr. John Chamberlain of
Charlestown. Joseph Champney, jun. M. A. The Rev. Mr. Charles Chauncey, of
Boston. Mr. Richard Checkley, Apothecary. The Rev. Mr. Ames Cheever, of
Manchester. The Rev. Mr. John Chipman, of Beverly. Mr. Benjamin Clark, of
Cambridge. Mr. Samuel Clark, of Brookline. Mr. Ebenezer Clap, of Dorchester,
Two Books. The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Clap, of Newport, Fourteen Books. Mr.
Tristram Coffin, of Newbury, Four Books. The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Colman, of
Boston. Mr. Josiah Conant, of Mansfield. John Cookson jun. B. A. Two Books. The
Rev. Mr. William Cooper, of Boston, Two Books. Major Henry Cope. Mr. Thomas
Copp. Capt. Elias Cotting, Two Books. The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Cotton, of
Bristol, Seven Books. Roland Cotton, M. A. Seven Books. Mr. Nathanael Curtis,
of Topsfield. The Rev. Mr. Job Cushing, of Shrewsbury. Nathanael Cushing. B. A.
Mr. Thomas Cushing, Seven Books. Thomas Cushing jun. M. A. Merchant.
Ammi-Ruhamah Cutter, M. A.
D.
Richard Dana, of Marblehead. M. A. Mr. Samuel Dana, of Pomfret. The Rev. Mr.
John Danforth, of Dorchester. Mr. John Darrel, Two Books. The Rev. Mr. Josiah
Dennis, of Yarmouth. The Rev. Mr. Jonathan Dickinson, of Elisabeth-Town,
New Jersey, Seven Books. Mr. William Down, Three Books. Mr. John Draper,
Printer. Samuel Dummer Esquire The Rev. Mr. Samuel Dunbar, of S^^^ghton. Mr. Edward
Durant. Mr. Barrat Dyre, Four Books.
E
Mr. Andrew Eliot. Mr. Benjamin Eliot, Bookseller, Seven Books. Mr. John Eliot,
Bookseller, Seven Books. The Rev. Mr. John Emerson, of Portsmouth. The Rev. Mr.
Joseph Emerson, of Malden. Mr. Thomas Emmons. John Air, M. A. Merchant.
F.
Mr. William Fairfield, of Wenham. Mr. William Fairfield jun. The Rev. Mr.
Benjamin Fessenden, of Sandwich. Mr. Grafton Feveryear. The Rev. Mr. Samuel
Fisk, of Salem. John Fitch, B. A. Mr. Thomas Fleet, Printer, Seven Books. Mr.
James Fosdick. Francis Foxcroft of Cambridge, Esquire Two Books. The Rev. Mr.
Thomas Foxcroft of Boston. Mr. John Franklin. Mr. Enoch Freeman of
Harvard-College. The Rev. Mr. Thomas Frink, of Rutland.
G.
Mr. Edmund Gale. The Rev. Mr. James Gardner of Marshfield. Mr. Nathanael
Gardner. Mr. Richard Gardner, of Cambridge. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gay, of
Hingham. Mr. Bartholomew Gedney, Seven Books. The Rev. Mr. Joshua Gee, of
Boston. Mr. Henry Gibbs. Mr. Robert Gibbs, of Providence, Apothecary. Mr. Aaron
G^^^t, of Colchester, Seven Books. Nicholas Gilman, M. A. Mr. John Goldsmith.
Mr. John Goldthwait, Four Books. Mr. Nathanael Goodwin. Mr. Thomas Goodwill.
The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Gookin, of Hampton, Two Books. Mr. Bartholomew Green,
Printer, Two Books. Mr. Bartholomew Green jun. Printer. Mr. Bartholomew Green,
Goldsmith. Mr. John Green, of Malden. The Rev. Mr. Joseph Green, of Barnstable.
Mr. Timothy Green, of New London, Printer, Seven Books. Mr. Timothy Green jun.
of Boston, Printer, Seven Books. Stephen Greenleaf, M. A. Mr. William
Greenleaf, Two Books. The Rev. Mr. John Greenwood, of Rehoboth. Isaac
Greenwood, M. A. Hollisian Professor of the Mathematics, etc. at
Harvard-College, Two Books. Samuel Greenwood, M. A. Merchant, Three Books.
Jeremy Gridley, M. A. Mr. John Gridley.
H.
The Hon. Edward Hutchinson Esquire Treasurer of Harvard-College, Seven Books. Dr.
Robert Hale, of Beverly. Mr. Thomas Hancock, Bookseller, Fourteen Books. Mr.
Nathanael Hasey. Mr. John Helyer, Seven Books. Mr. Daniel Henchman, Bookseller,
Fourteen Books. Mr. Charles Hendley. Mr. William Hide, of Newtown. The Rev. Mr.
Nehemiah Hobart, of Hingham. Noah Hobart, of Hingham. M. A. Mr. Charles Hobby,
Merchant. Wensley Hobby, M. A. Two Books. Mr. Nathanael Hodgdon. Mr. Ebenezer
Hough, Merchant. Mr. Amos Howard. Mr. Joseph Hubbard, Two Books. Thomas
Hubbard, M. A. Seven Books. Mr. Jabez Hunt. Mr. John Hunt, Merchant, Seven
Books. Thomas Hutchinson jun. B. A. Two Books.
J.
The Rev. Mr. Samuel Jefferds of Wells. The Rev. Mr. William Jenison, of Salem.
Mr. Thomas Jenner, of Charlstown, Merchant. Mr. Ephraim Jones, of Concord.
K.
Mr. Gershom Keys, of Shrewsbery, Seven Books. Mr. Jonathan Kimball, of
Wenham. Mr. Eleazer Kingsbery, of N^edham, Two Books. Mr. Samuel Kingsbery, of
Walpole. Mr. John Kneeland jun. Mr. Samuel Kneeland, Printer. Mr. Abraham
Knowlton, of Ipswich. Mr. Ebenezer Knight, of Marblehead.
I.
Capt. John Larrabee, Two Books. Mr. William Larrabee. Mr. Joseph Lasenby, Two
Books. Mr. Nathanael Leeman, of York, Seven Books. Mr. Knight Leverett,
Goldsmith. The Rev. Mr. Daniel Jews, of Pembroke. Joseph Jews, M. A. Isaiah
Lewis, of Marshfield, M. A. Library of the North-Church, in Boston. Library of
the South-Church, in Boston. Mr. Benjamin Little, of Newbury. Mr. Tristram
Little, of Newbury, Seven Books. The Rev. Mr. Benjamin Lord, of No^^^^h. Mr.
Daniel Loring. The Rev. Mr. Israel Loring, of Sudbury. Mr. Joseph Lovett of
Chel^^ford. Mr. William Louder. Mr. Michael Lowell. Mr. Caleb Lyman. Benjamin
Lynde, jun. of Salem, M. A.
M.
The Rev. Mr. Edmund March, of Almesbury. Mr. William Merchant. The Rev. Mr.
Josiah Marshal, of Falmouth. Capt. John Mason, of New London. Mr. Joseph Mason
of Watertown, Seven Books. Mr. Ralph Mayer. The Rev. Mr. Experience Mayhew, of
Chilmark. Mr. John Mead, of Southborough. The Rev. Mr. Henry Messenger, of
Wrentha^^. Timothy Minot, of Concord, M. A. Mr. Edward Moberly. Mr. Thomas
Moff^tt, Merchant. Mr. Samuel Morris, jun. of Woodstock. The Rev. Mr. Joseph
Morse, of Stoughton.
N.
Israel Nichols jun. M. A. Dr. John Nicoll, of New York.
O.
The Rev Mr. John Owen, of Groton.
P.
The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Parkman, of Westborough. The Rev. Mr. Edward Payson, of
Rowley. Mr. Nathanael Pearse. Capt. Daniel Pecker. Mr. James Pecker. Mr. Edward
Pell. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, of New York. Mr. Joshua Penhallow. Dr.
John Perkins, M. A. Dr. John Perkins Mr. Eleazer Phillips, of Charlstown,
Bookseller Fourteen Books. Mr. John Phillips. Mrs. Sarah Phillips of
Charlestown. Mr. Joseph Pomery. Mr. John Pratt, of Malden. The Rev. Mr. John
Prentice, of Lancaster. Nathan Prince, M. A. Fellow of Harvard-College, Two
Book. The Rev. Mr. Thomas Prince, of Boston, Two Books. Mr. Benjamin Procter.
Mr. Joseph Procter, Two Books. Mr. William Pynchon, of Springfield, Seven
Books.
Q.
(...) Quincy of Brantrey, Esquire
R.
(...) Samuel Rand, of Charlestown. (...) William Rand, Apothecary, Seven
Books. (...) Jeremiah Richards, of Roxbury. (...) Paul Rivoire, Goldsmith.
(...) George Robinson, Two Books. (...) Mr. John Robinson, of Duxborough. (...)
^^^^liel Rogers, Printer. (...) ^^gers, Merchant, Two Books. (...) John Rogers,
of Ipswich. (...) Mr. Nathanael Rogers, of Ipswich. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer
Rossiter, of Stonington. Daniel Russel of Charlestown, Esquire Two Books. The Rev.
Mr. Jonathan Russel, of Barnstable.
S.
The Hon. Samuel Sewall Esquire Two Books. Madam Mary Saltonstal, Two Books. Mr.
Jonathan Sewall, Merchant, Two Books. The Rev. Mr. Joseph Sewall, of Boston.
Samuel Sewall jun. Esquire Mr. Samuel Sewall, Merchant. Stephen Sewall, M. A.
Fellow of Harvard-College. Mr. John Shaw. William Smith, jun. of Charlstown M.
A. Mr. Samuel Stacey, of Marblehead. Mr. John Staniford. David S^earnes, of
Watertown, B. A. Joseph Stimpson, of Charlestown, M. A. Anthony Stoddard Esquire
Two Books. Mr. Joseph Stone of Framingham. Mr. John Symmes.
T.
Capt. Christopher Tailor. The Rev. Mr. John Tailor, of Milton. Mr. Gershom
Tenney. Oxenbridge Thacher, M. A. The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Thayer, of Roxbu^^^ Mr.
Benjamin Thwing. Mrs. Lydia Thwing, of Cambridge. Mr. Solomon Townsend. Mr.
Samuel Trott. The Rev. Mr. John Tufts, of Newbury Th^^^ (...) Mr. Andrew Tyler,
Goldsmith. Mr. Samuel Tyley, Public Notary, Two Books.
V.
Mr. Thomas Verien, Seven Books.
W.
The Hon. Isaac Winslow of Marshfield, Esquire Two Books. Mr. Isaac Walker. The
Rev. Mr. Nehemiah Walter, of Roxbury, Two Books. The Rev. Mr. Robert Ward, of
Wenham. Mr. William Warner, Two Books. Mr. Warren, M. A. The Rev. Mr. John
Webb, of Boston, Two Books. Mr. Joseph Webb, Seven Books. Nathan Webb, M. A.
The Rev. Mr. Habijah Weld, of Attleborough. Samuel Wells, M. A. The Rev. Mr.
William Welsteed, of Boston. Mr. Nathanael Wheeler. The Rev. Mr. John White, of
Gloucester. Mr. Samuel White, Merchant, Seven Books. Oliver Whiting of
Billerica, Esquire Ezra Whitmarsh jun. of Weymouth, M. A. Mr. Thomas Wier. The Rev.
Mr. Samuel Wigglesworth, of Ipswich. The Rev. Mr. Eleazer Williams, of
Mansfield. The Rev. Mr. Elisha Williams, Rector of Yale-College in New Haven.
Mr. Jonathan Williams, Two Books. The Rev. Mr. Nathanael Williams. The Rev. Mr.
William Williams, of Weston. Mr. Joseph Winn. Peleg Wiswall, M. A. Mr. Ebenezer
Wit, of Marlborough, Two Books. Mr. Benjamin Wo^ds, of Marlborough, Seven
Books.
Y.
Mr. William Young.
THE Introduction.
IT is agreed by all, that Lives of eminent Men are very profitable, and that
the Writing of them is of great Use to the World; especially if their Examples
have bin very shining, and they have served their Generation according to the
Divine Will; and therefore it is that so many Ancients and Moderns have
endeavored to transmit through Ages down to the latest Posterity the Lives and
Actions of their virtuous and excellent Friends.

IT has ever likewise bin allowed proper for SONS to communicate to the World
Accounts of their good and great PARENTS; to tell what they were, what they
have done and suffered, how they though it, and on what Accounts others are, have
bin, or may be the better for them: I say, it has bin looked upon as convenient
for Sons thus to honor their Parents; who have bin honored and highly
favored of Heaven; for were it otherwise* why are there so many Examples in
later Times as well as in former Generations, of this filial Piety? And
besides, whatever some may think of their Partiality and Prejudice, it must be
acknowleged that they are most capable of Writing concerning their Parents, for
they have their private Memorials, they have had more free Intimations of their
Mind, and have the most through Acquaintance with the secret Springs of their
Actions: On these Accounts they are rather more capacitated than others; and
therefore I hope to be excused, or at least indulged in this Performance by the
ingenuous and considerate Reader.

ENCOURAGED and animated by the many Sons of Ingenuity who have gone before me,
and particularly by my own FATHER and GRANDFATHER, who have raised literal
Monuments for their Parents; I shall now write the Life of, I might say with
Sir HENRY WOTTON, the BEST of Fathers: I shall write it with an inviolable
Fidelity and Truth; and I here declare that my Design in this Book, is chiefly
to glorify JESUS CHRIST and to serve HIS Church: Ac ne Patris mei Famae
parcerem, si ejus Laus cederet in CHRISTI opprobrium and Corruptionem Evangelii
and Scandalum Ecclesiae Molinaei Examen Amyrald. advers. Spanhem l. 2. p. 137.
.

THE LIFE OF The Reverend and Learned Dr. Cotton Mather.
CHAP. I. The Subject of the History; his Birth, Education, Early Religion,
Marriages and Children, with his Methods of Education, and Rules of private
Conduct.
SECT. 1. The Subject of this History, with an Account of his Descent and
Family.
1. DR. COTTON MATHER -- He was born Thursday Feb. 12. 1662, 3. at Boston in
New England.

I have no great Disposition to enquire into the remote Antiquities of his
Family; nor indeed is it matter of much Consequence that in our Coat of Arms,
we bear Ermine, Or, A Fess, Wavy, Azure, three Lions rampant; or, for a Crest,
on a wreath of our Colors a Lion Sedant, or on a Trunk of a Tree vert; -- The
Religion and Learning found in the Family was the most agreeable Pleasure to my
Father, and yields the most satisfactory Reflection to me.

2. Dr. INCREASE MATHER -- whose Relation, as Pastor to the North Church in
Boston, as President of Harvard College, whose printed Composures both Latin
and English, and whose Agency in the Courts of three Monarchs for his afflicted
Country have rendered him universally known -- was his Father.

3. HIS Mother was MARIA, the Daughter of the Renowned Mr. JOHN COTTON; who was
a Man of very exalted Piety and uncommon Learning: Out of Respect to this
excellent Man, He was called COTTON.

SECT. 2. His Education, his Eagerness and Progress in Learning; and early
Favors conferred on him.
1. HIS Education was at the free School in Boston under the Care, first of Mr.
BENJA. THOMPSON, a Man of great Learning and Wit, who was well acquainted with
Roman and Greek Writers, and a good Poet last under the famous Mr. EZEKIEL
CHEEVER, who was a very learned, pious Man, and an excellent Schoolmaster.
Under these two Masters he made a laudable Proficiency.

2. BY twelve years of Age, he had composed many Latin Exercises, had conversed
with TULLY, TERENCE, OVID and VIRGIL, had gone through his Greek Testament, and
entered upon ISOCRATES, HOMER and his Hebrew Grammar; and at that Age was
admitted into College. The pious Dr. HOAR, who was then President, according to
Custom, gave him this prophetical Head for his initial Declamation, Telemacho
veniet, vivat modo, fortior Aetas.

3. AFTER his entrance into College, he made as quick a ^^spatch as before;
Mastering Hebrew perfectly digesting ALEXAN^. RICHARDSON'S Tables, which he
transcribed; composing Systems of Logic and P^^s^^, which were afterward used
by others; and, in a Word, describing the Circle of all the Academical Studies.
Many are the Books which he then read with ingenious Remarks, of which he kept
an Account in his Diary.

4. WHEN he took his first Degree, which was at the Age of Sixteen, Mr. OAKS
the Praesident, in his Oration at the Commencement which I have read, thus
expressed himself concerning this hopeful Youth,

-- Alter vero COTTONUS MATHERUS nuncupatur. Quantum Nomen! Erravi, fa^eor Au
dit^res, diissem etenim, quanta Nomina! Nihil Ego de Reverendo PATRE, Academiae
Curatore vigilanti^simo, municipii A^ademici socio primario, dicam; quoniam
coram and in Os laudare nolim: sed ^i Pietatem, Eruditionem, Ingenium elegans,
Judicium Solidum, Prudentiam and Gravitatem AVORUM Reverendissimorum JOANNIS
COTTONI et RICHARD MATHERI, referat et representet, omne tulisse Punctum dici
poterit nec despero futurum, ut in hoc Juvene COTTONUS' atque MATHERUS tam re
quam Nomine coalescant et reviviscant. --

YOU will find in the Course of this History, that this great Man's Sentiments
were just, and his Expectations answered: So that I may now insert the true
Character of him, when he made some Figure in the World; which I choose to bring
in here, because it has some Relation to Praesident OAKS'S Prophecy.

A Friend thus writes of him;

"For Grace and Art and an illustrious Fame,
"Who would not look from such an om'nous Name;
"Where two great Names their Sanctuary take,
"And in a Third combined a greater make?
5. WHEN he was half a Year short of Nineteen, he proceeded Master of Arts, and
received his Degree at the Hand of his Father who was then Prae^dent. The
Thesis which he then maintained was, Puncta Hebraica sunt Originis Divinae: But
he afterward saw cause to change his Mind, and held the contrary Opinion to
the last. He though it, with the great PRID^AUX and some others, that the Points
were an Invention of the Mas^rites; and, because he could read and perfectly
understand Hebrew without them; he imagined there was no need of them, unless
for the Ignorant, as the Jews without Question were, after the Babylonish
Captivity, when the Points were contrived for their Instruction.

6. HE might well make a considerable Progress i^ Learning, being in his
earliest Years pretty healthy, having withal a great Capacity for Learning, and
being blessed with that first step to Knowledge, a modest Inquisitiveness.

7. AND, as it is observed there are very few who prove great Men unless they
begin betimes, he was very desirous of following SENECA'S Advice, that is, to
hasten and learn betimes, lest when old, he should be obliged to it Perg^ and
propera ne tibi accidat, ut Senex discas. Sen. (...). 77.
: And indeed he betimes laid up a good Stock of Knowledge; like the busy Ant
that adds to its heap, not ignorant or unaware of the future Horat. lib. Epod.
Carmen Seculare.
.

8. AND, if what some great Men have hinted be true Nemo Vir magnus sine
Afflatu Cic. de Not. D^orum. l. 2.
, while he was yet young he bid fair to be great; for he believed he should be
^o* he expected it; and therefore ( multa tuli^ feci^^^, etc.) he bore and did
many things and disregarded all the Difficulties that would encompass him.

Sect. 3. His Early Religion.
1. IT is an excellent Maxim, That the best Gifts are vain unless Piety adorn
them: And of this Mind was he, of whom I am writing, from his very Childhood.

AND, although his Desire of Learning was very great and strong, and his
Seize were truly considerable, he was not more noted for these Gifts than
for his early Piety and Religion.

FROM his earliest Days there were several good things found in him. When he
began to speak almost, he began to pray, and practiced this Duty constantly
while he was a Schoolboy; and, although he used no Forms in Secret, he composed
some for his School-Fellows and obliged them to pray. Before he could write
notes of Sermons in public Assemblies, he commonly wrote what he remembered when
he came home. -- He read the Scriptures with so much Ardor and Assiduity, that
fifteen Chapters a Day divided into three Exercises, and nothing less, would
suffice him. -- He would moreover reprove his Play-mates for their wicked Words
and Practices.

2. As he grew Elder, he joined himself to a Society of Young Men that met on
the Sabbath Evening for Religious Ends and Purposes; and unto these Meetings he
ascribed his first Rise and Improvement in the Art of Speaking, of Praying, etc.

3. BY Reason of some Miscarriages into which he was surprizingly bro't, he was
very Young put upon enquiring into his Estate; whether he were not an
Hypocrite, if not a Castaway? He found very frequent Returns of Doubts and
Fears; and therefore resolutely and frequently renewed his Closure with JESUS
CHRIST, as his only Relief against them. During this time, when he was
languishing under the Sense of his Vileness, and thinking with himself, Will
the LORD a^^^p^ of one that has done and ^in as I have? I say during this time,
he though it it proper to open his Bos^^ to his Father: Upon so doing his Father
told him, There was no Sinner repenting and returning but CHRIST will accept of
him: For (said he) observe it even among Men; there is a vile Sinner; a good
Man beholds and abhors him: Yet if this Man ever becomes a new Creature, the
same good Person, notwithstanding his former Vileness, will embrace him and
take him to his Bosom; and this (continued he) is an Emblem and Effect of the
Spirit of JESUS. -- Wonderful was the Quickening these Words gave him: They
influenced his Addresses to Heaven, in which he then had sweet and strong
Intimations of the Divine Favor.

4. WHEN he was fifteen, he was much affected by reading Dr. HALL'S Treatise of
Meditation, with his Proposals of proceeding Methodically in this great Duty of
Christianity. Upon this, He read several other Books upon that Subject, and
made many Essays at a Logical and regular Method for daily Meditation, and
proceeded so far that he wrote a Discourse upon that Subject, which at this
tender Age found a good Consideration among several ingenious Friends. The
Result of all was, that he finally pitched upon this Method. The Meditation
consisted of two Parts: In the first, He proceeded more doctrinally, to
instruct himself either with answering a Question, or with explaining a
Scripture, or with considering the Causes, the Effects, the Adjuncts, the
Opposites and Resemblances of the Thing that was his Theme. -- In the second
Part, he proceeded more practically to affect himself in three Steps; first, an
Examination of himself; next, an Expostulation with himself and last, a
Resolution in the Strength of Grace offered in the new Covenant. This happy way
of preaching with and unto himself he was acquainted with betimes.

5. AND before this, even at fourteen Years of Age, he began to keep Days of
Fasting and Prayer alone in his Study, and in those Duties he made at first
SCUDDER'S Christian's Daily Walk his Directory; and But of his Fasts (together
with his Thanksgiving) and his Devotions and Methods in them, I treat largely
in Chap. 6. whither I refer my Reader.

6. HAVING past his first Sixteen Years, he was though it of Age eno' to join to a
particular Church: He did so then accordingly, and renewed his Baptismal Vows
and Covenant. By approaching to the LORD'S Table, he though it himself obliged to
be very particular in Self Examination. I will here transcribe one Instance of
his Self-Examination, which he wrote when short of Seventeen.

Setting my self upon the Work of Self-Examination, I find;

1. Concerning my Faith.

I am convinced of the utter Insufficiency in my own Righteousness to procure
my Salvation. I see my own Righteousness to be nothing in point of Acceptance
with GOD. I see a woeful Hypocrisy has acted me, Sluggishness and Selfishness
has attended me, in the very best of all my Services.

I perceive now no other way for my Salvation, but only by the Lord JESUS
CHRIST; Refuge sails elsewhere on every Hand.

I behold a Fullness and a Beauty in JESUS CHRIST; HE is worth loving, worth
prizing, worth following.

Such is my Desire to obtain an Interest in HIM, and make HIM the only Portion
and Support of my Soul, that it is one of my greatest Griefs, to find my Heart
so dull in going forth after HIM.

2. Concerning my Repentance.

I abhor Sin, because it is abhorred by GOD and contrary to HIM.

SIN is my heavy Burden: Death it self would be welcome to me to free me from
such a Burden.

I am heartily troubled for the Sin in my Heart, and that fountain of
Corruption, the Plague of my Heart afflicts me.

3. Concerning my Love.

I long to see and know the Favor of GOD unto me; the sight of That would make
all my Afflictions light.

I desire to be as active as may be in promoting the Honor of GOD; and I
seldom come into any Company, without contriving, Whether I may not act or
speak something for That in it, before I leave it.

I am sorry, that I love GOD no more.

The Saints, that have the Image of GOD, are those whom I value most.

A Mean Person with Grace is more amiable to me than another who is otherwise
never so well qualified, but Graceless -- There are some other of his
Examinations, when in Younger Years and in advanced, which you will find in the
6th Chapter of this Book: I brought this one in here, as a Specimen of his
early Sense of Religion.

7. ANOTHER Thing, in which he demonstrated his early Piety, was his incessant
Aspirations after Usefulness. He was always of MELANCTHON'S Mind, who said, Let
who will abound and increase in Riches, they may for all me; I look upon my
Works as my Treasure E^ Operibus sit Abundantia mea; Divitiis per me ^ic^^
abundet quisquis volu^rit.
: He therefore sought all Occasions for doing Good.

THE Maxim he went upon was this, that a Power and Opportunity to do Good not
only gives a Right to the Doing of it, but also makes the Doing of it a Duty: A
Maxim truly noble and divine both in it self, and in its Effects! And it is
built upon those Words of our blessed Apostles, As we have Opportunity, let us
do Good unto all Men Gal. VI. 10.
.

HAVING a Principle of Good Will to Man deeply rooted in his Soul, he was very
soon and very strongly desirous that it might grow and flourish, and that
others might be the better for it.

HE first set himself to contrive what Good he might be able to do in his
Father's Family, by instructing his Brethren and Sisters, and by exhorting the
Servants.

HE anon proceeded to impose it as a Rule upon himself, never to come into any
Company where it might be proper for him to discourse, but he would, if
possible, so order it that it might be serviceable to the Company; and, he saw
the Fulfillment of that Promise, To him that has shall be given: For, upon his
faithful Improvement of his Talents, He found his LORD and Master went on and
multiplied his Opportunities, until he came to serve whole Churches, Towns and
Countries.

FROM his own happy Experience therefore, when he was advanced in Age, he would
often advise Young Men, to contrive and study as early as possible to do Good,
to love it and to account it a noble Thing. While We and our Opportunities are
but small, he would have us invent as many ways as we can to be serviceable: He
would not have us impertinent, immodest or ostentatious in our Essays; but
would have us with humility, and yet with Readiness, begin betimes with our
small Stock, and expect that, before we have done, GOD will do great things for
us as well as by us. I have made some Digression; but the Usefulness of it will
make Amends for it. I shall have Occasion hereafter more particularly to
mention his great Usefulness and extensive Labors.

8. HE very young though it it his Duty to give unto the LORD of all, some part of
small substance which was afforded him. Even from 14 he devoted a Tenth to our
Melchizedek; and from his Childhood was very good, manly and generous.

I will mention but two Instances here of his good Spirit and Charity; (having
Occasion e're long to give you some more) you will take them in his own Words;

It may not be amiss now and then to mention a Remarkable Providence, and make
some Remarks on the retaliating Dispensations of Heaven toward me. One thing,
that I will observe, is what I met with in the twenty first Year of my Life. I
can tell that the LORD has most notably, in many Instances retaliated my
Dutifulness unto my Father. Some of the Instances which I have taken Notice of
may seem trivial, but yet the Retaliation I saw in 'em gave them a Relish.

As now, I was Owner of a Watch, which I was fond of for the Variety of Motions
in it. I saw my Father took a Fancy to it, and I made a Present of it unto him,
with some Tho'ts that as it was but a piece of due Gratitude unto such a
Parent, so I should not go without a Recompense. Quickly after this there came
to me a Gentlewoman, from whom I had no Reason to expect so much as a Visit:
But in her Visit, she, to my Surprise prayed me to accept, as a Present from
Her, a Watch, which was indeed preferible to that, with which I had parted. I
resolved hereupon to stir up Dutifulness unto Parents in my self and others
more than ever.

At another Time; I bought a Spanish Indian Servant, and bestowed him upon my
Father. Some Years after this a Knight, whom I had laid under many Obligations,
bestowed a Spanish Indian Servant upon me. Many more such Things I might
mention; but I give these for a Taste.

SECT. 4. His Marriages and Children, with his Methods of Educating them.
1. BECAUSE I choose to finish what I have to write concerning him (inter
privatos Parietes) in his private Capacity, I incline now to bring in this
Section, and a following one.

2. MR. MATHER though it it advisable in his 24th Year to Marry. He first looked
up to Heaven for Direction, and heard the Counsel of his Friends -- The Person
he first pitched upon was Mrs. ABIGAIL, the Daughter of the Honorable Col
PHILLIPS of Charlestown, to whom he was married. She was a comely ingenious
Woman and an agreeable Consort. She died in the Year 1702.

3. UPON her Death his Family was in great Darkness and Disorder; which made
him continually look to HIM from whom descends every good Gift, to heal the
Breach GOD had made on his Family. His Petitio^^ were abundantly granted. GOD
showed him a Gentlewoman a near Neighbor; whose Character I shall give as I
have it from those who intimately knew her: -- She was one, of finished Piety
and Probity, and of an unspotted Reputation; one of good sense, and blessed
with a complete Discretion in ordering an Household; one of singular
Good Humor and incomparable Sweetness of Temper; one, with a very handsome
engaging Countenance; and one honorably descended and related; 'Twas Mrs.
ELIZABETH HUBBARD; who was the Daughter of Dr. JOHN CLARK. She had been a Widow
four Years, when Dr. MATHER married her, which was Aug. 18. 1703. He rejoiced
in her as having great spoil, and in finding her found great Favor of the
LORD. They lived together in perfect Concent and Harmony ten Years: She died
Nov, 8. 1713. with Willingness; the Fear of Death was extinguished in her; She
committed her self into the Hands of her SAVIOR, and in the same gracious
Hands She left her children -- She was much beloved and greatly lamented.

4. IN his fifty third Year, July 5. 1715. he was married to his third Wife.
She is the Daughter of the renowned and very learned Mr. SAMUEL LEE: She was
the Widow of Mr. GEORGE, a worthy Merchant, when Dr. MATHER paid his Respects
unto her in order to be Married. She is a Lady of many and great
Accomplishments, and is the Doctor's disconsolate Widow.

5. BY this last Gentlewoman, he had no Issue: by the two former Wives he had
fifteen, only two of which are living; one a Daughter by the first Wife; the
other, a SON by the second; he is the Writer.

BY his first Wife he had nine Children, of which but four arrived to Man's or
Woman's Estate. -- The first was named KATHARIN; a young Woman of good Wit, who
understood Latin and read Hebrew fluently. She died of a Consumption. Nuptiarum
^^pers and adhuc protervo -- Cruda Marito.

THE next was ABIGAIL: She was of a very amiable Countenance and loving
Disposition. She was Married and had four Children, two of which are living:
She died with Composure and Joy, in Childbirth.

THE third was INCREASE; a young Man well beloved by all who knew him, for his
Superior good Nature and Manners, his elegant Wit and ready Expressions, He
went to Sea, and in his Passage from Barbados to Newfoundland, was lost in the
Atlantic.

BY his second Wife, two Children only lived to grow up, out of six.

HIS dear Daughter ELIZABETH was one, who was married, and in two Years after
died. She very much resembled her Mother in her various Virtues.

6. I must here mention it for the Glory of GOD, as well as the Honor of his
Servant, that although He met with so many Bereavements in his Family, (as well
as Sorrows on other Accounts) yet He never fainted in the Day of Adversity: He
though it his Sorrows should rather animate, than hinder, his numerous Essays to do
Good: And therefore when the Desires of his Eyes were taken away, and when He
was deprived of his Children, none of these Things moved him so far as to
hinder him from his Duty. No! He ever preached after their Deaths, every one of
their Deaths, and printed the Sermons, that so others might be the better for
his Griefs. -- And indeed He always counted, it was in very Faithfulness that
He was afflicted; for under every Calamity, He considered how his CHRIST might
be glorified both by his Example and by useful Writings; and, in short, under
the repeated Rains of Adversity, He grew more and more fruitful in every good
Work.

7. I will conclude Sect. 4. with reciting some special Rules, which He
observed in the Education of his Children.

1. HE poured out continual Prayers to the GOD of all Grace for them, That HE
would be a Father to them, bestow HIS Son and Grace upon them, guide them by
his Counsel and bring them to Glory. And in this Action, He mentioned them
distinctly, every one by Name, to the LORD. 2. HE began betimes to entertain
them with delightful Stories, especially Scriptural ones: And he would ever
conclude with some Lesson of Piety; bidding them to learn that Lesson from the
Story. AND thus every Day at the Table, He used himself to tell some
entertaining Tale before he rose; and endeavor to make it useful to the
Olive-Plants about the Table.

3. WHEN his Children accidentally at any Time came in his way, it was his
Custom to let fall some Sentence or other, that might be monitory or profitable
to them. THIS Matter occasioned Labor, Study and Contrivance.

4. HE betimes tried to engage his Children in Exercises of Piety; and
especially secret Prayer: For which he gave them very plain and brief
Directions, and would suggest unto them the Petitions which he would have them
make before the LORD, and which he would therefore explain to their
Apprehension and Capacity. And he would often call upon Them; Child, Don't you
forget every Day to go alone and pray as I have directed you. 5. HE betimes
endeavored to form in his Children a Temper of Benignity. He would put them
upon doing Services and Kindnesses for one another, and for other Children. He
would applaud them when he saw them delight in it. He would upbraid all
Aversion to it. He would Caution them exquisitely against all Revenges of
Injuries, and would instruct them to return good Offices for Evil ones. He
would show them, how they would by this Goodness become like the Good GOD and
the blessed JESUS. He would let them discern he was not satisfied, except when
they had a Sweetness of Temper shining in them. 6. AS soon as possible, he
would make the Children learn to Write: And when they had the Use of the Pen,
he would employ them in Writing out the most instructive and profitable Things
he could invent for them. In this way (...) proposed to fill their Minds with
excellent Things, which he hoped would make a deep Impression upon their Minds.
7. HE incessantly endeavored, that his Children might betimes be acted by
Principles of Reason and Honor.
HE would first beget in them an high Opinion of their Father's Love to them,
and of his being best able to judge, what shall be good for them.

THEN he would make them sensible, it was Folly for them to pretend to any W^^
or Will of their own: They must resign all to Him, who would be sure to do what
is best; his Word must be their Law.

HE would cause them to understand, that it is an hurtful and shameful Thing to
do amiss. He would aggravate this on all Occasions; and let them see how
amiable they will render themselves by well-doing.

THE first Chastisement which he would inflict for any ordinary Fault, was to
let the Child see and hear him in an Astonishment, and hardly able to believe
that the Child could do so b^se a Thing, but believing that they would never do
it again.

HE would never come to give a Child a Blow, except in case of Obstinacy, or
something that is very criminal.

TO be chased for a while out of his Presence, he would make to be looked upon
as the sorest Punishment in his Family.

HE would with all possible Insinuations come upon them to gain this Point,
That to learn all great Things, was the noblest Thing in the World. He was not
fond of proposing Play to them as a Reward of any diligent Application, to
learn what is good; lest they should think Diversion to be a better and nobler
thing than Diligence. He would have them to propound and expect at this rate, I
have done well; and now I will go to my Father, who will teach me some thing
curious for it. He would have his Children account it a Privilege to be taught;
and would sometimes manage the matter so, that Refusing to teach them something
should be looked upon as a Punishment. The Strain of his Threatenings therefore
was; You shall not be allowed to read, or to write, or to learn such a thing,
if you do not as I have bidden you.

THE Slavish way of Education, carried on with Raving and Kicking and Scourging
(in Schools as well as Families) he looked upon as a dreadful Judgment of GOD
on the World; he though it the Practice abominable, and expressed a mortal Aversion
to it.

8. THOUGH he found a vast, a wonderful Advantage in having his Children strongly
biased by the Principles of Reason and Honor; (which he observed that
Children will feel and understand sooner than is commonly though it for;) yet he
would not neglect any Means and Endeavors to have higher Principles infused
into them.

HE would therefore betimes awe them with the sense of the Eye of GOD upon them
in the Ways which they take.

HE would show them how they must love our Lord JESUS CHRIST; and how they must
demonstrate it, by doing what their Parents require of them.

HE would often tell them of the good Angels, who love them, help them, guard
them from Evil and do many good Offices for them; who likewise take a very
diligent Notice of them, and ought not in any measure to be disobliged.

HE would not say much to them of the evil Angels, because he would not have
them entertain any frightful Fancies about the Apparitions of Devils: But yet,
he would briefly let them know, that there are Devils, who tempt them to
Wickedness, who are glad when they do wickedly, and who may get leave of GOD to
kill them for it.

HEAVEN and Hell he set before them clearly and faithfully, as the Consequences
of their good or bad Behavior here.

9. WHEN the Children were capable of it, he would take them alone one by one;
and after many affectionate, loving, strong Charges unto them, to fear GOD, to
serve CHRIST and shun Sin; he would pray with them in his Study, and make them
the Witnesses of the Agonies and Strong Cries, with which he, on their behalf,
addressed the Throne of Grace.

10. HE found much Benefit, by a particular Method as of Catechizing the
Children, so of carrying on the Repetition of the public Sermons unto them.

THE Answers of the Cathechism he would explain, with Abundance of brief
Questions which make them to take in the whole meaning; and he found by this
Way that they did so.

AND when the Sermons were to be repeated, he chose to put every Truth into a
Question, to be Answered with Yes or No. In this way he would awaken the
Attention as well as enlighten the Understanding of his Children. And in this
way he would take the Opportunity to ask, Do you desire such or such a Grace of
God? And the like: And in this way, he had Opportunity to demand, and perhaps
to obtain their early and frequent (and why not sincere?) Consent unto the
glorious Articles of the New Covenant. He though it the Spirit of Grace might fall
upon them in this Action, and they might be seized by HIM and held as HIS
Temples through Eternal Ages. Blessed be GOD it was so with several of them.

THUS I have recited the usual Methods, which Mr. MATHER observed in bringing
up his Children: There are several other Things which were very praise worthy
in his Carriage toward Them, but not of that Consequence with those I have
written; and therefore I shall omit them.

SECT. 5. Miscellaneous Heads of private Conduct.
1. IT is a saying of GERSON'S, Qui been vivit semper orat, He that lives well,
prays without Ceasing. Mr. MATHER was one of those good Livers. He prayed
always, at least, Six times a Day every Day.

2. HE was a Gentleman of uncommon Dispatch and Activity, and yet was ever upon
good Devices; so that, though he was constantly doing Service, he was ever
enquiring N^l c^ede^^ actum dum quid superesset agendum.
How he might do more Good?

UPON DAVID'S Arm being able to break a Bow of Steel, AUSTIN'S Gloss is, that
his Intention of good Works was indefatigable Intentio bo^^^um Operum in e^
c^at inde^atigabilis.
. Although the literal was not; the Gloss was, fulfilled or found in Mr. MATHER.

3. HIS Conversation he endeavored to render extremely entertaining, and it
was so; for he produced such a variety of useful Discourse as made him welcome
wherever there was any Relish for Learning, Politeness and Ingenuity. He had
the Je ne scay qu^i of Conversation in Perfection. As for his Friends when in
Company with him, when his Speech dropped upon them, after his Words; they
spoke not again; they wa^^ed for him, as for the Rain, and they opened their
Mouth wide as for the latter Rain: If he laughed on them, they believed it not.
-- And as for his Enemies, -- even they confessed his Excellent and profitably
pleasing Conversation, and in Society with him they were filled with silent
Wonder. Happy the Conversation, and happy the sharers in it Faelix Conversatio,
in q^^ Inimici nulla^ reperiant occasion^m, (...) so^t^ in (...) DEI, Hierony^.
!

I shall here give you the Rules he observed in Conversing: They may be ranked
under three Heads.

First, HE would not affect Loquacity in his Discourses, but, on the contrary,
much Deliberation. The Gravity and Discretion, accompanying such a Caution, he
beheld as of greater Consequence to one in all Companies, than the Reputation
of Wit; which by a greater Volubility of Tongue might easily be acquired: And
besides he r^membred in many Words there wants not Sin.

Secondly, HE would studiously decline to utter any thing, that he foresaw
might be useless; and much more, every Thing that might be hurtful and sinful
to be uttered. It was his Ambition every where to speak usefully, and say only
those Things that one or other might be the wiser or better for.

Thirdly, HE would, with all the nice Contrivance imaginable, improve
Opportunities to say something or other, that might particularly set off some
Glories of his LORD: He would every where contrive, if it were possible, to let
fall some Sentence or other, by which high Tho'ts of CHRIST might be raised in
those that heard Him.

4. THINKING his Charitable Disbursements may most suitably be reserved for the
next Chapter; I shall only here give you his private Sentiments of
Charitableness in his own Words;

I am not unable with a little Study to write in seven Languages: I feast my
self with the Sweets of all the Sciences which the more polite Part of Mankind
ordinarily pretend unto. I am entertained with all kinds of Histories ancient
and modern. I am no stranger to the Curiosities, which by all sorts of Learning
are brought unto the curious. These Intellectual Pleasures are far beyond any
Sensual ones. -- Nevertheless, all this affords me not so much Delight as it
does, to relieve the Distresses of any one poor mean miserable Neighbor; and
much more, to do any extensive Service for the Redress of those Epidemical
Miseries under which Mankind in general is languishing, and to advance the
Kingdom of GOD in the World. -- His private Conduct was consonant with his
Sentiments.

5. IT was his watchful Desire and Study, never to maintain a personal Quarrel
with any Man breathing; but rather deny himself of his Humor, his Esteem, -- or
any Thing in the World. His Reason was, because no Man can manage a personal
Quarrel without losing abundance of precious Time, which may be laid out
infinitely better in the Service of CHRIST and his Church; besides a deal of
inevitable Sin, which will insinuate it self into every personal Quarrel, by
which one's internal Peace is broken. And further, since we have but a short
Time to live in the World, He though it it foolish to throw away any of it in
Squabbles.

6. CONSIDERING that for Men, even good Men to speak Evil one of another, is a
very evil Thing -- He though it it would be a considerable Service to seek the
Suppression of that Vice or any Vergencies to it in himself. Wherefore, after
Flights to his JESUS for Strength to Will and Perform, he made these
Resolutions.

THAT he would never speak falsely of any Man; and that if he spoke Evil of any
Man, it should be under these Limitations and Regulations.

First, THAT He would keep a Charity for the Person of whom he spoke, wishing
most heartily that all Good might be spoken of him; and he would from Charity
speak to those when with them; -- always thinking, Whether what he said might
be for the Benefit of the Hearers?

Secondly, IF He spoke what was Evil of any Person, he would carefully watch
over his Heart, that he did not utter it with Delight: He would manage it with
Brevity and Aversion, as a very ungrateful Subject.

Thirdly, WHEN he must, or was obliged to speak what is Evil of any Man, if he
knew of any Good that could be spoken of him, he would besure to balance the
Evil with the mention of the Good.

Fourthly, BEFORE he would speak Evil of a Man, he would consider whether he
should not first speak to him; and, be it how it will, he would ordinarily,
speak nothing, but what he should cheerfully and contentedly say in the Hearing
of the Man of whom he is talking.

AND, Fifthly, HE would aggravate nothing; and when he spoke of an Evil would
not make it worse than it was.

THESE Rules he conscientiously observed. -- Would to GOD, others were so
careful as to take a due Notice of them!

7. BECAUSE he did not love to be disturbed with tedious and impertinent
Visiters, and because his Friends (Amici Temporis Fures) might sometimes
unseasonably interrupt him, he wrote over his Study Door in Capitals, BE SHORT.
And yet, let him be ever so busy when a Friend came to see him, he threw all
by, He was perfectly easy, with pleasure communicated the Observations he had
lately met with, and was so very obliging that, although his Friends knew his
hurry and great Business, they knew not how to leave Him.

8. HE would rarely see a torn Leaf of a Bible in the Street, but would take it
up with some particular Mark of Respect; not knowing but he might find some
special Admonition. This he found a very profitable Practice.

9. WHEN he rode abroad, He would most commonly take some young Gentleman with
him, with whom he used to pray in private at their Lodging in Inns and
Gentlemen's Houses, and unto whom he would endeavor in all possible ways to
recommend Religion with the sweet and easy, but strong Charms of it.

10. WHEN he went into any considerable Towns, he would for the most part beg
Play-Days for the Boys; and, as a Condition for their being excused from
School, he would enjoin some Religious Task upon them.

11. IF he heard that any Person had done him wrong in Word or Deed, he would
seldom let him know that he had any Knowledge of it. The best Way he though it was
to forgive the wrong and bury it in Silence. For besides the Consideration due
to the internal Advantage reaped by such Christianity, there is this to be
considered; Such is the Malignity in the most of Men, that they will hate you
only because they know they have wronged you. They will, as far as they can,
justify the wrong they have done you; and because they imagine you owe them a
like wrong, they will bear a confirmed Spite to you. But he found the best way
was Patience and Silence; the Consequence of which has been, those who wronged
him became his best Friends afterward.

12. I was going to relate some other Rules of Practice, of Prudence, and also
to tell the Methods which he kept to, to preserve Health. But I remember he has
described his Practice in those Rules and Methods which he has mentioned at the
End of his MANU^^^TIO A^ MINITSERIUM, to which I refer you

13. I will conclude this Section and Chapter with an Account of two Books in
which he was writing constantly.

THE first was his Quotidiana (as he called it) or Commonplace Book; in which
he wrote along the remarkable Passages in any Author as he read him; but for
fear he should be at a loss in finding any Passage, entered as he found it, he
therefore numbered every Quotation, and at the End of his Book had an Index of
Names, Things, etc. so that he could presently have Recourse to the Sentences
he wanted.

THE other Book was his Diary; in which he kept an Account of the most
considerable Articles in which he had done his Duty, as well as those in which
He had been deficient.

THERE was a German one SEBASTIAN HEINRIC, who, not many Years ago, published
for the Course of one Year whatever he did, read or saw for that Year.

MR. MATHER'S Diary was not such a Medley: No! There was none but important
Matters entered into it. I will only take Notice of what I have collected in
observing one Day, and one Year of it.

I find in one of his Diaries an Account of the Transactions of one Day as
follows. This Day I performed the Duties of my general Calling, instructed the
Scholars under my Charge, underwent the Diversion of Meals and Company, with
whom I was a considerable while; I made a long Sermon and preached it; I spent
more than a little Time at the private Meeting, where I preached, and read over
KNOX'S Historical Relation of the Island of Ceylon.

IN the Observation of one whole Year of his Diary I took Notice of it, --

THAT he had preached above seventy two public Sermons, and many private ones;
perhaps near half as many.

THAT not one Day passed without some Contrivance to do Good invented and
registered; besides, I suppose, many never entered his Memorials.

THAT no one Day had passed without being able to say at Night, that some of
his Revenues, though small, had been dealt out to pious Uses.

THAT he had prepared and published about fourteen Books.

THAT he had kept sixty Fasts and twenty two Vigils.

A vast Variety of other Things I find recorded, which I shall omit: I bring
this only as a Specimen of his Diary, how it was replenished and what Pains he
took not to spend his Life in vain.

BUT notwithstanding He took such Care of spending his Time; yet, I often in
his Books find him complaining of his Deficiencies, etc. His first Years, He
calls, Time so misspent as to render it unworthy to be called a Life; after he
was grown in Years, he chose rather to say, such a Year of his Age than his
Life: On one of his Books I read, such a Year of a forfeited Life; on another
Year, of " my sinning against my precious REDEEMER": On another, "Alas of my
Unfruitfulness"! On a fourth, "A Year sweel'd away in Sin and Sloth". So that
it might be said of Him, as was said of one that was very exact in his Walk,
that his Life was perpetua Censura, a continual Censure of himself.

ALTHOUGH he thus complains of himself: it would be happy for the greatest Part
of the World, if they could give so good an Account of their Time and their
Talents. Blessed is such a wise and faithful Servant, who when his LORD comes,
is found so doing.

I might under this Chapter have given you a large Account of his Fasts, etc.
(which belong to this private Character and Conduct) but I had rather reserve
them, until the 6th Chapter obliges me to produce them.

CHAP. II. His public Appearances and signal Services; in the Ministry, and in
Concerns abstracted from. it.
SECT. 1. His Ministry, Preparation for it, Hindrances of it, Introduction into
it, and Methods in it, etc.
1. THERE was one Thing, which, from his Cradle, seemed to have a dark and sad
Aspect upon his Usefulness, and that was an uncommon Impediment in his Speech.
Several great Men were Stammerers before him, as a MOSES, a PAUL, a VIRGIL, and
a BOIL; and perhaps such great and good Companions in Adversity might render
it less tedious and more tolerable.

2. WHILE he was full of Concern for Relief from this troublesome Infirmity,
that good old Schoolmaster Mr. CORLET gave him a Visit on purpose to advise
Him; Sir, said he, I should be glad if you would oblige your self to a dilated
Deliberation in speaking; for as in Singing there is no one who Stammers, so by
prolonging your Pronunciation you will get an Habit of speaking without
Haesitation.

3. HERE I must inform my Reader, that because of his Stammering, he had
almost, for some Time, laid aside the Tho'ts of being a Minister, and had with
great Application studied Physic: But, upon prosecuting Mr. CORLET'S Advice,
and having procured with Divine Help an happy Delivery, he was persuaded by his
Friends to desert the Calling of a Physician; He did so: And after having
studied Theology rationally and without Prejudice, he prepared for public
Appearance: And because of the Calling he had relinquished, he did in his first
Sermon consider our blessed SAVIOR as the glorious Physician of Souls; choosing
those words for his first Text in Luke IV. 18. He has sent me to heal the
brokenhearted.

4. SERRARIUS thought, that none were called Rabbis, but such as were advanced
in Years and had received Imposition of Hands and taught some Scholars. But
although he was well read in this Subject, Mr. BASNA^E says, he was mistaken; for
NACHMANIDES was styled Rabbi at eighteen Years old, because he distinguished
himself at this green Age, and began to teach.

Mr. MATHER deserved the Title of Rabbi at the the same Age; for he then
distinguished himself and began to teach: For on Aug. 22. 1680. He first
preached for his Grandfather at Dorchester, the Sabbath after for his Father
at Boston, and the Sabbath succeeding was in his other Grand-father's Desk at
Boston.

5. THE NORTH CHURCH at Boston having Time after Time taken notice of his great
Gifts and Abilities, on February 23d. 1680. gave an unanimous Invitation to
him, to be an Assistant to his Father, and made him encouraging Offers for his
Support.

6. AFTER this, they had further Experience of his Ministerial Qualifications,
and on Jan. 8. 1682. unanimously chose him for their Pastor, and desired his
Ordination as such over them. He for some Time de^^i^ed any Compliance with
their repeated Calls, partly because they were not in extreme Want, having his
Father with them, who was hearty and strong; and partly from a modest Opinion,
and low Apprehension of himself and his Talents. CHRYSOSTOM says, that when he
read that Text, Heb. XIII. 17. They watch for your Souls, as they that must
give Account -- the words caused an Earthquake within him, and produced an holy
Trembling in his Soul. -- The same words, with continued Reflections on them,
made him fear and quake exceedingly, about entering into sacred Orders.

7. NEVERTHELESS, at last, he was prevailed with to accept the sacred Burden;
(Onus Angelicis Hum^^is formidandum!) and he was ordained May 13th 1684; when
Mr. ALLEN, Mr. WILLARD and his FATHER imposed Hands on him; with the good
Apostolical ELIOT, who gave him the Right Ha^^ of Fellowship. -- A truly
primitive Ordination! which he never once in his Life scrupled the Validity of!
After a curious Examination of most of the Fathers in the three first
Centuries, he was verily persuaded that every one of them had been perverted
and abused by designing Men to serve their own Ends, especially in the Instance
of Ordination: And yet granting that not one of them had been debauched, and
all of them were unanimous for Episcopal (or Diocesan) Ordination; I say
granting this; yet he firmly believed that the scriptural Ordination (excepting
the extraordinary Part) were such as his own; and ever looked upon the Choice
of the People as agreeable to the Rights of Mankind in general, of a Church in
particular, consonant with the sacred Scriptures, and though it no Ordination
regular, unless Election of the People preceded it. I write not here my own
Sentiments (I dare not pretend to write them,) but the Doctor's.

8. I shall here transcribe some Passages I find in his Diary, relating to the
Cure of Pride, a Sin, which all are subject unto, and more especially
Ministers, and which ought with Care and all Diligence to be avoided.

THE apprehension of the cursed PRIDE (the Sin of young Ministers) working in
my Heart, filled me with inexpressible Bitterness and Confusion before the
LORD. In my early Youth, even when others of my Age are playing in the Streets,
I preached unto very great Assemblies, and found strange Respects among the
People of GOD. I feared (and Thanks be to GOD, that He ever struck me with such
a Fear!) lest a Snare, and a Pit were by Satan prepared for such a Novice. I
resolved therefore that I would set apart a Day, to humble my self before GOD
for the PRIDE of my own Heart, and entreat that by HIS Grace I may be delivered
from that Sin and from all the dreadful Wrath, to which I may be by that Sin
exposed. I did so; And on this Day I examined my self by the Discoveries of
Pride, which I found given in some judicious Discourses on that Subject. But I
found especially two Respects, in which I feared I was guilty before GOD.

First, MY Applauding of my self in my Tho'ts, when I have done any thing at
all significant; prayed or preached with Enlargements; answered a Question
readily, presently, suitably. Proud Thot's I saw fly-blow'd my best
Performances.

Next, MY ambitious Affectation of Pre-eminence far above what could belong to
my Age or worth, and above others that were far more deserving than my self.

FOR my Humiliation I then wrote these Considerations:

1. WHAT is Pride but the very Image of Satan on the Soul? The more any Man has
of CHRIST in him, the more humble will he be, more low and vile in his own Eyes
and more empty of himself. When GOD renews HIS Image in us, He pulls down our
proud Thot's. It Is true, Pride is a most natural Sin; but Grace would overcome
that in a most special Manner and Measure. And then how little Grace have I?
How unlike HIM, that could say, I am lowly? Let me for this Cause, abhor my
self in Dust and Ashes! 2. DO I not by Pride offend GOD? it is a Breach of HIS
holy Command and He often declares HIS Abhorrence of it. HIS holy SPIRIT is
grieved by it: And how vehemently does the Scripture caution against all
Tendencies unto it? Shall I bear to think of offending that GOD who has been a
Father to me, and whom I have chosen and vowed to love and serve as my GOD and
Father? Or that SPIRIT, upon the sweet Influences of which my Soul does live,
Sealed unto the Day of Redemption. 3. IS not Pride a most unreasonable Folly
and Madness in me? Have I any just Occasion for glorying in my self? Do I any
Thing singular? Am not I in most Seize exceeded by most of my Calling and
Standing? But, Oh, let this be a Dagger to my Heart! Have I not a cursed Nature
in me? And has not the LORD heretofore left me unto some Follies, the sense of
which should make me walk softly and my Days? LORD, I am viler than a Beast
before Thee! Or, why should I seek Honor. It Is not seemly for such a Fool. Am I
fit for Service? Or am I not rather unsavory Salt fit for Nothing but the
Dunghill? What am I better than the least of all Saints? If in any external
Grandeurs I get above any of them, I am by them the more obnoxious to
Temptation and Sin an Wrath* Ly then in the Dust, O my Soul, before GOD. 4. HOW
dangerous, how destructive an Evil is this Pride? I provoke the GOD of Heaven,
to take away every one of those Idols, which in my fond Pride, I dote upon; and
if the LORD should now deprive me of my Capacities and Opportunities, where am
I but in an horrible Pit of Sorrows and Miseries? And let me remember, Pride
will sooner than any Thing drive away the good SPIRIT of GOD from the Heart of
a poor Creature. And if that should be my Fate, -- LORD, Have Mercy on me! --
What a Monument shall I be of thy direful Vengeance? O that the LORD would set
home these Tho'ts for my Humiliation!
BUT what shall I do for the Cure of this Disease?

IN the first and chief place, I would carry my distempered Heart unto the LORD
JESUS, and put it into the Hands of that alsufficient Physician for HIM to ture
it.

Secondly, I would be daily watchful against my Pride, and continually keep an
Eye upon my Heart, and check the least Beginnings and first Motions of this
Corruption.

Thirdly, I would study much the Nature, the Work and Aggravations of this
Evil, and the Excellency of the Grace contrary unto it.

IN one of my Supplications this Day, I thus expressed my self;

LORD, What shall I do for the Cure of this Disease my Pride? Blessed be thy
Name, Thou have showed me a Way, and bid me walk in it. Have I not heard Thee
saying to my sinful, stung and swollen Soul, Look unto ME and be saved! And
therefore by thy Grace I will do it. I have done it and have found, and to this
Day find, the Benefit of it. Why is it that I am not insensibly and incureably
forever carried away Captive by the Lust with which I am now warring? It Is
because I had put my Heart into the Hands of the faithful JESUS, and He it is
that has not suffered me to go on unconcerned about the Distemper of my Soul,
but has awakened me to seek Relief at HIS Hands, as I do this Day. -- And now
LORD, I come to HIM. He sees how I am laboring and heavy laden, but He has bid
me come. Does He not call for my Heart? But what kind of Heart? It is not
mentioned; but I am sure it is my Heart that is called for. Hence though my Heart
be a proud Heart, yet as long as it is mine, I am to bring it. And, O LORD, I
bring it because it is proud. But wherefore does He call for it? Is it not that
He may set up His Kingdom in it, fill it with His Graces, and manifest the
power of His rich Goodness in it forever? Then let Him take my Heart and make
it humble! It is easy with Him to do it. Though I cannot overcome this Pride, He
can: Oh, Let Him do it, I wait upon Him for it; I believe and am satisfied that
He will do it; I have not sought THY Face in vain.

THESE Passages were wrote presenty aftr Mr. MATHER was settled in the Ministry,
and therefore I bring them in here. The Section is indeed long; but, as I bless
GOD, it has been very profitable to Me, I hope it will be acceptable to the
pious Readers, especially of the sacred Order.

9. I forgot to inform my Reader, That Mr. MATHER before He was Settled, kept
many Days of Fasting and Prayer in order to it. And in one of those Days,
having declared unto GOD, That not expecting any temporal Advantage, but rather
Sorrow and Sickness, Obloquy and many Persecutions, he would out of Love to
HIM, undertake the Work before Him, feed a precious and numerous Flock of His:
He then promised these Things to his LORD;

THAT He would endeavor to be a faithful Pastor unto those over whom he should
be placed.

THAT He would endeavor to be humble under whatever Enlargements should be
vouchsafed unto him.

THAT if GOD should give him to build up HIS Church with an unspotted
Reputation, he would endeavor to be contented with whatever State should be
ordered for him in the World, though never so Poor and many other ways afflicted.

10. He was constant and unwearied in his public Ministry, when he was entered
into it. -- Sometimes he has preached a Sermon for eleven Days successively. I
need not at large write the Subjects of his Discourses, his Method of Studying
and Preaching, since he has given so true a Description of them in his
Manuductio ad Ministerium. Pago 90, to 98 and 102, to 105.

11. BUT however I will give my Reader his Rules of Preaching, since they are
short, since they were though it upon when he was Young, others may be the better
for them, and since this Book may come into their Hands who have not seen the
Doctor's Manuductio.

First, WHEN he was at a loss for a Text, he would make a Prayer to the Holy
SPIRIT if CHRIST for HIS Direction and Assistance, as well to find a Text for
him, as to handle it.

Secondly, BEFORE he would undertake to go over any larger Portion or Doctrine
of the Bible, which might require many Sermon, he would with more Solemn
Supplications address Heaven for necessary Succors.

Thirdly, HE would weigh well the Original Tongues, as well as the usual and
needful Commentaries, for a Scripture before he would preach upon it.

Fourthy, IN pitching on Subjects to be discoursed in his public Ministry,
especially more occasional ones, (for which he would reserve himself a Liberty
in what Course soever he was) He would ever have some Design of suiting and
serving the Edification of the Hearers; -- ever -- preach upon Design.

Fifthly, HE would not stand long upon one Text ordinarily, but study an
acceptable Variety: Nor would he use one way of treating every Text, but be
various in his Methods.

Sixthly, HE would be Scriptural in all his Exercises; and ordinarily dismiss
no Head, without some place of Scripture well adjusted to it.

Seventhly, HE would always endeavor to fill ^is Hour well (and he did so) and
^roud every Sermon as full of Matter as possible without Obscurity.

Eighthly, IN uttering his Sermons he was not for beginning too fast or too
loud.

Ninthly, HE did not make his Sentences or Periods too extended for the Writers
to take them readily, or for the Hearers readily and easily to have the sense
of them.

Tenthly, BEFORE he preached any Sermon he was desirous in a devout Meditation
to work every Head of it upon his Heart, until he turned it into a proper
Supplication.

Eleventhly, HE would have and use Notes in Preaching; but yet would not so
read his Notes, as in the least to take off the Vivacity of his Eye, his Voice,
his whole Action.

Twelfthly, HE would have much of CHRIST in his Ministry; (CHRIST who is All!)
As knowing that the Holy SPIRIT loves to glorify CHRIST; and if he did so too,
he should have much of the HOLY SPIRIT with him in his Ministry.

Thirteenthly, AND he was resolved to have great Care in his Ministry, lest at
all he should confound the Methods of GRACE; upon a due Stating and Owning of
which the Success of the Ministry does exceedingly depend.

Fourteenthly, HE ordinarily would conclude his Sermons with some agreeable
Text of Scripture, left with Life and Pungency to the Consideration of the
Hearers; He though it the Practice edifying.

12. IN this Section I shall produce several Designs of Christianity, which he
formed after his Investiture in the Sacred Calling.

First, THE Apostle's Advice to a Young Minister, Exercise thy self to
Godliness; he would think much upon it, read over some Discourses on the
Subject, and as he went along, employ his particular Ejaculations upon every
Article.

Secondly, HAVING met with on Observation, That the want of Mortification in a
Minister, procures a sad Unsuccessfulness to his Ministry; and that he might
not be a deplorable Instance of it, he resolved immediately to read over Dr.
OWEN'S Treatise of Mortification, (with others on the same Subject) and
endeavor to follow and apply the Direction in it.

Thirdly, HE took a Catalogue of all the Communicants belonging to his Church;
and in his Secret Prayers he resolved that he would go over the Catalogue by
Parcels at a Time upon his Kness and Pray for the most suitable Blessings, he
could think of, to be bestowed upon each Person by Name distinctly mentioned.

Fourthly, IN perusing his Sermons before he Preached them, he resolved to make
even that an Exercise of Devotion by endeavoring to fetch an agreeable
Ejaculation but of every Head and every Text produced in them.

Fifthly, HE had one Design which I will express in his own Words;

IT will cost me very bitter Toyls and Pains; yet perhaps I may be serviceable
in it: If I procure to my self an exact Account of those evil Humors, of which
the place were I live at any time in under the observable Dominion; and whereas
those Devils may be cast out by Fasting and Prayer set apart a Day still of
secret Prayer with Fasting for each of them; to deprecate my own Guiltiness in
them, and supplicate for such Effusions of the SPIRIT from on high, as my
redress, remove and banish such Distempers from the place.

13. BUT he did not think these Things sufficient. He though it it his Duty to
visit the Families belonging to his Church; taking one, and sometimes two
Afternoons in a Week for that Purpose.

HE sent befire-hand to the Families, that he intended at such a time to visit
them: And when he came, with as pungent and handsome Addresses, as possible, he
would treat every Person particularly about their Eternal Interests.

First, HE discoursed with the Elder People upon such Points as he though it most
proper for them.

AND especially charged them to maintain Family Prayer, obtained their Promises
for it if they had neglected it, and prayed with them that he might show them
how to pray, as well as to obtain their purposes for it.

HE likewise pressed upon them the Care of instructing their Children and
Servants in the Holy Religion we profess, and bringing them up for CHRIST.

IT any that he should have spoke with, were absent, he frequently lest a
Solemn Text or two of the Sacred Scripture, which he though it most agreeable for
them; desiring some present would remember him to them, and from him recommend
unto them that Oracle of GOD.

AND by the way at his Farewell to his Christian Friends and as a Conclusion of
his Visit, he would contrive to commend unto them, some^ suitable Text of
Scripture of which they might think when he was gone from them.

BUT I return; He having done with the Parents, then called for the Children
and Servants; and putting to them such Questions of the Catechism as he though it
fit, he would from the Answers make as lively Applications to them, as could
be, for engaging them to the Fear of GOD.

HE frequently got Promises from them relating to Secret Prayer, Reading the
Scriptures and Obedience to their Parents and Masters.

HE would often set before them the Proposals of the NewCovenant, after he had
first labored for their Conviction and Awakening: So they have full of Tears
expressly declared their Consenting to, and Accepting of, the Proposals of the
Covenant of Grace, which he distinctly set before them.

SOME of the lesser Folks' he would order to bring their Bibles to him, and
read unto him from thence three or four Verses, to which he turned them: He
would charm them to think on such Things, as he thence observed for their
Admonition, and never forget those faithful sayings of GOD.

HE would sometimes leave some awful Questions with them, which, he told them,
they should not Answer to him, but to themselves; As, What have I been doi^g
ever since I came into the World about the great Errand upon which GOD sent me
into the World? And If GOD should now call me out of the World, wh^t would
become of me throughout Eternal Ages? And Have I ever yet by Faith carried a
pe^i^^^ng Soul unto the LORD JESUS for b^th (...) Salvation.

MANY other such Methods he took for the Winning of Souls in this Discharge of
his Ministry: And he enjoyed a most wonderful Presence of GOD with him in this
undertaking; and seldom left a Family without Tears dropped by several in it.

HE could seldom dispatch more than four or five Families in an Afternoon, and
looked on this Work as laborious as any in all his Ministry. He sat a great
Value upon his Pastoral Visits; he not only did, but got Good in his
Conversation with all sorts of Persons and though it he never walked more in the
SPIRIT than thus walking to his Flock to serve and seek their best Interest. I
need not say any more about his Visits; his Memorial for Pastoral Visits is
published, which will give you some Account of his Conduct in them.

14. HIS Love to his Church and Congrega^ion was very flaming. To Exercise this
Love -- he was very desirous: and therefore he resolved to take the Bills, that
are put up in our Congregation, for Prayer or Praise, and present the
particular Cases there exhibited before the LORD in his Study, where he did
more particularly implore the Grace of GOD for each of them than he did or
could in the Public.

AND in pursuance of this Intention, (that is the Exercise of Love) he would
ask himself before his Evening Prayers, Who has in the foregoing Day shown me
any Kindness? And he would then particularly supplicate the GOD of Heaven that
he would bestow Spiritual and Eternal Favors on each of them that had
particularly obliged him.

15. HE would never let any of his Flock (or indeed any other) fairly come in
his way, but he would let fall some Word or other, that he designed and hoped
might prove serviceable some way to them.

16. HE was continually scattering Books of Piety into their Hands; and often
did it with this ^^vice Remember I am speaking to you all the (...) have this
Book before you! And so there was not a Day in the Year in which he was not
preaching to many of them. It is scarce imaginable how many good Books he
disposed of: He has given away above a Thousand in a Year.

17. IT was a Rule with him (and he begged of GOD to give him this Goodness,
Patience and Condescension) rather to suffer and bury in filence any manner of
Injuries and Abuses from Absurd People, than to manage any Contention with any
of them on any Occasion. Let the Matter and Issue of the Controversy be what it
will, he though it he should gain more in regard of his greatest Interest by
remitting his Right, than vigorously pursuing it.

AND in the Services of Christianity, If he made any Difference between those
that abused him, and those that valued him; it was in being more ready to serve
the former than the latter.

AND it was admirable to see how this Conduct would conquer the Follies and
Humors of unreasonable People.

18. HE was ever desirous of entertaining an high Opinion of the personal
Worth, Wisdom, Goodness and Accomplishments of many in the Flock, and the
unspeakable Worth of the Souls of all of them, and by this Opinion to be
quickened in his Studies for his Sermons, that they might be as able, and yet as
useful Composures as he could render them: And indeed they never had cause to
complain of his Discourses as jejun^ and unstudied.

19. HE endeavored with explicit Considerations that all the temporal Benefits
he enjoyed by the Salary which his People allowed him, might be answered and
vastly exceeded in the Spiritual Benefits of which his Ministry might make them
the Partakers. Their Salary fed him: he would therefore prepare rich and
heavenly and Angels Food for their Minds. It clothed him; he would therefore do
his best in showing them how to put on CHRIST, how to defend and adorn
themselves with the Garments of Salvation. It warmed him; and therefore he
would endeavor to speak things unto them, that should make their Hearts burn
within them and keep alive the Flame of Piety among them.

20. I mentioned a little while ago his concern for his Church, in his Prayers
-- I must add this one Instance of his Love to them; That he would ever now and
then set apart an whole Day, to supplicate the Favor of Heaven for them with
strict Fasting. And on each such Fast, although near Four Hundred belonged unto
his Church, he would pray for each of them by Name and be^eech the most
suitable Blessings for them.

21. A Lord Chancellor of England, who was also Archbishop of York said in his
latter days, That in his Time he had passed through more Posts of Office and
Honor than most Men in the World; but if he were sure that any one Soul had
been by his Means converted unto GOD and CHRIST and Holiness, it would give him
unspeakable more Satisfaction than all the Dignities that had been conferred
upon him. How happy then was Dr. MATHER, and how astonishing his Satisfaction!
For, as ^e had not been a Year a Minister before he had thirty Seals of his
Ministry h. e. thirty who declared unto the Church He was the Cause under GOD
of their Awakening and Conversion; Many, Many, (GOD knows how many) have been
by his Addresses to them either by Tongue or Pen since bro^t home to GOD. --
Many excellent Persons on their Deathbeds have often spoken unto him of what
GOD had by his Ministry done to them: He has often seen them with Rapture
triumphing over the Sting and Fear of Death, owning him as the Instrumental
Savior of their Souls from Death, confessing their Love to him and assuring
him of the Wondrous Glory waiting for him as well as them.

22. I know not how to leave this Section without inserting the Words I met
with in the private Papers of his pious Mother, which she wrote on 4 d. 2 m.
1714. (on which Day she died.)

I went through many Deaths in bearing Children, but those Deaths have proved the
Spiritual Life of many a Soul. GOD particularly so blessed my Elder Son, that I
have often blessed the LORD, that made me the Mother of such an eminent Servant
of GOD.

SECT. 2. His being concerned in Affairs abstracted from the Ministry; in
Instruction of Scholars, in public Affairs of Government, etc. with Accounts of
his extensive serviceableness.
1. IT may as well be bor't in, in this Place as any, That from Seventeen Years
old he had for more than Seven Years together the Charge of Scholars, and some
under his Tuition older than himself. These his Pupils he carried through the
Parts of Academic Learning; and by instructing them confirmed himself in many
Points of Literature. The Methods how he taught them the Hebrew Tongue; How he
heard their daily Recitation from the Originals of both Testaments; how he
composed Catechisms of the Several Arts for them; how he directed their
Declamations and Disputes -- might be related for somewhat of Curiosity in
them. But I will hint one thing which may be grateful to those who have the
Employment of Tutors. It Is this; He had many Contrivances that he might save
the Souls of the Young Men who were committed to his Charge. He therefore,
^^^des his Cares to check all Ebullitions of Sin in any of their Conversations,
did successively use to send for them, one by one, into his Study, and there in
the most moving, soft, obliging, and yet most solemn and lively manner
discourse with them about their own everlasting Interests; and he would then
bestow some good Books on them to further the Work of GOD and (...) Grace upon
their Spirits: And moreover, he made it his Custom, that in every Recitation he
would, from something or other occuring in it, make an Occas^^^ to let fall
some Sentence, which might have a tendency to promote the Fear of GOD in their
Souls, which Practice did sometimes cause him to exert his Wit and Readiness;
but it left a good Effect upon the Youths.

AND at length GOD gave him to see the Harvest of these his Labors; for several
of these Young Men have proved able and holy Preachers, and among the most
hopeful of the rising Generation. Mr. MATHER would often say, He would give all
he was worth in the World for those Measures of Grace and sense which he saw in
some that were once his Pupils.

2. I am here to mention his being concerned in State Affairs (a difficult
Section!) and I must assure my Reader that I am more at a loss what to do about
it than any one in the whole Book; for should I omit the Section I must be a
faulty Historian, to leave out what is so considerable; and if I should insert
it at length, write the ill Managements of others and the Warmth with which the
Doctor ever appeared for Truth and Honor as well as for his People and
Country; I say, should I record these Things in all their Circumstances, it
might provoke the Anger of a few Gentlemen and others. Now because it is my
desire that this History may be very unexceptionable, I shall treat of one or
two Things only, and write of the Rest in such a General Way as to give no one
any Offense.

I find my self obliged to mention one or two Affairs, particularly in which
Mr. MATHER was considered and distinguished himself.

MY Country is very sensible that in the Year 1688. (when one of the most
wicked of Kings was on the British Throne) ANDROS and his Crew were very
violent, illegal and arbitary in their Proceedings: I need not give any
Narrative of their Managements here, because there has been an Account of them
already given to the World.

WHILE these Roaring Lions and Ranging Bears were in the midst of their
Ravages; It was in the Month of April when we had News by the Edges concerning
a Descent made upon England by the Prince of Orange for the Rescue of the
Nations from Slavery and Popery; -- Then a Strange Disposition entered in the
Body of our People to assert our Liberties against the Arbitrary Rulers that
were fleecing them: But it was much feared by the more sensible Gentlemen at
Boston, that an unruly Company of Soldiers, who had newly deserted the Service
in which they had bin employed for the Eastern War, by the gathering of their
Friends to them to protect them from the Governor, who, they though it, intended
nothing but Ruin (...) them, would make a great Stir and produce a bloody
Revol^tion.

AND therefore the principal Gentlemen in Boston (...) with Mr. MATHER to
consult what was best to be done; and they all agreed, if possible, that they
would extinguish all Essays in our People to an Insurrection; but that if the
Country People to the Northward by any violent Motions pushed on the Matter so
far as to make a Revolution unavoidable, Then to prevent the Shedding of Blood
by an ungoverned Multitude, some of the Gentlemen present would appear in the
Head of what Action should be done; and a Declaration was prepared accordingly.

ON April 18. the People were so driving and furious, that unheaded they began
to seize our public Oppressors: upon which the Gentlemen aforesaid ^ound it
necessary to appear, that by their Authority among the People the unhappy
Tumults might (...) a little regulated. And through the Goodness of GOD, although
the whole Country were now in a most prodigious Ferment and Thousands of
exasperated People in Arms were come into Boston, yet there was no manner of
Outrage committed; only the public Robbers that had lorded it over Us were
confined. 'Twas then Mr. MATHER appeared -- He was the Instrument of preventing
the Excesses into which the Wrath of Man is too ready to run; He came and like
a NESTOR or ULISSES reasoned down the Passions of the Populace: had he lisped a
Syllable for it, perhaps the People would by a sudden Council of War have
tried, judged and hanged those ill Men, who would have treated him otherwise.
Nevertheless he set himself both publicly and privately to hinder the Peoples
proceeding any further than to reserve the Criminals for the Justice of the
English Parliament.

NOW the Persecution which was intended for Mr. MATHER was diverted; for on
that very Day that he was to be committed to half a Years Imprisonment, those
that would have wronged him were justly taken into Custody: And yet so generous
was he as not only to expose his Name but even his Life unto the Rage of the
Multitude for the saving of some that would have hurt him: Though he had no
Thanks for his Ingenuity.

THE Spirit which acted him in these Matters is expressed in a Sermon he
preached to the Convention of the Colony from 2 Chronicles. XV. 2. It was printed
under the Title of, The Way to Prosperity.

A few Days before this, the Inhabitants of Boston assembling together to choose
Representatives for that Convention and vote Instructions for them, it was
apprehended, that the different Persuasions of the People about the next Steps
to be taken for our Settlement would have produced a Fury near to Bloodshed;
and therefore Mr. MATHER was desired to be at their Meeting. The Meeting began
with dangerous and horrible Paroxysms, which when he saw, he upon it made an
affectionate and moving Speech to them, at which many fell into Tears and the
whole Body of the People present immediately united in the Methods of Peace Mr.
MATHER proposed unto them.

UPON, Discoursing with him of these Affairs he has told me, that he always
pressed Peace and Love and Submission unto a legal Government, though he suffered
from some tumultuous People, by doing so; and upon the whole, has asserted unto
me his Innocence and Freedom from all known Iniquity in that Time, but declared
his Resolution, from the View he had of the fickle Humors of the Populace that
he would choose to be concerned with them as little as possible for the future.
And so I dismiss this Head of the Revolution.

3. MY Country is also acquainted with the Confusions which they suffered by
the Witchcrafts in it. I shall here say a little of that Time of Temptation;
and write Mr. MATHER'S Sentiments, and Actions.

THE Summer of the Year 1692. was a very doleful Time unto the whole Country.
-- The Devils after a most pra^ternatural Manner by the dreadful Judgments of
Heaven took a Bodily Possession of many People in our Salem, and Places
adjacent; where the Houses of the poor People began to be filled with the Cries
of Persons tormented by Evil Spirits. There ^^em'd to be an execrable
Witchcraft in the Foundation of this Wondrous Affliction; many Persons of
diverse Characters being accused, apprehended, prosecuted upon the Visions of
the Afflicted.

Mr. MATHER, for his Part, was always afraid of proceeding to convict and
condemn any. Person as a Confederate with afflicting D^mons upon so feeble an
Evidence as a Spectral Representation. Accordingly he ever testified against it
both publicly and privately, and particularly, in his Letter to the Judges, he
besought them that they would by no means admit it; and when a considerable
Assembly of Ministers gave in their Advice about that Matter, he not only
concurred with the Advice but He drew it up.

NEVERTHELESS, on the other side, he saw in most of the Judges a charming
Instance of Prudence and Patience; and as he knew their exemplary Piety, so he
observed the Agony of Soul with which they sought the Direction of Heaven,
above most other of our People who were enchanted into a raging, railing and
un^easonable Disposition. For this Cause, though Mr. MATHER could not allow the
Principles some of the Judges had espoused; he could not however but speak
honorably of their Persons on all Occasions; and his Compassion upon the sight
of their Difficulties, which Compassion was raised by his Journeys to Salem the
chief Seat of these Diabolical Vexations, caused him still to go to the Place.
And merely for this Reason, some mad People in the Country (from whom one o^
two credulous Foreigners have dared to published the abusive Story) under a
Fascination of their Spirits equal to what our Evergumens had upon their
Bodies, reviled Mr. MATHER, (...) if he had bin the Doer of the hard Things
that were done in the Prosecution of the Witchcraft.

IN this evil Time Mr. MATHER offered at the Beginning that if the possessed
People might be scattered far asunder, he would singly provide for Six of them;
and he with some others would see whether without more bitter Methods, Prayer
with Fasting would not put an end unto these heavy Trials: But his Offer was
not accepted.

HOWEVER for a great Part of the Summer he did almost every Week spend a Day by
Himself in the Exercises of a secret FAST before the LORD. On these Days He
cried unto GOD not only for his own Preservation from the Malice and Power of
the Evil Angels, but also for a good Issue of the Calamities in which he had
permitted the Evil Angels to ensnare the miserable Country. He also besought
the LORD that he would enable him, prosper, direct and accept him in publishing
such Testimonies for HIM as were proper, and would be serviceable unto HIS
Interests on that Occasion.

AND that a right Use might be made of the prodigious Things which had been
happening among us, he now composed and published his Book entitled, The
Wonders of the invisible World; which was reprinted several Times in London: In
the Preface he speaks of, "the heartbreaking Excercises." He went through in
writing it. -- There was a certain Disbeliever of Witchcraft who wrote against
this Book; but as the Man is dead, his Book died long before him.

BUT having spoken ^no' of the more public Witchcraft; I think I will hale in
here an Account of a Witchcraft happening in one private Family at Boston two
or three Years before the general one.

'TWAS, I think, in the Year 1689. in the Winter, that several Children
belonging to a pious Family at the South End of Boston were horribly bewitched
and possessed.

MR. MATHAR though it it would be for the Glory of GOD, if he not only prayed with
as well as for the tortured Children; (...) ^ook an Account of the
extraordinary Sympt^^ (...) ^^ch attended them, with sufficient Attestations to
confound the Sadducism and Atheism of a debauched Age.

HE therefore did these Things; and that He might more effectually do them,
took one of the Sufferers to his own House. With a thousand strange Passages he
found himself entertained; the chief of which he afterward compiled into a
just History which is published under the Title of, Memorable Providence
relating to Witchcrafts and Possessions. The Things referring to Himself in
these Papers, he reports as of a third Persons; and with the Story He also
printed some Sermons preached on that Occasion. -- Mr. BAXTER BAXTER often
mentions this Book in his Book of the World of Spirits; and once in a Lecture
at Pinners-Hall quoted it, with an Invitation unto People to purchase it; unto
which end Mr. BAXTER procured the Reprinting of it at London with a kind
Preface of his own to it. -- This Book also has been flouted at and written
against as well as the former; to mention the Author's Names would be to show
them too much respect; their Writings never had Credit eno' among any Men of
Sense to deserve an Answer.

BUT I have now done with any Account of the Witchcraft, and Mr. MATHER'S
Serviceableness in the Time of it.

I shall not come lower down, and show what a share the Doctor had in the
Management of Civil Affairs, for fear of writing amiss. But Si Chart^ s^^a^t
quod been feceris -- Mercedem tuleris.

4. BUT however I may observe that, all along, wherever he saw our Governors
and Commanders taking any steps that he though it might be hurtful, he would freely
either by Word of Mouth or Writing tell them his Sentiments; and whenever he
was apprehensive of any Step that might be for our Benefit, he would speak his
Tho'ts to our Rulers, and give them his best Advice.

5. AND not only to our Rulers here; but unto those beyond Sea, who were
concerned for our Welfare, he manifested the same Freedom. There are several
Persons of Quality; I suppose, now living that are conscious of the Doctor's
Fidelity to his Country in writing on their behalf, when any Danger thr^^^ned
them, and when any Profit might acrue from his Writing. -- But here too I am
obliged to refrain from showing the Instances.

6. THERE will be no hurt in relating the several Societies he was related unto.

HE promoted and set on foot Societies for the Suppression of Disorders and for
doing Good; and he belonged to them.

IN the Year 1^^9. He projected a Society of Peacema^ers, (like what we read of
in Courland) whose Business it was to compose and prevent Differences, and
divert Lawsuits that might arise.

HE was one of the Commissioners for the Indian Affairs, whom he very much
excited and spirited to the Doing of what has bin done here. He has sometimes
got them to keep a Time of Prayer for that poor People; he preached a Sermon
unto them, which is printed, and called India Christiana; and at the end of it
there is an account of the Propagation of Religion as well in the Eastern as
the Western-Indies. He belonged to some other Societies in this Country which
it is needless to write of.

7. HE printed a Proposal for an Evangelical Treasury; the Design of which was
to advance a Fund for bearing the Expense of building Churches in destitute
Places, of distributing Books of Piety, of relieving poor Ministers etc. The
Doctor's Church and some others came into it, and it is to be ho^'d that so good
a Practice will prevail more and more.

8. HE it was that bro't up the happy Method of Inoculation of the Small Pox
among us; For 'twas he that first drew up an Account of this Method from
TIMONIUS and PILARINUS out of the Transactions of the Royal Society, and
recommended it to the Physicians of the Town.

9. BUT he did not think it sufficient to be useful and active at home: he was
for appearing publicly, and to the European World.

WHEN the Arian Controversy was warm, he could not refrain writing his American
Sentiments upon it.

WHEN he saw the Protestant Interest run low, he must publish his Just
Sentiments of the Protestant-Religion; and observing the cursed Persecution of
the Protestants, he could not but print his Suspiria Vin^torum, calling all,
that might serve GOD with Freedom to pray for the oppressed People of GOD.

10. THAT his Usefulness might reach beyond his Country, he learned the French
and Spanish Tongues, and in his Forty fifth Year conquered Iroquois Indian; in
each of which he has published Treatises for their Instruction.

11. I have told you before something of his Charity. I may here take notice
that he did not look upon a Seventh part of his Interest as eno' to be laid out
in pious uses. -- I need not tell my Reader how he procured the Benefactions of
others; nor, since an Account of it is printed, need I acquaint you, how that
he procured several Benefactions for the pious Foundations at Hall in the Lower
Saxony, for which he has been publicly thanked.

12. THE Ambition and Character of my Father's Life was Serviceableness. I
shall conclude this Section and Chapter by telling you, that this Question What
Good shall I do? was the Subject of his daily Tho'ts, even from his early
Youth; and besides his Custom to set apart now and then a time to devise Good,
he seldom came into any Company without explicit Consideration upon it, as I
think I hinted before. It would indeed have been but a loss of time in him, and
otherwise useless to record Thousands of designs to do Good which he contrived
in his Mind. But however he had a Method (and I will give you Recollection of
it) which he observed in carrying on this manner of Life and Purposing, and
which it will not be amiss for the World to know sully: And however there may
be some private Circumstances in what I write, yet, because the greatest Part
have some Reference to the public, I though it it would be most proper to insert
his Method here, and to sum up this Chapter with it.

HE found that he could every Morning redeem the Time, while he was dressing
himself; by taking his grand Question into Consideration, What Good may I do;
Accordingly the Week was divided by him into as many Subjects of Consideration
as there be Days in the Week; and the Result of his Tho'ts on each of them, he
noted down as soon as he came into his Study in his Book of Hints for things to
be spoke or done; but with such very brief Hints that they only served to
preserve in his own Mind the Remembrance of his Purposes, until he should have
Opportunity to prosecute them.

I shall now recite in order his Morning Questions: but you may not imagine
that I shall or can transcribe the Multitudes of Answers to each Question upon
which he though it. However to illustrate the Manner and Process of his Operation
upon it, I may insert a few brief Hints of his; from which we may form an Idea
how to proceed upon such a Question, when We shall have i^ lying before us.

HIS Question for the SABBATH Morning constantly was,

WHAT shall I do as a Pastor of a Church for the Good of the Flock under my
Charge?

HERE he ranked the People of the Flock into several Classes, distinctly
considering, what they were, and what was to be done for them. He considered
what Subjects were most seasonable and agreeable to be handled in his Sermons;
what would most suit, and best serve each of the Classes. He considered how he
might make his Prayers as well as his Sermons leave good and strong Impressions
on the Auditory. He entreated the Neighbors, associated for Exercised of
Religion to send their Advice, what Things they might want or wish to hear
treated on, and he accommodated them. He considered how to make his public
Ministry more lively; useful and acceptable. He considered, who were to be
privately addressed with his Visits, and on what Intentions. He considered how
he might visit the Schools unto the best Advantage, particularly some Charity
Schools; which he procured to be crected. He considered how he might carry on
Evangelical Designs in concert with the Physicians in the Neighborhood; whom
he particularly desired; that they would let him know the Necessities of the
Sick, if he were ignorant of them, and unto whom he communicated rich Notions
and Medicines which in his Reading he had observed. Many more such Things he
though it upon.

ALTHOUGH I spoke something before of it; yet I will here again take particular
Notice of one Thing among his Purposes and Practices, because it belongs to
this Head of Considerations.

HE obliged himself unto this Method in Studying a Sermon; on every Paragraph
he made a Pause, and endeavored with Acknowledgments and Ejaculations to
Heaven, and with Self-Examinations to feel some holy Impressions of the Truths
in that Paragraph on his own Soul before he went any further. By means of this,
the Seven Hours which he usually took to Pen a Sermon, proved so many Hours of
Devotion with Him. The Day in which he made a Sermon, le^t just such a Flavor
on his Mind, as a Day of Prayer used to do. When he came to Preach a Sermon so
studied, he could do it with more Liberty and Assurance; and he though it the
Truths thus prepared would come with a more sensible Warmth and Life upon the
Auditory.

BUT I proceed;

HIS Question for MONDAY Morning was, What shall I do in my Family, and for the
Good of it?

HERE he considered himself as an Husband, as a Father and as a Master. He
would desire his Consort to think, what Proposals there were that She would
make to him in her Service. He projected how his Prayers with her in his Study
might be very much for her Service. He chose Books to be read by her that might
be so. He contrived how to mention some instructive thing at going to Sleep,
and Rising from it.

HE considered what Points of Education were still wanting in any of his
Children, and pursued them in the most proper Ways. I told you before, he
caused them to read and write such things as he found out for their best
Advantage, and most suitable Entertainment. He took each of them alone
successively on the Saturday Evenings, and, having obtained a knowledge of
their interior State, and the declared Resolutions of their Souls for early
Piety, he prayed with them. He caused some of them to compose Prayers and bring
them to him in writing, that he might see their Temper and Progress in
Religion. He obliged them to retire and ponder upon that Question, What should
I wish to have done, if I were now a dying? And he would oblige them to report
unto him their own Answer to the Question, of which he took Advantage to
inculcate the Lessons of Godliness on them.

HE considered how to drop useful Admonitions on his Servants, as they were
waiting on him; if the Action afforded any Time for it. He provided for their
Instruction in every thing that he supposed might be for their Good. He put
such Treatises into their Hands, as might be most profitable unto them in the
Perusal. And as a sort of Crumbs falling from the Table of his Servants, he
hired a Woman to keep a School, in which the Sable Sons of Ethiopia might every
Evening learn to read and be taught their Ca^^^hism; and he himself bore the
whole Expense of this Charity (...), every Week paying the Mistress her Wages.

TWO were his Questions for TUESDAY Morning.

First, WHAT shall I do for my Relatives abroad? He took a Catalogue, which
began with his Parents, and extended as far as the Children of his Cousin
Germans. With the help of this Catalogue, he propounded that he would at proper
times pray for each of them distinctly by Name. And that every Week he would
single out one of them to consider, What Good may I do for them? Or in what
Instance may they be the better for me? And, that he might address every one of
them successively with faithful Admonitions, concerning their interior and
eternal Interests, either by speaking to them personally, or by Writing to
them, or by putting Books of Piety into their Hands; he propounded in this way
to glorify our blessed SAVIOR, and endeavor a Conformity to him, who even on
his Cross took peculiar Care of one that was nearly related unto him. But he
did not confine these Essays of Good unto his Relatives within the Limits of
his Catalogue: No! Heh made them reach as far as ever he could find out
Opportunities. I need not any further explain this Article; only in one
Instance.

WHEN his Father was become aged and in a continual and desirous Expectation of
his call out of this World, though he was in a good State of Health, Strength and
Vigor; he resolved that every Interview he had with him (which was almost every
Day) should have in it something or other referring to the Heavenly World, and
assist their mutual Preparation for it* not knowing but it might be the last
Time of their Conferring together in this.

BUT then Secondly; When such an Occasion for it has occurred, he intermitted
the former Question, and was as much concerned for his Enemies (whom GOD made
Instruments of Good unto him) as for his Relatives. He therefore enquired, What
Good shall I do for my Personal Enemies; and how shall I overcome Evil with
Good?

HIS public Circumstances, he Faithfulness in the Discharge of his Duty, the
Power of Satan over the Minds of many People and the Envy of some ill Spirits
at his Improvement and Acceptance procured him a Number of personal Enemies, or
at least of such as treated him injuriously and abusively. Each of those
Persons, as far as he could come to the Knowledge of them, he would set himself
distinctly to consider, What good Offices he might do for them? Besure,
accordingly, he prayed for each of them by Name, and he would say, as I
remember I have read in Mr. BURKIT'S Life, some Persons had never had a share
in my Prayers but for the Injuries they have done me page ^4.
. And if he could perceive or invent any other Opportunity to do them Good, he
would do it; though many Times he has done it so, that they knew not whence it
came. He was very fond of being able to say, That he knew not of any Person in
the World, that had done him an ill Office, but he had done him a good one for
it; and he left off the Alternation of this Question, till there might recur
Opportunities for his Tho'ts upon it.

HIS Question for WEDNESDAY Morning was, What shall I do for the Churches of
the LORD, and the more general Interest of Religion in the World?

HERE he considered, what Proposals to make unto other Ministers of his
Acquaintance. He considered what Books he might compose and publish to advance
the Kingdom of his SAVIOR. He considered, how to diffuse and disperse the
Engines of Christian Knowledge and Virtue unto distant Places. He had his many
Correspondencies, (of which more by and by) but he would make them all
subservient to his great Design. His endeavors to serve the general Interest of
Religion, have reached unto each of the three Kingdoms. They have extended unto
several other Natitions of Europe. They have visited all the English
Plantations in America; and particularly every Town of the New-English
Colonies, to which he was under special Obligations. Negroes and Indians,
Nations of them as well as others, have been reached by them: Nor has the
Jewish Nation been unconsidered, nor the Greek Churches. Thus extensively
generous was he, that I cannot help using Sir JOHN DENHAM's fine Character of
his Thames Vid. Denham's Co^^e^'s H^ll.
, and applying it unto the Doctor;

Thus Godlike his unwearied Bounty flows;
First loves to do, then loves the Good He does.
Nor are these Blessings to his Banks confined;
But free and common as the Sea and Wind.
BUT I come to THURSDAY Morning: His Question for that was, What Good may I do
in the several Societies to which I am related?

HE was related to above twenty Societies of a Religious Character and
Intention. He must have his Times to Visit every one of these, always to do
something in them and for them. He kept a watchful Eye over them, and would as
far as possible make them become Engines of Good in the Land.

SOME of the Societies which he cherished as well as produced, were a sort of
Reforming Societies, or Societies for the Suppression of Disorders. I have
spoke of them before, but will now give a more particular Account of them. The
Doctor contrived and proposed, that the other Societies of Religion to which he
belonged might, as far as they could, bear their part in pursuing the Design of
these Reformers. But for these, he endeavored generally every Week to be
present with them; and ever to say something that might be both for their
Direction and Encouragement. He drew up certain Points of Consideration, to be
with due Pauses read in the Societi^s every time they met, for any to offer
what Proposal he pleased upon any of the Points at the Reading of it. I will
here transcribe those Points of Consideration; and we may easily guess, that
they will supply one with Matters to which one may be, not a little,
serviceable.

1. IS there any remarkable Disorder in the Place, that requires our endeavor
for the Suppression of it; and in what fair, likely way we may endeavor it?

2. IS there any particular Person whose disorderly Behavior may be so
scandalous and so notorious that we may do well to ^end unto the said Person
our charitable Admonitions? Or are there any contending Persons whom we should
admonish, to quench their Contentious.

3. IS there any special Service to the Interests of Religion, which we may
conveniently disire our Ministers to take Notice of?

4. IS there any thing we may do well to mention unto the Justices for the
further promoting good Order?

5. IS there any sort of Officers among us to such a Degree unmindful of their
Duty, that we may do well to mind them of it?

6. CAN any further Methods be devised that Ignoran^^ and Wickedness may be
chased from our People in general, and that Household Piety in particular may
flourish among them?

7. DOES there appear any Instance of Oppression o^ Fraudulence in the Dealings
of any sort of People, that may call for our Essays to get it rectified?

8. IS there any Matter to be humbly moved unto the Legislative Power to be
enacted into a Law for public Benefit?

9. DO we know of any Person languishing under sore and sad Affliction; and is
there any thing we may do for the Succor of such an afflicted Neighbor?

10. HAS any Person any Proposal to make for our own further Advantage and
Assistance, that we our selves may be in a probable and regular Capacity to
pursue the Intentions before us?

THUS I have taken the Liberty to recite their Points of Consideration, in
hopes that the publishing of them may be very serviceable.

THE Doctor started numberless Things in the Societies upon these Points. Their
Registers I suppose, are filled with them. I shall only add, concerning these
Societies, that once a Year they used all to meet together in one Place, and
have a Day of Prayer, in which they humbled themselves for doing so little
Good; and besought the Pardon of their Unfruitfulness through the Blood of the
great Sacrifice; and implored the Blessing of Heaven on the Essays to do Good
which they had made, with the Counsel and Conduct of Heaven for their further
Essays, and such Influences of Heaven as might bring about those Reformations,
which it was not in their Power to accomplish. On these Days the Doctor, with
another Minister carried on the Exercises.

THIS was his Method on Thursday Mornings: But at length he found it expedient
to change his Question; and He made this his alternate one; Is there any
particular Person able to do the Good, which lies out of my more immediate
Reach, to whom I may offer some good Proposal?

BY answering this Question, he made his Conversation still more useful. Thus
he was often a Doer of Good at the Second Hand, and often had the Pleasure not
to be known to have any hand at all in what was done.

THE Question for FRIDAY Morn was constantly this; What special Subjects of
Affliction, and Objects of Compassion, may I take under my particular Care; and
what shall I do for them?

HERE he took a Catalogue of the Poor in his numerous Flock; but extended his
Care further than so, wherever he saw any miserable. He minded also, who wanted
Employment; He took notice of those under peculiar Exercises; and was very
tho'tful, what Souls were by particular Addresses, to be pulled as Brands out
of the Burning, because of their being abandoned to flaming Wickedness? He
constantly fingled out one or other of these to be on this Morning considered.

I shall only add one thing more upon this Head: He considered, that though the
Wind will not fill the Hungry, yet it will turn the Mill, that will grind the
Corn to fill the hungry. And therefore, having his List of Miserables commonly
with him, he very often in Company would make it a Subject of the Conversation,
What shall be done for such or such an ^ne in my List? And thus, besides the
innumerable Kindnesses which he had himself more immediately done for them, he
procured multitudes of Kindnesses from others; and the first Spring in the
Motion has been unknown to them. Very much of the Spirit and Pleasure of his
Life was in such things as these. And I may tell my Reader, what I gave him to
understand before, that he did not ordinarily let one Day in a Year pass him,
without something expended on pious Uses, besides his other continual
Kindnesses to afflicted People.

AND at length I ^trive to his Question for SATURDAY Morning. I may well call
it his, for it was about the Concerns of his own Soul.

THE Question was; What more have I to do for the Interest of GOD in my own
Heart and Life?

I shall a little here illustrate his way of Thinking upon this Question.

HE would set himself to consider the more special Sins of his Youth; and what
more special Service he should do for the Kingdom of GOD, in the greatest
Contrariety to his former Miscarriages.

HE set himself then to consider the Reproaches he had met with; and upon this,
what Services he should be awakened by them to do for the Kingdom of GOD.

HE considered, how he was favored with surprising and uncommon Opportunities
to publish many Books of Piety; and of what vast Concernment it was, that he
should take effectual Care his own Books did not prove at last his
Condemnation, by his failing in those Seize in Religion, which he
commended unto others. Wherefore (with Prayers to be delivered from this) he
would sometimes on a Lord's Day Evening read over his own Books of Devotion,
and work them over again upon his Heart, until his own Soul was exquisitely
conformed unto them.

HE resolved, that whatever bodily Infirmities he might labor under, (or that
he could call to mind he had been visited with) he would make them the
Occasions and Incentives of some agreeable Dispositions in his Soul.

THUS I have given you a brief Specimen of his answering the last Question: I
have been the more brief here; because a fuller Answer will be given to it in
the sixth Chapter of this Book, where I shall treat of his Christian Life at
large.

CHAP. III. His Experiences, and Deliverances from Temptations. Dangers and
Sickness; together with his Deliverances from Evil Tongues and P^ns; and his
Carriage and Resolutions when troubled with them.
1. AMONG the three Things which constitute a finis^'d Divine, Temptation is
one; and none must expect to be rery considerable without them. Mr. MATHER had
his share of them.

HE was never much tempted to question the Existence and Providence of the
DEITY: If ever he was at all, he rejected the tho'ts with the utmost
Detestation and Abhorrence.

WHENEVER he was tempted to any evil Frame of Soul, or any wrong Action, his
constant Course was to cry out, O LORD I beseech THEE, Deliver my Soul! and he
endeavored to form such Tho'ts as should be reverse, to those infused or
excited by the Tempter, as well as to act contrary and diametrically opposite
to what he was tempted to. Thus he resi^ed the Devil until he fled from him: He
though it, that Oracle in 1 Cor. xv. 58. was Answer enough for any Temptation.

2. I will relate one or two Instances of the Divine Appearance to keep him
from Destruction, when in very great Danger.

IN his 36th Year he received a Remarkable Deliverance. For, Riding over a
Bridge one of the Poles on it, that was rotten, broke, and his Horse broke
through and sunk down to his Breast. Mr. MATHER chose rather to keep the Saddle
than go off into the River, and the Horse to the Astonishment of the Company
rose again (tearing off his Shoe in Rising) and leaped over with Mr. MATHER
safe upon him. How happily do all Creatures serve us, while we are serving
their and our LORD!

I shall relate but one notable Deliverance more: When the Squadron arrived
from the West Indies, on Board of which there was a considerable Army returned
from a fruitless Expedition there; Mr. MATHER was desired by many of the
Officers to give them a Sermon on a certain Sabbath upon an Island where they
put ashore to air themselves. He rashly undertook it, but while he was in his
Excellency's Barge, he was taken so very Sick that his Friends must needs carry
him back again. As soon as he came Home he was well: The Admiral afterward
told him, it was well he went no further; for the Army had newly suffered a
great Desolation by a Sickness more infectious and destructive than the Plague
it self: And had he gone and conversed among such an infectious Company, it
would probably have cost him his Life, as it proved mortal to many of his
Neighbors, who were so hardy as to go down among them.

3. BUT having mentioed his being kept from illness, I may now very properly
add a Section of his being visited with Sickness, his Thot's under it, his
Deliverance from it, with the grateful Sentiments of his Heart upon being kept
from sundry Diseases.

SOMETIMES, especially when a Young Man, he was troubled with tormenting Pains
in his Teeth and Jaws; which Pains made him lose more Time than he was willing
to spare, and which produced many a sad Hour to him in his Pilgrimage. In these
Pains he would set himself, as well as he could, to try his Ways.

HE considered whether or no, he had not sinned with his Teeth? How? By sinful
and excessive Eating: And by Evil Speeches; for there are Literae Dentales used
in them. At last by a course of Washing behind his Ears and on the Top of his
Head with Cold Water, he obtainted a Deliverance from the uneasinesses.

BY Reason of his Sedentary Life, great Study and little Exercise, he was when
in Years much afflicted and enfeebled with Sickness at his Stomach, a palled
and pained Stomach. From hence he must awaken himself to bewail his want of a
Stomach for the Service of GOD, and Meditations on his SAVIOR; he must mourn
for his not having an Appetite for the best Objects and Actions; which he though it
he had not duly relished: The Offenses of his Stomach in the Intemperance of
the Table he though it also to be bewailed; he must beg the Pardon of his
Miscarriages through the Blood of the great Sacrifice, and beg Grace to carry it
better. Thus he fetched Good out of Evil; and thus Evil worked together for his
Good.

THE last Thing I shall mention in this Section is his pious Tho'ts upon being
delivered from Sickness in General, and five Diseases in particular.

HE was ever desirous, to be greatly affected with Dispositions of agreeable
Gratitude unto the GOD of his Health; and by the Health with which he was
favored to be awakened unto such Acknowledgments of GOD and such Resolutions
of Piety, as he though it were most emphatically expected from him. Wherefore when
he visited the Sick, he would bless the LORD for his own Freedom from their
Diseases; and would think, what moral Diseases and Disorders he had analogous
to them, against which he should be watchful; and unto what Graces and Actions
he should by the Goodness of his SAVIOR be animated, and he would first offer
his Prayers and them employ his Cares for the obtaining of them.

THERE are particularly five Diseases; his Deliverance from each of which, he
improved in a way of exceeding Thankfulness unto the LORD his Healer. And being
delivered from them, he would on the occasion glorify his GOD after this
manner. Since he was not lying under the living Death of a Palsy, he would be
very zealous and active in the Service of GOD. Since he was not under
Corrosions of a Cancer, he would have all Tendencies to Envy extinguished in
his Soul, and a perpetual Joy at the Prosperity of his Neighbor flourishing in
him. Since he had not the Tortures of the Gout, his Feet should cheerfully
carry him to the afflicted, with Comfortable Words, and unto the Congregation
of the Faithful; While his Hands should not be idle in writing for GOD, and in
distributing to the Poor. Since the Stone had not laid him on the Rack, he
would ^e full of tender Compassion to all the Miserable. And since he was not
wasting with a Consumption, he would beware of Lea^ness in the Soul, and pining
away in Iniquity. Thus he learned Obedience by the things which he suffered not.

4. I never observed among Pagan Writers a better description in so few Words
of a good Man, resolute in Virtue, even while he is reproached for it, than
that of RUTILIUS, RUTILII Virtus and Innocentia lateret, nisi accepisset
Injuriam; Dum viciatur effulsit Seneca Epist. 79.
. The very same may be said concerning Dr. MATHER, in the midst of the base
Usage he met with from the Tongues and Pens of several.

MY excellent Uncle of Witney in Oxfordshire, in his Letter about Temptations,
observes, that Ministers, who meet with abuses from sorry and scoundrel People,
have cause to look on themselves as humbled on the Account of their having the
Egyptian Plague of Lice upon them. If so, then the Doctor might have Cause for
Humiliation on the same Account; having perhaps the Iinsults of contemptible
People, the Assaults of those insignificant Lice, more than any Man in
New England. These troublesome but diminutive Creatures he scorned to concern
himself with, only to pity them and pray for them.

HOWEVER GOD appeared so for him, that several of them have at last been bro't
^o confess, against their Will almost, what superior Excellency there was in
him.

I will here for some Causes insert one Passage; (though there were several in
the Doctor's Life of the same Importance) It Is this;

IN the Year 1704. October. 10. there came several People to the Doctor very late
at Night, telling him, there was a Man in the Town lay a dying, but could not
be satisfied unless he saw him before he died. The Man was noted for his
wickedness. His Name was Goerge Fielding.


WHEN the Doctor came to him (who wondered at him that he would so readily do
it) he told him to this Purpose That he had been a very profane Person; that he
had given himself a great Liberty to abuse good Men; but had abused no Man in
the World so much as Doctor MATHER, and that he could not go out of the World
without confessing it, bewailing it unto him, and beseeching him to pardon it.
The Doctor asked him, if he had received any particular Prejudice, or ever had
been informed or could have pretended any particular Matter of Fact, upon which
his Abuses might have been established? He gave him to understand, that There
was nothing of that, but all was downright Malignity; for he took him to be a
Man that did more Good than others, and that was all the Reason why he had
vilified him more than other Men.

THE Doctor, after his well known mild Way, told the Man, That there was no
Occasion for any Pardon because of his Speaking diminutively of him; for, says
he, you may speak so of me, and do me no wrong. But, continued he, for your
speaking injuriously, falsely, calumniously of me, it was indeed a Fault; yet,
as he would forgive it without his asking for it, had it been ten hundred times
more than it was, he would join with him in crying to GOD for the Forgiveness
of that, and every Thing else wherein he had done amiss.' He did so. The Man
was full of Affection to him, kept continually crying for him to be with him
the next Day in the Forenoon, and he died in the Afternoon. -- And perhaps
every Man who ever reproached him, if he were to place himself in the
Circumstances of a dying Man would alter his Opinion and change his Tone.

I have said of his meaner Reproaches: But, could one think it, the Doctor's
distinguishing Piety and Usefulness procured him some Enemies among those who
might otherwise pass for Men of Sense and Credit. Such would sometimes speak
disrespectfully of him; and now and then a ZOI^^S would vent his Spite,
foam^ous his Malice and Shame; while he instead of returning an Answer when
advised to it, chose rather to publish such Treatises as were lasting
Testimonies of his Religion and Charity.

THERE were some who also wret^ against him; but against all their Calumnies,
as St. IGNATIUS said to POLYCARP, he stood steady, and fast as a beaten Anvil.

SOMETIMES they would endite Letters full of g^^veling Malice, and send them
unto him: He received them without Emotion of Soul, and tied them up till they
made a large Bundle, on the out side of which he wrote, Libels? Father, forgive
them!

AND some have published Books full of Lies and Inve^tives against him: But, as
the Authors were but little regarded, the Books were scarce ever looked in. The
Doctor took no other Satisfaction of them, but just to write in the beginning
of the Books: Job XXXI. 35, 36. -- My Desire is -- that ^ine Adversary had
written a Book: Surely I would take is on my Shoulder and bind it as a Crown to
me. He though it it not worth his while to write against them, or rather for
himself; but chose once for all to give the Wo^ld, his Right ^a^ to shak^ off a
^iper*

I know not here how to use more significant Expressions than those used by Mr.
BAXTER in his dying Thot's, Page 227, ^^8.
concerning such as had been Angry with him, and could not endure him to answer
them, and vindicate his own Innocence; I say, I know not how to use better
Expressions of Dr. MATHER with respect to his Enemies, than these, -- That '
all of them together were never able to fasten their Accusations, and procure
any common Belief; nor to bring him under designed Contempt; much less to break
his Comforts, Encouragements and Labors.

I shall speak of but one thing more, and conclude this Chapter with it. The
Doctor was a firm Friend to his Country; and by Consequence must be hated by
the Enemies of it, as he was: For I suppose there was not one Enemy of our
Country but what pro^ess'd open Emnity to Him Quonam (...) meo, P. C. Fieri
dicam, ut nemo hi^ Annis viginti R^^pub. Hostis fuerit, qui non Bellu^ ^odem
Tempo^^ mi^^ quoque indixerit. Ciceron. Philip. Sec^nd.
for a great number of Years, perhaps the greatest part fo his Life.

AND therefore they were glad of all Opportunities which they might improve for
their Advantage against him; and were particularly pleased when they could meet
with any private Letters from others to him, as well as from him to others,
which some were so disingenuous as to expose: They were never able to bring
about their Designs: The Doctor was high above their reach.

BUT because the showing of private Letters is a frequent Practice, though a very
barbarous and ungentlemanly one, I will take the Liberty to transcribe for the
use of the Learned, the Words of CICERO, in Marc. Anton. Philippic. 2.

At etiam Lit^ras quas me sibi misisse diceret recitavit Homo, et humanitatis
expers, e^ vitae communis ignarus. Quis enim un^uam, qui Paulum mode benorum
Consuetudin^m noss^t, Literas ad se ab Amico missas, offensione aliqua
interposita, in medium protulit, palamque recitavit? Quid hoc est aliud, quam
tollere e Vita Vitae Societatem? Tollere Amicorum Colloquia absentium? Quam
multa Joca solent esse in Epistolis, quae prolata si si^t inepta esse
videantur? Quam multa seria, neque tamen u^lo modo divulganda?

-- At ego, non nego; teque in isto ipso convinc^ non Inhumanitatis solum, sed
etiam Amentiae. Quod enim Verbum in istis Literis est, non plenum Humaniratis,
Officii, Benevolentiae? Omne autem Crimen tu^^ est, quod de te in his Literis
non male existime^; quod scribam tanquam ad Civem, tanquam ad bonum Virum, non
tanquam ad Sceleratum et Latronem. At ego tuas Literas etsi jure poteram a te
lacessitus, tamen, non proferam.

CHAP. IV. An Account of his various Writings, more particularly of some that
he has Printed, and of others that remain in Manuscript.
THE Number of the Books, which he printed, is three hundred eighty and two;
and and yet, as one of the Greek Poets says of him that acts with GOD on his
side, he wrote them, as he did all Things with Ease. -- On the outside of the
Catalogue of his Works, which I shall give you at the End of this Book, he
wrote that Text for his further Excitation and Encouragement, Joh. xv. 8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit: And upon looking over
the Catalog^^ I could not help putting these two Lines at the End of it, in
which I acknowledge there is more Truth than Wit: Quam numerare Dies Sol dat
mortalibus Anno,
Plures perdectos edidit ille Libros.


2. BEFORE I speak of one particular Book, I shall make a general Observation
concerning the Doctor's Writings. To prepare the way to the Remark, let me tell
you, That Dr. MATHER'S quick Dispatch in Reading was well known to all; he
would ride Post through an Author, Cur^u^: pedum praevertere Ventos; and yet,
which was more surprising, he always remembered the most observable Things he
read, was Master of them and able to produce them.

MY general Remark therefore concerning most of the Doctor's Writings except
his practical ones, is, That we need not wonder to ^^nd in his Books so many
learned Allusions and References; for it is next to impossible, that a Man
should keep from writing learnedly, and as if he were acquainted with Author's
and their Sentiments, when his Mind is stored with their various Ideas and
Images, and he is a complete Owner of them.

THERE are indeed a Set of Witlings, who for Fear of Pedantry, and hurting a
Period, would not quote a Greek or Latin Sentence, however weighty and pregnant
it may be; but, instead of the massy Sense in the Expressions of others, choose
their own easy Flow of Words, and g^^ding Vacuity of Though It. Thus these Men Dum
vitant vitia in contraria cu^^u^ H^^at. Sat. 2.
, to use a Sentence of HORACE'S; and, to mortify them with another Author,
JUVENAL gives their Character when he says of some; Rarus Sermo illis et magna
Libido ta^^ndi Juvenal. Sat.
; which last Sentence I would translate, they have a great Gust for saying
nothing.

BUT on the other side, I must confess there may be a Fault in endeavoring and
straining for far fetched, and dear bought Hints, and ^ramming a Discourse with
them: And therefore I cannot but subscribe to the ingenuous Observation of Mr.
TRAPP In pretio Gemmae semper habitae, s^mperque ha^e^u^^^: vestem interim
Gemmis. etiam diversorum Generum, ^^^quaversum ^^ustan and coopertam, qu^^ no^
(...) quam l^ud^^t? Jo^. (...) Po^^ic. p. ^3^.
, That good Writings, as Clothes, ought not to be loaded with Jewels.

BUT this is no Exception against the Doctor's way of Writing; for, though his
Treatises were stuck with Jewels, they were not burdened with them: No! There
were just eno' to render a strong and easy Splendour.

I need not say any more in a general way concerning Dr. MATHER'S Writings;
since in the 44th and 45th Pages of his Manuductio he has hindered me, by giving
the World a Description and Account of them,

3. I come more particularly to speak of some of his Publications, with a
Vindication of them, and an Account of others, together with the Character of
some prepared for the Press, and now in my Hands.

THE first Book, I shall treat of, shall be his Magnalia CHRISTI Americana: A
Book replete with Learning, and excellently calculated for the Advancement of
true Religion and Undefiled: A Book, in which the good Names of above fourscore
Worthies, who for the Cause of CHRIST came over into this Land when it was a
Wilderness, are consigned over with Honor, to late Posterity: A Book, in which
there is a faithful Account of the Actions and Sufferings of our Fathers,
together with a true Relation of many remarkable Providence in settling this
Land, it is Churches, Colleges, Schools and Inhabitants: and, in a word, a Book,
in which the designs of a Church History are exquisitely accommodated.

BUT I had rather on this occasion use the words of Mr. ALSOP (a Gentleman of
great Learning and Peity, as well as of finished Wit) who, when an Abridgment
of this History was proposed in an Assembly of Ministers, said; It is a very
improper Proposal; It Is (...) to abridge it! Abridging it will injure it. There
is nothing superfluous in it: Instead of Epitomizing it, you had better read it
twice over as I have: No Man that has a Relish for Piety or for Variety can
ever be weary of it.

I have several other Letters by me from Gentlemen beyond Sea, which are full
to the same purpose: And here, the Gentlemen at Scotland will give me leave to
declare it, that they highly valued the Performance: and the equally learned
and modest Mr. MILLAR of Paisley in particular will forgive me, if I speak of
it, that in his excellent Book of the Propagation of Christianity, he mentions
the Doctor as well as his Magnalia with great Respect.

IN describing the Magnalia, I mentioned the Lives in it and their Number: I
may take notice here, that by the Year 1718. the Doctor had published the Lives
of no less than one hundred and fourteen Men, and more than twenty Women, and
since that Year, he has printed Accounts and Characters of many more; not to
say any Thing of the transient but honorable mention many others have had in
the Doctor's Tractates.

BUT I may particularly speak of the Life of his Father, Published in the Year
1724, which may pass for an Appendix to the Magnalia: It is a very entertaining
Life; was well received in Scotland, and in this Country; and is worthy to be
perused by every Man of Sense, Honor, and Virtue.

THE Doctor has given to the World a Book entitled, Psalterium Americanum; the
Design of which was, first, to give in Meetre an exact and literal Version of
the Hebrew Text, without any Jingle of Words at the End; and then, at the End
of each Psalm, to produce those Illustrations of the Text, and those pious
Hints that would both enlighten the Mind, and warm the Heart of the Singer. As
for the Illustratory part, no Man that has any Value for Divine Knowledge can
find Fault with it; and as for the Metrical Version some prefer it vastly to
any other; for as on one hand it has no large Paraphrase, nor yet any
Diminution of the Sense of DAVID, so on the other it has no Occasion to select
improper Words for the sake of a Rhyme.

THE Directions of a Candidate of the Ministry, which Dr. MATHER has printed,
has occasioned so many Letters of Thanks and Compliment^, that it would fill a
Volumne to recite them. And indeed, (Quis unquam vituperavit?) Who ever said a
word against it?

The Doctor's Christian Philosopher, in which the learned World enjoys a rich
Treasure, is a celebrated Piece: An ingenious Gentleman from London writes of
it " It is the Glory of New England, as it is the Admiration of Old.

HIS Ratio Disciplinae Fratrum Nov-Anglorum, (which Title he borrowed from
COMENIUS,) has had very great Encomiums. -- One of the most finished Gentlemen
and Scholars in America, one who was born for Government over Men as well as to
be a Ruler in the Commonwealth of Learning, and one who is Delicium Humani
Generis, has been pleased to write of that Book, that 'it is a decent
consistent Method of Church Government".

THUS I have writ of one or two of the Doctor's Books, which produced him the
greatest Esteem; these I chose to speak of, because they were composed with
strong Though It and great Application.

I will not mention any of his smaller Works, many of which were never designed
in the composing for the Press, and therefore needed not that great Accuracy as
if they had: And it was the Doctor's frequent Wonder that those Composures he
wrote with the least Trouble and Care, found a Passage into the World, while
many of his elaborate Composures lay by him.

BUT yet in and by those smaller Books (which he ever modestly called Essays.)
he showed he was in Labor, more abundant, he discovered the great Reach of his
Though It and Compass of his Learning, did a vast deal of Good and procured the
Thanks of innumerable. Many of these have had several Editions with Prefaces
from Men of the first Rank in the learned World.

I shall acquaint my Reader with two or three of those (Treatises or rather)
great Performances, which he left behind him in Manuscript.

THERE is his Angel of Bethesda: a Book in which under every Disease there are
proper, religious, Christian Sentiments for those who are Sick: and then the
most simple and easy Medicines collected from his own Knowledge and Use, and
from among the most noted Receipes and Experiments in learned Writers. This is
a considerable Volumn, and cost the Doctor many Years study to fill and
embellish it.

THERE is his ^oa^erges, or Work of the Day: A large Treatise, designed for the
promoting an Union amongst Protestants, and written with great Care, long
Observation, hard Study and a laudable Charity.

THERE is likewise his Triparadisus, which was sent to Mr. WYAT Bookseller in
London in order to be published: Since which I am informed the Bookseller is
dead, and know not what is become of the Manuscript. It is pity it should be
lost: It showed a great Acquaintance with Divine and Human Learning.

HIS Goliathus detruncatus, had as sad a Fate. The Book was written against Mr.
WHISTON: The Design of it was to show, that most of the Ant^^i^e^e Fathers were
orthodox and not Arian, contrary to that learned Man's gross Mistake: It was
written in an Epistolary Way: Dr. EDWARDS a famous Divine of the Church of
England was bringing it into the World, and had written a Preface to it; ^ut,
Dr. EDWARDS dying when it was upon the brin^ of appearing, the Work was bro't
to a full Stop, and I have not heard where the Letter is disposed of.

THERE remains but one more to be treated of; and That is a Work the writing of
which is enough constantly to employ a Man, unless he be a Miracle of Diligence
the half of the Threescore Years and Ten which is the Sum of Years allowed us.
I mean, his Illustrations of the sacred Scripture. The Doctor, from an Hint
given by that very great and learned Man my Lord BACON, begun this Work in his
thirty first Year, though he had before some Materials for it by him; and in his
fifty first Year so finished it, as to publish his PROPOSALS for printing it,
entitled, A new Offer to the Lovers of Religion and Learning. Ever since that
Time to his Death, he was adding to it: so that now it is judged to be by far
the greatest Amassment of Learning that has ever been bro't together to
illustrate the Oracles of GOD. I shall say no more here concerning it;
designing to print Proposals for it is Publication, together with which I shall
give a faithful Description of it.

5. I shall have done this Chapter, when I have writ Dr. FRANKIUS'S
Prescription which Dr. MATHER learnt of him and observed, that is, When one has
projected any Thing that will be evidently a Service to the Kingdom of GOD, he
should go on, with a lively Faith in HIM to carry him through, though at the
present he may have but little Prospect of accomplishing his Designs: GOD will
doubtless do very wonderfully for him.

CHAP. V. Foreign Honors and Correspondencies.
SECT. 1. Foreign Honors.
1. THE wise Man says, Prove. XI 27. He who diligently seeks Good procures
Favor: which Proverb Dr. PAT^ICK thus paraphrases, He that from the Time he
ri^es studies nothing but how to do Good unto others, shall obtain Favor both
with GOD and Man. Doctor MATHER knew experimentally the Truth of this.

2. I remember the famous ZANCHY in his Oration, when ROTANUS was made a
Doctor, says; -- Quos DEUS prior promovit, quis rejiciat? Quos DEUS prior
excellentibus Donis vero Doctore dignis exornat, (...) Doctorum Ornamenta his
deneget? And the same may be said concerning Mr. MATHER; When he was worthy of
the Doctorate, why should not he have it?

THE Renowned Senate of the University of Glasgow, sensible of his great
Merits, in the Year MDCCX. presented him with a Doctor's Degree, with a Diploma
for it, and the great Seal of the Academy affixed unto it.

IN the Diploma, speaking of the highest Academical Honor, the illustrious
Senate says; Cum h^c Academico Honor dignissimum ce^seamus Virum Egregium
COTTONUM MATHER, Evangelii apud Bostonienses Angliae novae Incoles Praeconem
celeberrimum. De cujus quippe Vitae Integritate, Ingenio, Prudentia, et
sacrarum Literarum Cognitione, nobis et orbi quidem literato constet, Fama
simul, et editis ab eo scriptis, istarum Virtutum Testibus luculentissimis; Eum
Virum c^. COTTONUM MATHER Doctorali in S. S. Theologia Dignitate insigniendum
judicamus etc.

WHEN the Diploma was sent unto Dr. MATHER, the most excellent Vice Chancellor
of the University wrote very kindly to him I will take the very great Freedom
to quote a Paragraph or two of his Letter; The high Value (writes he the
University here has for you, I hope, you will no longer doubt, when I tell you,
they have conferred the highest Academical Degree upon You the Doctorate in
Divinity; which I am persuaded is but what you deserve. Be pleased therefore to
receive your Diploma, which could not be sent sooner, in regard no such sure
Occasion offered until now. Sir, I shall henceforth reckon you under a nearer
Relation to this Society, and as one of us.

THE Dean of the Faculty also about the same time writes thus: Upon a Motion
made in the Faculty of this University, that some Testimony be given of the
Sense we have of your Merit, it was unanimously agreed unto, that the Honor of
Doctor of Divinity should be conferred on you. And, according to the Power they
have by their Foundation Charter, granted some Hundreds of Years ago, They have
(dispensing with your Absence) created you Doctor of Divinity; and having
ordered your Diploma they have signed it, and appended the Universities great
Seal. This their Deed is as valid, as any University in Europe can make it

FROM this Time Dr. MATHER had a very intimate Friendship and Correspondence
with several Gentlemen of that University: He heartily loved them unto his
Death, and never spoke of them but with Terms of the greatest Respect.

AND, as the very learned Man I quoted above says, that Vobis cavendum est, ne
quod non nullis contingit, contenti in^^atique solo Doctorum Titulo sludia
negligatis; sed danda potius Opera, ut Titulus, iste, Ornamentaque; Doctorum
nobis sint stimuli ad diligentius studendum and faciendum Officium. Zanchii
Orat de Dignitate studdi Theolog.
the Title and Ornaments of Doctor's should stimulate them to an industrious
Studying and Doing their Duty: of this Doctor MATHER was excedingly desirous.

WHEN he received his Diploma, he immediately looked upon it as an
Encouragement unto him in the Service of CHRIST and HIS Kingdom: He rendered
Thanks to Heaven, and begged Grace to make such an Improvement of the
Encouragement as might answer the Demands of Heaven from him: And he set
himself to consider, What Sanctity, what Gravity, what Usefulness, what shining
Abilities and Performances the Church of GOD might justly demand from one so
distinguished above any Man in the American Colonies.

I shall have done with this Head, when I have told my Reader of the pious Use
he made of his Ring.

SOME of the Doctor's Friends advised him to wear his Signet Ring, as a Token
and Assertion of his Doctorate in Divinity, to which he was admitted as above;
and not to do it from any Vanity of Ornament, but out of Obedience to the Fifth
Commandment, which directs us to assert the Honor of any Dignity, in which the
Providence of GOD may station us.

THE Doctor therefore would wear this Ring; and made this Action, so seemingly
inconsiderable, a great Engine of Religion.

First, HE looked on the Ring as a continual Admonition to him, to do nothing
below the Character, of which that was a Memorial; nothing disagreable to the
Gravity the Discretion and superior Behavior with which a Doctorate ought
always to be attended.

Secondly, IT effectually admonished him, that in his Discourse there should
pass nothing out of his Lips that was mean, or not according to the Laws of
Wisdom, Goodness and Usefulness

Thirdly, THE sight of the Gold frequently excited Wishes and Prayers in him of
this Importance. May I have the Grace, the Gain of which is better than that of
Gold* May I be a Son of Zion comparable to fine Gold: And on the Signet -- May
I be preserved from so provoking the holy LORD, that if I were a Signet on his
Right Hand, He would pluck me thence!

Fourthly, ONE Original to the Ceremony of a Ring for Doctors of Divinity was
to intimate, that they should be ready to set their Seal to the Advice which
may be received from them. The Doctor improved this as a Caution: His Advice
was asked on many Occasions; he would be very considerate, and on such
Occasions deliberate and look up to Heaven, desiring to speak nothing but what
he should be willing to seal it and stand to it.

Fifthly, THE Emblem on the Doctor's Signet is A TREE with Psalm. 1.3. written
under it; and about it GLASCUA RIGAVIT. The Cast of his Eye upon this,
constantly provoked him to pray, (...), O GOD, make me a very fruitful Tree,
and help me to bring forth seasonable Fruit continually!

3. THE Respect which the Royal Society in London paid him, did also very much
encourage him, and fortify him in his Essays to do Good, while it added to the
superior Circumstances, in which he was placed above the Contempt of envious
Men.

'TWAS in the Year 1714. he received a Letter from the Secretary of the Royal
Society, [RICHARD WALLER, Esq] dated December. 4. 1713. in which are these Words;
As for your being chosen a Member of the Royal Society, that has been done ^^th
by the Council and Body of the Society: only the Ceremony of an Admission is
wanting; which, you being beyond Sea, cannot be performed.

AFTER this he had several Letters from many considerable Gentlemen of that
society, who always Superscribed their Letters to him as F. R. S. And he was
assured by several of them, that he ought to affix that Title to his Name
before his Works: otherwise he would never have done it.

BUT there are a few in New England, who, as they grudged the Doctor any Honor,
were so very foolish and impudent as to doubt, nay to deny his Right unto that
Title: The Reason they gave for it was; because his Name was not in the List of
the Members of that Society: But they are ignorant of it, that, although his
Majesty's Subjects in any of his extended Dominions may be a Fellow of the
Royal Society, they may not have their Names in the List of the Society if they
are absent; which is the only Reason why the Doctor's was not. (...) it be
said, there are the Names of several outlandish Gentlemen in the List; what is
this to the purpose? They are Foreigners and are allowed this Honor because
they are so: whereas no Man among his Mejesty's Subjects may have this Favor,
unless he be present and be formally admitted. -- Several Gentlemen of the
Society wonder at the Stupidity of those People who doubt this, and in their
Letters express their Amazement at it: I have at this Time in my Hand, Letters
from Mr. WALLER, Dr. CHAMBERLAIN, Dr. WOODWARD, Dr. JURIN, and others who give
Dr. MATHER his Title, and express Concern that some sordid People here will not
allow it.

BUT the Doctor was very easy, as well he might; for if he had not the due
Title allowed him, he deserved it; as his Christian Philosopher, his Curiosa
Americana, or Letters to the Royal Society, together with his (unprinted) Angel
of Bethesda abundantly testify.

4. As for Domestic Honors they were comparatively but small; they honored not
the Doctor so much as he honored them.

5. I know not how better to dismiss this Head than with a pious Though It which
the Doctor had, upon the Honors of this World, and a Name among the Learned of
the World.

THERE is (he though it) an accursed Idolatry committed, when we take Notice of
this and that considerable in any Man, and consider not at the same Time the
great GOD as the Author of all this Excellency. Man ought to be looked on as
nothing, any f^^ther than what GOD makes him to be; so that when we see any
thing that looks great and good in any Man, it must be with sensible
Acknowlegements, that all comes from GOD.

THE most of Men will celebrate the Learning, the Virtue, the Conduct of an
eminent Person without the least Observation of our Maker in all; much less do
they give all the Glory of all to GOD, and behold Man, as no other than a
Vessel chosen by the Grace of GOD, to exhibit something of HIS own Glory in the
Points which render the Man observable.

Dr. MATHER therefore trembled, and was filled with a shuddering Horror, at the
Tho'ts of having a great Name in the World, or being applauded, admired and
mightily talked of. The Reason of this Regret was, because he though it those that
spoke w^^^ of Him, would not have the Piety to look further than him. He was
afraid his poor Name should have sacrilegiously lodged upon it, some Regards
that should be transferred to the glorious GOD alone. Indeed he was sensible,
there would be no Iniquity charged on Him for the Sacrilege into which others
fell: But yet beheld it as a great Infelicity: He reckoned himself unhappy in
being the Object upon which any should sinfully terminate their Honors and
Praises: He wonderfully abhorred it.

HE rejoiced in it, if any Lovers of GOD said; The GOD of all Grace has
disposed that Servant of H^^ to do virtuously; or the Power and Wisdom of GOD
have carried that Servant of HIS well through Labors and Sufferings! This was all
the Doctor desired; this was all his Ambition.

SECT. 2. Foreign Correspondencies.
1. IT would be tiresome to my Reader to tell what Correspondents the Doctor
had beyond Sea together with their Characters. All therefore I shall say here
is, that he had a very numerous and extensive Correspondence; so that I have
known him at one Time to have above fifty beyond Sea to whom he was obliged to
spend considerable Time in writing.

2. BUT, although it would be tedious to speak of all he was acquainted with by
Letters, it will not be so to name a few now Living with whom the Doctor
accounted himself happy in a Correspondence.

I have spoken before of his intimate Friendship with many Gentlemen of the
Scotch Nation in the sacred Order, but I must by no means forget here to
acquaint the World, that my Lord POLLUL a Gentleman of great Goodness; Humanity
and Religion, was pleased often to remember Him: I need not, I suppose, say any
Thing more of that Nation; nor any Thing of his Intimacy with several Ministers
of the greatest Character in England and Ireland: It Is well known.

THE very great and good my Lord Chancellor KING will not be angry, if I
publish it, that he has honored my Father with his Letters.

THE Author (if we are not mistaken in the Author) of the Miscellanea Sacra
also, (which Dr. MATHER looked upon as an inestimable uncommon Treasure) will
not take it amiss, if I let the world know he has many Times written to the
Doctor.

Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE likewise very sweetly entertained and highly gratified
the Doctor with his Epistles as well as his printed Composures.

THOSE learned mathematicians and Philosophers Mr. WHISTON and Dr. DESAGULIERS,
have written familiarly to him, and with Expressions of Love and Honor for him.

I shall mention but one more, who is I suppose, yet living, Mr. PILLIONERE,
from whom he had several Letters: And by the way, I think one of the Doctor's
Letters to him is printed in the Occasional Paper, and is called a Celebrated
Letter.

TO go a little further from Home and give an Instance or two more of the
Doctor's Correspondencies: From the Year 1712 to his Death, he had a free
Correspondence with a Gentleman, at Glaucha near Hall in the Lower Saxony, a
Gentleman in whom I know not which is greatest, whether his shining Goodness,
sincere unaffected Piety and miraculous Charity; or else his very great
Learning; I mean Dr. FRANCKIUS; one of whose pleasant long Letters to Dr.
MATHER is printed in Pietas Hallensis.

HE has (by Reason of that Value Dr. FRANCKIUS had for him) had also Letters
from the Danish Missionaries at Tranquebar in the East Indies; and not very
long since had a particular Account of their Proceedings from them.

3. HAVING written before of the Rules he observed as in other Things, in his
Correspondencies, and the Design of his Cultivating them; I must here abruptly
break off this Chapter, and proceed to another, in which you will find the
complete Christian and his heavenly Life.

CHAP. VI. An Account of the Christian Life and Practice of Piety of Dr.
MATHER; in which there is a particular Delineation of his Devotions and
Asceticks, together with his Methods in observing his private Fasts,
Thanksgivings, Vigils, etc. In which Chapter you will read the Christian of the
highest Rank.
WITH Devotion and Reverence I am now to write of the CHRISTIAN: Gradatim ad
Sydera tollor: I chose the rather to collect some Observations and Practices of
Religion into this Chapter, that so those who are seriously disposed may at
once find Exemplars to copy after.

I must confess I have no great Affection for the forced Wit in Anagrams and
the like; but yet I cannot help giving you one made by a pious Friend upon the
Doctors Name, COTTONUS MATHERUS; Anagr. Tu Homo ter Sanctu^; which Anagram I
was the more willing to recite here, because this Chapter is to be the plain
English as well as Proof of it.

I. His choosing of GOD, his conversing with HIM his Resigning unto HIM and his
Delight in HIM.

1. ON a Day of Prayer that he kept, I find him assured that all Controversy
was taken away between his Maker and Him, and solemnly renewing and subscribing
this Covenant.

THE COVENANT.

I renounce all the Vanities and cursed Idols and evil Courses of this World.

I engage, That I will ever have the great GOD, my best Good, my last End and
my only LORD.

THAT I will be ever rendering of Acknowledgements unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST
in all the Relations which he bears unto me.

THAT I will ever be St^^ying what is my Duty in these Things; and wherein I
find my self to fall short, I will ever make it my Grief and my Shame* and for
Pardon betake my self to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

NOW humbly imploring the Grace of the Mediator to be sufficient for me, I do
as a further Solemnity subscribe my Name with both Hand and Heart unto this
Instrument.

THIS his Covenant he frequently, seriously, solemnly renewed; and found his
Account in it.

2. HAVING laid this Foundation, he though it it his Duty to acquaint himself with
GOD, to resign himself to HIM and to delight in HIM.

CONSIDERING how, when Creatures take themselves Wings, while Afflictions roll
in upon us; 'twould be therefore Happiness to con^^rse with GOD as Alsufficient
and to take Satisfaction in HIM, at that Object, that will make up the Want of
all Things whatsoever.

HE then raised a Question, How can I take my Comfort in the Alsufficient GOD,
when my Interest in HIM is uncertain? Will not the LORD frown on my
Presumption, and say, I have rejected thy Confidences?

HE answered No. for he laid this down as a cer-Truth; that an Heart inclined
to converse with GOD, as the Object whose Alsufficiency makes up for the want
of all Creatures, is a most undoubted Sign of an Interest in GOD: He therefore
that can do such a Thing, may do it without any Objection and against every
Discouragement.

READING once Mr. BOYLE'S Seraphic Love, and finding some sublime Strokes upon
a Man's RESIGNING up himself, and especially his Will, to the GOD of Heaven; he
resolved he would set apart a Time on Purpose to give up himself and his Will
unto the LORD, and so to seek a Preparation for an actual and entire Submission
unto HIM in all his Concernments. He did so.

IN his Papers I find an Address of his on that Occasion, which I will give in
his Words as follows.

MOST glorious LORD! Thou have offered Thy self unto thy Creatures, and often
called upon them to take Thee of their GOD. This, This is that which I am
willing, I am desirous, I am resolved this Day to do. I take THEE, O LORD, to
be my GOD, and hence I take thy Glory for the End unto which I would be and
live; I take the Enjoyment of THEE for may great and sole Happiness; and, which
is the peculiar Thing I am now aiming at, I take Thy Will to by my Will. As for
my own Will, LORD, I find it blind, foolish, wicked, hurtful; and therefore I
renounce, reject and resign it; and say again, LORD, let Thy Will be my Will. I
have great Concernments; Concerns as to this World and as to the future; They
are many and weighty. But O GOD, THOU art the only wise GOD; There is perfect
Knowledge with THEE; THOU art of great Power; Thy Understanding is infinite:
And, in that sweet Reconciler of GOD and Man the LORD JESUS CHRIST, THOU art
wonderfully merciful and Gracious unto them that draw near unto THEE, as I do
this Day. Unto Thy Wisdom and Goodness I commit my Concernments one and all. I
cast all my Cares upon my GOD. O THOU most wise and good GOD, I resign all unto
Thee. Is it not Thy Pleasure that I should so do? It is. And have THOU not
Pleasure in seeing me do so? THOU have. I then profess in thy Presence; All my
Concernments are put into Thy Hands and left unto Thy Managements forever. And
now I am inconceivably happy! The LORD GOD Almighty will perform all Things for
me, and all Things now shall be well performed. Whatever now befalls me will be
an Effect of the great JEHOVAH'S infinite Wisdom and Goodness. And though it be
never so really cross to my Humor, and seemingly cross to my Welfare, I will
take Contentment in it; because I will now look upon it as the Will of HIM that
is infinitely wise and good; the Will of HIM that is my Friend, my Father, my
GOD; the Will of HIM that has undertaken the Conduct of all my affairs
forever. And, O my Soul, O my Will; Remember Thou after this never to be
disturbed about future Events, and always to approve the present Dealings of
the LORD.

BEING disposed and resigned as I have written; He formed Resolutions to
DELIGHT in GOD, after this Manner.

1. I will ever mourn over the Distempers of my own Heart, which incline me to
take an unchaste sort of Delight in Creatures, in Idols, in Vanities.

2. I will bless GOD for those Afflictions, for those Dispensations be they
never so distressing, by which He is curing these Disorders in me.

3. I will always account my self happy in the Favor of GOD; although I should
have no Earthly Thing to give me any Satisfaction.

4. I will reckon any Opportunities for my being bro't into a Converse with
GOD, as Treasures to be preferred above all Riches.

5. I will never be any other than in a restless Disquiet of Soul, until I find
all my Ends to be entirely swallowed up in the Glory of GOD.

6. I will relish all my Enjoyments even to my very Meat and Drink mainly, and
if I can merely, under the Notion of my being by them assisted in the Knowledge
or the Service of GOD.

7. I will endeavor to be continually abounding in the Thot's of GOD; nor would
I be ordinarily one waking Quarter of an Hour wholly destitute of them.

8. It shall be my Measure to wait upon GOD, in all the Ways of his Worship, in
which I may have Communion with HIM, especially in frequent Prayers unto HIM.

LORD, Assist me, Accept me, Delight in me.

2. CLOSING with CHRIST, Accepting HIS Righteousness, Loving HIS Glory, and
Living by Faith in HIM.

1. I find him one Day thus renewing his Closure with the LORD JESUS.

HE considered that GOD had offered CHRIST unto him; although he was a sinful and
wretched Creature, and because he was so: And therefore it was his Duty to take
HIM.

HE then examined, whether there was no Reserve, that ^ight herein prove
destructive to his Soul. He sought unto the LORD, that HE would search him, try
him, s^e whether there were any way of Wickedness in him. He found the Things,
of which he had most Reason to be jealous were Worldly Honors and Carnal
Pleasures; and therefore he thus renounced them.

LORD, I give my Name unto THEE; If THOU will have it reproached, I am content:
Only give me thy CHRIST, and I shall be satisfied. Yea, I will seek the Honor
of Thy Name, whether the Honor of my own be advantaged or prejudiced by my
doing so.

LORD, if any of my Delights are sinful, or as far as they are sinful I utterly
forego them, and beseech THEE to make me abhor them: JESUS CHRIST my LORD is
better to me than any of them, than all of them. If they are lawful, yet will I
leave them, when either the Command or the Glory of my LORD calls me another
way.

AND he added, 'Now I believe the LORD is mine and I am His: He will carry on
his Kingdom in my Soul in spite of all Oppositions whatsoever: I leave all the
weighty Affairs of it with HIM for ever and ever.

IN Prosecution of this Action of Closing with CHRIST, no Man or Book showed
him the way; but he though it the HOLY SPIRIT was his Teacher, and that by HIM he
was led on to the most explicit Procedure in it.

IN a different Day from the former, I perceive that he used such Words as
these before his REDEEMER.

O my dear LORD; Thy FATHER has committed my Soul into Thy Hands: There is a
Covenant of Redemption in which I am concerned: I know my Election by my
Vocation, and my Concernment in that Covenant, by my being made willing to come
under the Shadow of thy Wings in the Covenant of Grace. Now in that ancient
Covenant the FATHER said unto the SON, Such a Soul there is that I will bring
into thy Fold, and Thou shall undertake for that Soul, as a sufficient and an
eternal SAVIOR. Wherefore I am now in thy Hands, O my LORD: Thy FATHER has put
me there, and I have put my self there; O save me, heal me, work for me and in
me the good Pleasure of thy Goodness.

AND a little after I read as follows;

LORD, I have been leaving my Soul with my LORD JESUS CHRIST; and THOU have bid
me to believe I shall be saved by HIM. LORD, I do believe that there never came
a miserable Soul unto CHRIST in vain, and I believe that I my self shall not
find it in vain. He will do great Things for me. He has done enough already to
leave me without any Cause of Repenting that I have with so much Agony of Soul
come unto HIM. But I believe, that he has more still to do for me. Having been
the Author he will be the Finisher of my Faith.

2. ONE special Character upon the Experiences of his Life, was the great and
clear Application he had made unto the Righteousness of CHRIST for his
Justification before the Holy GOD.

I cannot well entertain my Readers with an Article of more Importance than
this; I will therefore transcribe a few select Passages from his Memorials,
which are worthy of a more than ordinary Consideration and Attention.

AT one Time he writes thus;

IN the former Part of this Day, I humbled myself before the LORD with
inexpressible Agony of Soul for all the Filthiness of my Heart and Life: I did
with Tears bewail my sinfulness before the LORD: and submitting my self unto
the Divine Sovereignty, which might uncontrolably make me a Vessel of Dishonor
and an Instance of Confusion: I further acknowledged that the Divine
Righteousness added to Sovereignty had farther Advantages to proceed against
me, and make me a dreadful Monument of Divine Displeasure.

WHILE I was in the midst of my disconsolate Reflections, the SPIRIT of the
LORD caused me to behold the Obedience, the Sacrifice and the Suretiship of my
precious REDEEMER, as provided by the FATHER for the Relief of my Distresses:
And that good SPIRIT caused me to rely upon it: So that I said with Tears of
Joy before the LORD; Now I know that all my Debts are paid; my GOD will now
make no Demand of me, but that I love HIM and praise HIM, and glorify my
blessed SAVIOR for ever. I know it! I know it! And now I will do so forever! I
can do no other.

AT another Time;

I experienced an unspeakable Satisfaction of Soul this, Day, when taking part
with the LORD against my Self, I approved all His Laws, and abhorred my self on
the score of my Contrariety to them and Violation of them; and I justified all
the Chastisements that had therefore befallen me: And then with a^avished Soul,
I felt the LORD assuring me that His free Grace would impute unto me the
Righteousness of CHRIST, and at the same Time imprint upon me an holy
Disposition to conform unto that Righteousness in my own Heart and Life.

AT another thus;

THIS Day my Spirit was exceedingly distressed at the View of my own manifold
present and former Vilenesses, which I bitterly bewailed before GOD. -- But I
find his Humiliations concluded thus;

-- AND yet after all this, I do Believe, LORD Help my Unbelief! I Believe,
that my precious SAVIOR our Immanuel has fully obeyed and suffered Thy Will,
as a Surety in the Room of Sinners. I Believe, that the Righteousness of this
our Surety is offered unto my Acceptance, that for the sake of it I may become
accepted with GOD. I Believe, that whenever THOU do enable me to rely upon
this Righteousness, THOU do immediately absolve me from all my Guiltiness and
pronounce me a dear Son, a pleasant Child, upon whom THOU will surely have
Mercy. And I Believe that the Greatness of my Sins does nothing to render me
incapable of this free and rich Grace of Heaven. O my GOD, in this Belief I
cast my self at the Feet of JESUS CHRIST: There will I ly waiting, looking,
assured to receive thy Favors. Thus this Child of ABRAHAM Believed, and it was
counted to him for Righteousness.

3. IT was the Heaven of the Doctor's Soul, This he chose and begged, to be made
an Instrument of exhibiting the Glory of CHRIST unto HIS People, of inviting
and inducing others to glorify HIM.

HE received a Letter once, a short Letter from a very Religious Man, which had
this Passage in it.

YOU WILL pardon my troubling you with a Line or two to thank you for your
Maschil, [the Title of a Book the Doctor had published.] which I think may be
called Mictam, as well as Maschil. You help me to this Though It; How full of
Excellency is the glorified Man the LORD JESUS CHRIST; if by His HOLY SPIRIT He
so fills one of His Admirers, that He is enabled to fill a Book with such
excellent Things

IT IS impossible to express the satisfaction of Soul, which the sight of this
Passage raised in the Doctor. That holy ones, whose Hearts are set upon
glorifying JESUS CHRIST, should by any Thing of CHRIST in Him, be led into the
Contemplation of His Glories! This, This He looked upon as the highest Pitch of
His Felicity: He though it of, he aspired unto nothing higher than this throughout
Eternal Ages. It ravished him, when he saw the good GOD beginning to grant him
this Felicity. He despised the Diadems of Emperors in Comparison with it; and
cried out with a Rapture, greater than that of ARCHMEDES I am happy! I am
happy! LORD, I am swallowed up with the Ecstasies of Thy Love!

4. I shall recite some very singular Methods of his maintaining a Life by the
Faith of the SON of GOD: and, because it is impossible to use Words more
expressive and weighty, I shall choose rather to produce the Doctor's own Words
than my own.

HAVING entertained a right and clear Apprehension of my great SAVIOR; and His
glorious Person, as the Eternal Son of GOD incarnate and inthroned in my JESUS
being somewhat understood with me: and beholding the Infinite GOD as coming to
me and meeting with me in this blessed Mediator; The Thot's of Him are become
exceeding frequent with me. I count it a Fault, if my Mind be many Minutes
together without some Thoughts that have in them a Tincture of Piety: But I
have learnt the Way of interesting my SAVIOR in the Tho'ts: And I feel an
Impatience raised in me, if I have been many Minutes without some Tho'ts of
Him. I fly to Him on multitudes of Ocsions every Day, and am impatient if many
Minutes have passed without some Recourse to Him.

EVER now and then I bestow a Rebuke upon my self, Why have I been so long
without some Tho'ts on my lovely SAVIOR? How can I bear to keep at any
Distance from HIM? I then look up to my SAVIOR; O my dear SAVIOR, Draw near
unto me: Oh! Come down to dwell in my Soul, and help me to form some Tho'ts
wherein I shall enjoy THEE!

UPON this I set my self to form some Tho'ts on my most amiable SAVIOR, His
Glories, His Merits, His Pattern, His Maxims, what HE has done, and what HE
will do for us. I find the Subject infinitely inexhaustible. -- And after I
have been in the Day thus employed, I fall asleep at Night perpetually in the
midst of some Meditation on the Glory of my SAVIOR; usually on a Scripture
where that Glory is mentioned. So I Sleep in JESUS! And when I wake in the
Night, I do on my Bed seek Him that my Soul does Love: Still in the Night the
Desires of my Soul carry me to Him in Tho'ts on the Subject which I fell asleep
with.

I find that where CHRIST comes, a wondrous Light, Life and Peace comes with
Him, together with a Strength to go through Services and Sufferings. The Holiness
and Happiness to which I am introduced by this Way of Living, it is better to me
than all the Enjoiments of this World. All the Riches of this World appear
contemptible Things unto me, while I have the unsearchable Riches of CHRIST
thus bro't into my Possession. And all the Glory of this World would not
incline me to forego this way of Living.

NOW, O my dear JESUS, I know, I have an internal Witness, that THOU art the
SON of GOD and the SAVIOR of the World.

CONCERNING this Matter I have had a Contemplation which had a most melting
Efficacy on me.

WHEN the Cloud of Glory, which was the SHECHINAH that had our SAVIOR with the
Angels of his Presence dwelling in it, came down and filled the Temple of old,
what a grateful Spectacle was it, and what Acclamations did it raise in the
Spectators? A godly Man is a Temple of GOD; a living Temple; dearer to Him than
any Temple of mere Matter, though the most splendid and costly in the World. And
our SAVIOR comes into an Heart which is continually instructing, reforming and
solacing it self by thinking on Him. O Heart panting after thy SAVIOR; so kind
is He, so very kind, that even at the Call of a Though It He will come in unto
Thee! A Temple so filled with the Glory of the LORD is unseen to the standers
by, to Flesh and Blood. -- The Life of the pious Man is hid with CHRIST in GOD:
It is an hidden Life. But GOD sees the Temple with Pleasure. The SAVIOR who
knows all Things is pleased with the sight. His Angels make their
Acclamations upon it.

BUT that I may set this important Matter, yet in a fuller Light I shall be
more punctual and particular in my Account.

I behold the Infinite GOD in His Eternal SON assuming the Man JESUS, into such
an intimate and conscious Union with Him, that in my SAVIOR I now see a
GOD-MAN, and a MAN, who has the Fullness of the GODHEAD personally dwelling in
Him.

IN this GOD-MAN I behold all possible Provision for the happy Return of Man
unto GOD, and all possible Encouragement unto Man to seek and look for such an
Happiness.

AS this my SAVIOR is very GOD, and my Hope and Joy in Him is all animated
from that Consideration; so, being one GOD with the FATHER and SPIRIT, who
through Him communicate themselves to me, I consider my self as coming to GOD in
Him and conversing with the whole GODHEAD in my more immediately having to do
with Him.

THE first Thing I do, is to accept the Offers which this wonderful SAVIOR
makes to me of being mine and bringing me to GOD. I hear Him graciously
offering to make me Righteous and Holy, reconcile me to GOD, quicken me to Live
unto Him, and work in me that which shall be well-pleasing before Him. I feel
Him so apprehending of me that He disposes and enables me to give an hearty,
joyful, thankful Consent unto these Proposals of Grace; and in consenting to
them, I entertain a comfortable Persuasion of my kind Reception with Him; I
think it my Duty to be well persuaded, that He will surely do me Good.

AND now what remains is, that as I worship GOD in the Spirit, so I may rejoice
in CHRIST JESUS.

WHEREFORE in the first Place I ask it of the glorious GOD with the
Importunity, that having CHRIST concerned for me, I may also have HIM
poss^ssing of me; That I may have Skill, Will and Help from Heaven to converse
with HIM continually; That I may be so well of it as to keep continually
^alling HIM into my Thoughts, and feeding upon HIM. I have declared unto the
LORD, that i^ HIM would grant me this Felicity, I cared not what ^ef^^ me; I am
willing and ready to encounter any Thing that HE shall please to order for me.

MY Life is full of Sacrifices: But that which carries me well through them all
is this Consideration; That While I have CHRIST, I have enough; I can rejoice
in HIM while I have nothing else left unto me!

BY the faithful Dispensations of GOD I have been brought to this, That I feel
my self dead unto all Creatures. I have employed the Sacrificing Stroke upon
all my Enjoyments. My Serviceableness to the Kingdom of my SAVIOR was the last
Thing that in my Death to all Things here below I parted with; The Thing which
I could least of all part with: But this Darling, which I would fain have had
saved from the Power of the Dog, I have also Sacrificed. I have submitted unto
it that the Ever-Blessed ONE should not only make me vile among His People, but
also utterly lay me aside from doing any more Services for His Kingdom in the
World. -- I have been entirely dead unto every Thing else, and have had nothing
but this one Thing left unto me, That I may have my JESUS not only doing for
me, but also dwelling in me; and enabling me perpetually to feed and live upon
HIM. This will be enough. I care not if I am stripped of every Thing else, if I
may but enjoy this Felicity.

IN pursuance of this Felicity, it is not easy for me to delineate or enumerate
the Methods of Conversing with my only SAVIOR, wherein I have been instructed
of GOD. And it is impossible for me to express the Satisfaction that irradiates
and replenishes my Mind upon the Discoveries of any new Methods for it. No
Affluence of any Worldly Wealth, no, nor any Advances in any Sciences could so
transport and ravish me!

THE Blessedness of the Heavenly World lies in our being with CHRIST; and by
being with the LORD, and beholding His Glory in precious Thoughts of HIM here,
I apprehend my self even in Heaven upon Earth: And indeed the Light and Peace,
the Joy; Strength and Purity with which it fills my Mind carries a Foretast and
Earnest of Heaven in it.

I soar up to an inexpressible Contemplation on my SAVIOR, as the Wisdom of
GOD, who is the Archetype of the whole Creation, and in whom there are the
original Ideas of all that is produced by His Hands in the World, even that
Platform and Substance, of which all Creatures are but the Issues and the
Shadows.

I am hence wondrously reconciled unto my approaching Death, inasmuch as going
from Creatures here, I go to Him in whom I shall find all that I leave and
infinitely more.

IN the mean Time I am sure, that whatever I find amiable or comfortable in any
Creatures here, is much more to be found in Him.

HENCE when I see any Thing that is amiable in any Creatures, I commonly fly
away from them to my SAVIOR and think, How great is His Goodness and his
Beauty!

WHEN I find any Thing that is comfortable in any Creatures, I commonly hasten
away unto my SAVIOR, and think, What Benefits will flow from Him to me?

UPON the withdraw of any Creatures, or when any desirable Enjoyments are
witheld or taken from me, I think, What is it that would recommend these Things
unto me? And I presently find my SAVIOR commended unto me by such and more
desirable Qualities. In his being mine I find every Loss repaired abundantly!
Dead unto every Thing but my SAVIOR, I thus express my Sentiments;

FOR the Delights of this World. -- Such Delights as I taste in the mere
Tendencies of Nature, I would in the Taste of them think, The Will of GOD,
expressed in the Nature of His Works is thus complied with. But, Oh, What shall
I find in the Infinite GOD Himself upon my going back unto Him! -- Those
Delights which are most helpful to me in seeing and serving of GOD are those
which I would have the most Value for: And even my Appetites for my Food
particularly shall be so regulated. -- But I know of no Delights comparable to
those which I take in Communion with my SAVIOR.

FOR the Riches of this World. -- I use no Labor, I have no Desire to obtain
temporal Riches: They appear to me very contemptible. My Riches are my
Opportunities to do Good, and those Illuminations of my Mind which furnish me
for it. -- In my SAVIOR I have unsearchable Riches, and in my Fruition of Him
I have a full supply for all my Wants.

FOR the Honors of this World. -- My Abhorrence of having the great GOD robbed
on my Account, by People gazing on me without being led through me to Him,
renders all the Honors in the Praise of Men very distasteful to me. I do
nothing to gain Honors for my self; and if I do secure any Thing of Esteem or
of Station, it shall be purely for the Interest of GOD. -- If I be accepted
with my SAVIOR and employed in Work for His Kingdom and have His Image
imprinted on me: Here are all the Honors that I wish for.

I go over the afflictive Things with which my Life is all embittered (and I
make the fame Salleys toward CHRIST upon the Arrival of any new Affliction) I
repair to my JESUS: I realize not only His Hand, but also His Love in fending
the Trouble. I see my SAVIOR once encountering the same Trouble, and I am
heartily pleased at my Conformity to Him. I see how patiently and with what
Views He bore the Trouble, and I wish to be like Him. I consider what is that
Good which this Trouble deprives me of, and I see the same Good, and what is
infinitely better, laid up in my SAVIOR; and I am satisfied. The Tho'ts of my
SAVIOR I forever find sweetning the bitter Waters of Marah to me. I find Him
the Comforter that always relieves my Soul, when I have Him near unto me.

HOW many, O LORD, are the Tho'ts, which I form in my Mind concerning THEE! The
Occasions on which, the Contrivances with which, I cherish the Tho'ts cannot be
reckoned up in Order.

WHEN I see any Thing excellent in any Man, it leads me to Tho'ts on the
superior Excellencies in my SAVIOR.

THE Qualities of the various Animals which I happen to have before me, put me
in Mind of the admirable Qualities by which my SAVIOR is endeared unto me.

WHEN I see People miserable in any Point, it raises in me some Tho'ts on the
Miseries, from which I am delivered by my SAVIOR, and my Obligations to my
Deliverer.

WHAT are the Uses of my Garments to the Parts that are covered with them? Of
such Uses is my SAVIOR to my Spirit, with the Tho'ts of which I have adored
Him.

WHAT is there in the Diets of my Table to render them agreeable unto me?
Analag^us Properties I discern in my SAVIOR; and the Tho'ts thereof give me an
exquisite Relish of Him.

I durst not let my Mind ly fallow as I walk the Streets. I rebuke my self with
heavy Complaints (and I make my Moan to Heaven) if I have gone many steps
without some struggle to pull down the Thot's of my SAVIOR into my Soul. I
have compelled the Signs in the Streets to point me unto something in my
SAVIOR that should be though it upon. When I have been at a loss for fresh Tho'ts
on Him, it has been but casting my Eye on the Shops of either side, and from
the Varieties in them, I have had something of my SAVIOR suggested unto me.

ENQUIRIES after News are made with Frequency, with Eagerness: I am grown very
Cold in such Things: My Concern for them and Pleasure in them is very much
extinguished. Some new Tho'ts of HIM shall be the News* after which I shall be
still most enquiring. Here I have any Curiosity gratified a thousand Times more
than in the News of the common Occurrences in the World.

I have sometimes an Expectation of some Satisfaction arriving to me, and a
little of Strength and Impatience in it. I re^und it: I have done expecting any
good Things from this World: my Tho'ts usually are, What is the Good of that
which I expect? O my Soul, All of this Good Thou have already in thy SAVIOR.

I have in my Study a very easy Chair: When I am going to repose my self in it,
it is a common Reflection with me, Return to thy Rest, O my Soul; O my JESUS,
Thou art the Rest of my Soul.

ON the LORD'S Day I would enter into the Rest of GOD. That I may Sabbatize
aright I hear my SAVIOR inviting of me, Come unto me, and I will give you
Rest. On this Day I try to make a particular Application of that Invitation. I
get my Mind filled this Day with as many Tho'ts of my SAVIOR as may be: Which
Tho'ts in general have a Tendency to convey a sweet Rest unto the Soul that
entertains them. And more particularly, If I happen to think of any Thing that
may be uneasy to me, I presently seek a sweet Rest for my Soul in JESUS CHRIST
as being and as doing what will be a Relief of that Uneasiness. Yea, I
sometimes now cast an Eye on the uncomfortable Things which give a Disturbance
to my Rest in this World, on purpose that I may immediately take my Flights to
something in CHRIST, that shall show me a plenteous Redemption from them. So I
rejoice in the LORD again and again, and so I find His Rest is glorious.

EVERY Day I find in my self such Imperfections; Infirmities, Miscarriages; as
cause me to humble and abhor my self before the LORD. Now I employ my own
Humiliations for Scaffolds from whence I would raise the Praises of my
admirable SAVIOR. Whatever I see mean and vile in my self, I would proceed
from thence to think, How much the Reverse of this is to be seen in JESUS. From
the Loathing of my self I would pass on to the Loving of my SAVIOR. And so
among other Consequences; I shall also affect my self with the only
Righteousness which I have to plead that I may be justified before GOD.

THE Pagans had their many gods, and for one Blessing they hoped from one of
their gods, for another from another. Now all the Glories which I find them
dividing among their many gods, I ascribe unto my SAVIOR who is the true GOD
and Eternal Life; and look for every Blessing from HIM alone.

IN my conversing with my SAVIOR; I go through many Portions of Scriptures which
testify of Him; especially the Psalms, employing a Verse or a Clause at a Time
for the Subject of my Meditation, when every Night I fall a sleep in JESUS. Now
the Psalms are filled with Prayers, wherein I find my Condition so suited that
I cannot express it better before the LORD. But when I present such Prayers
unto the LORD it proves a vast Encouragement and Consolation unto me, and
therein I maintain a most sweet Fellowship with my SAVIOR, when I think; This
very Prayer was once presented by my SAVIOR unto HIS Eternal FATHER: My
SAVIOR once prayed at this Rate and found Acceptance: I pray but as my SAVIOR
taught me and as HE did before me: Certainly such a Prayer will be grateful
unto GOD.

Finally, IN my admirable SAVIOR accomplishing an Eternal Redemption for us, I
see glorious Transactions and Occurrences. Now I am follicitous to feel the
Power, the heavenly Power of these Things upon me, that I may come into an holy
Fellowship with them, and with Him in them. This I take for a Token to me, that
my SAVIOR has been concerned for me is these Parts of his potent Mediation.

I see GOD becoming a Man in my SAVIOR, I feel the Power of it in my returning
to GOD and meeting with Him in my SAVIOR.

I see my SAVIOR leading an hidden Life, and passing through obscure
Circumstances while He sojourned among us: I feel the Power of it in my being
willing to have my Walk with GOD carried on with all possible Concealment upon
it.

I see my SAVIOR doing illustrious Miracles upon the Children of Men in their
Distresses: I feel the Power of it in my own Experience of the Divine Works
upon my Soul, answerable to what was in those ancient Operations of the LORD.

I see my SAVIOR dying for my Sin, dying on the Cross: I feel the Power of it
in the Death of my sinful Dispositions, my Dying unto Creatures, my having for
this World the Sentiments of a Man hanging upon a Cross.

I see my SAVIOR in His Resurrection triumphing over the Powers of Darkness,
and entering into a New Life wherein HE lives for ever more: I feel the Power of
it in my rising and getting up out of my Lifeless Darkness, and my coming into
a New Life, wherein I shall pursue the Designs of PIETY, quickened with an
Everlasting Principle of it, to which I was once a Stranger.

THIS may be enough to illustrate the Way of Living in which the GOD of all
Grace enabled Dr. MATHER to proceed. In this Way of Living, He waited to see
what his SAVIOR would do for Him: Thus leaning on the Beloved of his Soul He
would go up from the Wilderness of this World.

3. HIS Occasional Thoughts and Ejaculatory Prayers.

1. THAT Dr. MATHER might walk in the fear of the LORD all the Day long, his
Mind was continually conversing with GOD and preparing for Heaven in Occasional
Prayers and Meditations. His Opinion and Persuasion concerning such Tho'ts was,
that while He was forming of them He was directly, nearly, sweet answering the
Grand End of his Life, which is to Glorify GOD and acknowledge HIM; That He was
also therein rectifying his Soul and ripening it for the Employments and
Enjoyments of the Heavenly World.

I shall now tell you some of the Rules which He prescribed unto Himself to
awaken the Thor'ts and Prayers of a Religious Mind on the Occasions which
frequently occurred.

WHEN He heard a Clock strike, He could not help thinking and wishing, that He
might so number his Days as to apply his Heart to Wisdom; and that He might so
spend every Hour as to be able to give a good Account of it.

AT the Winding up of his Watch, He blessed GOD for another Day and desired He
might spend it in Endeavors to glorify HIM.

WHATEVER Comfortable Things He saw any other. Person enjoy He took the Comfort
of it, adored the Goodness of Heaven and wished for a right Improvement of it.

HIS Life was full of Services: but on every one He would distinctly consider
how to do it out of Obedience to GOD, how to glorify and ser^^ CHRIST, how to
imitate HIM, and after all what an unprofitable Servants He was.

WHEN He dispensed Kindness to any Person, He would at the same Time lift up a
Prayer for them, that they might not be unmindful of such Duty to HIM as through
this Kindness they might be invited to.

HE had oftentimes an Opportunity to express a Benignity to Br^it Creatures,
either to feed them or make their Condition easy to them: He would do it with
Delight and raise two Meditations upon it. " I am now the Instrument of GOD
unto these Creatures; HIS Kindness passes through my Hands to them: And will not
the blessed GOD he as beneficent unto me as I am unto these Creatures?
especially if, as they look unto me to be kind unto them, I always look up unto
HIM.

WHEN he knocked at a Door, the Faith of our SAVIOR'S Promise was awakened in
Him, Knock and it shall he opened unto You.

WHEN he mended his Fire, it was with a Meditation how his Heart and Life might
be rectified, and how through the Emendations of Divine Grace His Love and Zeal
might flame more agreably.

WHEN he put out his Candle, it must be done with an Address to the Father of
Lights, that his Light might not be put out in Obscure Darkness; and with a
Wish that when He goes out by Mortality He might enter everlasting Life and
Light.

AS he tasted of the several Fruits which are the rich Product of Summer, he
would set Himself to think on some special Glory of our SAVIOR, of which he
might by it be lead unto the Contemplation, and so address HIM with a rapturous
Confession of it.

IN drinking a Dish of Tea, (of which he was a great Admirer) he would take an
Occasion for these Tho'ts especially with the Ingenuity of Occasional
Reflection and agreeable Similitude, that should have many sweet Acknowlegements
of the glorious JESUS in them. And whatever Delight any of his Senses enjoyed,
it was soon sanctified and rendered more delightful by his making such an
Improvement of it.

THE Servant of the LORD could say, Mine Eyes prevent the Night Watches, that I
might Meditate in thy Word. When the Doctor waked in the Night, he would impose
it as a Law upon Himself ever before he fell asleep again to bring some Glory
of his SAVIOR into his Meditations, and have some agreeable Desire of his Soul
upon it.

WHEN he paid what he owed at any Time, he would reflect on what he owed CHRIST
for paying his Debt tot he Justice of GOD, and was desirous that he should owe
no Man any thing but Love.

AMONG the Occasions for the Expressions of Piety and Thankfulness, he would
affectionately take Notice of the mean Employments wherein he saw other People
occupied. When he saw those whose Business it was to dig in the Earth, to sweep
Chimneys, cleanse the Kennels, or drive the Coach, the Cart or Wheel-barrow, or
exercised in the like low Degree; I say, when he saw those Men, it raised his
Heart in Wonders at the Goodness of GOD, which distinguished him with nobler
Employments.

WHEN he visited a Sick Person he would fetch some Admonition relating to the
moral Distempers in his Heart and Life, analogous to the Circumstances of the
diseased Person.

IF any Thing began to raise any Ebullition of Anger in him, he would endeavor
to allay it by thinking, "What Provocations have I given to the great GOD; and
what was the Meekness and Wisdom of my blessed JESUS when he met with
Contradiction from Sinners.

WHEN he washed his Hands, he must think of the clean Hands, as well as pure
Heart, which belong to the Citizens of Zion.

AND when he did so mean an Action as paring his Nails, he though it how he might
lay aside all Superfluity of Naughtiness.

SOMETIMES he had kind Presents made him: He would by the Quality of the
Presents be awakened unto particular Acknowledgments and Resolutions. He would
think, What Good Thing should that Man wish, and what Good should he do, whom
GOD obliges by bestowing such Things upon Him? And he would always add a
Reflection upon the Humiliation of our SAVIOR who wanted such Things, through
the Ingratitude of an evil World.

WHENEVER he met with any Crooked Thing, he reflected after this manner; My
Will is crossed; but what particular Instance of Disobedience and Contradiction
to the Will of GOD should this Affliction lead me to consider of.

HE had for many Years a Morning Cough: it every Morning raised proper
Dispositions of Piety in him.

IN managing his Correspondencies, He would think, What honorable Mention can
I make of my SAVIOR here, and what Service may I do for the Kingdom of my
SAVIOR on this Opportunity? He afterward added three Reflections. First; When
he was Sealing a Letter and sending it away, he would with an act of
Resignation put it over into the Hands of the Divine Providence for the Safety
and Success of it. Secondly; When he was opening any Letter, he would lift up
his Heart to Heaven that ^e might be prepared for whatever was grievous o^
joyful. Thirdly; In his last Prayers in his Study at Night before he went to
rest, he would call to mind whom he had received any Letter from in the Day,
and would make particular mention of that Person and pray for suitable Mercies
for him.

THUS I have given you a Specimen, which is all I intended, and all you can
expect here.

2. BUT that so the Doctor, whether he eat or drank or whatever he did, might
do all to the Glory of GOD; he was very constant in Ejaculatory Prayers and
Praises.

THE particular Seasons, in which he was furnished with them, were as follows,
viz.

BEFORE he set upon any signal Act of Worship, an Ejaculation must ask for help
in that Act.

WHILE he was joining with another in Social Praying he would fix his wandering
Heart by annexing such a pertinent Ejaculation unto every Sentence that was
uttered as, "LORD, I own it, or LORD I ask it!

IN hearing of a Sermon he would tack a serious Ejacul^^ion upon every Text or
Head that should be proposed in it.

BEFORE his Preaching of a Sermon, he revolved it in a Meditation that should
turn every part of it into some Ejaculation.

HIS Course of daily Meditation, which he carried on, had agreeable Ejaculations
intermixed in the whole Exercise.

Numberless Ejaculations at the LORD's Table he though it highly seasonable.

IN Singing a Psalm and Reading a Chapter, as he went along he would form
agreeable Ejaculations out of every Verse.

WHEN in his liesure Minutes he fetched Lessons from the Creatures of GOD, he
would not dismiss them until he had put them into proper Ejaculations.

WHEN any new Comfort was conferred on him, he had this Ejaculation, "LORD,
Help ^s to ^^pl^y this Talent for thy Glory". And when any new Trouble was
inflicted on him, he prayed, "LORD, Help me to ^ear as well as to hear the Rod".

EVERY new matter of Care bro't with it new Matter for his Prayers: He thought
therefore that the least he could do was to carry a short Petition to the LORD;
and thus he asked the smile of Heaven upon all that he had to do.

ESPECIALLY if any weighty Question was propounded unto him, he would not
answer it until he briefly addressed Heaven for a right Answer.

HE had often "LORD, Save thy People" in his Mind; such Ejaculations for the
Church of GOD, he often used.

HE liked that good Rule which one proposed for himself, When I think of my
Friend, let it be with a praying Though It.

WHEN he was informed of any Neighbor in Affliction, he thought it bespoke his
charitable Ejaculations.

WHILE he walke^ the Shr^^s, (...) in (...) Room with his Mind otherwise
unemployed, he would not, lose the Time, but use his Wi^ as well as Grace in
contriving some suitable Blessing for such and such as were before him; and
then he would form it into an Ejaculation for them. Thus none, but HE that
knows the Thot's afar off, were acquainted with the secret pious Motions of his
Soul.

-- So much for Ejaculatory Prayers for the present.

THE Seasons for Ejaculatory Praises you may take as follows, vis.

THE Occasions which occurred for his Prayers, sometimes too, solicited for his
Praises.

EVERY Dispensation of GOD afforded Matter for such as Ejaculation to him.

ESPECIALLY when any conspicuous Mercy was bestowed upon him, he expressed his
Gratitude by some grateful Ejaculation upon it, such as, Thou ar^ good, and
Thou do Good.

AND whenever any Perfection of GOD was by any Effects manifested unto him, he
would by some adapted Ejaculation celebrate that Perfection, saying LORD, how
great is thy Power, thy Wisdom, Justice, Sovereignty and Bounty.

-- THUS likewise of Ejaculatory Praises.

I will resume the Head of Ejaculatory Prayers; and shall conclude this Head
with some of them, which he used at a Table once and in walking the Streets; by
which you may guess very easily, how he walked as in the sight of GOD.

AT a Table, where he though it it not proper to say much, and the Discourses of
others were too trivial to be worthy of his Intention.

LOOKING on the Gentlewoman that carved for the Guests; " LORD, though it he, Carve
a rich Portion of thy Graces and Comforts to that Person.'

A Gentlewoman stricken in Years; 'Lord, adorn that Person with the Virtues
which Thou prescribest unto aged Women.'

FOR a Gentlewoman newly Married, 'Lord, Marry and Espouse that Person to Thy
self in a Covenan^ never to be forgotten.'

FOR a Gentlewoman very beautiful, 'Lord, Give that Person an humble Mind, and
let her be most concerned for those Ornaments that are of great Price in thy
sight'.

FOR one of our Magistrates, 'Lord, Inspire that Person with Wisdom, Courage
and Goodness to seek the W^lfare of thy People.'

ONE of the Ministers; Lord, Enc^ine and assist that Person to be a faithful
St^ward in thy House.'

ONE unhappy in his Children; 'Lord, Conver^ the Children of that Person, and
let him have the Joy to see them walking in the Truth'.

ONE weakly and sickly; 'Lord, Let the Sun of Righteousness arise on that
Person with Healing under his Wings'.

A Physician; 'Lord, Let that Person be successful in his Practice; and let him
carry the Distempers of his own Soul successfully to his Healer'.

ONE that had met with great Losses; 'Lord, Give that Person the good Part that
can never be taken away'.

AND for the Servants giving Attendance; 'Lord, Make them thy Children and
Servants of JESUS CHRIST'.

WHEN he walked the Streets, he still blessed many Persons who never knew it,
with secret Wishes after this manner for them;

UPON the sight of a tall Man; 'Lord, Give that Man high Seize in
Christianity: Let him fear GOD above many'.

A lame Man; 'Lord, Help that Man on moral Accounts to walk uprightly.'

A Negro; 'Lord, Wash that poor Soul; make him white by the Washing of thy
SPIRIT.'

CHILDREN standing together; 'Lord, Let the blessed Hand of CHRIST be put on
these Children'.

CHILDREN at Play; 'Lord, Let not these Children always forget the Work upon
which they came into the World'.

A Merchant; 'Lord, Make that Men a wise Merchant'.

A very little Man; 'Lord, Bestow great Blessings upon that Man, and above all
thy SON the greatest of all Blessings'.

A Man on Horseback; 'Lord, Thy Creatures serve that Man; help him to serve
his Creator.'

YOUNG People; 'Help them, O Lord, to serve their Creator in the Days of their
Youth'.

YOUNG Gentlewomen; 'Lord, Make them ^ise Virgins, and as the polished Stones
of the Temple'.

A Shopkeeper busy at Work; 'Let not this Person so mind the Affairs of this
World as to neglect the one Thing needful'.

A Man going by without observing him; 'Lord; I pray THEE, Help that Man to
take a due Notice of CHRIST'.

ONE in Mourning; 'Lord, Give that Man the Comforts which Thou have promised to
the blessed Mourners'.

A very old Man; 'Lord, Make him an old Disciple'.

ONE leaning on a Staff; 'Teach this Person, Lord, to lean on his SAVIOUR'

ONE who had spoken injuriously of him; 'Lord Bless, spare and save that Person
even as my own Soul; may that Person share with me in all the Salvations of
GOD'.

ONE that was reckoned a very wicked Man; Lord, Rescue that poor Man who ('it is
to be feared) is possessed by Satan, who leads him captive'.

IN like manner, when he has been sitting in a Room full of People at a
Funeral, where they take not much liberty to Talk, and where much Time is most
unreasonably lost; he usually set his Wits to work to contrive agreeable
Benedictions for each Person in the Company.

BUT it were endless to exemplify a thousandth part of those Ejaculations, in
which his Grace and Love were exercised.

4. HIS Fasts, Thanksgivings, Vigils, and Self-Examinations.

1. FASTING, however in this Generation it may be despised, is very useful not
only because Nature, but also Grace, fares the better for it, and is
strengthened by it: Hence it is that so many religious Men have looked upon it
as a necessary and important Duty.

THERE is a Passage in the Talmuds ( in Hierosy^ Kil^im. Fol. 32. 2.) that
Rabbi JOSI fasted eighty Easts and R. SIMEON BEN LAGISH three Hundred; that
they might see R. CAIJAH RUBBA^. The Jews report of R. ZADOK that he did so
mortify himself with Fasting that he was commonly called Chalsha i. e. the
Weak. They tell us also of R. JOSHUA BEN ANANIAH that his Face was black by
reason of his Fas^ings.

SO very frequent among the Primitive Christians was the Practice of this Duty,
that it was to be discovered in their Faces and Joints; so that Pallidi and
Trepidi were the opprobrious Names which the Heathen for this Reason gave them.

BUT among those that have done virtuously in this Respect, perhaps Dr. MATHER
has excelled them all.

IN my Sermon on my Father, I said, by a very moderate Computation, he kept
about Four hundred and fifty Fasts: I computed thus, That from his fourteenth
Year almost unto his Death, he though it himself starved unless he fasted once a
Month; that he, when concerned in any very great Affair, would also very often
keep Weekly Fasts, sometimes two in a Week; and inasmuch as he kept not Records
of all the Fasts he observed and so I could not exactly number them, I
therefore though it the Number above specified to be a moderate Computation.

I shall here give you his Frame, his Sentiments and Actions on two or three of
his Days of Fasting (in his own Words) from which you may judge of the rest.

SETTING apart a Day (the Day past) for Prayer with Fasting in my Study; I
judged my self before the LORD for my various Transgressions; and in the
Distresses of my Soul, beholding my Misery by my Estrangedness from GOD and
Exposedness to his Wrath; but believing that the LORD JESUS CHRIST the only
Mediator was willing to have Mercy upon me, after all the Indignities I had put
upon Him, if I now looked unto Him: I ^^rnestly beseeched Him graciously to
take Care of all that concerned my Salvation; and rescue me from all the
Confusions I had brought upon my self by my leaving GOD, and be my Priest,
Prophet and King forever. And I professed unto Him; that I left my immortal
Spirit in his blessed Hands, and that I would expect every part of my Welfare
as the fruit of his blessed Satisfaction and Intercession; and that I would
submit unto his glorious Dominion, Power and Wisdom so as never willingly to
withdraw from the Regulations of them; but I would fly unto his precious Blood
for Pardon whenever I perceived in my self any Deviations. And I concluded with
a triumphant Faith that He would do me Good, and GOD would have no Controversy
with me; and that I should after a desirable manner Know, Love and Honor Him;
and that I shall find my never dying Soul under the peculiar Care of a merciful
Redeemer in the Times of the greatest Extremity that shall or can ever come
unto me --

-- THUS on one Day.

ON another Day he writes thus;

THIS Day having humble my self and judged my self before the LORD for my many
Provocations; and watered my Couch with my Tears in the Apprehension of my
exceeding Vileness; at length Floods of Tears gushed from me in my laying hold
on the pardoning Mercy of GOD in JESUS CHRIST. The Spirit of the most High
bro't me to a mavelous Temper which was to me like the very Suburbs of
Heaven, wherein He assured me that all my Sins were forgiven; and that his
Anger in the sense of which my Soul trembled; should no more burn against me.
Upon this I called unto mind the Names of as many Persons as I could any ways
learn had reproached and injured me; and I most heartily begged the GOD of
Heaven on the behalf of them one by one, that they might be blessed with all
the Blessing; of Goodness, and such Blessings especially as were most suitable
for them.

I also besought the LORD that I might never Sin against Him with Will or
Design or Delight any more: I professed unto Him that I should rejoice to Die
this very Day, if I might be everlastingly delivered from sinning against Him:
I declared before Him that I was very sure I should be with CHRIST e're long,
and joyfully behold his Face in sinless Glory.

ON another such Day I find in his Papers, That he did with Plenty of Tears
lament his Wretchedness: And herein, says he, I was carried forth to declare
unto the LORD, that having dishonored His glorious Name, if there were no
other way for the Honor of it to be recovered except in my Ruin, I laid my self
down at His holy Feet to be disposed of for ever by Him as He should please.
But yet I said, that His Name was a GOD that would abundantly Pardon, and that
He had provided a way for the Glory of it, and that whosoever will accept of
Salvation in and through CHRIST should upon His Word be sure to have it; and so I
concluded with Assurance that the LORD JESUS CHRIST was interceeding for me,
and that because He had Lived and Died I should not Die but Live. And these
Motions of Soul in me were accompanied with very rapturous Hallelujahs, with
Transports of Love and Praise; telling the LORD that now I would be His
forever, and I longed now to be with my REDEEMER in the Mansions that are above
where I shall certainly be; but for one Reason I desired to Live a few Days
more upon Earth, even that I might Labor and Suffer for Him, and Serve Him,
where I had sinned against Him: And this shall be my Work, all the Day long
while I have a Day to live.

THERE was once a Time and a Thing in which the Doctor was full of distress.
His Temptations and Difficulties were extraordinary: He thought himself called
unto more than ordinary Humiliations, Supplications and Resignations. In this
Time he rarely let a Week pass without setting apart a Day for Fasting with
Prayer for many Months together; and ever now and then he had his Vigils for a
Conversation with Heaven; and every Day for the most part he had one secret
Prayer more than he used to have and lay prostrate in the Dust with Tears
before the LORD, yet he though it it necessary to do something more than all this.

HE had often in his Life kept two Days of Fasting and Prayer in on Week: But
now he was resolved to spend Three Days after this manner in his Study, and
beseech the LORD thrice, knocking at the Door of Heaven for three Days
together; and he was carried through the Undertaking even beyond what his feeble
Constitution could have looked for.

HE was desirous that each Day should have it is peculiar Character, though there
were many general Strokes of Devotion which were common to all the Days.

THE Character of the first Day was Confession of, and Contrition for the Sins
which might expose him to the Displeasure of Heaven; (in which he used a
Catalogue of Things forbidden and required in the Commandments, as well as the
Ingredients of Original Sin) and he petitioned for the Pardon of all through the
Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST.

THE Character of the second Day was Resignation to the Will of GOD in whatever
Sorrows had befallen him, and in the sorrowful things which he could imagine
might possibly be inflicted on him He found astonishing Entertainment from
Heaven in this Action.

THE singular Character of the third Day was Request; first for Help under and
against all the Assaults of Temptations upon him; and then, for the Angelical
Ministry to be employed on his Behalf and for his Help in those Cases, in which
the Heirs of Salvation use to be befriended by the Ministers who do the
Pleasure of the LORD.

I will now use his own Expressions: -- My Three Days left me in a very
desirable Frame; very fearful of Sinning against GOD, very raised in my tho'ts
of CHRIST, and Heaven, and very watchful to do Good and bring forth Fruit unto
the LORD.

BUT because an Admission to extraordinary intimate Communion with Heaven uses
to be followed with sore Buffetings from Satan either by internal Impressions
or external Occurrences, I had a trembling Expectation of what might follow
upon that Intercourse with Heaven to which I had bin newly admitted.

The Evil that I feared came upon me, but yet I received a mavelous Harvest
of the Three Days. The Design of them was obtained to Admiration.

I will insert but one more Day of Prayer with Fasting, which he kept under
some Temptations; on which I find he has entered this Record.

IT was a Day full of astonishing Enjoyments, a Day filled with Resignation,
Satisfaction and Heavenly Astonishments. Heaven has as it were been opened unto
me this Day. Never did I so long to die and fly away into Heaven! I have seen
and felt unutterable Things, I have tasted that the LORD is gracious. I can by
no means relate the Communications of Heaven to which I have been admitted. I
am now sure that the great GOD is my GOD, that I stand before HIM in the
Righteousness of CHRIST, that no Good shall be withheld from me, that GOD will
use me to glorify HIM greatly, and that I shall be an Object for the
Everlasting Triumphs of infinite Grace.

I was scarce able to bear the Ecstasies of Divine Love into which I was
raptured. They exhausted my Spirits; they made me faint; they were
insupportable; I was forced to withdraw from them lest the Raptures should make
me swoon away.

I could produce a vast Multitude more of his Entertainments, his Tho'ts and
Methods on Day's of Fastings, but it would swell this Book to too great a Bulk.

2. I come therefore to write of his Thanksgivings, which were very numerous: I
shall collect but three Instances out of the many that are before me.

ON one Day he kept, he set himself; 1. To recollect the merciful Dispensations
of GOD unto him. 2. To consider the Aggravations of those Mercies in the
Greatness and Freeness of them. 3. To register them in his Memorials. 4. To
acknowledge them in his Devotions. 5. To Contrive what Returns he should make
by way of Gratitude to GOD.


HE writes, I spent the Day in such Exercises, and the sweetness of them with
the heavenly Afflatus they bro't upon my Mind, made me a rich Recompense for
the Labor of them:

IN the Close of the Day coming to ponder, What shall I now render to the LORD
for all his Benefits?

HIS Tho'ts are thus written down.

I. SHALL I not love the LORD, and be constant, fervent, unwearied in serving
of HIM? Especially in the Rules I have proposed for my Conversation?

II. SHALL I not endeavor to shine by a good Example?

III. SHALL I not husband and redeem the Golden Hours, which I enjoy in the
midst of so many Smiling Providence?

IV. SHALL I not every Day in every Capacity, Relation, Company be contriving,
What can I now and here do for God? And lay my self out accordingly?

ON! That GOD would help me thus to do!

ON another of there Thanksgivings he writes thus;

THE Forenoon of this Day I spent;

I. IN acknowledging my own ^^^eness before GOD, by which after an aggravated
Manner I have become unworthy of all that Goodness and Mercy that has followed
me all my days.

II. IN acknowledging those Glories which belong unto the great GOD as HE is
infinitely excellent in Himself, and as HE is the Creator and Governor of the
World, and unto JESUS CHRIST as HE is one altogether lovely. -- In these
Exercises my Heart was bro't to such Frames as would have turned a Dungeon into
a Paradise.

IN the Afternoon I went over the former Kindnesses of GOD unto my self in my
Tho'ts, my Psalms, my Praises.

BUT I more especially singled out three Things in which I have seen the Favor
fo God; viz. Answer to Petitions, Rescues from Temptations and those
Afflictions by means of which I have enjoyed both.

I essayed then to bless the LORD for those Favors with which at present I am
on every side surrounded, such as,

MY Life and Health.

MY Accomplishments in any Points of Learning.

MY well furnished Library.

MY Improvement in the Ministry of the Gospel.

MY peaceable Settlement in a Place of great Opportunities to do Good.

MY Success in my public and private Labors.

MY Acceptance and Interest among the People of GOD.

MY Enjoyment of my Father to this Day.

THE notable Gr^wth and Peace of the Flock, over which I am a Pastor.

HAVING employed my Admirations and Adorations upon the Grace from whence these
Things do come unto me; I then came to consider the free Grace of GOD unto me
in,

THE Gift of CHRIST unto the World.

THE Offer of HIM unto my self in particular.

THE Sense of the Necessity of CHRIST, GOD has given me.

THE Union with HIM to which the Holy SPIRIT has bro't me.

AND all the further Operations of the HOLY SPIRIT upon my Soul, by which He is
continually making me more meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

I concluded the Day with considering, What shall I render to the LORD?

I then gave my self, my whole self, and Powers, Members, Capacities and
Interests (which I owned was the least that I owed) unto the LORD.

IN particular I added, That, since I owed all my good Things to the
Compassions of GOD, I would always be contriving how to honor HIM, and would
procure some Testimony against some common Evils in the Land which are
offensive to HIM.

AND since it was the Mediation of CHRIST unto which I owed the Procurement of
all, I would preach a Sermon, the Scope of which should be to magnify the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, and invite the Minds of Men to an assiduous Contemplation of his
Glories.

THE Third and last I shall write of, shall be more particularly described than
the rest, because of something mo^^ singular and infi^^^^ive in it.

(...)

I saw that the Scriptures mentioned the Ministry of the good Angels, about the
Heirs of Salvation with Frequency; and I saw that my Life had been wondrously
signalized by the Ministry of those Angels. Wherefore loath to be guilty of such
an unthoughtful Neglect of the Angels as the Generality of the Faithful who
enjoy the Assistances of those Heavenly Guardians are, I devoted this Day to
glorify the GOD and Father of my LORD JESUS CHRIST for the Ministry of ANGELS,
which has notably befriended me unto this very Day. And I expected in this Way
not only to render my self more agreeable to those excellent Spirits, but also
to obtain from their and my LORD a more signal share of their Influence than
had ever yet been granted me.

IN the Evening before this Day, I was amazed when I beheld, but happy that I
plainly beheld, the happening of several Things that seemed as it were
contrived on Purpose to indispose me for the Duties now before me: But I
comfortably got over all the Indispositions.

TWILL be needless to relate how many Hymns I sang referring to the Angels.

IN the Morning I wrote an Illustration upon a Text about the good Angels: And
I made my Family-Offering suitable to the Design before me.

AND one Law which I laid upon my self this Day was, that in all the Intervals
of more stated Thinking, as I passed from one Object to another, I would make
Ejaculatory Thanksgivings unto the LORD upon all the Occasions which offered
themselves unto me. But how many Scores of Ejaculations thus occasionally
acknowleging the Greatness and Goodness of GOD passed from me this Day, I
cannot reckon.

MY chief Exercise in the Forenoon was, To consider exactly, and with as much
of Scripture and Learning as I could, the Existence, the Properties and the
Relations of the good Angels; and, the Honor, but not Worship, due to those
benign Spirits: And then to run over the mavelous References to their
Ministry which I have here and there found scattered in the Oracles of GOD;
whether toward particular Saints or toward the Church in General. These
Considerations with a vast Variety took in the chief of the Story of the Bible
together with the Apocalyptical Prophecies, especially in the Trumpets and
Vials wherein Angels are concerned. But my Considerations were still directed
unto the LORD with my Desires, that HE should forever be magnified and
glorified for the Things, in which he had thus commissioned his Angels to be
his Messengers and his Instruments.

I cannot fully express the Elevation of Soul with which I went through these
noble Exercises; which Exercises at last I concluded with Assurances, that I
should one Day come to praise HIM that se^s upon the Throne and the Lamb in the
Company of his holy Angels forever.

IN the Afternoon, I looked over some Catalogues of Mercies received from the
GOD of Heaven, which I had heretofore entered into my Diaries; and by comparing
of what I read in the Book of Heaven about the Agency of the Angels, I
examined, where I might make an Allowance for their subordinate Agency in my
own Affairs.

THE main Heads of Kindness done for me which the Word of GOD permitted me to
count Angelical were these.

I. I have Reason to think, that the Par^ntal Government, which in my Childhood
was a thousand Ways a Blessing to me had a B^ass very often given to it by the
Angels of GOD.

I considered Jud. xiii. 12.13. and Met. ii. 1^.

II. I have bin preserved in and from many Dangers while I was yet a Child by
the Angels looking after me. -- I considered Mat. XVIII. 10.

III. IN my Education I was wonderfully circumstanced by Helps and Means of
Learning, by a Capacity to Learn and kind Conduct of Tutors, which the Angels
doubtless influenced. -- I considered Genesis XXI. 17.18.19.

IV. WHEN Epidemical Sickness, have carried off many of my Neighbors, and I
have bin in the midst of them, I have been kept unto this Day, by the Angels
about me. -- I considered Psalm. XCI. 3.4.

V. I have made many Journeys and never yet came to any Harm in any of them:
The Angels were my Keepers. -- I considered Psalm. XCI. 11.13.

VI. I was blessed with an early Conversion to GOD; and the blessed SPIRIT has
bin ever since wondrously at work upon my Soul to fit me for the Society of
Angels in a better World. Here was a Joy, and as to many Circumstances, a Work
of Angels. -- I considered Luke XV. 10.

VII. MY Call to the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Hearts of People being so
disposed that I have had my Call in so remarkable a Place as where my Lot is
cast, has bin a Thing full of Wonders, and I don't fear to say full of Angels.
-- I considered Acts XVI. 9.10.

VIII. THE Door of Utterance Opened for me has some surprising things in it,
which I am certain have proceeded from the Angels of GOD. -- I considered Luke
I. 20. Isa. VI. 6.7.

IX. MY strange Opportunities to do Good and and serve the Church of CHRIST
both by speaking and Writing; and the Impulse I have often had upon my Mind, at
which I have often bin amazed There has bin the Energy of Angels in these
Things. -- I considered Act. x. 30, 32. Act. viii. 29.

X. MY Marriages have bin under the Direction of Angels, and the Condition of
my Family also. -- I considered Genesis xxiv. 7.

XI. THE Provision of a Food convenient for me have frequently bin so strangely
timed, that I were blinder than a stone if I should not see Angels my
Providers. -- I considered Psalm. lxxviii. 25.

XII. UNREASONABLE Men that had no Faith have Zealously fought my Ruin for my
Faithfulness to the Interest of CHRIST; but I have had an Host of Angels for my
Guard. -- I considered Genesis xxxiii. 4. and Dan. vi. 22.

XIII. MY lost Health has bin restored and prolonged; Have not the Angels bin
my Physicians. -- I considered John v. 4.

XIV. MANY a Time have I bin ready to do those Things which would have bin very
contrary to GOD'S Glory as well as pernicious to my own Welfare; but I have bin
strangely hindered: By whom? Truly the Angels of the LORD. -- I considered Numb.
xxii. 32.

SUCH Things as these I did with multiplied Hallelujahs acknowledge on my Study
Floor before the LORD. And in the midst of my rapturous Praises I could not
forbear saying, Bless the LORD, O my Soul, and forget not all His Benefits!
And, if any good Angels of the LORD are now with unto me, Do You also (...) the
LORD ye Heavenly Ministers: And Oh, (...) His, (...) HIM.

FROM hence I went on to Supplications that the great GOD would go on more than
ever to employ His good Angels for my GOOD, which I also then particularized in
many Articles; and that HE also would preserve me from the Illusions and
Injuries of Evil ones.

I then considered, What Returns I should make unto the LORD for the Benefits,
which I have received by His Angels. And here I though it on the Message which an
Angel bro't from Heaven unto one of his Fellow Servants toward the Close of a
Day spent in extraordinary Devotions, Thou art a desirable MAN. [Dan. ix. 23.]
So I spent an Hour or two in considering what would render me such a Man.

ONE special Thing wherein I proposed unto my self a way to become desirable
was to become Angelical

-- Accordingly I considered;

HOW the Angels were continually engaged in beholding and admiring the Glories
of the great GOD. [ Mat. xviii. 10.]

HOW They were continually studying the Mysteries of Redemption by JESUS CHRIST
with the Characters and Approaches of His Kingdom. [1 Pet. 1.12.]

HOW They were continually upon the Wing to go upon the Errands of the King of
Heaven. [ Psalm. ciii. 20, 21.]

HOW They were continually doing of Good among the People and Churches of the
LORD, [ Heb. 1.14.]

HOW They took particular Satisfaction in the Conversion of miserable Sinners.
[ Luke xv. 10.]

HOW the Angels, in fine, were very Holy. -- These Things I considered for my
own Imitation.

BUT for the Close of all; because I though it it would be a little Angelical, as
well as otherwise agreeable, I took a List of many poor People in my Flock with
some Care to have their Necessities relieved against the approaching Winter.

AND so the Day ended.

3. IT is impossible for me to tell how many VIGILS Dr. MATHER kept, he not
always keeping an Account of them: I shall therefore only in general let you
know that he frequently in former Years conversed with his SAVIOR in the Night
Watches.

HE considered that the Primitive Christians in Obedience to that Command of
Watching unto Prayer sometimes had their VIGILS which were of great Use unto
them in their Christianity. To spend a good Part of a Night now and then in
Prayer, and so take the Advantage of a noctural Solitude, and abridge
themselves of their usual Rest, for the sake of a devout Conversation with
Heaven; They found GOD rewarding them and the Devotions of such VIGILS with a
more than ordinary Degree of Heavenly Consolation. And so the Doctor likewise
found it. He has frequently withdrawn from his Lodging agreeable enough unto
Him, and in the Dead of the Night has retired unto his Study; where he has
thrown himself on his Floor in the Dust, and wrestled with him in Prayer for a
great while together. In doing thus he was rewarded with unutterable
Communications from Heaven.

4. I will here give my Reader the Result of three Self-Examinations, which I
find in the Doctor's Papers, and which will be sufficient to show how he
proceeded in that Exercise.

I find in one of his Self-Examinations, preparatory to a Communion, what
follows recorded.

I find; [1.] NOT only my Understanding sees, but my Will chooses the great GOD
as my best Good and my last End.

I. MY Interest in HIM is my greatest Wish and Joy. According to, Psalm. xvi. 5,
6. Psalm. lxxiii. 25. ^am. iii. 25. Isa. xxvi. 13.

Object. THEN You would be more careful and earnest for securing it.

Answ. I. I mourn under and strive against my own coldness, and endeavor to
stir up my self.

2. MY Zeal to make sure of any other Enjoyment is not so lively as to make
sure of this.

2. I do heartily embrace and propose ^^e Gloryfying Him, as the main Design
upon which I would be and live and work.

Quest. HOW do you know that?

1. BY my frequent and actual Dedications to his Glory.

BY the Disposition of my Soul in Prayer for any Mercy, above all for that
Mercy.

3. BY my exceeding Satisfaction, when I see GOD acknowledged, especially when
by me, or by my means.

[2.] WITH much Detestation I reject all that which has made any Separation
between the LORD and my Soul. -- Sin is that accursed Thing, Isa. lix. 2.
Wherefore -- I lament it; I abhor it; I labor to avoid it.

[3.] I essay to come unto JESUS CHRIST the ever-glorious Mediator that I may
be instated in the full Enjoyment of GOD. According to John xiv. 6.

1. THIRSTY after the Fountain of Life in GOD, to the Lord JESUS CHRIST as the
Way. 2. I would have none but HIM to be my SAVIOR. 3. I am free that HE should
execute every one of all his Offices in the accomplishing of my Salvation.
Blessed be the LORD, who has not lest ^^e destitute of his Eternal Mercies.
I employed a Collection of Marks which I had lying by me; I proceeded by
direct rather than reflex ones; That is to say, Examining whether I had done
these and those good Things, I put it out of Doubt by doing them over again.
Incredible Satisfaction and I hope some Satisfaction was the Effect of these
blessed Exercises.

THE Result of the second Self-Examination, which I promised, I find written as
follows.

ASKING the Help of Heaven in this Work, that if I were yet unsound I was
desirous to begin the Work of Conversion again, and anew go over all the
sorrowful Hours which I had seen in that Work: But that if I saw my own
Sincerity, my Hands would thereby be strengthened in the Warfare to which I am
called.

I then found such Things as these, which made me hope that the LORD had begun
a never dying Work of his Grace upon my Soul.

1. THE Supreme Design and Desire of my Soul is, that GOD may be forever
glorious.

INFERIOR Ends are become despicable in my Eyes; and I apprehend those to be
the vilest Fools, who live only unto themselves.

THE Voice of my Soul is, Oh, let the LORD be magnified! Hence I am contriving
every Week, every Day and perhaps oftener than so, What can I do for the Name of
GOD.

HENCE my Thirst after an Enlargement in the Service of GOD, and after the
Enjoyment of my own Salvation, does then after the most melting Manner
transport me, when I think, Hereby the Glory of the infinitely amiable GOD will
be discovered.

HENCE those Things by which the Glory of GOD is obscured and eclipsed;
especially those cursed Lusts of mine which have robbed the LORD of that Glory
that I might have bro't HIM, do vex and cut my very Soul within me.

Finally, MY Heart rejoices in any Revenues of Glory bro't any way to the LORD:
I fell my own Interest gratified by it, and see my best Friend honored and
advanced.

2. MY Heart is insatiably pressing after the high Seize of Religion.

OH! When I consider what it is to converse with GOD continually; and not only
to be living always with and upon and unto the LORD, but also to love no
Creature except in HIM, and for HIM, and to have HIM for my All in all, My
Hear^ springs at it. I cry, I strive, LORD, let me thus draw near unto THEE.

And herein the LORD gives me some Experience that is exceeding desirable.

FOR when I have bin mightily carried forth in my public Dispensations I have
taken Comfort: In what? Not that any Gifts of Mine have been seen, but that the
Power, the Wisdom, the Goodness and Truth of the glorious GOD have glittered
through me as through a sorry Lanthorn to the View of many Hundreds at a time. This
even dissolves my Heart and causes me to love that GOD who has honored HIMSELF
by me.

HENCE also my Spirit grows more unconcerned about keeping or losing any
Creature Comforts, [consolatiunculas Creaturulas;] for I can encourage my self
in the LORD my GOD.

3. I drive a continual Trade of the most exact, explicit Addresses unto the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is the Mediator between GOD and Man; soliciting HIM to
accomplish the great Work of bringing my GOD and my Soul together, and fulfill
all his Offices in the Doing of it.

4. MY Respect unto the Commandments of GOD is Universal. Be a Precept never so
difficult and so likely to be recoiled at by Flesh and Blood; if I see it is
GOD's, my Soul says, It Is Good! let me Obey it till I die!

5. LET my own Iniquity assault me with never so much Vehemence and Violence, I
never let go the Combat: But if I am foiled, I mourn, I am humbled, I am
grieved exceedingly; and with extreme Ardor and Anguish, I Keep crying unto
Heaven for Help; resolving so to do while I have a Day to Live. -- Wherefore,
^less the Lord, O my Soul!

IN the third and last Examination, which I shall mention, his Soul sallies
forth unto these three Acts of elevated Christian^^^

1. LORD, I am so ^^^fied in the infinite Glory and Greatness of my LORD JESUS
CHRIST, and of Thy infinite Regard to Him, that I wholly give up my self unto
that Illustrious LORD and I pitch upon it as my chief Happiness to serve Him
forever.

2. LORD, I am in such ill Terms with my Sin, that I most heartily give Thanks
unto THEE for the most bitter and ^umbling Dispensations of thy Providence
toward me that have any Tendency to mortify it.

3. LORD, I willl always be at Work for THEE, and be so far from thinking much
of any Work, which I may do for THEE, that whatever Suffering do be^all me for
the sake of that Work, I will rejoice in them exceedingly -- These three
Self-Examinations will give you a Specimen of his Procedure in that Employment.

5. HIS Morning Tho'ts, manner of spending Saturday-Afternoons, and Method of
Sabbatizing, his Reading of the Scriptures and Application of the Promises,
Employment of his Mind at the Eucharist, with his Prayers at the Sacrament, his
Petitioning for three Favors, and his Resolution for a Walk with GOD.

[1.] I have already written of the stated Course of Thinking he observed for
every Morning in the Week: I shall here just let you know, that the Doctor
constantly, besides his Reflections upon the Question for the Morning, fixed
his Rising Tho'ts in the Morning upon some Scripture, which might be of special
Consequence of his beft Interests.

ONE Example may serve for all here: The Text he chose for one Morning was that
in Zech. xiii. 1. On which his Tho'ts were under these Heads; 1. THE Blood of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST is fitly compared unto a Fountain. 2. IT IS an open
Fountain. 3. THE End of it is the Washing away of Sin. 4. SIN is therefore to
be looked on as the vilest Uncleanness.


IT would take up too much Room here to describe at large this Method and the
Usefulness of it: All I shall add about it is, that Dr. MATHER went over many
Portions and Chapters of the Bible in this Method, and handled multitudes of
Cases referring to the most important Points in Christianity.

[2.] HE had a particular holy Way of spending the Afternoon of Saturdays.

-- HIS Method was this; 1. MAKING three Prayers THE first, ((...) he begun
other Afternoons) consisting of Praises unto GOD for His Mercies unto Him, and
his Requests on the behalf of others.

THE second; consisting of more signal Converse with GOD, in renewing of
Covenant and Closures with JESUS CHRIST and the like.

THE third, consisting of Petitions relating to the Ministerial Capacity, in
which he was placed, and particularly the Services of the Day ensuing.

2. THINKING on that Question, What is it that I am further to do for the Name
of GOD? 3. MEDITATING on the Truths of GOD, especially such as he was to
deliver on the Morrow. 4. READING of Books and Singing of Hymns in which his
Graces might be exercised. He spent many such Blessed Afternoons and kept
Records of them.


[3] HAVING spoken concerning Saturday Afternoons; it is natural to enquire how
he spent the Sabbath?

I will here give you what I find, the various Exercises he went through on but
one Sabbath.

HAVING the Evening before laid aside all Affairs that might be any Encumbrance
to him, having devoted the Evening to the Exercises of Piety, and charged His
Family to make Preparation for the Sabbath; in the Morning he awoke Blessing
GOD for another Sabbath, and arose earlier than on other Days.

HE considered his usual Question for the Morning. What shall I do for the Good
of the Flo^k that I have under my Charge? He sang his Morning Hymn, and coming
down into his Study, wrote his Answer to his Question.

HE applied himself to his Maker, as for the Pardon of his former Trespasses on
His holy Day of Rest; through the Blood of him who is the LORD of it, so for
Grace from HIM now to sanctify his Day.

THROUGHOUT the Day, he kept his Tho'ts in an agreeable Employment and under the
necessary Government. When he was not engaged in any extended Exercise of
Devotion, he was continually forming Admonitions of Piety from occasional
Objects and Occurrences; Every Thing about him preached unto him, and he
usually turned the Lessons into Ejaculatory Prayers. If he found his Mind begin
at any Time to ly fallow and empty of good Tho'ts, he presently rebuked it and
renewed them. It any evil Tho'ts began to make the least Approach to his Mind,
he presently bewailed it and rejected them, and raised good ones contrary to
them.

HE so took heed against Sinning with his Tongue, that he did not utter one
Word on the Day, but what he though it he did well to say.

HE wrote an Illustration upon a Text of the sacred Scripture.

HE read a suitable Portion of the Old Testament in the Hebrew Language.
Another in the French. And then a suitable Portion of the New Testament in the
Greek.

THEN he made the Morning Prayer of his Study.

HIS Breakfast (which was as his other Meals slender) being bro't him, his Food
was received with Praises to GOD, Meditations on the nobler Provisions which He
had made for his better Part.

WITH the like Dispositions and Meditations he anon took the other two Meals of
the Day.

HE went down to his Family, sang and prayed with them.

HE gave Charges to his Family to remember the Sabbath Day and keep it holy.
And, to the very small Children that were to stay at home, he assigned
Sentences of the Bible to be got by Heart.

HE returned to his Study, and prayed that the public Sacrifices, to which he
was going might be profitably and acceptably carried on.

HE went unto the Public, where his venerable Parent performed the public
Ministrations. The very Bell put him in Mind of the joyful Sound. Here he gave
such Attention that not one Passage of the Prayer, not one Head or Text, and
scarce one Sentence in the Sermon passed without his Mind moving toward Heaven
with an adapted Confession or Petition upon it. And every Verse of the Psalm he
accompanied with a Note and a Prayer deduced from it.

WHEN all was finished, he set himself to form Desires for all the Hearers, and
the Desires and Resolves for his own Life; and think on those Improvements in
Piety, to which the Subject treated on might lead him.

RETURNING to his Study, he read over some Discourses on the great Sabbatism
which the Church of GOD is to look for, and the glorious Things which are
spoken about the City of GOD, and the Prophecies relating to the latter Days.
This he did (as he usually did) because he looked on the Sabbath as a peculiar
Type and Sign of the blessed Millennium.

GOING to his Table, he fed the Souls of the Company with as profitable
Discourses as he could entertain them with.

AND he also drew out his Soul to the Hungry; he though it it a Day proper to
dispense Kindnesses unto the Poor; he was careful to have some such invited
unto his Table.

AFTER this, he went on to the Affairs of the great Sabbatism. He read a
Paragraph of Scripture referring to it, with his acutest and most penetrating
Tho'ts upon it and suitable Ejaculations. And he sang an Hymn relating to it.

THEN prostrate in the Dust, he poured out a Prayer for Zion in the Dust, and
for the Hastening of the Day of GOD.

UPON this he took the Sermon He was to preach immediately, and run it over so
that his M^^d was formed into proper Tempers and Wishes on every Head of the
Sermon.

HE then on his Knees bewailed before the LORD such Sins as the Sermon he was
to preach most called him to repent of; and prayed for Grace to do such Things
himself, as his Sermon was to excite his Hearers to; and begged for the Help of
Heaven in the Work before him.

HE went unto the public, and spent about three Hours in carrying on the
Services there, in a great Assembly with great Assistance from Heaven.

HIS Mind, between the Conclusion of the Services, and his visiting of his
Habitation, was filled with Prayers that what had passed might make due
Impressions upon the People.

EXCESSIVELY tired he drank his beloved Tea, with Praises to the glorious GOD,
and some Tho'ts on his precious Benefits to which the Water led him.

HE made a Prayer for such Blessings as he was daily to ask for.

HE went down to his Family; where he catechized his Children; and went through
the Sermons of the Day in a way of Dialogue with them; and sang and prayed with
them and the Neighbors that came in to join with them.

THEN he caused such of his Children as could do so, to tell him, What new
Matter of Prayer they were apprehensive of? And he charged them to retire with
it before the LORD.

HAVING also ordered one of his Sons to hear the Servants read and say their
Catechism: he retired unto his Study and meditated on that Point; What have I
l^^t undone that it would be for my Consolation and Satisfaction to do before I
die?

HE read in a Book of Piety, a Sermon that might add unto the Heavenly Tincture
on his Mind.

HE was called to pray with a Sick Person, unto which he went with Alacrity as
unto a Duty of the Sabbath.

HE went again to his Family, and sat with them, while each of the capable
Children successively read their several parts of some Book of Dovotion to the
whole Family: And he took Occasion from thence to renew his ^^^tructions to
them.

THEN he sang with his Family his Evening Hymn.

HE returned to his Study, and in Prayer gave Thanks for the Mercies of the
past Day; and implored a Pardon for the Errors, of it, both of which he
endeavored particularly to enumerate. He committed all his Interests into the
Hands of his dear SAVIOR, and exerted a Principle of Grace in an Act that was
an evident Token of Salvation, that might assure him of his Safety if he were
to die before the Morrow.

Finally, HE declared before the LORD, that although some had observed a Reward
of Temporal Blessings even in the ensuing Week to encourage their Sabbatizing,
he had been abounding in this Work of the LORD without the Encouragement of any
such Expectation. If never so much Disappointment or Affliction should befall
him in the Week, or in the rest of his Life, yet he would go on in the Labors
of Sabbatizing to him; and assure himself that he should find his Account in
the Rest that remains for the People of GOD; but renouncing all Pretense to
Merit in his own Performances, So he went to Rest; and fell asleep reading some
divine Author.

THIS Variety of Duty (I find) was done by him on one Sabbath: And although he
found himself very weary, yet his Spirit found those unspeakable Consolations
and Advantages from such unwearied Sabbatizing, as carried rich Compensations
with them.

[4] WHEN he read the Scriptures, he had one very holy and useful Practice in
it.

THIS was, a Course of Reading with such a Devout Attention as to fetch at
least one Observation and one Supplication, (a Note with a Wish) out of almost
every Verse in the Bible. He had a Prospect of more than a little Good by it;
he though it a great deal of Truth and Grace might pass through his Soul in thus
waiting upon GOD, and his Prospect did not fail him. The Reading the Scriptures
in such a Manner and with such an Affection proved unto him a most glorious
Opportunity for Conversing with GOD. And he gave more Thanks to Heaven for
teaching him this way of Living than if he had the greatest Earthly Revenues
bestowed on him.

AND here is a proper Place to relate a Proposal, which he drew up in the
Manner and Words following, Viz.

LET it be a part of my Business every Day to be applying of the PROMISES.
There are certain Promises that are of continual Use in the Christian's daily
Walk; and I wish I might every Day have some delightful Reflections on several
of them.

EVERY Day I shall have Occasion for a Promise of a Supply for all my Wants in
the Day: Such an one is that in Phil. iv. 19. GOD will supply all your Needs.

EVERY Day I shall have Occasion for a Promise of Grace to manage the Day for
the Glory of GOD. Such an one is that in Zech. x. 12. I will strengthen them in
the LORD, they shall walk up and down in his Name says the LORD.

EVERY Day I shall have Occasion for a Promise of a growing Victory over Sin.
Such an one is that in Mic. vii. 19. He will subdue our Iniquities.

EVERY Day I should have a Promise of Success in my Undertakings. There is one
in Psalm. i. 3. Whatsoever he does shall prosper.

EVERY Day I should have a Promise of Protection from Dangers. There is one in
Psalm. xci. 10. No Evil shall befall thee.

EVERY Day I should have a Promise of Counsel in my Difficulties. There is one
in Psalm. xxxii. 8. I will instruct thee, and I will teach thee in the Way which
thou should go.

EVERY Day it were good I should have a Promise of not being the worse by
whatever happens to me. It Is to befound in Romans viii. 28. All things shall work
together for Good.

EVERY Day I cannot be without a Promise of Eternal Happiness at my dying Day.
Here it is, Luke xii. 32. It is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the
Kingdom.

OH! That I might often every Day be glancing at such Promises as these! It
would be Heaven upon Earth to be doing so; and it would have a charming
Efficacy upon me for the perfecting of Holiness in the Fear of GOD.

[5.] THE! Doctor had much Exactness in the Method of employing his Mind at the
Table of the LORD -- I will here transcribe only the first of the many ^n^^^nce
he recorded of his more methodical Proceedures at the sacred Table.

PRAYER being finished, his Mind thus operated;

Do I need the LORD JESUS CHRIST? Yes, infinitely; but chiefly on two Accounts.

THE Guilt of Sin on me is mountainous; none but HE can remove it: The Power of
Sin in me is mavelous; none but HE can subdue it.

BUT am I wi^ing to have the LORD JESUS CHRIST? -- Yes, most heartily.

FOR there is a dreadful Necessity that the Miseries of my Soul should be
relieved. -- HE and none but HE can relieve them.

I cannot find any Thing unlovely in the LORD JESUS CHRIST; all His Benefits
and Offices are desirable. -- And therefore, LORD, I am willing

ART Thou so? Then take HIM, says the LORD, I give HIM to Thee.

BY this Time the Sacramental Bread was brought unto Him to seal the Gift;
which He took [and eat] accordingly.

AND then he proceeded; The LORD JESUS is mine; If I am ready to question it, I
may now see and feel and taste it. My LORD and SAVIOR I may be sure, will
engage for my Good and perfect every part of my Salvation.

AT the Administration of the Wine; and after Prayer; -- Thus,

THE first Covenant is broken; It speaks nothing but Confusion to fallen Man:
The gracious GOD therefore enters into a New Covenant which is of Grace. In it
is tendered all manner of Good for Believers on CHRIST, the Mediator of that
Covenant.

AM I willing to come under the Wings of this Covenant? -- Yes; LORD, Thou have
made me willing.

THEN, says the LORD, Here is the New Testament in my Blood.

By this Time the Sacramental Wine came unto him; he drank of it, and thereby
he had all the Good of the Covenant sealed unto Him.

He then proceeded; Now I shall have Repentance and Remission of Sins. Now all
my Changes will be well ordered for me. My GOD will guide me by Counsel and
bring me to Glory. All the great and precious Promises of GOD are my Heritage
and shall be the Rejoicing of my Heart.

THIS one Instance may teach us how to manage our Sacramental Meditations much
to our spiritual Profit. The Sermons which he heard preparatory to Communion,
he made very subservient to his Meditations in this Way of regularly
marshalling them on such blessed Occasions

[6.] BUT when the Doctor himself administered the Eucharist, his Devotion was
very flaming and his Prayers exceedingly fervent.

HIS Prayers, poured out at the Celebration of the Sacrament were dictated, as
GREGORY NA^IANZEN says of his Fathers, by the Holy SPIRIT of GOD. He rarely
administered on such Occasions before the LORD without signal Irradiations of
Mind and very enlarging Influences. He could not, as he told me, keep written
Memorials of those Passages; For, if his Employments were not so many as to
hinder him, it were next to impossible to recollect and express the warm
Requests, the strong Cries, the celestial Expansions of his Soul when employed
in that heavenly Business.

[7.] He has often begged with irresistible Importunity Three Favors of the
glorious GOD; in which there is implied all that a Man need desire and seek
after.

First, THAT CHRIST might appear to him the most glorious of Objects.

Next, THAT Sin might appear to him the most odious of Objects.

Thirdly, THAT the heavenly World might be as real to him as any Thing upon
Earth.

[8.] I cannot conclude this Chapter more agreably than with his Resolutions
for his W^lk with GOD? They being the brief and full Recapitulation of what I
have written before concerning his Constancy in Religion.

RESOLUTIONS for my W^lk with GOD? LORD Thou that workest in me to Will, help
me to resolve.

I. As to my Thoughts.

1. To endeavor that I will keep GOD^ CHRIST and Heaven much in my Tho'ts.

2. IN a special manner to watch and pray against all Evil Tho'ts; especially
in the Times of Devotion.

II. As to my Words.

1. To be not of many Words; and when I do speak to do it with Deliberation.

2. To remember my Obligations to use my Tongue as the LORD'S and not my own;
and therefore to promote savoury Discourse if I can wherever I come.

3. NEVER to answer any Question that is weighty without lifting up my Heart to
GOD in a Request that HE would help me to give a right Answer.

4. To speak Ill of no Man, except on a good Ground and for a good End.

5. SELDOM to make a Visit without contriving, What I may do for GOD in that
Visit?

III. As to my daily Course of Duties.

1. To pray at least thrice every Day. 2. To meditate once a Day after a
Doctrinal and Applicatory Manner.
3. To make a Custom of propounding to my self these three Questions at Night
before I sleep.

WHAT has been the Mercy of GOD in the Day past?

WHAT has been my Carriage before GOD in the Day past? AND

IF I die this Night, is my immortal Spirit safe?

4. To lead a Life of constant Ejaculations. 5. To be diligent in observing
illustrious Providence.
BUT in all to be continually going to the LORD JESUS CHRIST as the only
Physician and Redeemer of my Soul.

LORD, THOU that workest in me to resolve, help me to perform.

THUS I have written of his Christian Life and Conversation; and here conclude
this Chapter.

CHAP. VII HIS latter Days; in which his Sentiments of some important Things
are mentioned, together with a Relation of Temper in his last Illness and the
Cirumstances of his Death; and at the End a Catalogue of the Books he published.
SECT. I. HIS way of Living in his latter Days.
1. THE very learned and good DRUSIUS says, that his Old Age was better to him
than his Youth. So was Dr. MATHER'S: He was generally more hearty in his latter
Years than former; and, although he was always very temp^rate, in his later Times
he was exceedingly regular; in every Thing but Reading and Writing, for he was
as constantly employed in these, as if he had but newly taken a Pen or Book
into his Hand.

2. CICERO, in his Book of Famous Orators, speaking of PISO who when he first
set out got considerable Fame, says, that he maintained his, Ground while he
could labor and be industrious, but continues TULLY, Postea quantum detraxit ex
Studio, tan^um amisit ex Gloria, h. e. As he ceased from his Study he lost his
Credit. Dr. MATHER, as I said before, did not abate his Studies; and hence, he
had those docti Sales and that grata Senectus which CLAUDIAN admired in
PALLADIUS, that is, he rendered himself agreeable in Age by his polite
Facetiousness and the Surprising Discoveries of his Reading and Wit. Hence
likewise he was caressed by all that knew him (though in his latter Days he
studiously avoided Company as much as he could) and was resorted to by Persons
of all Characters for his Directions. Advice and Instruction.

3. I must relate one Thing by which all Parents would do well to receive
Instruction, it is this; He would not, as I more especially know in his latter
Days, keep a morose Carriage toward his Children, nor at an haughty Distance
from them; but forever when they came into his Presence he would condescend to
the Familiarity of an Acquaintance; and thus he would instruct and edify, thus
allure and charm us, thus make us love his Society, ever come into it with
Delight and never leave it but with Sorrow: -- Which Method, I believe, will
work more forcibly upon any Children of common Sense and more engage them to
love their Parent and incline them to be good and virtuous, than any crabbed
Looks, austere Orders or surly Demands whatever.

2. His Sentiments upon some important Things.

1. ALTHOUGH he was a Defender of the Doctrines of Grace, as expressed in the
Articles of the Church of England; and, as to Church Discipline, was of
Congregational Principles, which he looked on as most agreeable to the Word of
GOD and the Rights of the Christian Church; yet he was very extensive in his
Charity, being desirous to receive all whom CHRIST receives to the Kingdom of
GOD, viz. All who fear GOD and work Righteousness, all who do not abet Errors
and indulge Practices inconsistent with the Christian Life: And being of such a
charitable and good Temper, he must needs be an Enemy to all Persecution as he
was. He though it that a good Subject and good Neighbor had a Right to Life and
the Comforts of it, let his Opinion in Religion be what it will, He early
imbibed this Opinion, grew strong in it, left it behind him and to the last,
was an Encourager of manly Religion without any bitter Spirit common to this
Party and that Faction. 2. As it is well known that Dr. MATHER was well
acquainted with the Sacred Prophecies, on which he formerly writ and printed
his Tho'ts; so it may not be amiss to inform my Reader, that, in several Things
relating to the Prophecies, he saw cause to alter his Mind; particularly
concerning the second Coming of CHRIST, the Conflagration, the New Heavens and
New Earth, and the Calling of the Jews.
I will here write those Sentiments of these Things of which the Doctor just
before he died had a firm Belief from a strict Enquiry, long Study and much
Prayer; and, as near as I can, I will express his Sentiments in his own Words
in the following Assertions.

1. THE second Coming of the LORD will be at and for the Destruction of the Man
of Sin and the Extinction of the Roman Monarchy under the Papal Form of it. He
though it that, although Wise Men have interpreted our SAVIOR'S Coming in the Clouds
of Heaven and the Brightness of his Appearance as if it me'nt any Thing besides
His Personal Coming, herein they spoke foolishly and unaccountably. For as
their Interpretations leave us destitute of any Proof that our LORD will ever
come at all, so they go very far toward a Trespass on the third Commandment.
2. THE Conflagration described by the Oracles of GOD in strong Terms, and which
we are warned of by the Mouth of all the Prophets; this Conflagration will be
at the second Coming of the LORD. To make the Petrine Conflagration signify no
more than the laying of Jerusalem and her Daughter in Ashes: And to make the
New Heavens and the New Earth signify no more than the Church State of the
Gospel. -- These are shameful Hallucinations. And as for the New Earth, before
the Arrival of which no Man can reasonably expect happy Times for the Church of
GOD upon Earth, it is the greatest Absurdity to say that it will take Place
before the Petrine Conflagrations; and there is no Prospect of arguing to any
Purpose with such as can talk so very ridiculously. 3. UPON the Conflagration
the glorious GOD will create New Heavens and a New Earth. In the upper Part of
our Atmosphere, where will be the New Heavens, there will be the holy City
which GOD has prepared for his People. This holy City will be inhabited by the
raised Saints, attending on our SAVIOR there and receiving the inconceivable
Recompenses of all their Services and Sufferings for Him. The New Earth will be
a Paradise, prepared for another People and full of the goodness of the LORD.
4. IT is impossible to find any Inhabitants for the New Earth, but a set of
People that shall escape the Conflagration. It is a Thing plainly revealed unto
us, that our descending Redeemer, while yet at a further Distance than he will
anon come, when he sets Fire to the Earth, will by his Almighty Voice raise the
Dead, whom he intends for Blessedness, so fetch them to him as to bring them
with him: As he is going on in his nearer Approaches with his illustrious
Retinue to give Order for the tremendous Fire, he will hear the Cries of his
chosen, called and faithful ones, and he will send His Angels to do for them as
once for ELIJAH; These Hundred and forty four Thousand Servants of GOD and
Walkers with HIM, that have the Mark of GOD upon them, when the Destroyers are
going to hurt the Earth, shall be caught up to meet the LORD and with HIM they
shall be in Safety, while they shall see the Earth flaming under them. These
are they who shall return to the New Earth, possess it, and people it, they
shall soon multiply into mighty Nations upon it. 5. THE Process of Judgment on
the Sheep and Goats, in the twenty fifth Chapter of Matthew, has not one of the
Raised from the Dead concerned in it; but it is a quick Division and Decision
made by our LORD among the Christians who cry for Mercy, when they see the Fire
of GOD ready to seize upon them, determining who shall be caught up to meet the
LORD, and who shall be left to the Perdition of ungodly Men in the Flames
before them; and there shall not one ungodly Man be left living in the World.
6. THE raised Saints in the New Heavens will not marry nor be given in
marriage, but be equal with the Angels; The changed Saints on the New Earth
will build Houses and inhabit them, plant Vineyards and eat the Fruit of them,
and will have an Offspring that will be with them the blessed of the LORD; and
if blessed; then sinless and deathless: The sacred Scriptures have expressly
declared this Difference between them. 7. WHILE the holy People on the New
Earth shall be circumstanced like Adam and Eve in Paradise, in a pure and
spotless Manner Living unto GOD; the Raised Saints, being somewhat more
Angelically circumstanced, will be sent from Time to Time down from the New
Heavens unto them to be their Teachers and Rulers and have Power over Nations,
and the Will of GOD will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. This Dispensation
will continue at least for a thousand Years. Whether the Translations from the
New Earth to the New Heavens will be successively during the thousand Years, or
all together after it, has not been discovered. 8. THE New Heavens, in
Conjunction with the New Earth under the Influence of it, is that Heavenly
Country which the Patriarchs looked for. When the great GOD promised them that
he would be their GOD and bless them, they understood if of his bringing them
into this Deathless and Sinless World. They who expect the Rest promised for
the Church of GOD upon Earth to be found any where but in the New Earth, and
they who expect any happy Times for the Church in a World that has Death and
Sin in it, -- Th^se do err, not knowing the Scripture nor the Kingdom of GOD.
9. SUCH a Conversion of the Israelitish Nation with a Return to their ancient
Seats in Palestine, as many excellent Persons in latter years (and among the
Rest himself) have been persuaded of: He now though it inconsistent with the coming
of the LORD and the Burning of the World at the Fall of Antichrist, before
which Fall no body imagines that Conversion. And indeed how is it consistent
with the Deep Sleep in which the Diluvium Ignis must, as that of Water did,
surprise the World? The holy People of the Prophecies is found among the
Gentiles, the surrogate Israel. The New Testament seems to have done with a
carhal Israel; The Eleventh Chapter to the Romans is greatly misunderstood,
where we find all Israel saved by a filling up of the Gentiles which we
mistranslate the fullness of the Gentiles. The Prophecies of the old Testament
that seem to have an Aspect upon such a Nation; are either already accomplished
unto that Nation in the Return from the Chaldean Captivity; or they belong to
that holy People whom a Succession to the Piety of the Patriarchs will render
what our Bible has taught us to call them the Israel of GOD: But the final
Fulfillment of them all will be in the World to come, or the New Heavens and the
New Earth where GOD will dwell with Men and be their GOD. Of what Advantage to
the Kingdom of GOD can the Conversion of the Jewish Nation be, any more than
the Conversion of any other Nation, except we should suppose to remain upon the
Jewish Nation after their Conversion something to distinguish then from the
rest of the Christian Believers? Now to suppose this, would it not be to
rebuild a Partition Wall that our SAVIOR has demolished and abolised; which a
Christian, one would think, would no sooner go to do than to rebuild the fallen
Walls of Jericho. 10. BY all just and fair Computations the twelve hundred and
sixty Years allowed for the Papal Empire must be near, if not quite expired. By
Consequence the one thousand three hundred and thirty five Years, which bring
the Time of the End when Daniel, with every other good Man, is to rise and
stand in his Lot, are not likely to extend beyond the present Century. And for
ought any Man alive can say the Midnight Cry may be heard before to morrow
Morning. Those awful Things, which our LORD foretold as the Signs of his Coming
have been all actually exhibited and fulfilled; We have had them all in all the
Terrors of them, and a stupid World has not understood them.
THE Doctor was very much displeased with those, who, proposing rather to carp
than to search, think they have at once routed all Hopes to understand the
Scriptures and secured an unintelligible Obscurity and Ambiguity to the Divine
Oracles only by demanding with an Air of Contempt, Where will you find Gog and
Magog? They are not ordinarily capable of receiving a Rational Answer till they
have more seriously though it on what is to arrive a thousand Years before the
Rising of Gog and Magog. Suppose (what indeed the Doctor would not allow) the
Question to be unanswerable: He would then ask, Is there no Question concerning
the Raised Bodies of the Faithful which these People will confess cannot yet be
answered? And yet, continued he, they will not renounce the Faith of the
Resurrection.

THE Doctor used to say, I will also ask you one Thing, which if you tell me I
will in likewise tell you: The Bodies of the Raised shall they be furnished
with Teeth or no? Or I will only ask; Where will you find the Nations, over
which the Raised Saints (or the Overcomers) are to have Power? Tell me that,
and I will tell you where to find Gog and Magog.

AND as for those who think it improbable or incredible, that so dreadful a
Thing as a Conflagration should be ordered for such an evil World as this; they
will do well to think on the Evil of Sin and to remenber that the Antediluvian
World had us many fine Buildings, Cities and Artifices in it as, and probably
more People than, there are in ours. No more than eight Persons were saved out
of the Destruction which Flood of Water bro't upon that World; whereas there
will be a great Number, GOD knows how many Thousands, saved out of the fiery
Flood which we have to look for.

THUS I have given a brief Account of Dr. MATHER'S latest Sentiments concerning
the sacred Prophecies: I have been the more concise, because I hope I shall
procure a Publication of His Triparadisus; which will give the World a more
ample Account as well as Proof, of his Persuasion.

3. THE Doctor's Temper in his last Illnesses, with the Circumstances of his
Death.

1. As He had walked in the Light of GOD's Countenance through the greatest Part
of his Life; so in the latter Part of it he had more peculiar and lively
Displays of the Divine Favor; particularly in his last Illnesses.

In one Sickness I find he was sure all his Sins were pardoned, that he was
above the Fear of Death and that he esteemed Patience under Sickness to be
better than Health it self.

IN this Illness I likewise met with his Enquiries after the Reasons why most
Men choose rather to Live than to Die? The Causes why the Generality desire Life,
^re either because they are afraid to Die, or else because they Love Creatures
here so well that they are loath to leave them. Now neither of these Reasons
were sufficient to make the Doctor prefer Life. Not the former, for he was a
Conqueror and more than a Conqueror over Death through JESUS CHRIST; nor yet the
latter, because he could not be loath to leave the Streams to go to the
Fountain, he loved the Creator more than Creatures.

AND as for his Advantages for doing Good in this World; whenever GOD should
please to put an End to them, he was ssatisfied.

2. ONE Day, when he was laboring under some Infirmities; I find him writing
as follows:

WHEN I was pouring out my Prayers unto the LORD, I mentioned the Prolongation
of my Life to enjoy and improve more Opportunities of glorifying Him. In my
Prayers, I humbly represented to the LORD, that there were two Objections
against my dying, which my Flesh would be ready to make; but through His Grace I
had conquered them.

First, My Flesh pleaded that the Comforts of Earth were too agreeable Things to
be easily forsaken. But my Faith is persuaded and satisfied that the Delights
of Heaven are sweeter than the Comforts of Earth; and I can freely leave all
the Entertainments of this Evil World; that i may be with CHRIST, where to be
is by far the best of all.

Secondly, My Flesh pleaded, What will become of my Offspring when I am gone?
But my Faith is persuaded and satisfied, that GOD will be a Father to my
Fatherless Offspring; and my LORD JESUS CHRIST, whom I have served without
seeking, as many others would have done, to enrich my self with a Portion for
my Children, will marvellously become such a Guardian unto them, that they
shall not want any good Thing.

My Mind being on these two Accounts thus easy and ready to Die, I then besought
of the LORD nevertheless that He would yet spare my Life, to work for HIM a
little more among his People.

THUS the Doctor could say, as MARTIN of Tours did, Libera me, quaeso, Domine;
ex mortali illo Carcere; Veruntamen si adh^^ Populo tuo^^^ necess^rius, non
^e^uso Laborem.

BUT, Having Writ of his Concern for his Children, I see not why I may not add,
though it may seem out of Place here, what he wrote when some of his Children
were small, viz. His Instrument of Betrustment and Resignation for his
Children, which he knew not how soon he might leave as Orphans. -- The
Instrument, which He, prostrate in the Dust, spread before the LORD, runs in
these Terms;

O MY great and good SAVIOR, Thou SON of GOD, and the LORD in whom the
Fatherless find Mercy: The principal Satisfaction and Consolation with which I
receive the Children, which the LORD has graciously given me, at their Birth
into the World is, the Prospect of more Subjects for my SAVIOR and the
Propagation and Continuation of His Kingdom in the World. For this purpose it
is my strong and full Desire to do my Part that my Children may know their
SAVIOR and serve HIM with a perfect Heart and willing Mind. And I earnestly
cry unto HIM to produce a Work of Grace in their Souls and to take them under
the perpetual Conduct of the Spirit of Grace, that they may do so.

Now I firmly believe that the World is under the Government of my SAVIOR, and
that he sets at the right Hand of GOD, and that the Affairs of the Divine
Providence are under his Administration. He does particularly employ the
Ministry of His mighty Angels in governing the Children of Men, and yet more
particularly make them the Guardians of His little ones: most of all when in
his Providence He makes them Fatherless Children. O! Orphans well provided for!

WHEREFORE, O my SAVIOR, I commit my Children into thy Fatherly Hands. I pray
to Thee that thy gracious Providence may, and I trust in Thee that it will be
concerned for them. Oh! Let nothing be wanting to them that shall be good for
them. Cause them to Fear, to Love Thee, to walk in thy ways; and make use of
them to do Good in their Generation. Be Thou their Friend and raise them up
such as may be necessary, and in a convenient Manner supply all their
Necessities. Give thy ANGELS a Charge of them; and when their Father and Mother
forsake them, then do Thou take them up.

THIS is the Supplication, this the Resignation, this the Dependence of C.
MATHER.

3. Jam me^m Pectus ardet Conspectu Vitae Aetera^, cujus vere sentio in me
Initia, were the dying Words of a learned GERMAN Physician. The same might
Doctor MATHER use in his two last Sicknesses.

I will here recollect some Passages that occurred in the Illness before that of
which he died, which manifest his being ripe for Glory and show that those
Words were fulfilled unto Him, It shall come to pass, at Evening Time it shall
be Light!

HE said in our Hearing, LORD, Thou art with me, and do enable me to sing in
the dark Valley of the Shadow of Death. I perceive the Signs of Death upon me,
and am I not affrighted? No, not at all! I will not so dishonor my SAVIOR as
to be srighted at any Thing that can befall me, whi^t I am in his blessed Hands!

WHEN some Gentlemen came to see him, he said, I hope, I shall not be found a
Fool, but here ^^ly and sing, Soul, take thine Ease T^ou have Goods laid up in
Store for many, many Years, for endless Ages; but another sort of Goods than
what this vain World puts off its Idolaters with!

THERE were several other Passages which I will give my Reader just as the
Doctor wrote them with his sick Hand.

I feel the Life of GOD begun in my Soul, and a predominant Respect unto the
great GOD governing of me and enclining me to acknowledge him in all my Ways.
Here is a Life begun which can terminate no otherwise than in an endless Life
with my GOD. There is a Well of Water in me that will Spring up to Everlasting
Life. Death, do thy worst; there is no killing of that Life to which my GOd has
begun to raise me.

HAVE I had a glorious CHRIST living, acting and working in me, and quickening
me for living unto GOD; and will he ever lose his Hold of me? No, No; I am sure
of living with him forevermore.

BY the precious Tho'ts of my blessed JESUS often, often every day formed in my
Mind, have I had him dwelling in me; and shall I not now go to dwell with him?
I shall; assuredly I shall.

HAS a Conformity to CHRIST been the Strain and Salt of my Life; and have I
made it my Study, not only to imitate him in doing always the Things that
please the Father, but when my Afflictions have been such as to resemble his
Humiliation, have I not even rejoiced in Tribulation? And shall I not go to
partake with him in Fullness of Joy and Pleasures forevermore?

HAS my dear SAVIOR made me a Sacrificer, such a Sacrificer that not only has
my Life been filled with Devotions toward GOD and Benignity toward Men which
are Sacrifices that GOD is well pleased with through CHRIST; but also have I not
looked on all the comfortable Things of this World with a Sacrificing Eye, and
consented that the Holy ONE, if He please, should deny all these Things unto
me; let Him only bestow his SON upon me and I should be satisfied? And shall I
not now be admitted among the Priests of GOD and CHRIST? Yes indeed and even
while I am yet among the Sacrificed, and still separate, Souls under the Altar,
I shall have the White Robes of the Priesthood given to me.

HAS the glorious JESUS even here so supplied all my Wants with Riches of Glory
in my sense of having HIM for mine, that I could patiently quietly cheerfully
bear the loss of all Creatures from the view of having CHRIST concerned for me
and feeling HIM conversing with me? And now I am going from all Creatures here
below, will HE not take me where HE will show and give HIMSELF unto me, and be
unto me infinitely better than all?

HAVE I, to animate my self-unto Holiness in all Manner of Conversation, in my
Contemplations often endeavored to affect my self with the Holiness of the
purified Spirits in the Paradise of GOD; their flaming Devotions; their Delight
in GOD; their Hatred of Sin; the Contempt with which they look down on the high
Things of this World; and the Goodness with which they treat one another? Done
this which earnest Desires to be as like them as this mortal State may attain
to and will admit of? And shall I not now be ferch'd away to join with them in
the Praises of GOD?

HAS the Angelical Ministry been what I have been thankful for and mindful of?
Have I been a Cause of Joy among the Angels by being a Repenting Sinner? Have I
been deterred from doing amiss because of the Angels? Have I frequently though it,
with what a Zeal of the lord of Ho^^^ the Angels do burn; how they are upon the
Wing to excute the Commands of our LORD; with what pure Eyes of Detestation
they behold Evil and look upon Iniquity; with what Pleasure they do good
Offices for the Heirs of Salvation? And have I wished and longed, O^^k that I
were as far a^^y Capacity would allow of it like (...) those Holy ones! And
shall not my Soul now ^^^l into the Hands of those my dear ^^a^liant and ^e
^^rri^d into the glorious presence of GOD with exceeding Joy?

Am I willing to be all that my SAVIOR would have me to be? Am I willing to go
wherever my SAVIOR would have me to go? Am I willing to leave all that my
SAVIOR would have me to p^^t with? Have I no Will of my own left now to ^use
Rebellion in me? Now I have nothing to do but to die: Nay, I have not that to do
neither: I am dead already, my Will, the hardest Thing to be killed in me, is
already dead. LORD, thou will show Wonders to the Dead! My SAVIOR, I am coming
to see thy Wonders!

INDEED my Heart is deceitful above all Things; what if a deceitful Heart
should now turn me aside and I should perish with a Ly in my Right Hand? But I
make my Retreat unto the blessed JESUS, as the Prophet whose Office it is, to
save me from Delusions. I will go up from the Wilderness leaning on the Beloved
one who has espoused my Soul unto Himself. To HIM who is the Truth, I lift up
the ardent Cry of my Soul, O my SAVIOR, make my Heart sound in thy Statutes.
Let me not be confounded with the Hope of the Hypocrite. I commit my Soul into
thy Hands: I know whom I have believed; Thou will keep what I commit unto Thee.

BUT! What if after all a Sovereign GOD will have me to be a Castaway; and I
shall be cast into an Hell where the Divine Justice will be for ever scourging
of me? -- I deserve it should be so! -- Faulty Thot's! fiery Darts! -- In the
Horror of Darkness I now humble my self as Clay before the Potter, and I feel
my Heart so filled with the Love of GOD, and so satisfied in His doing all
Things right as they should be done, that if it should be so, yet I desire that
no Scourge upon me may produce any Thing from me worse than this, O love and
praise and serve the glorious GOD who does all of this! Le^ none resist the
Will of the glorious GOD who does all of this! Let me undergo all of this,
rather than ever entertain one hard Though It of the glorious ONE! -- But my Soul
being thus disposed, the HOLY SPIRIT of my GOD immediately shoots the Rays of
His Light into it, and most powerfully says unto me, These Dispositions were
never made for an Hell, the Fire whereof is for the Enemies of GOD. If it were
possible for a Soul to go to Hell with such Dispositions, it would carry Heaven
thither with it. No, no; Thou art a pleasant Child unto me: I will surely have
Mercy on thee!

AND now, vain World, farewell! Thou have been to me a very uneasy Wilderness.
Welcome, everlasting Life! The Paradise of GOD stands open for me. I am just
entering into a World, where I shall be free from Sin and from all Temptations
to it: a World where I shall have all Tears wiped from my Eyes; a World where I
shall be filled with all the fullness of GOD. The best Hour that ever I saw is
what I am hourly and gladly waiting for!

THESE Passages the Doctor writ; but many of us heard most of them from his
Lips.

4. AND now I write of his last Illness and the Circumstances of his Death.

FROM the Beginning of his last Illness, which was about the latter end of
December 1727, 8. He had a strong Assurance it would be His Death. He
therefore, writing a Note to one of his Physicians, told him, "My last Enemy is
come, I would say my best Friend."

THERE was nothing He was more desirous of and pressed after with more
Vehemence in his last Sickness than a Resigned Will. He several Times told us,
when He should have his Will entirely swallowed up in the Will of GOD he should
have no more to say to us -- He had some Things on the Anvil which he would
willingly have lived to finish, but, said he; If the GOD of my Life has ordered
otherwise, I desire to have no Will of my own. When one of his Church asked
whether he was desirous to die? He replied, I dare not say that I am, nor yet
that I am not; I would be entirely resigned unto GOD. When the Physicians
hinted unto him that he would die, He said with uplifted Hands and Eyes, 'Thy
Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.' And a few Hours before his Death he
assured those who were round his Bed, Now I have nothing more to do here; my
Will is entirely swallowed up in the Will of GOD

As through the Course of his Life He proposed the Glory of GOD as His last End,
He, at the last days of his Life, was very desirous that GOD might be
exceedingly glorified and gratified by him and his means: when therefore he was
told how much many good People prayed for him; He said, The Prayer of the
Upright is His delight; and I rejoice in that Sickness which, by procuring the
Prayers of sincere Christians, procures a Pleasure in the Infinite GOD.

HE often expressed the good hope he had; His being above the Love of Life and
the Fear of Death; assuring us, that he was going to eat the Bread and drink
the Waters of Life freely; that all Tears would be soon wiped from his Eyes;
that every Thing looked smiling about him! that it was impossible He should be
lost; that he had a strong Consolation and that his Views of the Heavenly World
were all glorious.

MANY were the Blessings he pronounced and the Charges he gave those who were
near him. How did he wish that the Blessing of HIM in whom all Nations are to
be blessed might rest on the Persons and Families of those who came to see him!
How did he wish a CHRIST might be the Portion of several, thinking HE was
Blessing ^no'? The Blessing he gave Mr. BYLES his Sister's Son, is as follows;
My dear, Child, and my Son, my Son, I bless you; I bless you; I wish you all
manner of Blessings! I know not what better to wish you than this, that you be
strong in the Grace with which our LORD JESUS CHRIST will furnish you, I know
not what better to wish you than this, that you may be an Instrument of
displaying to others the Beauties and Glories of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. I know
not what better to wish you than this, that you may be very fruitful in
Projections and Essays to do Good, that it may be your Ambition to bring forth
much of that Fruit by which our Heavenly Father may be glorified. You have been
acquainted with my poor Manner of Living, even in the more secret Strokes of
it; follow what you have found in it agreeable to the Pattern of a glorious
CHRIST. My dear Son, I do with all possible Affection recommend you to the
Blessing of our dear LORD JESUS CHRIST. Take my Hands, and my Heart full of
Blessings.

IT would a little discover the Vanity of the Writer as well as the Fondness of
the Parent, if I should write all the Doctor said to him in the Blessing He
gave him: I shall therefore but just mention the Tenor of it, when on bended
Knees his Blessing was asked; You have been a dear Son and a pl^^sant Child
unto me, and I wish you as many Blessings as you have done me Services which
are very many I wish and pray the GOD of ABRAHAM, ISAAC and JACOB may be yours
and HIS Blessing rest upon you. I wish that, as you have a Prospect of being
serviceable in the World, you may be great and considerable, as the Patriarchs
were, by introducing a CHRIST into the World. The Grace of the LORD JESUS
CHRIST be with you. AMEN!

HE informed me then, what he would have to be done as to his private Affairs
and Pape^^ and when, after several Rules of private Conduct given to me which I
shall not write, I asked him what Sentence or Word, what (...) He would have me
think on constantly, for I ever desired to have him before me and hear him
speaking to me? He said, Remember only that one word Fructuosus. What I have
thus written with relation to my self happened on the Sabbath, two Days before
he died.

THE Day before he died he had some Passages read to him out of a Book he
printed, entitled Restitutus, which Passages he said He felt, and if he had
Strength to speak he would use the very Words; I shall transcribe them, for
they will supersede ^he mention of any other Sentences by which He testified
his Preparedness for Death. They are as follows from page 41 of that Book.

IF the Request be granted, and the Felicity of having our SAVIOR graciously
with us be obtained, what ^ Strength will the Joy of the LORD give to us for
our Conflict with the last Enemy? It is a Passage in the Prophecies of JEREMIAH
concerning the Gospel Day, which is to pass from the Destruction of the old
Jerusalem to the Arrival of the ^^w, when the LORD our GOD shall come and all
his holy ones with him; Zech. xiv. 7. It shall come to pass, at Evening Time it
shall be Light. O the Light, which a glorious CHRIST present with us will give
us in the Evening, when we apprehend our selves in all the Darkness which we
should else have to terrify us, when the Curtains of a Deathbed are drawn
about us. The Light of a Soul passing into the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. The Light of an open and abundant Entra^^ into the Paradise of GOD!

MAY we have our glorious CHRIST with us, when were are passing through the Fire,
we shall be as unhurt, as untouched, as easy as the three Worthi^s were in the
fiery Furnace. By His good SPIRIT He will now say unto us, Fear thou not, for I
am with thee; Be not dismayed, for I am thy GOD and SAVIOR, I will strengthen
thee, yea I will assist thee, yea I will uphold thee with the Right Hand of my
Righteousness. Upon the renouncing of all Dependence on our own Righteousness,
and relying on the Righteousness of the perfect Obedience, which the SON OF GOD
stooping to be our Surety paid unto His own Law in our stead, He will uphold us
with the Right Hand of His Righteousness. Giving us to see our selves furnished
and covered with a Righteousness of more Account than the best Angel in Heaven
may pretend unto, He will enable us to say, The Gates of Righteousness I see
set open for me! And having a Soul set upon the Praising of GOD, greatly
affected with the Praises of his CHRIST, and strongly desirous to celebrate and
propagate, we shall be able to go on and say, I will go in at those golden
Gates; I have something to do within. I will go in and praise the LORD; It is
what I have begun to do; and His Praise endures forever: Never, Never shall I
give over the Doing of it.

VERILY the gracious Presence of our SAVIOR with us will enable us to Sing in
the Valley of the Shadow of Death and render it no more than a Shadow of Death
unto us. It will so set us above the Fears of Death, so that if perceiving the
Signs of it upon us, we be asked, Are you not frighted! We shall cheerfully
reply, No, not at all! I will not so dishonor a glorious CHRIST as to be
affrighted at any Thing that can befall me, while I am in His blessed Hands! It
will so mollify the fierce Visage of Death, as that if our Tho'ts of the dying
Hour be enquired after, we shall break forth into Triumphs upon it; O joyful
Hour! O welcome Hour! Come Lord JESUS, come quickly. Why is thy Chariot so long
a coming?

IN order to this, the Power of the LORD bring present, He will enable us to
read our Evidences for Heaven and see the evident Tokens of Salvation, in which
He has marked us for those of whom He has declared, They shall be mine in the
Day when I make up my Jewels.

WE shall see, That the Love of GOD has caused us to close with it as our
Blessedness, and to be ambitious of nothing so much as this, that we may Be and
may Do what may be a grateful Spectacle unto Him, and be afraid of allowing so
much as in the Tho'ts and Frames of our Hearts, any Thing that He may be
displeased at.

WE shall see, That the Faith of CHRIST has not only carried us unto Him, to be
made Righteous and Holy in the Evangelical Way, and be brought by Him unto the
full Enjoyment of GOD in a deathless and sinless World, but also caused us to
take up with Him as our Alsufficient Portion.

WE shall see, That we have a Spirit of Benignity toward our Neighbor, and
rejoice in all the Good that may be done unto him.

SEEING these Marks of the Lamb upon us, we shall conclude, O my SAVIOR, I am
Thine; and nothing shall pluck me out of thy glorious Hands! The HOLY SPIRIT of
GOD helps the Believer first in a way of rational Argumentation to take
Encouragement from the Things that accompany Salvation found upon him. And
while he is doing so, he breaks in upon the Soul of the Believer in a way of
more immediate Irradiation and with an overpowering and overwhelming Efficacy
assures him, The glorious GOD has made Thee one of His Children, and will
surely do thee Good.

HE will enable us to feel the Life of GOD, begun in our Souls, and a
predominant Respect unto the great GOD governing of us and enclining us to
acknowledge HIM in all our Ways: We shall then raise this Conclusion upon it,
Here is a Life begun that can terminate no otherwise than in an Endless Life
with my GOD. There is a Well of Water in me that will spring up to everlasting
Life. Death, do thy worst; there is no killing of that Life which my GOD has
begun to raise me to Have I had a glorious CHRIST living, acting and working in
me, and quickening me for Living unto GOD; and will He ever lose His hold of
me? No, no; I am sure of Living with Him forevermore!

BUT indeed it is not easy to recite and reckon all the ravishing Reflections,
which a CHRIST graciously present with a departing Believer may give Him the no
small Consolations of GOD withal. -- I should here write on further from the
46th Page to the 52; but I remember a few Pages before I gave it you.

THE Doctor died on February the thirteenth, which was the Day after his
Birthday, in which his sixty fifth Year was consummated. From the Thursday
before to that Time he was dying of an hard Cough and a suffocating Asthma with
a Fever; but he felt no great Pain; he had the sweet Composure and easy
Departure, for which he had entreated so often and fervently the sovereign
Disposer of all Things.

THUS Lived and thus Died Dr. MATHER, to use the words of one of our Ministers
in his Discourse on his Death, the Glory of Learning, and the Ornament of
Christianity The Rev. Mr. THACHER of Boston


HE was buried the Monday following; when his Church (which honorably bore the
Charge of the Funeral) to testify their superior Regard for their dear Pastor,
went before the Corpse, while the Honorable WILLIAM D^^^MER, our Lieut.
Governor and Commander in Chief, the Honorable the Council and Rep^^^^ (...)
of this Province, with a vast Number of Ministers, Justices of the Peace,
Merchants, etc. followed the Mourners.

THE Thursday before the Burial, the Reverend Mr. COLMAN, preaching at the
Lecture on ENOCH'S Translation, gave him an handsome Character; and the Sabbath
after Mr. GEE considered the Mourning of Israel for AARON, and ingeniously
applied it unto the mournful Occasion presented unto us. -- Mr. PRINCE also
preached a funeral Sermon on him from ELISHA'S Lamentation for ELIJAH, wherein
he has done my Father a great deal of Justice. -- Which Three Sermons together
with a Fourth Preached by the Doctor's Son, in his Father's Pulpit soon after
his Death, have been Published among us.

I shall now close the Account of my FATHER'S Life, with a CATALOGUE of the
BOOKS he Published.

CARDAN wrote a Book, De Libris propriis; and, says he, Imitatus sum in hoc
scribendi Genere GALENUM et ERASMUM, qui ambo Catalogum Librorum suorum
scripserunt. -- Dr. MATHER like these, was obliged to write a Catalogue of his
Works; and it was well he did; for otherwise I should not have been able to
have given a complete one to the World. He has published three Hundred and
eighty two Books, as I said before: The Titles of which with the Years wherein
they were emitted are now to be exhibited and to terminate the Life, as a
Friend calls him, of one of the most pious, learned and effective of Mortals.

A CATALOGUE OF THE BOOKS Published by Dr. Mather.
1686.
THe Call of the Gospel. Military Duties. A Sermon to the Artillery Company in
Middlesex.
1687.
Right Tho'ts in sad Hours: on the Death of a first Born.
1688.
Early Piety exemplified in the Life of his Brother Mr. Nathaniel Mather. with
several Sermons.
1689.
Small Offers toward the Service of the Tabernacle in the Wilderness.
Memorable Providence relating to Witchcrafts and Possessions, with some
Sermons annexed. Soldiers counseled and comforted. Work upon the Ark. The
wonderful Works of GOD commemorated, with a Sermon to the Convention on the way
to Prosperity. Speedy Repentance urged; with some historical Passages
1690.
The present State of New England considered in a Discourse on a public Spirit
A Companion for Communicants. The Serviceable Man. A Sermon at the Anniversary
Election. Serious Thoughts in dying Times. Addresses to old Men, young Men and
little Children. A Scriptural Catechism. The Triumphs of the Reformed Religion
in America, in the Life of Mr. JOHN ELIOT.
1691.
Expectanda; or Things to be looked for. Little Flocks guarded against grievous
Wolves; or a Display of Quakerism. Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion; or the
Character and Happiness of a virtuous Woman. Blessed Unions; with the Heads of
Agreement between the united Brethren. Fair Weather; or a sacred Exorcism upon
sinful Discontent, with some things annexed to promote Godliness. Balsamum
Vulnerarium e Scriptura; or the Cause and Cure of a wounded Spirit. Preparatory
Meditations on the Day of Judgment. A Midnight Cry; with an Instrument of
Acknowlegements and Protestations.
1692.
Optanda: or good Men described and good Things propounded. The Wonders of the
invisible World; with a Did course annexed concerning Temptations. ^num
Necessarium; or awakenings for the Unregenerate.
1693.
Warnings from the Dead: Sermons occasioned by some capital Executions. The Day
and the Work of the Day. Winter Medications.
1694.
Early Religion with certain Memoirs of some who at their Death left Examples
of it. The short History of New England. Brontologia Sacra: Sermons occasioned
by remarkable Thunder-Storms. Seven select Lectures. Durable Riches; or the
true Cause of losing, and the right Way of thriving. Help for distressed
Parents. A good Master well served: or the Properties and Practices of a good
Servant, with the Duties of a Master
1695.
Johannes in Eremo: or the Lives of several famous Divines. Observanda: or the
Life of the late Queen MARY; and a Discourse on the Wheels of Divine
Providence. A Cry against Oppression. The Christian Thank-Offering.
1696.
Pietas in Patriam: or the Life of Sir WILLIAM PHIPPS Things for a distressed
People to think upon: A Sermon at the Anniversary Election: with several
Histories annexed. Great Examples of Judgment and Mercy; with Memorables
occurring in the Sufferings of Captives among the Indians.
1697.
Gospel for the Poor. The Songs of the Redeemed: A Book of Hy^^^ Faith at Work.
Ecclesiastes: or the Life of Mr. Jonathan Mitchel. Humiliations followed with
Deliverances; to which are annexed some Remarkable Providence. The Way to
excel: A Funeral Sermon on Mr. John ^aily with Memoirs of his Life; and the
Character of a Christian. Men's sana in Corpore sano; or a Discourse upon a
Recovery from Sickness.
School.
The Bostonian Ebenezer; with a Lecture on Household Religion. Eleutheria. An
Idea of the Reformation, and an History of Nonconformity. A Pastoral Letter to
the English Captives in Africa. Decennium Luctuosum. An History of Remarkable
Occurrences in the long War with the Indians from 1688 to School; with two
Lectures for the Religious Improvement of them. The serious Christian. Three
Essays. Pillars of Salt. An History of Criminals executed; with two Lectures on
Sin punished with Sin.
1699.
La Religion pura; To which is added, La Fe del Christiano: An Essay to convey
Religion into the Spanish India. The Faith of the Fathers: A Catechism for the
Jewish Nation. A Family well-ordered: with an Address ad Fratres in Eremo.
Thirty important Cases; published in the Name of the Ministers meeting at
Cambridge. A Letter of Advice to the Churches of the Non-Conformists. The
Everlasting Gospel; or the Gospel of Justification. The Religious Mariner. The
Flocks warned against Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; with an History of Impostors,
and a Lecture on their Occasion.
1700.
Things that young People should think upon. A monitory and hortatory Letter to
the English who debauch the Indians. An Epistle to the Christian Indians;
English on one Page, and Indian on the other. The good Linguist. A monitory
Letter concerning the Maintenance of the Ministry. A Pillar of Gratitude: A
Sermon at the Anniversary Election. Reasonable Religion. Grace triumphant. A
Defense of Evangelical Churches. The great Physician. A Token for the Children
of New England, in Narratives and Instances of Piety in Children. American
Tears upon the Ruins of the Greek Churches. The young Man's Monitor. Triumphs
over Troubles. The old Principles of New England. Christianus per Ignem; or a
Disciple warming himself and owning his LORD.
1701.
A Companion for the Afflicted. A Letter concerning the Sufferings of our
Protestant Brethren. The young Man's Preservative. Thaumatographia Christiana:
or the Wonders of Christianity. Death made easy and happy. A Christian at his
Calling. Two Essays; One on the general Calling, another on the personal.
Christianity to the Life: A Discourse on the Imitation of our SAVIOR. Masch^l:
or the faithful Instructor, in Memorials of Christianity. Advice to the
Churches of the Faithful; reporting the present State of the Church through out
the World. Magna^^ CHRISTI Americana; o^ the Church History of New England.
1702.
Cares about the Nurseries. Much in a little. A Letter to the ungospellized
Plantations. A monitory Letter to them who absent themselves from the public
Worship of GOD. A seasonable Testimony to the Doctrines of Grace fetched out of
the Articles and Homilies of the Church of England. The ^ortraiture of a good
Man. Necessary Admonitions concerning Sins of Omission. Wholesome Words: or, A
Visits of Advice to Families visited with Sickness. Meat out of the Eater: or
Funeral Discourses occasioned by the Death of several Relatives.
1703.
The Day which the Lord has made: A Discourse concerning the Institution and
Observation of the LORD'S Day. The Glory of Goodness; with Remarks on the
Redemption of Captives rom the Cruelties of Barbary. The Retired Christian. The
high Attainment: A Discourse on Resignation. Agreeable Admonitions to Young and
Old. A Family Sacrifice. Lessons of Godliness for Children of godly Ancestors.
Great Consolations; or a tempted Christian triumphing over his Temptations. The
Armor of Christianity: A Treatise on the Wiles of the Devil. Jedidiah, or a
Favorite of Heaven described. Methods and Motives for a Society to suppress
Disorders. E^^^^, Or a virtuous Woman found. An Essay on the Death of Mrs. Mary
Brown. A Tree planted by the Rivers of Water. An Essay on the Improvements to
be made of our sacred Baptism.
1704.
Youth under a good Conduct. A weaned Christian. A faithful Monitor; with an
Abstract of the Laws against punishable Wickedness. Le ^rai Patron de Saints
Paroles; designed for the Instruction of our French Captives. A Servant of the
LORD not ashamed of his LORD. Faithful Warnings to prevent fearful Judgments.
The Nets of Salvation; with a Poem. A Comforter of the Mourners. Lex
Mercatori^; or the false Dealer fairly dealt with. Nicetas; or Temptations to
Sin well answered and conquered. Baptistes; or a Conference about the Subject
and Manner of Baptism. Monica Americana; or Female Piety exemplified, in a
funeral Sermon for Mrs. Sarah Lever^^t with an Elegy.
1705.
A Letter about the present State of Christianity among the Indians. A faithful
Man described and rewarded: A funeral Sermon for Mr. Michael Wigglesworth, with
Memorials of Piety extracted from his Papers. Parental Wishes and Charges; with
a Poem entitled the Consent. Family Religion excited and assisted. The Rules of
a Visit. Mare Pacificum; or the Satisfactions of afflicted Christianity. The
Christian Temple. Vigilantius; or the Servant of the LORD found ready for HIS
Coming, on the Death of seven young Ministers, with an Elegy. The Religion of
the Cl^set, or the Christian furnished with a Companion for Solitude.
1706.
Good Lessons for Children, in Verse. A young Follower of a great SAVIOR. Free
Grace maintained and improved. The Negro Christianized. The good old Way; or
Christianity as it appeared in the Lives of the primitive Christians. Private
Meetings animated and regulated. Heavenly Considerations; or the Joy of Heaven
over them that answer the Call of Heaven. Good fetched out of Evil: A
Collection of Memorables relating to our Captives. The impenitent Sinner
disarmed of his Plea for Impenitency. The best Ornaments of Youth. Treacle
fetched out of a Viper: An Essay upon Falls into Sin. The Man of GOD furnished
with supplies from the Tower of David. An Essay upon the Character and
Condition of the Covetous.
1707.
Another Tongue bro't in to confess our SAVIOR; or Christianity in the Tongue
of the Iroquois Indians. An Essay upon profane Cursing and Swearing. The
Soldier told what he should do. The greatest Concern in the World. Frontiers
well defended: An Essay directing our Frontiers how to behave themselves. The
Fall of Babylon. Ornamental Piety. The Spirit of Life entering into the
Spiritually Dead. Manly Christianity. Winthrop^ Justa: Mortality considered; in
a Sermon at the Funeral of J. WINTHROP, Esquire
1708.
Sobe^ Considerations on a growing Flood of Iniquity ^^uth in its brightest
Glory. Corderius Americanus. A funeral Sermon on the Death of Mr. Ezekiel.
Cheever, with an Elegy. A good Evening for the best of Days. The Temple
opening. Nunc dimittis briefly descanted on: A funeral Sermon on Mr. John
Higginson, with Memoirs of his Life.
1709.
The Desires of the Repenting Believer. The Bonds of the Covenant. The Sailor's
Companion and Counselor. Work within Doors. A Christian Conversing with the
greatest Mystery of Christianity. An Essay on the Streets of the Holy City. The
Cure of Sorrow. The Heavenly Conversation. Dust and Ashes: An Essay on
Repentance to the last.
1710.
Christianity demonstrated: An Essay on the Witness within. Bonifacius: An
Essay upon the Good to be devised by those who would answer the great End of
Life. Elizabeth in her holy Retirement. Man eating the Food of Angels: or the
Religion of the Morning, with the History of V^n Extor. Nehemiab: An Essay on
Divine Consolations. Memorials of Early Piety: The Life and Death of Mrs.
Jerusha Oliver.
1711.
Orphano trophium; or Orphans well provided for. Compassions called for; or
profitable Reflections on miserable Spectacles. The Fisherman's Calling. A
Christian Funeral. The old Paths Restored. Persuasions from the Terror of the
LORD: A Sermon on the Day of Judgment. ^ho'ts for the Day of Rain; or the
Gospel of the Rainbow, etc. Advice from Taberah; A Sermon after the terrible
Fire in Boston. A Soul well-anchored. Winter Piety. Seasonable Tho'ts on
Mortality.
1712.
Awakening Tho'ts on the Sleep of Death; with a Debt paid unto the Memory of
some that sleep in JESUS. The Ways and Joys of Early Piety. Pastoral Desires.
The Young Man spoken to. The hard Way of Transgressors. Reason satisfied and
Faith established; or the Resurrection of JESUS demonstrated. A Town in its
truest Glory. Grata Brevitas: A short Essay to demonstrate a few Words may have
much comprised in them Repeted Warnings; with the Remarkable Experiences of a
young Man. Grace defended; with a Dissertation about the penitent Thief. A
flying Roll to enter the House and Hand of the Thief. Tabitha Rediviva: The
good Works of a virtuous Woman described and commended, with some Justice to
the Memory of Mrs. Eliz. Hutchinson.
1713.
Adversus Libertinos; or Evangelical Obedience described and demanded. A
Testimony against some evil Customs. A Man of his Word. Things to be though it
upon. The A. B. C. of Religion. Golgotha: A lively Description of Death; with
Memorials of an hopeful Young Man. A Present of Summer Fruit. The curbed
Sinner: A Sermon occasioned by a Sentence of Death on a young Man for Murder.
What should be most of all though it upon An Essay upon a Soul at ease; a funeral
Sermon for Mrs. Mary Rock. The Will of a Father submitted to. The Religion of
the Cross; occasioned by the Death of Mrs. Elizabeth Mather. Hezekiah; A
Christian armed with Strength for a Day of Adversity. The best way of Living.
1714.
A perfect Recovery; exhibited after a sickly Winter. A Life of Piety resolved
on: Upon the Death of Mrs. Sarah Ting. Vita brevis; an Essay upon withering
Flowers. Maternal Consolations; on the Death of Mrs. Maria Mather. The
Sacrificer. Insanabilia: An Essay upon incureables. A short Life, yet not a
vain one: occasioned by some Instances of Mortality. Verba vivifica: some Words
of Life, produced by the Death of some young Persons. The glorious Throne: A
Sermon on the Succession of the British Crown to the illustrious House of
Hanover. Duodecennium luctuosum: The History of a War with the Indians from the
Year 1702. to 1714. A Monitor for Communicants. Death Approaching. Pascentius:
An Essay how to live in hard Times. Verba opportuna: The Circumstances of
Boston considered, with fresh Inculcations of early Piety.
1715.
Just Commemorations; the Death of good Men considered with the Character of
some. Nuncia bon^ e Terra lon^inqua: An Account of some good and great Things
done in (...). A Sorrowful Spectacle: Sermons occasioned by a Sentence of Death
on a Murderer. A Monitor for the Children of the Covenant (...) The Echoes of
Devotion. The grand Point of Solicitude; or an Essay upon Divine Desertions.
Good Men described with the Character and History of Mr. Thomas Bridge. Shaking
Dispensations with Remarks on the Death of the French King. Lapis e Monte
excisus: The Stone cut out of the Mountain; a Treatise in English and Latin.
Parentalia: The Blessings and Comforts for pious Children after the Death of
their good Parents. Successive Generations: Remarks on the Changes of a dying
World. Vital Religion served with eight Essays. Fair Dealing between Debtor and
Creditor. The Servants of Abraham; with Motives for the Instruction of
Servants. Life swiftly passing and quickly ending; on the Death of Mrs.
Mehitabel Gerrish. The City of Refuge. The Christian Cynick.
1716.
The Resort of Piety. Piety demanded. Directions how to spend the LORD'S Day
Evening. A brief Essay on Tokens for Good. The Thankful Christian. Victorina: A
Sermon on the Decease of Mrs. Katharin Mather, with a further Account. Zelotes:
A Zeal for the House of GOD blown up: A Sermon at the opening of a new Church.
1717.
The Case of a troubled Mind. Iconoclastes: An Essay upon Idolatry too often
committed under the most Reformed Christianity. The Voice of the Dove; with
Memoirs of Mr. Robert Kitchen. The Everlasting Gospel to be preached unto the
Nations. The Valley of Hinnom: The Terrors of Hell demonstrated in the hearing
of a murderous Malefactor. Febrifugium: An Essay for the Cure of ungodly Anger.
Anastasius: The Resurrection of Lazarus improved. The Tribe of Asher: A Sermon
at the Baptism of a Grand Child. Piety and Equity united. 1. The Desires of
Piety. 2. The Measures of Equity. The Divine Sovereignty displayed and adored;
on the Death of Mrs. Hannah Sewall. Hades looked into: The Power of our SAVIOR
over the invisible World; at the Funeral of Wait Winthorp Esquire with an Elegy and
Epitaph. Instructions to the Living from the Condition of the Dead: Remarkables
on the Fate of Pirates; and a Sermon on their Occasion. Faith encouraged; with
a Relation of the Jewish Children at Berlin. Raphael: The Blessings of an
healed Soul considered
1718.
An Essay to do good unto the Widow. The obedient Sufferer. Brethren dwelling
together in Unity: A Sermon at the Ordination of a Baptist Minister. Psalterium
Americanum: The Book of Psalms in Blank Verse with Illustrations. A Man of
Reason. An Essay on the Condition of Man known in his Place no more: A funeral
Sermon for Mr. Thomas Barnard. Providence asserted and adored: A Sermon
occasioned by the Death of several who were drowned. The Religion of an Oath.
1719.
A distressed People entertained with Proposals for the Relief of their
Distresses. A new Year well begun: An Essay offered on a New Years Day.
Gen^thlia pia: Thot's for Birth Day. Vigilius; or the Awakener. Youth advised:
An Essay on the Sins of Youth. A glorious Espousal. Desiderius: A desirable
Man described with a Commemoration of Mr. James Keith. An Heavenly Life. The
Salvation of the Soul considered. The Tried Professor. An Essay on seasonable
Interpositions of Divine Providence, on the 5th of November. The Righteous Man
described, and asserted as the excellent Man: A Sermon on Mr. Joseph Gerrish.
An Account of an uncommon Appearance in the Heavens, with Remarks upon it. A
Year and a Life well concluded: A Sermon on the last Day of the Year. Sincere
Piety described, and the Trial of Sincerety assisted.
1720.
Brother's Duty: An Essay on every Man his Brothers Keeper. The quickened Soul;
or the Withered Hand revived. Coheleth: A Soul upon Recollection coming into
incontestible Sentiments of Religion. Undoubted Certainties: A certain Prospect
of Death: A Sermon on Mrs. Abigail Sewall. The Right way of shaking off a
Viper. The Christian Philosopher. The Ambassador's Tears. The accomplished
Singer. American Sentiments on the Arian Controversy.
1721.
India Christiana: An Account of the Propagation of Christianity in the East as
well as West Indies. ^^^^^ta Parsimonia; or ^^^me spent as it should be. What
the pious Parent wishes for. A Vision in the Temple; or the LO^D of Hosts
adored. The dreadful Sound in the Ears of the Wicked. The World Alarmed.
Genuine Christianity: A funeral Sermon for Mrs. Frances Webb. Silentiarius: An
Essay on the Patience and Silence with which sad Things are to be entertained:
On the Death of Mrs. Abigail Willard. An Account of the Method and Success of
Inoculating the Smallpox.
Love triumphant: A Sermon at the gathering a new Church and Ordaining their
Pastor. Bethiah; Or the Glory which adorns the Daughters of GOD. The Minister:
A Sermon at the Anniversary Convention of Ministers. Doves flying to the
Windows of their SAVIOR. An Essay on the vain Presumption of Living and
Thriving; On the premature Death of a Young Gentleman. Pia Desideria; Or the
smoking Flax raised into a sacred Flame. Nismath-Chajim, the probable seat of
all Diseases, and a general Cure for them. Divine Afflations: A Essay to
describe the gracious Instuences of the HOLY SPIRIT. The Soul upon the Wing: An
Essay on the State of the Dead.
1723.
The Voke of GOD in the Tempest. ^^thana^l^; o^ sudden Death made easy and
happy: A funeral Sermon. Coedestin^s: A Conversation in Heaven quickened and
^^^^ed. Some seasonable Enquiries upon Episcopacy. A Walk with GOD
characteri^ed: A Sermon on Mr. Joseph Belcher. The LORD high Admiral of all the
Seas adored. Valerius; or Prosperity of the Soul described. A F^ther departing;
A Sermon on Dr. Increase Mather. An Essay on Remarkables in the Way of wicked
Men. The pure Nazarite. Parentator: Memoirs of the Life of Dr. Increase Mather.
1724.
Proposals for Religious Societies, with a Sermon. The Converted Sinner, upon
the Execution of some Pirates. Stimulator; Or the Case of Soul walking in
Darkness. The true Riche^: An Essay on the unsearchable Riches of CHRIST. The
Nightingale: An Essay on Songs among Thorns. Light in Darkness; with an Example
of Young Person meeting Death with Triumphs over it. A short Essay on Troubles
to be looked for. A Funeral Sermon for Governor SALTONSTAL. Une grand Voix du
Ciel a la France. Three Sermons on the Death of a Son. A good Reward of a good
Servant: on Mr. Thomas Walter.
1725.
The Palm-bearers: A Relation of patient and joyful Sufferings in the Church of
Scotland from 1660 to 1688. Virtue in it is Verdure: A funeral Sermon for Mrs.
Abigail Brown. Repeated Admonitions about the Maintenance of the Ministry. All
supplied in all-sufficient SAVIOR: a funeral Sermon. The Waters of Marah
sweetened; on the Death of a young Gentleman. The Gospel of the brazen Serpent.
DEUS Nobiscum; a brief Essay on the Enjoyment of GOD. Renatus: or a Soul
passing from Death to Life. The Choice of Wisdom. Diluvium Ignis. Directions
for a Candidate of the Ministry. Vital Christianity; or the Life of GOD in the
Soul of Man.
1726.
Ratio Discipline Fratrum Nov-Anglorum. A good old Age: The Glory of Aged
Piety. Some seasonable Advice to the Poor. The Condition to which the
Protestant Religion is reduced. Ecclesia Monilia: The Treasure of the Almighty
KING opened, with Memorials of Mrs. Eliz. Cotton. A Vial poured out on the Sea:
occasioned by the Execution of some Pirates. An Essay to bespeak early Piety;
on the Departure of Mrs. Eliz. Cooper. Terra beata: An Essay on the Blessing of
Abraham. The Instructor. An Essay on the Light which good Men have in dark
Hours. The Comforts of one walking through the Valley of the Shadow of Death. A
Soul bound up in the Bundle of Life. Na^ls fastened. Igno^^^tia scientifica: An
Essay on Man's not knowing his Time.
1727.
The evident Tokens of Salvation. The sealed Servant of GOD appearing with a
well-testified Adoption. The Marrow of the Gospel: or the Union between CHRIST
and the Believer. Restitutus: A Discourse made upon a Recovery from Sickness.
Agricola: or the Religious Husbandman. Christian Loyalty, on the Death of King
GEORGE I. and Accession of King GEORGE II. An happy Departure; on the Death of
Mr. William Waldron. The Balance of the Sanctuary. The Yoke born in Youth; with
an Account of a Young Person. The Terror of the LORD; with Remarks on the
EARTHQUAKES. An Essay to preserve and strengthen the good Impressions made by
EARTHQUAKES. An Essay toward a Religious Improvement of Baptism, at the sight
of Administration. The Chambers of GOD opened and visited; on the Death of Mr.
Peter Thacher. -- N.B. This was the last Sermon my Father delivered from the
Pulpit: and truly such a Sermon as a good Minister would desire should be his
last.
SINCE his Decease there have been two Sermons, which he left prepared for the
Press, published; their Titles are, The Widow of Naim. The Mystical Marriage.


THESE two make the Number of his Books to (...) three Hundred and eighty three.

AFTER this CATALOGUE, I will here take the Liberty of borrowing two or three
Lines from ^^^ANAN'S E^^^^dium on CALVIN and applying them to the Doctor.

Hunc ^rgo in Portum caelo plaudente receptum,
Tu licet in placida tranquillus Pace quiescas;
Non tamen omnino po^uit mors invida totum
Tollere MATHERUM terris; Aeterna manebunt
Ingenii Monumenta sui; et livoris iniqui
Languida paulatim cum Flamma resederit, omne,
Religio qua pura nitet se funde^ in Oras
Fama tui --
WHICH Lines I have Englished after this manner, THOUGH Heaven rejoice you're of
your Port possessed,
And you may now in Peace and Safety rest:
Yet envious Death, which him reduced to Clay,
Our MATHER could not wholly urge away:
No, No; Eternal must his Works remain;
The rich Productions of his Fruitful Brain!
When by Degrees, as a weak Flame of Fire,
Cursed Envy shall with trembling Hirts expire;
Then where there is any pure Religion found.
MATHER, thy Name shall reach, thy Fame shall found.


FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction to the Doctor's Life. page ^

CHAP. I.
His more private History. 3. 1. His Birth and Family. ibid. 2. His Education,
Eagerness and Progress in Learning; with early Favors. 4. 3. His Early
Religion. 6. 4. Marriages and Children with his Methods of Educating them. 12.
5. His private Conduct. 19.
CHAP. II.
His public Appearances and signal Services. 26. 1. His Ministry with what
relates to it. ibid. 2. Being concerned in other Affairs; 1. Instruction of
Scholars. 40. 2. An Account of the Revolution in N.E. 41. 3. Witchcrafts in N.
E. 44. 4. Giving Advice at home. 47. 5. Writing beyond Sea. ibid. 6. Societies
related unto. 48 7. Evangelical Treasury. ibid. 8. Inoculation. ibid. 9.
Services abroad. ibid. 10. Learning Languages. 49. 11. His Charity. ibid. 12.
Continual Serviceableness. ibid.

CHAP. III.
His Experiences and Deliverances. 60. 1. Temptations Conquered. ibid. 2.
Dangers Escaped. ibid. 3. Tho'ts in Sickness and Exemptions from it. 61. 4.
Carriage when Evil Tongues and Pens attacked him. 65.
CHAP. IV.
His Various Writings and their Character. 67. Books Published. 69. Books in
Manuscript, 72. Though It, on preparing them. 73.
CHAP. V.
His Foreign Honors and Correspondencies. 74. 1. His Foreign Honors. ibid. 1.
Doctorate of Divinity. ibid. 2. Fellowship of the Royal Society. 77. 3. Worldly
Honors despised. 79.
2. His Foreign Correspondencies. 80.
CHAP. VI.
His Practice of Piety. 82. 1. Choosing GOD, Conversing with, resigning to and
Delighting in HIM. ibid. 2. Closing with CHRIST, Accepting His Righteousness,
Loving his Glory, and Living by Faith in Him. 86. 3. Occasional Tho'ts and
Ejaculatory Prayers. 101. 4. Fasts, Thanksgivings, Vigils and
Self-Examinations. 109. 5. His Morning Tho'ts and other pious Exercises. 128 1.
Morning Tho'ts. ibid. 2. Way of spending Saturday Afternoon. ibid. 3. Method of
Sabbatizing. 129. 4. Reading Scriptures and Application of Promises. 133. 5, 6.
Employment of Mind and Prayers at the LORD'S Table. 135, 137. 7. Three special
Favors desired. 137. 8. Resolutions for a Walk with GOD. ibid.

CHAP. VII.
His Latter Days. 1. His Way of Living. 139. 2. His Sentiments upon some
important Things. 140. 3. His Temper in his last Illness with the Circumstances
of his Death. 146. A Catalogue of his Books. 161.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
HAVING before spoken of the BIBLIA AMERICANA, ( page 73.) and at the same time
promised that I would give the World a more distinct and particular Account of
that Work, I had laid aside the Tho'ts of saying any Thing further about it for
some time: But being advised by a Gentleman of the sacred Order for whose
Judgment I have a great Value, to delineate and describe here that Performance,
it is Excellency and Usefulness, that so it is inviting Character, being more
publicly exposed, may excite Gentlemen, Divines and others to countenance the
Publication of it; and being withal convinced that the Proposal is good and
proper; I have therefore determined here to add an exact Account of the BIBLIA
AMERICANA.

OR, The SACRED SCRIPTURES of the OLD and New Testament ILLUSTRATED:

IN which, besides the many Thousands of curious Notes that shine in Ancient
and Modern Writers of all Persuasions, and some Essays to explain many Passages
from the Observations of Christian Experience; there are the following Things
observable; I. THE sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament exhibited, In
the Order of Time, wherein the several and successive Occurrences may direct to
the Placing and Reading of them: which Exhibition alone will greatly inlighten
them, and do the Service of a valuable Commentary. II. AN Emendation of our
present Version; from the Discoveries of the most learned Philologists from the
earliest Ages of sacred Literature down to Bochart, Calmet and Parker: and a
particular notice of those many Instances wherein our greatest Masters of the
Original Languages have expressed their wishes to see the common Translation
amended and refined. III. A rich Collection of ANTIQUETIES which reflect a
Light on the Heavenly Oracles; especially those wherein the Idolatry,
Oeconomicks, Politics, Agriculture, Architecture, Tacticks, Music, Habits,
Diets, etc. in former Ages may have some Reference in the sacred Pages to them.
IV. THE LAWS of the Israelitish Nation interpreted, and rescued from the
Misinterpretations that some famous Writers have put upon them: contrary to the
real Original and true Intention of them. V. THE TYPES of the Bible
accommodated with their Antitypes; by which a wondrous Mixture of sacred Profit
and Pleasure arises from those Paragraphs, which seemed to be the least
Instructive. VI. REMARKS as well for the Illustration of the Old Testament as
for the Confirmation of the New, drawn out of those very unpromising heaps, the
TALMUDS and other Jewish Writings. VII. NATURAL PHILOSOPHY brought to serve
revealed Religion. The fairest Hypotheses offered of th^se grand Revolutions,
the Creating, Drowning and Burning of the World; together with the Astronomical
Affairs, the Meteors, Minerals, Vegetables, Animals, Diseases, Anatomical
Curiosities, and what relates to the Invisible World of Good or Evil Spirits,
mentioned in these Divine Pages, as they are represented in the best Tho'ts of
our Times. VIII. THE CHRONOLOGY of the Bible every where cleared of it is
Difficulties -- with the most accurate Harmony of the Gospels that has yet been
offered. IX. THE sacred GEOGRAPHY; in which there are the situation of Paradise
and Palaestine; with an Account how the Earth has been peopled; and a
Collection of those many instructive Things, which Travelers of unspotted
Veracity have contributed for our illumination. X. AN elaborate and
entertaining History of the ISRAELITISH NATION in every Place; especially from
the Birth of our great REDEEMER to this very Day; with a particular History of
the City JERUSALEM under it is wonderful Vicissitudes from the Days of
MELCHIZEDER down to ours; of the ancient Sects among the Jews and their present
wretched State, the Relics of the Ten as well as the Two Tribes and where they
are now dispersed. XI. THE HISTORIES of all Ages called in to show how the
Prophecies of the Divine Oracles have had their most punctual Accomplishment;
wherein the Reader will find an entire Body of Ecclesiastical History: and
modest, but strongly established Conjectures on such as yet remain to be
fulfilled, and the State of the Church and World in future Ages to the End of
Time. XII. THE true Doctrine of the Sabbatical CHILIAD, which more opens and
breaks in on the more considerate inquirers as the Day approaches, brought in
as a Key to very much of the Wealth which the Church of GOD possesses in this
Book of the Kingdom: With the clearest Tho'ts of the most penetrating W^ters on
the Apocalypse, rescued from the more a^^trary and indefensible Conceits of
superficial Students in the sacred Prophesies.


THE usual Method for the Publication of such a Work, has been by
SUBSCRIPTIONS, and in the Proposals to give a computation of the number of
Sheets, and the price of the Books to Subscribers in Quires, and when Bound:
But in the present Case the precise Number of Sheets cannot easily be known,
which will occasion something of uncertainty.

However, IT is supposed that the Work will be contained in Three Volumns in
FOLIO, and may be afforded for between Three and Four Pounds Sterling; and in
New England Money according as the Exchange shall then be. Whoever shall
Subscribe and Pay for Ten Sets shall have One Gratis, which will considerably
reduce the price. And as a farther Motive, it may be said, That this
Performance will not interfere with the Works of the Excellent POOL, BURRIT, or
HENRY: It being the constant study of the Author to avoid it, and in this to
add whatever other curious things have yet been published on the sacred
Scriptures.

SUBSCRIPTIONS will be taken by Samuel Gerrish, Daniel H^nchman and Thomas
Hancock Booksellers, in Boston; and as soon as there shall appear sufficient
Encouragement, the Manuscripts will ^e sent to London to be Printed there, with
all convenient Expedition, and Care will be taken of the Paper, Printing and
Binding, that it be suitable to such a Work.

The END.

